Annunciation.

The anniversary of the Nativity having been placed

on the 25th of December, according to the course of nature,

the 25th of March was anciently celebrated as the

anniversary of the annunciation, and is still observed on

that day, and the duty of saluting the Virgin (Virgo) and

announcing her conception by the Holy Ghost or third

person in the Trinity was assigned to the genius of Spring.

In the Chaldean version of the Gospel story the name of

Gabriel was given to this personification, and in the Christian

version of that story he is made to perform the same

office; see Luke i. 26-35.

Ascension.

Celebrating the anniversary of the ascension forty

days after Easter, it was anciently observed on the 4th of

May, and it was taught that the incarnate saviours ascended

bodily into heaven, in a golden chariot drawn by

four horses caparisoned with gilded trappings, all glittering

like fire in the fervid sunlight. Hence when we read

in II. Kings ii. 11, that "There appeared a chariot of fire

and horses of fire, . . . and Elijah went up by a

whirlwind into heaven," we must accept this text as descriptive

of the imaginary ascension of one of the incarnate

saviours of ancient Judaism.

Assumption.

When the Summer solstice was in the sign of Cancer,

the sun was in that of Virgo in the month of August, and

the anniversary of the Assumption was observed on the

15th of that month, and is so observed at the present

time. The fact that the anniversary of the Ascension precedes

that of the Assumption explains why Jesus is made

to say to his mother (Virgo) soon after his resurrection,

"Touch me not: for I am not yet ascended to my Father."

John xx. 17.

The Lord's Supper.

In the ancient solar worship the so-called ordinance

of the Lord's Supper was observed just before the anniversary

of the autumnal crucifixion; and consisting of bread

and wine, in reference to the maturing of the crops and

completion of the vintage, was, like the modern festival of

the hardest home, a season of thankfulness to the Lord

(God Sol) as the giver of all good gifts. Hence being

observed but once a year, it was in reality not an ordinance

but an anniversary; and the fact that Christians

partake of these emblems so frequently during the year

indicates that the original signification of the Lord's Supper

has been lost.

Transubstantiation,

or the conversion of the bread and wine into the veritable

blood and body of Christ, is a doctrine of the Catholic

church which was derived from the ritual of the ancient

solar worship.

In the 26th chapter of Matthew we have an account

of the Lord administering the last supper to his Disciples

on the eve of the autumnal crucifixion, and in verse 27

it reads that "he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave

it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it." The compilers of

the modern version of the Gospel story must surely have

inadvertently copied this text as it read in the ancient

versions of that old, old story, which, when observed in

remembrance of "Our Lord and Saviour Bacchus," was

called the Bacchanalia, or feast, of Bacchus. At these

orgies the participants give thanks for the wine by not

only drinking all of one cup, but many more; in fact they

kept on drinking until they fell under the table.

Autumnal Crucifixion.

The beneficent seasons of Spring and Summer coming

to an end at the Autumnal Equinox, the 22d of September

was made the anniversary of the Autumnal Crucifixion.

The vernal resurrection and Autumnal Crucifixion,

representing the alternate triumph of the personified

principles of Good and Evil, as manifested in the diversity

of the seasons; we find appropriately expressed in

two religious pictures. In the one, the Saviour, appealing

as a vigorous young man, surrounded by a brilliant halo,

representing the rays of the all-conquering Sun of Spring,

is rising triumphantly from the tomb, before whom the

demon of Winter, or Devil, is seen retreating in the background.

In the other, the vanquished Saviour, represented

by the figure of a lean and haggard man, with a crown of

thorns upon his head, around which appears a faint halo

of the Sun's declining rays, and above which is placarded

the letters I. N. R. I., the initial letters of Latin words,

signifying the life to come, or the eternal life, is suspended

upon the cross, at the foot of which his mother Mary

(Virgo) is represented as kneeling in a mourning attitude,

and by her side is seen a serpent and a skull, the emblems

of Evil and of Death.

Michaelmas.

In the calendar of the ancient Astral Worship, the

fourth day after the Autumnal Equinox was dedicated to

the genius of Autumn. In the Chaldean allegories the

name of Michael was given to this personification, and

called Michaelmas, or feast of Michael. In the Catholic

calendar this anniversary is placed an the 29th of September,

instead of the 26th of that month, while that

of St. Matthew, the Christian genius of Autumn, which

should be placed on the 26th of that month, is observed

on the 21st.

Thus we have shown that the anniversaries of the

ancient Astral Worship were all fixed, and from church

history we learn that they were so observed by the Christians

until the Council of Nice in the year 325, when the

Bishops assembled at that celebrated convocation, desiring

to have the festival of Easter celebrated on Sunday,

which had been made the Sabbath by the edict of Constantine,

in the year 321, ordered that it should be observed

on the Sunday of the full moon, which comes on or next

after the Vernal Equinox. Hence, converting it into a

movable festival, its allied feasts and fast days were also

made movable.

