THE SACRED NUMBERS 7 AND 12.

In reference to the planets, and the signs of the

Zodiac, the numbers seven and twelve were recognized

as sacred by the ancient Astrologers, and dedications

were made to them in all kinds and sorts of forms. In

the allegories, the genii of the planets were designated

as spirits or messengers to the Supreme Deity, imaginarily

enthroned above the firmament, which we find described

in Revelations iv. 5, as "Seven lamps of fire burning

before the throne, which are the seven spirits of God;"

and which were represented by lights burning in seven

branched candlesticks set before the altars in the temples;

the central light for the Sun; the Moon, Mercury and

Venus on one side; and Mars, Jupiter and Saturn on the

other. The seven branched candlesticks seen in all

Catholic churches, and in some Protestant ones, are intended

to represent the same planetary system.

Among the numerous dedications to the genii of the

planets we mention the seven days of the week, the seven

stories of the tower of Babylon, the seven gates of Thebes,

the seven piped flute of Pan, the seven stringed lyre of

Apollo, the seven books of fate, the book of seven seals,

the seven castes into which the Egyptians and East Indians

were divided, and the jubilee of seven times seven

years. Among the dedications to the twelve signs we

mention the twelve months of the year, the grand cycle

of 12,000 years, the twelve altars of James, the twelve

labors of Hercules, the twelve divisions of the Egyptian

Labyrinth, the twelve shields of Mars, the twelve precious

stones, ranged in threes to denote the seasons, in the

breastplate of High Priest, the twelve foundations of the

Sacred City, referred to in the Book of Revelation, the

twelve sons of Jacob, the twelve tribes of Israel, and the

twelve Disciples. In the Book of Revelation alone the

number 7 is repeated twenty-four times, and the number

12 fourteen times.

THE TWELVE THOUSAND YEAR CYCLE.

In determining the duration of the period within

which were to occur the events taught in the doctrines of

the Exoteric Creed, the ancient Astrologers dedicated

a thousand years to each of the signs of the Zodiac, and

thus inaugurating the cycle of twelve thousand years,

taught that, at its conclusion, the heaven and the earth,

which they believed to be composed of the indestructible

elements of fire, air, earth and water, would, through the

agency of the first of these, be reduced to chaos, as a

preliminary to the reorganization of a new heaven and a

new earth at the beginning of the succeeding cycle. Such

was the origin of the grand cycle of the ancient Astrolatry,

and it must be borne in mind that its authors made its

conclusion to correspond in time and circumstance to the

doctrines relating to the finale of the plan of redemption.

THE ANCIENT TRIAD.

After conceiving the idea of a primeval chaos, constituted

of four indestructible elements of which fire was

the leading one, the Oriental astrologers began to indulge

in speculations relative to the agencies which were engaged

in its organization. Having no knowledge of the

forces inherent in nature, they imputed this work to three

intelligences, which, embodying the All in All, they personified

by the figure of a man with three heads, and to

this trinity gave the names of Brahma, Vishnu and Siva.

Such a figure, carved in stone, may be seen in the island

Cave of Elephanta, near Bombay, India, and is popularly

believed to represent the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer;

but, in determining their true signification, we

must be governed by the ancient teachings that "All

things were made by one god-head with three names, and

this God is all things." Hence the conclusion is irresistible

that the first person represents neither the creator

nor organizer of chaos, but chaos itself; the second person,

its organizer and governor; and the third person, the

agent in nature which impresses all her parts with life and

motion; the latter being the imaginary great soul or

spirit inculcated in the Esoteric philosophy. In support

of this opinion it will be found that the Egyptian Triad of

Father, Son and Spirit is virtually the same we have assigned

to its Oriental prototype. Thus we see that to

the ancient Astrolatry Christendom is indebted for the

Trinity of

            "God the Father, God the Son,

            God the Spirit—three in one."

But, having ascribed supreme intelligence or reason

to its second person, under the name of the Logos, or

Word, and designating its third person as the Holy Ghost,

the ancient Triad was usually formulated as the Father,

the Word and the Holy Ghost, as may be seen by reference

to the text in the allegories which we find recorded

in I John v. 7, which reads that "There are three that

bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word and the

Holy Ghost, and these three are one."

Considered in some forms of Astrolatry as too

sacred to attach a name to the triune Deity, he was called

"the One," and we find him thus designated in the 4th

chapter of Revelation, where, like Zeus and Jupiter, of the

Grecian and Roman mythologies, he is represented as

seated above the firmament, upon a throne from which

"proceeded lightnings and thunderings," and to whom

all, the subordinate divinities were made to pay homage.

As the hurler of thunderbolts he was called "the Thunderer,"

and as the opener of the windows of heaven,

when it rained, he was designated "Jupiter Pluvius."

Such was the ancient Triad made to say of himself, in an

inscription found in the ruins of the temple at Sais in

Egypt, "I am all that has been, all that is, and all that

shall be, and no mortal has lifted yet the veil that covers

me;" and such was the Triunity referred to as the God

Universe by Pliny, the Roman philosopher and naturalist,

who, flourishing in the first century of the Christian era,

wrote that he is "An infinite God which has never been

created, and which shall never come to an end. To look

for something else beyond it is useless labor for man and

out of his reach. Behold that truly sacred Being, eternal

and immense, which includes within itself everything; it

is All in All, or rather itself is All. It is the work of

nature, and itself is nature."

Thus we see that, although inculcating homage to a

multitude of subordinate divinities, the ancient Astrolatry

was only an apparent Polytheism; its enlightened votaries,

recognizing the dogma of the unity of God, were in

reality Monotheists, paying supreme adoration to the

mythical genius of the Sun, to whom we will now direct

attention.
