

CHAPTER VII

Come, princes of the ragged regiment,

You of the blood! PRIGS, my most upright lord,

And these, what name or title e’er they bear,

JARKMAN, or PATRICO, CRANKE or CLAPPER-DUDGEON,

PRATER or ABRAM-MAN--I speak of all.

Beggar’s Bush.

Although the character of those gipsy tribes which formerly inundated most

of the nations of Europe, and which in some degree still subsist among

them as a distinct people, is generally understood, the reader will pardon

my saying a few words respecting their situation in Scotland.

It is well known that the gipsies were at an early period acknowledged as

a separate and independent race by one of the Scottish monarchs, and that

they were less favourably distinguished by a subsequent law, which

rendered the character of gipsy equal in the judicial balance to that of

common and habitual thief, and prescribed his punishment accordingly.

Notwithstanding the severity of this and other statutes, the fraternity

prospered amid the distresses of the country, and received large

accessions from among those whom famine, oppression, or the sword of war

had deprived of the ordinary means of subsistence. They lost in a great

measure by this intermixture the national character of Egyptians, and

became a mingled race, having all the idleness and predatory habits of

their Eastern ancestors, with a ferocity which they probably borrowed from

the men of the north who joined their society. They travelled in different

bands, and had rules among themselves, by which each tribe was confined to

its own district. The slightest invasion of the precincts which had been

assigned to another tribe produced desperate skirmishes, in which there

was often much blood shed.

The patriotic Fletcher of Saltoun drew a picture of these banditti about a

century ago, which my readers will peruse with astonishment:--

‘There are at this day in Scotland (besides a great many poor families

very meanly provided for by the church boxes, with others who, by living

on bad food, fall into various diseases) two hundred thousand people

begging from door to door. These are not only no way advantageous, but a

very grievous burden to so poor a country. And though the number of them

be perhaps double to what it was formerly, by reason of this present great

distress, yet in all times there have been about one hundred thousand of

those vagabonds, who have lived without any regard or subjection either to

the laws of the land or even those of God and nature . . . No magistrate

could ever discover, or be informed, which way one in a hundred of these

wretches died, or that ever they were baptized. Many murders have been

discovered among them; and they are not only a most unspeakable oppression

to poor tenants (who, if they give not bread or some kind of provision to

perhaps forty such villains in one day, are sure to be insulted by them),

but they rob many poor people who live in houses distant from any

neighbourhood. In years of plenty, many thousands of them meet together in

the mountains, where they feast and riot for many days; and at country

weddings, markets, burials, and other the like public occasions, they are

to be seen, both man and woman, perpetually drunk, cursing, blaspheming,

and fighting together.’

Notwithstanding the deplorable picture presented in this extract, and

which Fletcher himself, though the energetic and eloquent friend of

freedom, saw no better mode of correcting than by introducing a system of

domestic slavery, the progress of time, and increase both of the means of

life and of the power of the laws, gradually reduced this dreadful evil

within more narrow bounds. The tribes of gipsies, jockies, or cairds--for

by all these denominations such banditti were known--became few in number,

and many were entirely rooted out. Still, however, a sufficient number

remained to give, occasional alarm and constant vexation. Some rude

handicrafts were entirely resigned to these itinerants, particularly the

art of trencher-making, of manufacturing horn-spoons, and the whole

mystery of the tinker. To these they added a petty trade in the coarse

sorts of earthenware. Such were their ostensible means of livelihood. Each

tribe had usually some fixed place of rendezvous, which they occasionally

occupied and considered as their standing camp, and in the vicinity of

which they generally abstained from depredation. They had even talents and

accomplishments, which made them occasionally useful and entertaining.

Many cultivated music with success; and the favourite fiddler or piper of

a district was often to be found in a gipsy town. They understood all

out-of-door sports, especially otter-hunting, fishing, or finding game.

They bred the best and boldest terriers, and sometimes had good pointers

for sale. In winter the women told fortunes, the men showed tricks of

legerdemain; and these accomplishments often helped to while away a weary

or stormy evening in the circle of the ‘farmer’s ha’.’ The wildness of

their character, and the indomitable pride with which they despised all

regular labour, commanded a certain awe, which was not diminished by the

consideration that these strollers were a vindictive race, and were

restrained by no check, either of fear or conscience, from taking

desperate vengeance upon those who had offended them. These tribes were,

in short, the pariahs of Scotland, living like wild Indians among European

settlers, and, like them, judged of rather by their own customs, habits,

and opinions, than as if they had been members of the civilised part of

the community. Some hordes of them yet remain, chiefly in such situations

as afford a ready escape either into a waste country or into another

Jurisdiction. Nor are the features of their character much softened. Their

numbers, however, are so greatly diminished that, instead of one hundred

thousand, as calculated by Fletcher, it would now perhaps be impossible to

collect above five hundred throughout all Scotland.

A tribe of these itinerants, to whom Meg Merrilies appertained, had long

been as stationary as their habits permitted in a glen upon the estate of

Ellangowan. They had there erected a few huts, which they denominated

their ‘city of refuge,’ and where, when not absent on excursions, they

harboured unmolested, as the crows that roosted in the old ash-trees

around them. They had been such long occupants that they were considered

in some degree as proprietors of the wretched shealings which they

inhabited. This protection they were said anciently to have repaid by

service to the Laird in war, or more frequently, by infesting or

plundering the lands of those neighbouring barons with whom he chanced to

be at feud. Latterly their services were of a more pacific nature. The

women spun mittens for the lady, and knitted boot-hose for the Laird,

which were annually presented at Christmas with great form. The aged

sibyls blessed the bridal bed of the Laird when he married, and the cradle

of the heir when born. The men repaired her ladyship’s cracked china, and

assisted the Laird in his sporting parties, wormed his dogs, and cut the

ears of his terrier puppies. The children gathered nuts in the woods, and

cranberries in the moss, and mushrooms on the pastures, for tribute to the

Place. These acts of voluntary service, and acknowledgments of dependence,

were rewarded by protection on some occasions, connivance on others, and

broken victuals, ale, and brandy when circumstances called for a display

of generosity; and this mutual intercourse of good offices, which had been

carried on for at least two centuries, rendered the inhabitants of

Derncleugh a kind of privileged retainers upon the estate of Ellangowan.

‘The knaves’ were the Laird’s ‘exceeding good friends’; and he would have

deemed himself very ill used if his countenance could not now and then

have borne them out against the law of the country and the local

magistrate. But this friendly union was soon to be dissolved.

The community of Derncleugh, who cared for no rogues but their own, were

wholly without alarm at the severity of the Justice’s proceedings towards

other itinerants. They had no doubt that he determined to suffer no

mendicants or strollers in the country but what resided on his own

property, and practised their trade by his immediate permission, implied

or expressed. Nor was Mr. Bertram in a hurry to exert his newly-acquired

authority at the expense of these old settlers. But he was driven on by

circumstances.

At the quarter-sessions our new Justice was publicly upbraided by a

gentleman of the opposite party in county politics, that, while he

affected a great zeal for the public police, and seemed ambitious of the

fame of an active magistrate, he fostered a tribe of the greatest rogues

in the country, and permitted them to harbour within a mile of the house

of Ellangowan. To this there was no reply, for the fact was too evident

and well known. The Laird digested the taunt as he best could, and in his

way home amused himself with speculations on the easiest method of ridding

himself of these vagrants, who brought a stain upon his fair fame as a

magistrate. Just as he had resolved to take the first opportunity of

quarrelling with the pariahs of Derncleugh, a cause of provocation

presented itself.

Since our friend’s advancement to be a conservator of the peace, he had

caused the gate at the head of his avenue, which formerly, having only one

hinge, remained at all times hospitably open--he had caused this gate, I

say, to be newly hung and handsomely painted. He had also shut up with

paling, curiously twisted with furze, certain holes in the fences

adjoining, through which the gipsy boys used to scramble into the

plantations to gather birds’ nests, the seniors of the village to make a

short cut from one point to another, and the lads and lasses for evening

rendezvous--all without offence taken or leave asked. But these halcyon

days were now to have an end, and a minatory inscription on one side of

the gate intimated ‘prosecution according to law’ (the painter had spelt

it ‘persecution’--l’un vaut bien l’autre) to all who should be found

trespassing on these inclosures. On the other side, for uniformity’s sake,

was a precautionary annunciation of spring-guns and man-traps of such

formidable powers that, said the rubrick, with an emphatic nota bene--’if

a man goes in they will break a horse’s leg.’

In defiance of these threats, six well-grown gipsy boys and girls were

riding cock-horse upon the new gate, and plaiting may-flowers, which it

was but too evident had been gathered within the forbidden precincts. With

as much anger as he was capable of feeling, or perhaps of assuming, the

Laird commanded them to descend;--they paid no attention to his mandate:

he then began to pull them down one after another;--they resisted,

passively at least, each sturdy bronzed varlet making himself as heavy as

he could, or climbing up as fast as he was dismounted.

The Laird then called in the assistance of his servant, a surly fellow,

who had immediate recourse to his horsewhip. A few lashes sent the party

a-scampering; and thus commenced the first breach of the peace between the

house of Ellangowan and the gipsies of Derncleugh.

The latter could not for some time imagine that the war was real; until

they found that their children were horsewhipped by the grieve when found

trespassing; that their asses were poinded by the ground-officer when left

in the plantations, or even when turned to graze by the roadside, against

the provision of the turnpike acts; that the constable began to make

curious inquiries into their mode of gaining a livelihood, and expressed

his surprise that the men should sleep in the hovels all day, and be

abroad the greater part of the night.

When matters came to this point, the gipsies, without scruple, entered

upon measures of retaliation. Ellangowan’s hen-roosts were plundered, his

linen stolen from the lines or bleaching-ground, his fishings poached, his

dogs kidnapped, his growing trees cut or barked. Much petty mischief was

done, and some evidently for the mischief’s sake. On the other hand,

warrants went forth, without mercy, to pursue, search for, take, and

apprehend; and, notwithstanding their dexterity, one or two of the

depredators were unable to avoid conviction. One, a stout young fellow,

who sometimes had gone to sea a-fishing, was handed over to the captain of

the impress service at D--; two children were soundly flogged, and one

Egyptian matron sent to the house of correction.

Still, however, the gipsies made no motion to leave the spot which they

had so long inhabited, and Mr. Bertram felt an unwillingness to deprive

them of their ancient ‘city of refuge’; so that the petty warfare we have

noticed continued for several months, without increase or abatement of

hostilities on either side.