

CHAPTER XVIII

Talk with a man out of a window!--a proper saying.

Much Ado about Nothing.

We must proceed with our extracts from Miss Mannering’s letters, which

throw light upon natural good sense, principle, and feelings, blemished by

an imperfect education and the folly of a misjudging mother, who called

her husband in her heart a tyrant until she feared him as such, and read

romances until she became so enamoured of the complicated intrigues which

they contain as to assume the management of a little family novel of her

own, and constitute her daughter, a girl of sixteen, the principal

heroine. She delighted in petty mystery and intrigue and secrets, and yet

trembled at the indignation which these paltry manoeuvres excited in her

husband’s mind. Thus she frequently entered upon a scheme merely for

pleasure, or perhaps for the love of contradiction, plunged deeper into it

than she was aware, endeavoured to extricate herself by new arts, or to

cover her error by dissimulation, became involved in meshes of her own

weaving, and was forced to carry on, for fear of discovery, machinations

which she had at first resorted to in mere wantonness.

Fortunately the young man whom she so imprudently introduced into her

intimate society, and encouraged to look up to her daughter, had a fund of

principle and honest pride which rendered him a safer intimate than Mrs.

Mannering ought to have dared to hope or expect. The obscurity of his

birth could alone be objected to him; in every other respect,

With prospects bright upon the world he came, Pure love of virtue, strong

desire of fame, Men watched the way his lofty mind would take, And all

foretold the progress he would make.

But it could not be expected that he should resist the snare which Mrs.

Mannering’s imprudence threw in his way, or avoid becoming attached to a

young lady whose beauty and manners might have justified his passion, even

in scenes where these are more generally met with than in a remote

fortress in our Indian settlements. The scenes which followed have been

partly detailed in Mannering’s letter to Mr. Mervyn; and to expand what is

there stated into farther explanation would be to abuse the patience of

our readers.

We shall therefore proceed with our promised extracts from Miss

Mannering’s letters to her friend.

SIXTH EXTRACT

‘I have seen him again, Matilda--seen him twice. I have used every

argument to convince him that this secret intercourse is dangerous to us

both; I even pressed him to pursue his views of fortune without farther

regard to me, and to consider my peace of mind as sufficiently secured by

the knowledge that he had not fallen under my father’s sword. He

answers--but how can I detail all he has to answer? He claims those hopes

as his due which my mother permitted him to entertain, and would persuade

me to the madness of a union without my father’s sanction. But to this,

Matilda, I will not be persuaded. I have resisted, I have subdued, the

rebellious feelings which arose to aid his plea; yet how to extricate

myself from this unhappy labyrinth in which fate and folly have entangled

us both!

‘I have thought upon it, Matilda, till my head is almost giddy; nor can I

conceive a better plan than to make a full confession to my father. He

deserves it, for his kindness is unceasing; and I think I have observed in

his character, since I have studied it more nearly, that his harsher

feelings are chiefly excited where he suspects deceit or imposition; and

in that respect, perhaps, his character was formerly misunderstood by one

who was dear to him. He has, too, a tinge of romance in his disposition;

and I have seen the narrative of a generous action, a trait of heroism, or

virtuous self-denial, extract tears from him which refused to flow at a

tale of mere distress. But then Brown urges that he is personally hostile

to him. And the obscurity of his birth, that would be indeed a

stumbling-block. O, Matilda, I hope none of your ancestors ever fought at

Poictiers or Agincourt! If it were not for the veneration which my father

attaches to the memory of old Sir Miles Mannering, I should make out my

explanation with half the tremor which must now attend it.’

SEVENTH EXTRACT

‘I have this instant received your letter--your most welcome letter!

Thanks, my dearest friend, for your sympathy and your counsels; I can only

repay them with unbounded confidence.

‘You ask me what Brown is by origin, that his descent should be so

unpleasing to my father. His story is shortly told. He is of Scottish

extraction, but, being left an orphan, his education was undertaken by a

family of relations settled in Holland. He was bred to commerce, and sent

very early to one of our settlements in the East, where his guardian had a

correspondent. But this correspondent was dead when he arrived in India,

and he had no other resource than to offer himself as a clerk to a

counting-house. The breaking out of the war, and the straits to which we

were at first reduced, threw the army open to all young men who were

disposed to embrace that mode of life; and Brown, whose genius had a

strong military tendency, was the first to leave what might have been the

road to wealth, and to choose that of fame. The rest of his history is

well known to you; but conceive the irritation of my father, who despises

commerce (though, by the way, the best part of his property was made in

that honourable profession by my great-uncle), and has a particular

antipathy to the Dutch--think with what ear he would be likely to receive

proposals for his only child from Vanbeest Brown, educated for charity by

the house of Vanbeest and Vanbruggen! O, Matilda, it will never do; nay,

so childish am I, I hardly can help sympathising with his aristocratic

feelings. Mrs. Vanbeest Brown! The name has little to recommend it, to be

sure. What children we are!’

EIGHTH EXTRACT

‘It is all over now, Matilda! I shall never have courage to tell my

father; nay, most deeply do I fear he has already learned my secret from

another quarter, which will entirely remove the grace of my communication,

and ruin whatever gleam of hope I had ventured to connect with it.

Yesternight Brown came as usual, and his flageolet on the lake announced

his approach. We had agreed that he should continue to use this signal.

These romantic lakes attract numerous visitors, who indulge their

enthusiasm in visiting the scenery at all hours, and we hoped that, if

Brown were noticed from the house, he might pass for one of those admirers

of nature, who was giving vent to his feelings through the medium of

music. The sounds might also be my apology, should I be observed on the

balcony. But last night, while I was eagerly enforcing my plan of a full

confession to my father, which he as earnestly deprecated, we heard the

window of Mr. Mervyn’s library, which is under my room, open softly. I

signed to Brown to make his retreat, and immediately reentered, with some

faint hopes that our interview had not been observed.

‘But, alas! Matilda, these hopes vanished the instant I beheld Mr.

Mervyn’s countenance at breakfast the next morning. He looked so

provokingly intelligent and confidential, that, had I dared, I could have

been more angry than ever I was in my life; but I must be on good

behaviour, and my walks are now limited within his farm precincts, where

the good gentleman can amble along by my side without inconvenience. I

have detected him once or twice attempting to sound my thoughts, and watch

the expression of my countenance. He has talked of the flageolet more than

once, and has, at different times, made eulogiums upon the watchfulness

and ferocity of his dogs, and the regularity with which the keeper makes

his rounds with a loaded fowling-piece. He mentioned even man-traps and

springguns. I should be loth to affront my father’s old friend in his own

house; but I do long to show him that I am my father’s daughter, a fact of

which Mr. Mervyn will certainly be convinced if ever I trust my voice and

temper with a reply to these indirect hints. Of one thing I am certain--I

am grateful to him on that account--he has not told Mrs. Mervyn. Lord help

me, I should have had such lectures about the dangers of love and the

night air on the lake, the risk arising from colds and fortune-hunters,

the comfort and convenience of sack-whey and closed windows! I cannot help

trifling, Matilda, though my heart is sad enough. What Brown will do I

cannot guess. I presume, however, the fear of detection prevents his

resuming his nocturnal visits. He lodges at an inn on the opposite shore

of the lake, under the name, he tells me, of Dawson; he has a bad choice

in names, that must be allowed. He has not left the army, I believe, but

he says nothing of his present views,

‘To complete my anxiety, my father is returned suddenly, and in high

displeasure. Our good hostess, as I learned from a bustling conversation

between her housekeeper and her, had no expectation of seeing him for a

week; but I rather suspect his arrival was no surprise to his friend Mr.

Mervyn. His manner to me was singularly cold and constrained, sufficiently

so to have damped all the courage with which I once resolved to throw

myself on his generosity. He lays the blame of his being discomposed and

out of humour to the loss of a purchase in the south-west of Scotland on

which he had set his heart; but I do not suspect his equanimity of being

so easily thrown off its balance. His first excursion was with Mr.

Mervyn’s barge across the lake to the inn I have mentioned. You may

imagine the agony with which I waited his return! Had he recognized Brown,

who can guess the consequence! He returned, however, apparently without

having made any discovery. I understand that, in consequence of his late

disappointment, he means now to hire a house in the neighbourhood of this

same Ellangowan, of which I am doomed to hear so much; he seems to think

it probable that the estate for which he wishes may soon be again in the

market. I will not send away this letter until I hear more distinctly what

are his intentions.’

‘I have now had an interview with my father, as confidential as, I

presume, he means to allow me. He requested me to-day, after breakfast, to

walk with him into the library; my knees, Matilda, shook under me, and it

is no exaggeration to say I could scarce follow him into the room. I

feared I knew not what. From my childhood I had seen all around him

tremble at his frown. He motioned me to seat myself, and I never obeyed a

command so readily, for, in truth, I could hardly stand. He himself

continued to walk up and down the room. You have seen my father, and

noticed, I recollect, the remarkably expressive cast of his features. His

eyes are naturally rather light in colour, but agitation or anger gives

them a darker and more fiery glance; he has a custom also of drawing in

his lips when much moved, which implies a combat between native ardour of

temper and the habitual power of self-command. This was the first time we

had been alone since his return from Scotland, and, as he betrayed these

tokens of agitation, I had little doubt that he was about to enter upon

the subject I most dreaded.


