

WHAT ARE YOUR HOBBIES?

According to your Zodiac sign you have a disposition for certain hobbies.

You may not necessarily have these hobbies but your inclinations lie towards

them.

CAPRICORN BORN.—Gardening. Nature Study. Rambles in the

countryside. Making things of almost any kind. Chemistry. Physics.

AQUARIAN BORN.—Aviation, ranging from actual flying to making

aeroplane models. Gliding. Constructing all kinds of articles. Painting

pictures. Drawing. Needlework.

PISCES BORN.—Traveling, especially by sea. Photography. Constructing

and using wireless apparatus. Making electrical apparatus. Theater-going

and amateur theatricals. Arts and crafts (girls).

ARIES BORN.—Traveling, touring. Anything connected with motor

cars. Sight-seeing. Making things. Reading. Arts and crafts (girls).

TAURUS BORN.—Constructive hobbies, from wireless to the building

of houses. Walking. Golf. Swimming. Collecting antiques.

GEMINI BORN.—Likely to be interested in inventions. Good at solving

puzzles. Football. Tennis. Nature rambling. Girls have a bent for

household duties, such as cooking, needlework, etc.

CANCER BORN.—Interested in the wonders of the world. Anxious to

see things and people. Music. Reading. Collecting antiques. Almost any

outdoor game. Girls are fond of needlework of the finer kinds.

LEO BORN.—Hobbies allied to the daily work. Intellectual reading,

especially anything bearing on historical matters. Going about. Golf.

Swimming. Making things of an artistic nature.

VIRGO BORN.—Indoor games. Making and repairing household articles.

Good at manual activities, from playing the piano to constructing toys. Prefers

to be amused indoors than out in the open.

LIBRA BORN.—Doing things to keep the home ship-shape. Football.

Cricket. Photography. Reading. Wireless. Needlework and knitting (girls).

SCORPIO BORN.—Scientific recreations of all kinds. Keeping pets.

Nature rambling. Girls take a keen interest in household duties. Card

playing. Seeing people. Dabbling in mysterious matters, such as thought-reading,

table-rapping, seances, etc.

SAGITTARIAN BORN.—Hobbies of an intellectual character. Walking.

Outdoor sports. Boxing. Nature study. Keeping pets. Reading.

[60]

WHAT IS YOUR LUCKY NUMBER?

Once more from the rising sun of the East further marvelous theories

have reached us through the paths of the ages. To many of our prosaic

Western minds, maybe not unnaturally, these ideas will at first sight appear

almost ridiculous. However, do not condemn numerical mysteries unheard,

for no Manual of Fortunetelling would be complete should it not include

a talk on this most arresting subject.

Students of numbers, as do astrologers and students of palmistry, declare

that there is no such thing as luck or chance in the world. They also state

that we are strongly but not inevitably influenced by certain powerful laws

of Nature.

Number science is certainly unknown to the great majority of us, but

there are some superstitions which are based on evil numbers; these superstitions

we treat with great respect. Very few of us really care to sit down

thirteen at table, while I have known a man go sad and smokeless rather

than be the third to light his cigarette off one match!

Fortunetelling by numbers is allied to astrology very closely indeed. Let

us now take each day of the week individually and see what information

we can get from it. You will find that very useful as a check upon your

other forms of fortunetelling.

ON WHAT DAY WERE YOU BORN?

If, as I suggested, we take the days of the week we shall find that they

in turn are influenced by the order in which they are found, or by the

number which is theirs. For instance, Sunday being the first day, is

influenced by No. 1, and Friday, being the sixth day takes No. 6 as its ruling

number.

According to the ancients each number has its corresponding planet; here is

a little table showing the planet representing and ruling over each number.

No. 0.

Represented by Space.

No. 1.

Represented by The Sun.

No. 2.

Represented by The Moon

No. 3.

Represented by Mars.

No. 4.

Represented by Mercury.

No. 5.

Represented by Jupiter.

No. 6.

Represented by Venus.

No. 7.

Represented by Saturn.

No. 8.

Represented by Uranus.

No. 9.

Represented by Neptune.

Taking each day of the week in order, we find the following characteristics.

TABLE OF DAYS IN WEEK

No. 1 (Sunday).—You will see by your table that this day takes the Sun

for its ruler—Sun-day. It is a fortunate day; persons born on a Sunday have

a brave and honest influence on them. They will be optimistic, but not[61]

foolishly so, while at the same time they have great pride in the reputation

of themselves and their families. If they have any fault it is, maybe, that this

pride is felt, a little too strongly; they may be inclined to take themselves

rather too seriously. However, I repeat, this is an excellent day.

No. 2 (Monday).—This day is the Moon-day. The lesson for Monday

men to learn is steadiness. They are too easily influenced and are blown

hither and thither upon life's winds. They adapt themselves well to change

of place, circumstances, scene, and frequently follow the sea. They have

plenty of imagination in their natures, and should cultivate common sense.

No. 3 (Tuesday).—The day of Mars (French—Mardi). Frequently the

engineers of the world. An ambitious go-ahead day is Tuesday. These

Tuesday folk are the explorers, the men who emigrate, and the earnest

patriots of life. Soldiers, workers at the furnace among other workers, are

found among those born on Tuesday. Their womenfolk are inclined to be

rather shrewish and domineering. They are not naturally good managers,

and should cultivate this quality because they are always rare workers.

No. 4 (Wednesday).—The table tells us that these are the Mercurians.

The men are quick at calculating figures, and always capable and thoughtful

workers. Mercury, as its name implies, gives quickness, with business trading

capacity. The women appear not to be so favorably influenced, they

must guard against grumbling and gossip; then they may do well enough.

No. 5 (Thursday).—Under the planet of Jupiter, these Thursday people

have many good qualities. They are liberal and good natured, but have one

vice—the outcome of their virtue. They are inclined to be too liberal with

themselves, which is extravagance. Given an idea they can turn it to good

account, but do not, as a rule, originate ideas. Statesmen are here found;

let these Jupiterians beware of a love of display and what is commonly

known as side. Then they are very excellent people indeed.

No. 6 (Friday).—Look at the table—see Venus is the planet of Friday.

This accounts for many things. Here we see the typical Venus type. Gay,

light-hearted, with no thought of the morrow, they flit happily through life

like a gilded butterfly upon the wing. If they lack taste they over-dress.

Their good qualities are their charming personalities, pleasing manners, and

a quick command of music and art. They should beware of being only

butterflies, and should cultivate strength of character. They should also

obtain by hook or by crook a liking for hard work; it will serve them in

good stead.

No. 7 (Saturday).—Saturday, as its name tells us, has sad Saturn for its

planet. Here we have the exact opposite to the persons mentioned who were

born on a Friday. Saturday people miss half the joy of living by their cold

and calculating natures. Careful with money, they are patient workers,

they must beware of being miserly, and should certainly cultivate their

missing sense of humor. The good qualities in these people are their

sincerely earnest outlook and their capacity for an almost endless grind of[62]

hard work. Their womenfolk frequently make old maids and should practice

sweet temper and a kindly feeling towards the rest of the household.

YOUR OWN NUMBER

But there is much more in the science of numbers than that which can

be gleaned from the days of the week. There is your own personal number,

the number which influences you and your actions more than any other.

If you know your number, think how you can use it for good and avoid

others for ill! The finding of your number is a simple matter when you

have mastered the elements of numerology, which is the science of numbers.

Let us explain how your own number is found. First, write down your

birth-date, the day of the month, the month itself and the year. Thus, three

items are required. Take first the day of the month. If it consists of one

figure, leave it. If it consists of two, add them together, and, if the answer

comes to two figures, add them together. All this may appear a little involved,

but it is not, as one or two examples will show.

Suppose you were born on the 9th of the month, then 9 is the number

you want.

But, suppose it was the 16th, then six and one make seven. Therefore

7 is the required number.

Again, if you were born on the 29th, then nine and two make eleven, but

as eleven consists of two figures, you must add them together, and they

make 2.

So much for the day of the month, now for the month itself. January

stands for one, February for 2, and so on, to December for 12. The numbers

of the months from January to September can stand as they are, but October

November and December, being 10, 11 and 12, must be added up, as already

described. Thus October is one, November is two and December three.

Thirdly, the number of the year must be considered. Say you were born

in 1910. These figures add up to eleven, and eleven, being double figures,

adds up to 2. Therefore 1910 is equivalent to 2.

Work out your figures here.

You have now obtained three separate figures, add them together and if

they come to a one-figure number, that is the number which you require.

On the other hand, if it is a double-figured amount, add the two figures

as before, until you arrive at a single-figured amount. Then that is the

number you require.

So as to make the whole thing perfectly clear, we will take a complete

example and work it out, exactly as you must work out your own birth-date.

Example.—12th September, 1913.

12 = 1 + 2 = 3

September is the 9th month = 9

1913 = 1 + 9 + 1 + 3 = 14 = 1 + 4 = 5

3 + 9 + 5 = 17 = 1 + 7 = 8

[63]

Therefore, the personal number of anyone born on 12th September, 1913,

is 8. Eight should guide and influence all his or her actions. We are not

going to pretend that benefits will accrue on every occasion that the personal

number is observed, but we are going to say that we have noted some

marvelous pieces of good fortune when it has.

When you have found your personal number, there are several ways in

which you can use it. Suppose your number is the one just found, eight;

then you can conclude that the eighth day of any month will be a propitious

one for you. But that is not the only one. The 17th is equally good,

because one plus seven gives eight. Moreover, the 26th is in a similar

position. Two and six make eight.

Yet another way to use your personal number arises when you want to

know whether some important step should be taken on a definite day. What

is the particular day? Add up its numerological values, exactly as you did

with your birthday, and if it resolves itself into the same number as your

personal number, you may go ahead with cheerfulness. Put forth your

best effort, and, on the day, you will have ample chances of success.

THE NUMBER OF YOUR NAME

Numerology permits of still another step. Take your own name and see

what number it is equal to. You will be able to do this in the following

way: A stands for one, B for two, C for three, and so on. When you reach

I, which is 9, commence again and give J the value of one, then continue.

To make all this clear, we will set out the values of the complete alphabet:

1 = A J S

2 = B K T

3 = C L U

4 = D M V

5 = E N W

6 = F O X

7 = G P Y

8 = H Q Z

9 = I R —

Thus, suppose your name is Joan Shirley, the letters resolve themselves

into the following numbers:—

J O A N S H I R L E Y

1 + 6 + 1 + 5 + 1 + 8 + 9 + 9 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 55

55 = 5 + 5 = 10 = 1 + 0 = 1

From all that we have said, it will be clear that the birthdate may be used

for finding the personal number, or the letters of the name may be used. On

rare occasions, the two ways will provide the same number. When this is

the case, great faith should be placed in that number. But, when the two

ways give different numbers, what? Does one disprove the other? No. You[64]

simply have two numbers favorable to you. The birthdate number is the

more definite and reliable because your very existence is based on it.

A word at the end. Married ladies must use their maiden name for

finding the name number.


