                                                                                                                  [Pg 29]
                                           CHAPTER III
                                      THE CELESTIAL HOUSES


The imaginary circle which passes immediately over your head as you face the South is called the Prime
Vertical. This is divided for astrological purposes into twelve equal divisions called Houses, six of which are
above the horizon and six below it. They are counted from the East Horizon under the Earth to the West, and
thence through the zenith to the East again. The ﬁgure in Section IV., chapter v., will make the idea easy of
comprehension.
Each such division or House carries its own signiﬁcation, and it has been ascertained beyond all doubt or cavil
that the ruling of the Ancients in this matter is altogether reliable, however empirical it may appear.
The First House governs the personal appearance, but chieﬂy the face and head. The Second House rules over
ﬁnance, movable eﬀects, commerce. In the body it governs the neck and throat. The Third House governs short
journeys, letters, and other means of communication, near relations or neighbours. In the body it governs the
arms and lungs. The Fourth House governs real estate, the residence, the produce of the earth, the mother of          [Pg 30]

the subject, and the end of life. In the body, the breasts and thorax. The Fifth House governs progeny, the sex
instincts, domestic relations, and social pleasures. In the body, the back and heart. The Sixth House governs
the health, servants, and personal comforts of the subject, clothes, food, and other physical requisites,
sanitation, hygiene. In the body it rules over the abdomen and lower viscera. The Seventh House has dominion
over marriage, contracts, agreements, partners, and matters of exchange. In the body it has relation to the loins
and kidneys. The Eighth House rules death, loss, legacies and dowries, and matters appertaining to the
deceased. In the body it is related to the excretory system. The Ninth House is said to govern long journeys,
publications, religious beliefs, foreign lands, and legal aﬀairs. In the body it rules the thighs. The Tenth House
rules over position, honour and fame of the subject, the father, superiors of all orders. In the body it rules over
the knees. The Eleventh House governs friends, social relations, societies and companies with which the
subject is concerned. In the body it has relation to the legs from calf to ankle. The Twelfth House rules
ambushes, restraints, privations, imprisonments, conﬁnements, and all limitations of the personal freedom. In
the body it rules the ankles and feet.
Applying these signiﬁcations to the interpretation of a horoscope it will be seen that if Mars should be rising at
the moment of birth there will be a scar or mark on the face. Observations of this sort will frequently assist to
determine the time of birth when it is not known. Similarly with other planets in the same or other Houses; but of
this more anon.




                                                                                                                      [Pg 31]
                                            CHAPTER IV
                                 THE ASTRONOMICAL ASPECTS


Aspects are certain angular distances measured on the Ecliptic, and they form a fundamental part of
astrological science. Any planet may be good or bad in its eﬀects on the character and destiny, according to the
aspect that it throws to the chief points of the Horoscope. The aspects are: The semisquare aspect of 45
degrees, sextile of 60 degrees, square of 90 degrees, trine of 120 degrees, sesquiquadrate of 135 degrees, and
the opposition of 180 degrees. There is also the conjunction, when bodies are in the same degree or part of a
Sign.
The good aspects are the trine and sextile; the evil being the semisquare, square, sesquiquadrate, and
opposition. The aspect of a planet determines its eﬀects, whether for good or evil. The conjunction is good with
good planets, such as Jupiter and Venus, and evil with malefic planets such as Mars and Saturn.
When planets are the same distance North or South of the Equator they are in parallel declination (p.d.), and
they then act as if in conjunction. Also when planets are in mutual disposition, that is to say, occupying one
another’s signs, they act as if they were in conjunction.
Planets in conjunction act according to their simple natures, but when in aspect, according to the nature of that       [Pg 32]

aspect. The beneﬁc planets Jupiter, Venus, Sun, Moon, and also Mercury when in good disposition with another
planet or in a congenial Sign, produce good eﬀects by their conjunctions and by their trine and sextile aspects;
but when in square, semisquare, or sesquisquare aspect they are uniformly evil in eﬀect. On the other hand, the
maleﬁc planets Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, and Mars, together with Mercury when ill-disposed or in uncongenial
Signs, are evil in their eﬀects when in conjunction with the signiﬁcant points of the horoscope; also when in evil
aspect; but they nevertheless produce good effects when in good aspect.

                                               The Significators.
The more important points of the Horoscope to which aspect can be thrown are called “Signiﬁcators.” The
general signiﬁcators in any horoscope are the Sun, the Moon, the Midheaven (the degree which holds the
meridian of the horoscope), and the Ascendant (the degree which is rising). But every planet can be a particular
significator in its own province, namely, in the Sign which it rules, and the House in which it is found at birth.
In a general sense the Moon is signiﬁcant of the mother, female relations, the personal health and fortunes and
the changes incident to these. The Sun in the same way indicates the father, male relations, the vital principle,
and position. Mercury is the signiﬁcator of the mind and intellect, the faculties generally. Venus is signiﬁcatrix of
love aﬀairs, domestic relations, pleasures, and of young female relations, sisters, &c. Mars is signiﬁcator of          [Pg 33]

enterprises, strifes, and young male relations. Jupiter is signiﬁcator of increase and emoluments; Saturn of
legacies, inheritance, and aged persons; Uranus of civic and governmental bodies; Neptune of voyages and
psychic experiences. The chief points to be regarded, however, are the Midheaven, the Ascendant, and the
places of the Sun and Moon.



                                                                                                                        [Pg 34]
