                                                                                            [Pg 76]
                                           CHAPTER VIII
                                   MARRIAGE CIRCUMSTANCES


The question as to how, when, and where marriage will take place is an all-absorbing one to the majority of men
and women, and no less important than interesting. Astrology has made it possible to answer these questions
categorically and with particular precision and verity.
The conditions of connubial life are judged (in a male horoscope) from the condition of the Moon and Venus,
and (in a female horoscope) from that of the Sun and Mars. The planet to which the luminary ﬁrst forms an
aspect after birth (that which it “applies” to) denotes the marriage partner. If the aspect be good there will be
agreement and the choice of a partner will be fortunate. But if the aspect be evil, there will be trouble after
marriage. The nature of the planet to which the luminary forms its aspect after birth ought also to be considered,
for if it be that the luminary applies by a good aspect to a beneﬁc planet, or to one that is well-placed and
aspected, then there will be considerable happiness and fortune in marriage. On the other hand, if both the
aspect and the planet be evil—as if the Moon were applying to the opposition of Saturn or Uranus or Mars—               [Pg 77]

then the fate in marriage will be extremely unhappy and disagreements will be frequent and even permanent.
When the aspect and the nature of the planet are at variance, as when the Moon has a good aspect to Saturn,
or a bad aspect to Jupiter, there will be a mingled fortune of good and ill in marriage. There is no better sign of
happiness and harmony in marriage than a good aspect between the Sun and Moon.
Moreover, it may happen that the Moon applies by good aspect to a planet after birth, and that there is at the
same time a maleﬁc body in the 7th House. This indicates that there will be agreement in the connubial life, but
that bereavement will soon follow.
When the Moon applies to Neptune there will be some peculiarity or touch of genius in the partner, according as
Neptune may be aspected. Uranus shows eccentricity and sometimes wilfulness. Saturn shows steadiness,
industry; or jealousy and coldness. Jupiter indicates a good nature, bountiful and honest, but may be given to
excess and extravagance. Mars induces industry and practicality, but it gives a strong temper and considerable
independence. The Sun shows dignity and loyalty, but may indicate ostentation and foolish pride. Venus
denotes peacefulness and a genial, reﬁned nature, but its perversion brings indiﬀerence, neglect and
disorderliness. Mercury denotes an active and energetic nature, but may produce a busybody and meddler.
Everything depends on the aspect which the signiﬁcant luminary throws to the planet it applies to, for if the
aspect be good it will indicate the better qualities of that planet; but if evil, then there is frequently the
unfortunate consequence of choosing a partner in whom the perverted qualities of the planet are predominant.            [Pg 78]

Good planets in the 7th House indicate a good partner, but when at the same time the aspect of the luminary is
evil, it will denote a good marriage, followed by bereavement.
Marriage to a widow (or widower) occurs when Mars and Saturn are the planets concerned in the indications, as
if Mars be in the 7th House and in aspect to Saturn, or if the Moon apply to Mars when aspected by Saturn, or
when one of them is in the 5th House and the other in the 7th.
Love aﬀairs before marriage are indicated by the 5th House, the planets therein and their aspects, and in a
general sense by Venus in a male horoscope and Mars in a female horoscope.
Thus if Venus (or Mars) be aﬄicted by Saturn or Uranus there will be disappointment in the early aﬀections.
Uranus in aspect to Venus gives romantic attachments and much inﬂuence over the other sex. Neptune in
aspect shows idealism, and when aﬄicting Venus it produces chaos and entanglement, danger of seduction.
Mars afflicting Venus gives ardour and impulse.

                                            More than one Marriage
is indicated when the luminary is in aspect to more than one planet in a double-bodied sign,e.g., Gemini,
Sagittarius, or Pisces. Or, if the luminary itself be in a double sign and in aspect to any planet other than one
which may be in the 7th House. Also a double sign being on the cusp of the 7th House, and the luminary in a
fruitful sign, Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces, or in aspect to planets in those signs. All these are signs of more than     [Pg 79]

one marriage during life.
Signs of separation or divorce are as follows: The luminary applying to the ill aspect of a maleﬁc planet, Venus
aﬄicted, and Uranus in the 7th House or aﬄicting the Moon or Venus. In female horoscopes change the
Significators, taking the Sun and Mars instead of the Moon and Venus, and judge the same.
Where more than one marriage is shown, the ruler of the 7th House denotes the ﬁrst partner, and the planet
ruling the sign it occupies is called its “dispositor” or “displacer.” This dispositor represents the second partner.
The planet to which the signiﬁcant luminary applies is that which is taken to describe the partner, according to
the sign it is in. But if this planet be retrograde, i.e., going backwards in the zodiac by apparent motion, then it
only represents an attachment which will be broken oﬀ. Its dispositor then becomes the signiﬁcator of the
partner. But the ruler of the 7th House is taken for the condition and fortunes of the partner, and if it be aﬄicted
or badly placed and weak in the horoscope, then the marriage will be ill-assorted, unfortunate, and full of
dissatisfaction. The contrary is the case when the significant planet is well placed and aspected.
The place or circumstances under which the partner will be met may be known from the sign and house
occupied by the planet to which the luminary ﬁrst applies after birth. Thus if it be in the 11th House, the partner
will be met among friends, at the house of a friend, or introduced by a friend. If in the 3rd House, then on a short    [Pg 80]

journey or in correspondence; in the 5th, at a place of amusement; in the 10th, in the course of business; and so
on, judgment being made according to the places and circumstances ruled by the House occupied by the
planet.




                                                                                                       [Pg 81]
                                           CHAPTER IX
                                    INDICATIONS OF PROGENY


The 5th House, the planets therein and the position and aspects of the Moon, have to be considered in this
matter.
If the 5th House be occupied by beneﬁc planets, or planets well aspected by others, then the progeny will be a
source of satisfaction and credit to the Subject, and will be reared to maturity. But the contrary is the case when
the 5th House is occupied by malefic planets and such as may be heavily afflicted.
The Moon represents the tendency in the male and the capacity in the female, and when well aspected, or free
from evil aspects and well placed, then there will be good fortune in connection with the progeny.
When Uranus aﬄicts a planet in the 5th House, there will be some premature births, and generally it will be
observed that when planets are opposed from the 11th and 5th Houses, or maleﬁc planets occupy those
houses, there is trouble through the progeny, and usually the loss of one or more during infancy is to be feared.
As to the number of children, no empirical rules exist for the judgment of this matter, which necessarily is a         [Pg 82]

diﬃcult one owing to the fact that we have no means of comparing the horoscopes of man and wife, but the
nature of the sign on the cusp of the 5th House is usually to be depended upon for an approximation. Thus
Aries, Leo, and Capricornus give small families. Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, and Pisces give large families,
and the other signs yield a moderate family. When the Moon is strong, angular, and not aﬄicted, the number is
increased. Twins are born from double-bodied signs occupying the cusp of the 5th House, or planets in the 5th
in a double-bodied sign.
The condition of each child is known in a general manner from the alternate Houses, commencing with the 5th.
Thus the ﬁrst child is (in a male horoscope) ruled by the 5th House, and planets therein; the second child by the
7th House; the third by the 9th House, and so on. In a female horoscope the ﬁrst child is ruled by the 4th House;
the second by the 6th House, and so on.
Thus if it be found that there is probability of loss of some of the progeny, the children most liable to aﬄiction
may be known by this method; for the Houses which contain the maleﬁc planets, or the aﬄicted planets,
correspond to the afflicted progeny.
Illustrious children are born to the Subject when the ruler of the 5th House is in elevation and well aspected, and
in a congenial sign. But if the ruler of the 5th House be badly placed and aspected and in a sign of debility, i.e.,
opposite to one over which it rules, then the progeny are ill-equipped for the battle of life, either mentally or
morally. The particular qualities and fortunes of the progeny can only be known from their individual horoscopes.      [Pg 83]

When maleﬁc planets hold the 12th House in a female horoscope, there will be danger in conﬁnement; and the
same happens if either of the luminaries, but particularly the Moon, be afflicted in the 5th House.




                                                                                                                       [Pg 84]
                                            CHAPTER X
                                     VOYAGES AND JOURNEYS


The indications of short journeys, inland and around the coast, are to be judged from the 3rd House and the
planets therein. If a movable sign be on the cusp of the 3rd House, or planets in a movable sign occupy the 3rd
House, then there will be much travelling and many short journeys to and fro. The aspects to these planets in
the 3rd will indicate whether such journeys will be mainly successful or not. When there are no aspects to the
planet or planets in the 3rd House the fortune of short journeys is to be judged from the nature of the planet in
the 3rd, as if Jupiter, they will be fortunate and lucrative; but if Saturn, unfortunate and subject to many
hindrances and delays. When maleﬁc planets are aﬄicted in the 3rd House, or maleﬁc planets in the 3rd throw
evil aspects to the Sun or Moon, then there will be dangers and accidents.
Watery signs on the cusp of the 3rd House, or planets in watery signs in the 3rd, indicate cruising and yachting,
short journeys by water around the coast. If the Moon be in good aspect to these planets, then there will be
safety in passage; but if aﬄicted by the planets in the 3rd there will be danger of collision, capsizing, &c.,         [Pg 85]

according to the nature of the planet in the 3rd House.
Long voyages are to be judged in exactly similar manner from the 9th House, the planets therein and their
aspects.
The 4th House indicates the place of birth, and if this House hold a beneﬁc planet, or either the Sun or Moon,
well aspected, then there is fortune in the place of birth, and journeys should only be undertaken when they are
without doubt fortunate in their issues and admit of a return to the native place. When, however, the 4th House
is occupied by evil planets or planets heavily aﬄicted, it will be advisable to remove from the place of birth and
seek fortune in more propitious localities.
In this matter the choice is made by reference to that planet which holds the greatest power for good in the
horoscope of birth, and the quarter of the Heavens which it occupies will indicate the direction, as from the
place of birth, to which the Subject should repair.
Thus, if between the East horizon and the meridian, South-east; between the meridian and the West horizon,
South-west; and so of the rest. The points of the compass follow the cardinal points of the Heavens, the
Midheaven being South; the Nadir, North; the Ascendant, East; and the Descendant, West. If a maleﬁc planet is
rising or setting at birth it is advisable to ﬁx the place of residence so much to the Eastward of the birthplace as
will suﬃce to bring the maleﬁc planets out of the angles of the horoscope. The same if maleﬁc planets occupy
the 10th or 4th Houses. On the contrary, if beneﬁc planets are in the 3rd and 9th Houses the Subject should            [Pg 86]

move Westward so as to bring the benefic influences into the 10th and 4th Houses.
When beneﬁc planets or planets well aspected occupy the angles of the ﬁgure at birth the Subject should not
travel far, nor reside long away from the place of birth.
Indications of many voyages are as follows: Many planets in watery signs, Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, and
also in the sign Virgo. When the majority of the planets are in cardinal and ﬂexed signs, Aries, Gemini, Cancer,
Virgo, Libra, Sagittarius, Capricornus, and Pisces, there will be many changes and journeys. Also if the Sun,
Moon, Mars, and Mercury are in either the 3rd, 9th, 12th, or 6th Houses, there will be many journeys and long
explorations in foreign countries.
When planets are aﬄicted in watery signs there will be danger in voyages, and if the Moon or Sun be aﬄicted in
Virgo there will be submersion due to wreck.
Also, when there are planets, especially maleﬁcs, in Scorpio, Leo, Taurus, and Aquarius, aﬄicted by the
aspects of other planets, or themselves afflicting the Sun or Moon, then there is danger of drowning.
When the signs of voyaging are propitious, and especially when the indications in the 4th House are not so,
then removal from the place of birth to some other permanent centre of activity will be advisable. But when good
planets or planets well aspected are either rising or in the 4th House, the Subject should remain in his native
place, and in the end his patience will be justified.




                                                                                                                       [Pg 87]
                                           CHAPTER XI
                                    OF FRIENDS AND ENEMIES


The general harmony of the horoscope consists in the positions and aspects of the planets and their relations
with the luminaries. When this is conspicuous there will be many friends and supporters, and the associations of
the Subject will be pleasant and proﬁtable. But when the horoscope is fraught with evil aspects and angular
positions of the malefics there will be much strife and many enmities.
In a particular sense the friends and associations of the Subject are to be known from the 11th House and the
planets therein. For if there be a beneﬁc planet in the 11th, especially if in good aspect to either of the
luminaries, there will be many friends and adherents.
Similarly, the enemies of the Subject are known from the 7th House, and secret enemies from the 12th. Maleﬁc
planets therein, especially in evil aspect to the Sun or Moon, shows many opponents.
Neptune in any maleﬁc aspect to the Sun or Moon shows danger of deceit and treachery being practisedupon              [Pg 88]

the Subject, and if violent testimonies concur from the ill aspects of Mars or Uranus he will be in danger of an
ambush. Saturn in the 7th or 12th shows long feuds and implacable enmities. Uranus therein shows litigation
and heckling of creditors. Mars therein is an index of violence and passionate hatred. Mercury therein shows
much scandal and many petty annoyances.
Now observe the places of the maleﬁc planets and the Houses wherein they are situated. Take the date when
the Sun is in the same longitude as any of these maleﬁc planets, which will be the same in any year, and this
will be the birthday of persons who are to be avoided as likely to bring mischief into the life. Supposing, for
instance, that Saturn is found at birth in the 10th House, in the 13th degree of the sign Aquarius. Reference to
the Ephemeris (Sect. II., chap. i.) will show that the Sun is in Aquarius 13 on the 1st and 2nd February. Hence it
would be unfortunate for the Subject to serve any man who was born between the 28th January and the 3rd
February in any year. Also, if Uranus were in Leo 23 in the 7th House he should not go into partnership or
marriage with anybody born on or near the 15th August in any year.
Take now the places of the beneﬁc planets, and also the place of the Moon, and ﬁnd the corresponding Solar
dates, for these will be the birth dates of such persons as should be cultivated and drawn into close association
for mutual benefit.
Observe also the trines and sextiles of the beneﬁc planets and of the Moon, and the squares and opposi
                                                                                                    tions of          [Pg 89]

the malefics, for these will operate in a minor degree in a similar manner as already indicated.
A comparison of the horoscopes of persons, whether kings or plebeians, with those of others who have wrought
great good or evil in their lives, will immediately establish this observation. Indeed there is nothing more
dependable in the whole range of scientiﬁc observation than this sympathy and antipathy of horoscopes and
their corresponding results. It is an argument for the claim of its advocates that Astrology should be regarded in
the light of a science, for if the planets act not at all upon the dispositions and tendencies of men their squares
and oppositions in two separate horoscopes would have no signiﬁcation. Let those who are unhappily mated
compare their horoscopes and they will ﬁnd the signs of discord to which reference has been made above. On
the other hand, let any man who has been lifted to wealth, fame, or position by the patronage of another
compare his horoscope with that of his benefactor, and it will be found that the beneﬁc planets in the latter hold
the places of the Sun, Moon, Midheaven, or Ascendant in his own. This frequently accounts for the fact that
men with comparatively unfortunate horoscopes are sometimes found in positions of inﬂuence and in the
enjoyment of considerable fortune. The complex fabric of life has its warp and woof wherein many coloured
threads are woven together for the completing of the grand design, and the great loom of life has its wheels
within wheels which only the Great Artiﬁcer can understand and regulate. We here below, subjects all of
interplanetary action, must content ourselves with the design as revealed to us in the history of mankind, or we      [Pg 90]

must seek to understand the purpose of life, its motif, the complex laws which operate to bring about the
unfoldment of the great plan, and thence to prognosticate that which hereafter shall be revealed to the
commonplace observer.




                                                                                                                      [Pg 91]
                                            CHAPTER XII
                                             THE END OF LIFE


The end of life is judged from the planets occupying the 8th and 4th Houses, for the 8th denotes Death, and the
4th denotes the ﬁnal resting-place of man. When beneﬁc planets, or the Luminaries well aspected, occupy
these Houses, you may judge that the end will be peaceful, normal, and that death will take place in the midst of
congenial and even exceptionally agreeable surroundings.
When, however, the maleﬁc planets hold these Houses, or aﬄict the luminaries therein, you may judge greater
stress and privation.
Uranus in the 8th House denotes a sudden death, and the same result is observed when the Luminaries therein
are aﬄicted by Uranus. Neptune in the 8th denotes danger of trance, coma, and simulated death, and when this
position is observed it is necessary that all the signs of mortiﬁcation should be present before interment is
eﬀected. Saturn produces death by privation and obstructions, by chills and colds. Mars induces death by fevers
and inflammatory action, and frequently by hæmorrhage.
Planets in Fixed signs in the 8th House show death from heart or throat aﬀections, aﬀections of the excretory            [Pg 92]


