

CHAPTER VI.

CONCERNING THE TWELVE HOUSES OF HEAVEN AND THEIR POWERS

The ancient astrologers divided the heavens into twelve houses.

The First House.—This is called the Ascendant, and the

planet rising therein—whether well or ill-dignified—will materially

affect the mind, bodily appearance and fate of the native through his

whole existence. This house is masculine, and governs the head and face

of man and, if the planet Mars be in this house at the time of birth,

there will always be some blemish or mole in the face of the native; if

a few out of the degrees have ascended the scar or blemish is, without

fail, on the upper part of the head; if the middle part of the sign

ascends the mark is in the middle of the face; if the latter part of

the sign is ascending the mark is near the chin. This house represents

the head, the tongue and the memory, and it governs in colours white.

The Second House.—This house has signification of the native's

wealth and worldly goods. The house is feminine, ruling the neck, and

the colour is green.

The Third House.—This governs brothers and sisters, short

journeys, neighbours, letters and writings. It is masculine and governs

the hands, arms and shoulders; its colours are red and yellow mixed.

The Fourth House.—This rules the father, inheritances or

property of the native, and shows his condition at the close of life.

It is feminine, and rules the stomach, breast and lungs; its colour is

red.

The Fifth House.—This signifies the children of the native,

also his success in speculation and hazardous games, the pleasures he

enjoys and the wealth of the father. It rules the heart, back and

liver, is masculine, and represents in colour black and white mixed.

The Sixth House.—This concerns the native's servants, sheep,

goats and small cattle. It also signifies the father's kindred. This

house is feminine. It rules the belly and intestines and its colour is

black.

The Seventh House gives judgment of marriage and describes the

man or woman in all love questions. It is masculine, it rules the

haunches, and its colour is black.

The Eighth House argues of death, of legacies and wills, also of

the kind of death a man shall die; it is a feminine house. It rules the

lower parts of the trunk of the body; its colours are green and black.

The Ninth House gives judgment on voyages and long journeys, and

also on events happening to the wife's kindred. It rules the hips and

thighs. It is a masculine house; its colours are green and white.

The Tenth House is called the Mid-heaven, and is

feminine. This concerns the native's mother, and also his calling. It

rules the knees and hams, and its colours are red and white.

The Eleventh House represents friends and friendship. It is

masculine and rules the legs.

The Twelfth House.—This house is often called the Evil

Dæmon, for it is the house of sorrow, self-undoing, enemies and

imprisonment. It governs great cattle. It is feminine, and rules the

feet and toes, and in colour it governs green.

The strongest houses are the first (the Ascendant) and the tenth

(the Mid-heaven). The first, fourth, seventh, and tenth are

called Angular Houses, and represent the four cardinal points of the

compass; thus the first is east, the seventh west, the fourth is north,

and the tenth south. The second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh houses are

called Succedent Houses; the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth houses

are termed Cadent Houses (see plate 1). Any planet posited in a Cadent

House is regarded as weak in its effects on the native. It is necessary

to have thoroughly mastered the influences of the twelve houses, as

well as those of the seven planets, and of the signs of the zodiac,

before attempting to cast a nativity or to work a horary question.

 

CHAPTER VII.

AN EXPLANATION OF VARIOUS TERMS USED IN ASTROLOGY

Ascension, Right.—The distance any body or point in the heavens

is from the beginning of the ecliptic or first point of Aries. It is

measured in degrees and minutes of a degree. It is thus abbreviated, A.

R.

Ascension, Oblique.—If a star be not on the equator, it will,

when it rises, form an angle with that part of the equator which is

rising at the same time, and this is called its

Ascensional Difference.—This, added to its right ascension (A.

R.) if it have south declination, but subtracted from it if it

have north declination, gives its oblique ascension.

Application signifies the approach of two planets and is of

three kinds: first, when a planet, swift of motion, applies to one of

slower progress: for example, we will suppose Mercury posited in 16

degrees of the sign Gemini, and Mars in 21 degrees of the same sign

(both being in direct motion), Mercury being swifter would

overtake and form a conjunction with Mars, which is termed a direct

application. The second kind of application is formed by two

retrograde planets: thus we will suppose Mercury in 16 degrees of

Gemini and Saturn in 15 degrees of the same sign, both retrograde.

Mercury being the swiftest planet, applies to Saturn, a more ponderous

planet, by retrogradation, and this is called a retrograde

application. The third kind of application is when one planet,

being direct in motion, meets another which is retrograde: for

instance, we will suppose Mercury retrograde in 16 degrees of Gemini,

and Saturn direct in motion in 12 degrees of the same sign; here

Mercury, being the higher planet, applies to a conjunction of

Saturn by a retrograde motion. These two last are considered

evil applications. It should also be remembered that the

superior planets, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, never apply to the inferior

planets, Venus, Mercury and the Moon, except by retrograde motion; but

the inferior planets apply in both ways.

Besieging signifies a planet situated between the two malevolent

planets, Saturn and Mars: thus, if Saturn were in the 12th degree of

Aries, Jupiter in the 14th, and Mars in the 16th, Jupiter would then be

besieged by the two malefic planets, Saturn and Mars. This is,

of course, an evil position.

Cazimi.—A planet is said to be in cazimi when it is in

the heart of the Sun: that is, only 17 minutes before or after the Sun.

All astrologers agree that a planet is fortified by this position, but

a planet when combust is very evil in its influences.

Direct motion signifies that a planet is moving on its natural

course, according to the succession of the signs of the zodiac: thus a

planet is direct in motion when it moves from Aries to Taurus,

or from Taurus to Gemini.

Frustration means the approach of a swift planet to an aspect

with one of slower motion; but before it can approach near enough to

join that aspect the more weighty planet is joined to some other, by

which the first aspect is frustrated.

Hayz is when a masculine diurnal planet is situated above the

horizon in the daytime, or when a feminine nocturnal planet is placed

below the horizon in the night-time; this is fortunate in its

influence.

Node.—That part of the ecliptic where a planet passes out of

north into south latitude is its south node; that where it goes into

north latitude is its north node.

Oriental and Occidental.—A planet, when oriental, rises before

the Sun; when occidental sets after him and is seen above the horizon

when the Sun is down; consequently, when a planet is oriental it is

posited in the east, and when occidental, in the west.

From the fourth house eastward to the tenth is oriental and from the

tenth westward to the fourth is occidental. But or

are oriental between the first and tenth and its

opposite quarter and are occidental between the tenth and

seventh and its opposite quarter.

Void of course is when a planet is separated from another

planet, and does not, during its continuance in the same sign, form any

aspect with any other planet. This most usually happens with the Moon.

The effect of this is

To face Chapter VIII.

 