

CHAPTER XIII.

SOLAR HOROSCOPES[15]

JANUARY.—AQUARIUS

The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-second of January

to the Twenty-first of February.

The man born under this influence will be of medium stature, good

genius and a great speaker. He will achieve what he desires and will

become famous in his own country.

He will be subject to melancholy, very religious and of a highly

conscientious nature. The stars, however, destine him to pass through

much poverty in his youth and he will have other troubles in the matter

of deaths of relations and friends before he is thirty. He will travel

much and, in his early youth, he will suffer from illness. He will be

much influenced by women to his own detriment. He will lose his first

wife and will marry twice, but the second marriage will not be very

fortunate. At thirty he will be very seriously ill, but will recover

and live on to about sixty-four years.

The woman who is born at the above-mentioned dates will have a charming

and expressive face; her eyes will be soft and beautiful in shape and

her hair of a medium brown colour, neither very dark nor very fair. In

character she will be slightly melancholy and of a romantic turn of

mind. She will be happy in her marriage. She will have a serious

illness at fifty, but will recover from it through the affectionate

care of her husband, and will live to a good old age, surrounded by her

children's children.

FEBRUARY.—PISCES

The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-second of February

to the Twentieth of March.

The man who is born under the influence of this sign will be above

middle height, his chin will be fleshy, his eyes blue and his

complexion rather colourless. His forehead will be low and broad and

his eyes will express much kindness and goodness of disposition. He

will be very fond of aquatic pursuits and take great delight in

angling. He will not be studious, for he has not much perseverance, but

he will take delight in conversation of an instructive order. He will

not be much of a talker and will be slow to give his opinions on any

subject. He will be of a luxurious temperament and will be much

influenced by women. He will be economical in his household expenses,

but will spend money freely on his own pleasures out of his family

circle. He will be fond of travelling and will be more fortunate in

other places than in his own country. He will be ingenious and of good

counsel, yet wiser for others than for himself. He will lose his wife

early in life, but will not marry again, yet this more from indolence

than constancy of feeling.

The woman born at this time will be fairly good looking; her eyes will

be light blue and she will have a fair complexion and a dimple in the

right cheek. She will be of a good disposition and kind to the poor;

but yet she will be self-indulgent and much given to luxury of all

sorts. She will marry twice and have many children, but the stars do

not promise her much happiness. She will die at sixty-eight.

MARCH.—ARIES

The qualities given by this sign of the Zodiac last from the

Twentieth of March to the Twentieth of April.

The man born under this sign will be of medium stature, of fierce

countenance, with an aquiline nose, quickly moving eyes and a strongly

marked dimple in the chin. His hair will be of a reddish tint, his

forehead broad and his complexion florid. He will be a loud talker and

have much inclination for women and also for the pleasures of the

table. He will be fond of field sports and very courageous. He will be

subject to accidents, both from fire and from four-footed beasts. He

will be capricious in his affections and will suffer much from his

affairs with women in his youth, but will grow wiser towards middle

age. He will not marry. At fifty he will lose much money and will fall

into poverty, and thus become alienated from the friends of his youth.

His life will not be prolonged much beyond fifty-five years.

The woman born at this time will have a florid complexion, large

round-shaped eyes and a square chin. She will be of middle height and

rather strongly made. She will be quick-tempered, strong-willed, very

courageous and rather selfish. She will marry at twenty-three, but will

not have many children. She will be a widow in middle life and will

marry again within a year of her first husband's death. She will die

suddenly by an accident in her fifty-sixth year.

APRIL.—TAURUS

The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-first of April to

the Twenty-first of May.

The man born under this sign will have full lips, a short throat, and a

mole at the back of his neck. He will be subject to sudden fits of

anger and will be fierce and cruel. He will be fond of women, but will

not be much liked by them and will suffer much in consequence. He will

be ambitious, fortunate in business and energetic. He will not be very

prudent in speech and will often get himself in trouble by

over-communicativeness. He will marry a rich wife and will acquire much

money by legacies from her relations. He will be very ill at forty, but

he will survive it and come into much riches soon after it. His life

will go on to about sixty-two, when he will die of much the same

illness which he had at forty.

The woman born at this time will be graceful and well formed, with

luxuriant hair and a full and well-formed mouth. She will have a good

complexion and will have fascinating manners, so that she will much

attract men. She will run great risks both from fire and water, and she

will be subject to weakness of the eyes to such excess that towards the

end of her life she will have reason to fear blindness, but she will

escape this calamity. Although she will have many lovers she will only

marry once, for her husband will survive her. She will have many

children and they will all live. She herself will die before sixty.

MAY.—GEMINI

The influences of this sign will last from the Twenty-second of May

till the Twenty-first of June.

The man born under the influence of this sign will be subject to ulcers

and all skin diseases. He will be tall, well formed and of florid

complexion. He will be much liked for his amiable qualities and will

govern his family well. He will travel much in foreign countries and

will acquire many beautiful things in the course of his travels. He

will be attentive to women, very conscientious, gracious and valiant.

He will not be at all given up to luxury, but will be of a pious and

self-denying temperament. He will be bitten by some venomous reptile,

yet will not die of the wound, but will recover entirely from it in a

short time. He will be falsely accused of some sin and will be

imprisoned for it; but he will come out victorious and his innocence

will be acknowledged by all. His marriage is uncertain.

The woman who is born at this time will be fluent of speech, gracious

in manners, witty and intelligent, but rather sensitive in temper. She

will be small of stature, slight in figure and of a fair complexion.

She will have well marked yet delicate eyebrows, brilliant eyes and

small white teeth; her hands will be slender, with pointed fingers. By

reason of her grace and wit she will be much loved, but she will not

marry until she is twenty-five. She will be passionately loved by her

husband, but she will not return his affection. She will have very few

children who will not live beyond childhood. She herself will die at

sixty-seven.

JUNE.—CANCER

The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-first of June to

the Twenty-first of July.

The man born under this sign will be of medium height and will have

light hair and eyebrows. He will be given to deceit in his manners with

women and will be very inconsistent, yet always with such gracious

manners towards them that he will be much beloved by them. He will

travel much, and will suffer many misfortunes in the way of accidents.

He will in middle age lose much money through the misconduct of his

brothers, who will, by their extravagance, spend all the father's money

and thus leave only a poor inheritance. He will occupy himself with

agriculture and be successful with it. At forty he will suffer from a

very serious illness and his life will probably end at forty-eight.

The woman born at this time will have large grey eyes, full lips and an

abundance of soft, rather colourless hair. She will be fond of luxury

and ease, and will be much given to the pleasures of the table, and

will eat much and drink more. She will marry early, but will not agree

with her husband by reason of her own inconstancy. She will be married

three times, and will get on better with her last husband than with the

two others. She will have several children, but they will all be of a

sickly constitution. She herself will have a very serious illness at

seventy which will cure her of all her troubles.

JULY.—LEO

The influences of this sign extend from the Twenty-first of July to

the Twenty-first of August.

The man born under this sign will be of middle height, but more

inclined to be tall than short; his hair will be of a red colour, and

his eyebrows will be well marked and much arched in their form. He will

be valiant, hot tempered, very talkative, somewhat boastful, but

pleasant and jovial in his manners. He will be a great admirer of

women, but not constant in his affection. He will marry once, but not

the woman he so much loves.

The woman born at this time will be tall, with bright hair of a reddish

gold colour, grey eyes, with a bold fierce glance, and long features.

Her nose will be aquiline and the face a long oval. The lips will be

full but firmly closed and the teeth good and large. She will be quick

of temper and difficult to please, fond of pleasure and very ambitious

of shining in society. Her great desire for admiration will cause her

to be much talked about—not always in a manner pleasing to her

husband. She will marry early. She will lose her husband in early youth

and will marry again soon after her widowhood. She will be much subject

to illnesses through the blood, and at forty-eight she will have a very

serious illness; but she will recover and live another fifteen years,

but her life will always be full of anxieties and troubles.

AUGUST.—VIRGO

The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-second of August to

the Twenty-third of September.

The man born under this influence will have an abundance of hair and

will have a large chin and a good complexion. He will be ambitious,

enterprising, and very valiant, but a little capricious. He will suffer

much illness and, when he is about thirty years of age, he will be

menaced by death or imprisonment, yet he shall escape both evils. He

will be of a sympathetic and benevolent disposition and will give good

counsel to his friends. He will have a beautiful wife whom he will

tenderly love, although she will not return his affections.

A woman born at this time will be graceful and charming, with a

well-formed face, an agreeable expression, small mouth and

well-proportioned figure. Her voice will be one of her charms, and will

be clear and soft and singularly harmonious. She will be much loved and

admired for her wit, and will show much taste for music and dancing.

She will have fairly good health, and her beauty and charm of manner

will make her much sought after in marriage, but she will not accept

any of her numerous lovers until after her twenty-second birthday. She

will be much loved by her husband, and being inclined to be devout, she

will educate her children in the fear of God. She will die at

sixty-nine.

SEPTEMBER.—LIBRA

The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-third of September

to the Twenty-third of October.

The man born under this sign will be fluent of speech and his voice

will be sonorous and will sound angry even when he is not so. He will

be wise and prudent and will be much esteemed by good men. He will be

just and honourable in all his dealings and will acquire the respect of

all who know him for his conscientious dealings with his fellow-men. He

will marry twice. His second wife, whom he will marry when he is turned

forty, will be extravagant, and will so worry him by spending all his

substance, that she will bring on his death before he is fifty.

The woman born at this period will be, say the astrologers, cheerful

and of a kindly disposition. She will be of a lively temperament and

will easily learn both music and dancing and will excel in both. She

will be amiable, very caressing in manner and much loved by all who

know her. She will marry twice. Her first husband will be rich and of

mature age and very prudent. The second will be young and will soon

spend the greater part of the money left her by her first husband. She

will be gay, fond of pleasure and rather a coquette, which will much

displease the second husband. She will be rather given to gambling and

will lose money in this way, which will cause her much discomfort and

anxiety in her latter years.

OCTOBER.—SCORPIO

The influences of this sign will last from the Twenty-second of

October to the Twenty-first of November.

A man born under this sign will be short and broad in figure and

ungraceful in his movements. He will be dark in complexion; but the

hair will be of a red-brown colour, the eyebrows thick and meeting over

the nose. He will be prompt in judgment, but very wily and inconstant,

promising one thing and doing another, so much so, that those who have

once had dealings with him will never again have confidence in him,

knowing how likely he is to deceive them. He will be of a perverse and

irritable temper, which will cause him to have many enemies; and

notwithstanding all his acuteness, he will always be poor. He will

travel much and will lead a somewhat vagabond life. He is very unlikely

to marry, and he will probably die a violent death.

The woman who is born under the influence of the Scorpion will be of a

reddish colouring and of middle height and strongly built. As regards

her character, she will be affable, much beloved by her relations, fond

of pleasure, yet very energetic in the discharge of her household

duties, sensitive in temper, a little revengeful and very ingenious and

of quick judgment. In her youth she will have much trouble from

lawsuits, but she need not fear the result, for as she is pious God

will always protect her. She will only marry once, at about her

twenty-sixth year, and will die at sixty-eight. She will have no

children.

NOVEMBER.—SAGITTARIUS

The influences of this sign continue from the Twenty-second of

November till the Twenty-first of December.

The man born under this sign will be of pale complexion and he will

have long features and dark hair and eyes. He will be prudent, studious

and economical. He will see many foreign countries and will gain much

money in his youth, by reason of which he will excite the envy of his

friends. He will receive much injury from a relative, who will

endeavour to prejudice people against him, but he will always be well

received and much liked in society. He will be generous to his friends,

but he will be badly recompensed for his kindness. He will be

persevering in his profession and will attain a good position in it. He

will be subject to internal complaints, but will live long. He will be

untrue to his wife, but he will be careful that she does not know it.

He will have several children, but they will be no comfort to him, as

they will be always ungrateful to him.

The woman who is born at this time will be well formed, with luxuriant

hair and well-marked and rather arched eyebrows; her forehead will be

broad and her intellect good, but her temper easily irritated and over

sensitive, especially where her affections are concerned. She will be

timid, very constant both in love and friendship, generous in her

affections, yet very ill-requited in this respect. She will marry at

twenty-six and will have many children. She will suffer much from the

evil tongues of false friends, who will malign her to her husband, but

her innocence will be made known and in the end she will be fully

justified. She will live to sixty-eight.

DECEMBER.—CAPRICORNUS

