

                SOMEPROBLEMS    O F MODERN   ASTROLOGICAL  IDEAS
     (3) Astrology predicts changer in consciousness not behavio~or events.
     It is here that the new psychological astrology departs from tradition.
Here the relationship between celestial patterns and human beings is not
with outward, observable patterns of behavior and tendencies but rather
with the unobservable, inner Me of a person, or what Perry called the "psy-
chic structure which underlies personality" (Perry, 1995b, p. 123; see also,
Perry, 1988). He said
A horoscope symbolizes the complex, evolving narure of consciousness.. . the depths of per-
sonality.. . the dynamic relations between psychological drives. For example, Sun square Saturn
symbolizes a conflict between the need for self-expression and the need for self-control.. .
(Perry, 1995b, p. 124).

Zodiac signs symbolize general, ". . . fundamental human needs, or motiva-
tional drives, inherent in the human condition" (Perry, 1988, p. I), whereas
the house positions and planetary aspects symbolize a particular inlvidual's
"map of consciousness" or "inborn personality structure" (Perry, 1988, p. 2,
3 ) . The extreme problems of accounting for the relations between celestial
factors and observable, relatively specific outcomes postulated by the trad-
tional astrologer are further exacerbated by the psychological astrologer's ad-
dtional conjectures. How do we know such invisible psychological processes
underlie the astrological symbolism? Perry stated such cognitive processes
and structures are distded from the composite descriptions associated with
traditional astrological symbolism. For example,
". . . the need of a [zodiac] sign can be inferred from the behavior which is characteristic of
that sign, e.g., leonian pride, creativity, and a~niabilityevidence the universal human need for
vabdation of perceived identity" (Perry. 1988, p. 2).

      It is ddficult to see how it follows in the f i s t place from the character-
istic behaviors of a sign that one intrinsic motivational factor ties them all
together, and even if the case could be made, a further case would need to
be independently made for the particular human drives postulated by Perry.
H e never clearly set out how he arrived at these conclusions. No sets of
studles of a quantitative or qualitative nature are discussed, nor is there any
kind of an appeal to any careful examination of the astrologically symbolized
behaviors by independent astrologers or psychologists to determine what


T w o harbingers and precursors of modern astrops chology are Dane and Rudhyar and Alan
Leo. In the earl rwentiech century, the British astrofoger Leo in.ected theosophist and mystical
ideas into astroLgy. The move away from traditional ideas in d e United States was begun by
Rudhyar and his humanistic astrology orientation during the third decade of the century. In
their "inner" orientation, Rudhyar and Perry overlap, the main difference being that Rudhyar is
more i n c h e d to Eastern mysticism and rehgion. A critical examination of Rudhyar's ideas can
be found in Kelly and Krutzen (1983).
1052                             I. W. KELLY

one might infer from them. Furthermore, if only the whole chart will do, in-
ferences based on parts are by definition meaningless.
     Perry elevated psychological astrology to miracle status by further in-
forming us that the dynamic relations between various psychological drives
symbolized by the horoscope are "fluid and changing, varying in accord
with situational specificity, developmental age, emotional maturity, and level
of psychological integration" (1995b, p. 123; 1994, p. 34). Further, ". . . un-
like the boundaries of physical objects, the contents and processes of con-
sciousness involve meanings whose boundary regions are fuzzy. . . . [mlean-
ings are indefinite, arbitrary, relational and culturally embedded" (Perry,
1995a, p. 34). The psychological astrologer claims these incredbly complex,
changing, amorphous, inner complexities (which may not even be conscious)
have been inferred from clusters of behaviors associated with astrological
symbolism.
     It is clear that no theory of consciousness based on physical processes
can perform the role demanded, so Perry opted for dualism, the existence of
a nonphysical, immaterial mind. While psychological astrology was described
as a theory of "extraordinary complexity and a model of consciousness"
(Perry, 1995a, p. 32; 1994, p. 33), epistemological questions regarding this
dualistic view of consciousness were never addressed; we are merely offered
tidbits such as, consciousness is a "nonphysical system" (1995a, p. 32) and
"a subjective experience of awareness that has no material correlates.. ."
(1995a, p. 34). Nowhere &d Perry articulate the intrinsic nature of his ver-
sion of the nonphysical mind. It is also far from clear how the postulation of
a soul/nonphysical mind can contribute toward clarlfylng and informing our
understanding of central notions such as purposive behavior, values, internal
self-causation, meanings and creativity, over that offered by contemporary
models consistent with materialism (such as those offered by Flanagan, 1992;
Searle, 1992; Crick, 1994; Penrose, 1994; Dennett, 1996). Neither does he
offer us any inkling as to the mediating role the nonphysical mind plays be-
tween cosmos and psychic structure.
     Since psychological astrology does not have a theory of its own regard-
ing the nature and structure of the inner psychological processes supposedly
mirrored by planetary configurations, it rests m a d y on those postulated by
modern psychodynamic theories. More specifically, Perry related the birth
chart (horoscope) to "conscious and unconscious processes, areas of repres-
sion and conflict, pathways of sublimation, transference dynamics, projec-
tions and the lke" (Perry, 1995b, p. 123; see also, Perry, 1988). Even if we
contend that psychological astrologers have refined the crude approxima-
tions of the traditional astrologers (who do not offer plausible scenarios of
how their correlations were established), this case is very difficult to make.
The reason is simple. Twentieth century theorizing was influenced by a great
                           MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                                      1053

variety of areas of research, including invest~gat~ons    into brain function, Hu-
manistic and existential schools of psychology, artificial intelligence, physical-
ism and functionahsm in philosophy, and so on. Ancient, medieval, and re-
naissance theories of mind uthzed by the astrologers of the past were quite
ddferent. And, to complicate the picture further, as philosophers of science
such as Thomas Kuhn (1970) have pointed out, when new paradigms come
and go, the same or similar terms often acquire new meanings. For example,
the contemporary terms 'motion' and 'matter' were also used by Aristotle
with ddferent interconnections and meaning. Therefore, Perry's claim that
"there is near uniform agreement based on centuries of observation, as to
the meaning of [astrological symbolism]" (1993, p. 7 ) is clearly problematic
in light of the historical disagreements over the nature and constituents of
the mind.
      Consider also the psychological astrologers' claim that inner mental dy-
namics can be expressed in a great variety of ways. Here they reject as sim-
plistic the traditional astrologer's claim that celestial patterns are typically as-
sociated with relatively specific outcomes. But in rnakmg this rejection, they
stepped from the frying pan into the volcano, because it further increases
the already impossible complexity of possible associations. As an example of
this new complexity, the British astrologer Charles Harvey (1995) claimed:
      The same [planetary] combination can express itself In a whole range of ways. For exam-
ple, Uranus in hard aspect with the midpoint of Sun and ,kloon may produce a Napoleon or a
Hitler, but equally it may produce a Margaret Thatcher, d S p ~ k eM d i g a n , a Martin Luther or
a particular [spiritual, caring1 astrologer [such] as Dr. Zip Dobyns (p. 52).

     Similarly, Perry claimed that the Psychological Astrology does not pre-
dtct specific behaviors or life outcomes but rather "predicts qualttative expe-
riences of consciousness that can be reflected in a variety of manifestations"
(Perry, 1994, p. 34; 1995a, p. 34). H e affirmed that "The meanings of the
parts may be stable, [but] the emergent qualities they ~ r o d u c ewhen com-
bined are not [because] real people are changing, evolving entities that are
far too complex to type or tag with a few simple key words" (Perry, 1993,
p. 7). Ln other words, according to Perry and Harvey, the birth chart accu-
rately shows our underlying subjective processes, but as to their outward
manifestation, astrologers can only guess at a range of possible happenings.
The inner psychic state is shown in the birth chart, but after that just about
anything goes. As Perry said, "we all have the potential to behave in any
way that is humanly possible, and we frequently do" (1995a, p. 36).
     We can see that the psychological astrologer is worlung with a challeng-
ing system. To start with, it involves celestial configurations that can never
be examined in isolation and whose variety when combined is immensely
larger than anyone could possibly cope with. Nevertheless, the planetary
1054                                      I. W. KELLY


configurations supposedly correlate with an invisible, largely unconscious,
psychlc structure that underlies personality, and that is associated with out-
comes so varied and so uncertain that the astrologer can only make guesses.
Finally, this psychic structure is based on psychoanalytic and humanistic psy-
chological theories that since the 1950s have come under very heavy criti-
cism. 10 If this criticism is successful then psychological astrology in its pres-
ent form will go down with the ship (e.g., see Macmdan, 1991; Esterson,
1993; Grunbaum, 1993; Kerr, 1993; Spence, 1994; Webster, 1995; Crews,
1996; Dean, 1996a). After all, if the psychological structure symbolized by
the planets and their interrelationships is problematic, the rest of the theory
is on shaky ground.
     4. Astrology can only be appropriately evaluated in a magical, animistic
world-view.
     Traditional astrology emphasizes the prehction of events, the associa-
tion of relatively spechc, observable outcomes with astrological factors,
sometimes with the view that planets are transmitters of physical influence.
Thus the clients of the famous 17' century astrologer WdLam L1Uy ex-
pected predictions and decision making, not psychology and rehgion. Such
an orientation is not adverse to experimental investigation. A main problem
for this approach, as Perry acknowledged, is that the vast majority of studies
have not supported such claims (Perry, 1995a). Further, there is no prospect
that plausible physical hkages wdl be discovered that explain astrological
associations with human activity (Perry, 1995a, pp. 26-33; Culver & Ianna,


 "'Astrolo ers are forever trying to increase the surface plausibility of astrology b associating it
with theqatest theories that have caught the public imagination. So ~ l u m e n t h i ( 1 9 9 4 p.
                                                                                                , 19)
appealed to the relevance of "fuzzy logic" to astrology, while Perry alluded to "chaos theory"
(1994, p. 34) and the "new physics" exemplified by Fritjof Capra and David Bohm. Townley
(1994) informed us that "the more advanced areas of systems mathematics [complexity theory,
information theory] and neuroscience [could] be very friendly to the type of structural thinking
that the best of astrology has to offer and to which astrology could make important contribu-
tions" ( p 43). Tewsbury (1988) noted how Rupert Sheldrakes' g c i p l e o€ formative causauon
"should remove the objection that astrology is impossible," ad g m an interesting circularity
that "astrology ~ r s d fis a further poinrer to its truth." A negative feature of these astrologers'
writings 1s (llelr penchant to be crucially vague at critical points. We are not provided specifics
of how these juxtapositions wdl take place. We are on1 given promissory notes. It is never
made clear how the new physics and other modern disci iines can provide support for the sup-
position that specific planetary configurations can synzbojze Fundamental human needs, or moti-
vational drives (e.g., How Sun square Mars symbolizes over-all strength and vigor in the person-
ality) [see Stengler (1995. 1996) for critical comments on misinterpretations of Quantum Me-
chanics by advocates of New Age claims]. Further, such modern approaches in             ysics do not
explain why the planetary positions of a moment in the past (birth) describe             supposedly
continuing nature of a person in the present. And what about the 'birth' of a country, a com-
pany, a resolution, a domicile, and so on, all of whch astrologers confidently taking as having
their own natal charts? (Jones, 1996).
       \Ve have also heard it all before. In the past, the same confidence was expressed by
                    s every prominent theory of the time. The two millennia of failures provides
a s t ~ o l o ~ e rwith
some good inductive grounds for believing that the confidence of present-day astrologers is as
misplnced as that of their predecessors. Such represents the triumph of hope over experience.
                             MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                                         1055

1988; Crowe, 1990). For example, no proposed physical explanation can ex-
plain, in advance, how Sun-Jupiter contacts symbolize expansive, optimistic
beliefs rather than something else, how Scorpio can symbolize secrecy rather
than something else, or how the 2nd House can symbolize possessions rather
than something else, and so on.
     Perry stated, even though studies relating astrological configurations
with specific observable outcomes have failed, this poses no ddficulty for
psychological astrology since it is concerned with the 'inner Me' of an indi-
vidual, which cannot be adequately tested by modem, materiahstic, scienufic
methodology. Besides, he claimed, astrologers already have independent ex-
periential (clinical) evidence that astrology works" (Perry, 1995a, pp. 14, 26).
While astrology seems implausible from the perspective of modern physical
theories, if we adopt a different set of metaphysical assumptions (for exarn-
ple, a more magical-animistic framework) we are told, astrology becomes


  The seductive phrase 'ex eriential evidence' is roblematic. Practitioners of psychological a
;aches         Perry disavowecf (e.g., Skinnerian bepaviorism, Freudian psychoanalysis) and ;!tt
many competin schools of astrolo in both h e East and West, many of whom would contest
Perry's approacf, all cite tesrimoniyevidence and case studies which support. But if we can all
cite experiential evidence for our r i t i o n s , that can hardly, by itreg distinguish the good from
the bad, the better theory €ram t e worse. As Meehl pointed out, "the scholarly authors of
Malleus MaleJironrm pursued . . . an enterprise detailing symptoms that diagnose witchcraft. De-
spite their scholarly efforts, we know today there are no persons who have made a solemn pact
wch Satan and thereby gained preternatural powers. If asked to su port their theoretical sys-
rem m d the technical procedures warranted by it, [they] would J u b d e s s have invoked the
med~evalequivalent of 'clinical experience"' (1995, p. 1021).
       A salutary lesson here is provided by other nonmainstream approaches such as phrenology,
graphology (handwriting analysis), and palmistry which cover the same ground as psycholog~cal
astrology. Phrenology was immensely popular in the nineteenth century and both hrenolog~sts
and their clients were very satisfied with phrenological readings. Graphology has t e e n around
for centuries and is still very popular. It is instructive to compare the Following endorsements
of psychological astrolog/, renology, graphology, and palm-reading: (1) "[Tlhe client's char-
acter and hfe story inevita~Fyconform to the range o potenoals symbolzed by the [horo-
scope], often in exmaordinary specific ways" (Perry, 1994,                35). (2) "The phrenologist has
shown thar he is able to read character Wte an open book an$.to lay bare the hidden springs of
conduct with an accuracy that the most inrimate friends cannot ap roach" (Alfred Russel
Wallace, cited in Severn, 1913, 6). (3) "Your handwriting is a l l - r e v e k g . To the trained eye
it lays open your secret mind. %very whirl or line you en ex oses your true character and
  ersonality . . ." (Marne. 1988, p. 2). (4) "A study of the :and tees much a b o u t . . . he physical
E o d y . . . health, vitality. . . the emotional nature--love potential. . . the will and individuality
. . . success in business. . . talent. . . creativity. . . fame. . . self-fu&ent-travel,      life experi-
ence, spiritual developmeni" (Wilson, 1971, pp. 7-8).
       Astrolog is only one of a very lar e number of contenders, past and present, which rely
on ma ical dinlung and purport to yi$d knouded e unattainable to materialistic science. No
plausib?e reasons have been provided that all of i e s e extrascience contenders are intercon-
nected, or mutually sup orting (Lo tson 1996). Planets or head.bumps or palms or
handwriting, at least one o? them is rezundint. Astrology is in the unenviable position of hav-
ing to show either that it provides enuine insight into areas not covered by the social sciences
and related disciplines, o r to show k a t it can meliorate our unde~stand~ng        in the same domains
covered by contemporary psychological and sociological theories. Astrologers have to show they
can provide insight or benefits beyond those provided by nonastrological theories.
       Third, many sources of bias operate in such personal experiences that can lead clinicians
to claims of personal knowledge that are invahd, despite their association with high levels of
conviction (Dawes, 1994; Grove & Meehl, 1996; Dean, Kelly, Saklofske, & Furnham, 1992).
1056                                          I. W. KELLY

plausible. l2 Perry (1995a) stated the world-view needed to make sense of as-
trology must involve "a sacred realm that unites, orders, and animates the
cosmos" (p. 19), or what West called "a system of magic" (1991, p. 223)
and Cornelius (1994, p. 19) called "some other element" (that is, other than
delusion and ESP). The metaphysical perspective proposed by Perry reintro-
duced ancient notions of teleological causation, occult powers of attraction,
psychospiritual explanation, and most importantly, the notion that psyche
and cosmos are alike, and correspond through symbolic action-at-a-distance
(1995a, pp. 15-16).
      Further, Perry explained, this will involve a return, at least in part, to
beliefs that were common in prescientific cultures in which a 'world soul or
consciousness' was immanent in all parts of the universe. The universe, so
conceived, involved a hierarchy with parts interconnected by "sympathetic
resonances." Astrology played a large part in such world-views because it
gave people a symbolic language "for understanding the various meanings
and correspondences of natural phenomena" (Perry, 1995a, p. 15; also, 1993,
p 2).
     Perry and most other Western astrologers tended to avoid specifics
when describing their animistic world-views. Lstead we are provided sprin-
h g s of opaque terms and expressions such as 'laws of resonance,' 'spiritual
reality,' 'the soul,' 'the sacred,' 'occult cause,' and 'inherent powers to attract
other things.' While most of us have some familiarity with such terms it is
unlikely that we could give a coherent account of them. So an explication of
astrological theories should explain these central elements. But instead of
clarification, we are offered evasions such as "Astrology seems to belong to
some other order of knowing things, barely conceivable in the modern


 "The astrologer Pottenger (1994) said "Opponents of astrology like to quote 'extraordinary
claims require extraordinary proof without giving any roof that 'as above so below' is an ex-
traordinary c l a h . It is only extraordinary in some ~ h ~ o s o p l u e sespecially
                                                                            .           materxa[i$B frame-
works which den meaning" (p. 37). As it stands, w at Pottenger stated is trivally true. Whal-
euer is ostulatei(barring logical im ossibilitiesl is more 'plausible' within some world-view(s)
than o k r s . For example, fairy b u b b L , oblins, and Guardian angels are extraordinary claims
in materialistic conceptions of the world ?and perhaps many ochers as well), but this alone does
not provide any reason to believe in cheir existence.
     The claim that the universe has meaning and provides us with signs or portents does not
imply that the signs are to be found 'up there,' they might only be found in entrails, the tracks
and movements of nature, or only in messages from angels or similar beings, or in a number of
other forms. It does not follow that an animistic/magical universe nust have, or even might
have, meaning reflected everywhere. W e need cogent reasons to prefer the animistic universe of
astrologers to ocher possible animistic universes, and furthermore evidence for a particular as-
trological system than other alternatives.
     There are also an incredibly large number of ossible pairings between 'as above, so
below.' The possibilities are even larger for a system Eased on the symbolic meaning of si ns
For example, there are probably more possible pairings of two things in, say, Jungian sym%ol:
ism than if we confiie o u n d v e s to putative causal (material) r d a t i o n s h i ~ ~so; it is even more
incumbent on astrologers to provide a reason why they connect two t lngs cogether than it
would be for a materiahsc.
