

CHAPTER XV.

CHIROMANCY AND ITS ORIGIN

Chiromancy is a science which teaches us to read not only the character

but the whole destiny—for good or evil, the length of life and often

the manner of death of a man by the lines and marks to be seen in his

hand. This study is sometimes called Palmistry, in which case, however,

it properly refers only to a judgment formed from what appears

in the palm of the hand, whilst Chiromancy (taken from the word

Cheir, a hand, and Manteia, divination) signifies the

revelations made by the hand, taken as a whole. Chiromancy is nearly as

ancient as astrology, with which it is indissolubly connected,

for the hand represents, as has been before said, a natural horoscope,

which is placed upon it at the time both of the conception and the

birth by the influence of the stars. The seven planets are all

represented in the hand and also the twelve signs of the zodiac, so

that the casting of a nativity is needless, as by simply examining a

hand by the light of Chiromancy we can indicate what planets have been

powerful at the time of birth, and what, therefore, will be their

effect for good or evil over the existence; and we can also find the

dates of the principal events of the life. We find many allusions to

this subject in the Bible, and still more in the ancient Kabbala.

The Holy Kabbala, as it was called by the Magi, must not be confounded

with what is called "The Black Art"; it is, on the contrary, the

quintessence of reason and morality as they were understood by the

ancients and contains that traditional science of the secrets of nature

which, from age to age, is borne towards us as the wave is carried by

the tide to the shore; but it has been transmitted obscurely, because

the doctrines of the Kabbala were known only, in those early ages, to

the adept and the initiation, later on, of neophytes was only yielded

after a series of severe and terrible ordeals, whilst the revelation of

its mysteries to the uninitiated was punished by death.

The necessity of silence was, in fact, one of the principal tenets of

the Kabbala and is represented, in the figure of Adda-Nari,[16] by the

position of the fingers of the hand holding the flowering branch of

Abundance; the thumb and the first two fingers, which in Chiromancy

represent will, power and fatality, are held open;

whilst the third and fourth fingers, representing light and science,

are closed. This was meant to indicate to the good—the initiated—that

they would have, when united, strength and will to direct Fate; but

that they must keep hidden from the wicked and ignorant both light and

science. It must, however, in justice to the ancient Kabbalists, be

suggested that their inculcation of silence probably arose, not so much

from a desire of domination, but rather from the fact that, feeling

themselves superior in knowledge, they thought they were obeying a

divine law in refusing to the wicked those lights which, when possessed

by them, led, as perhaps they had sometimes found, to error. We, seeing

things in a wider light, give, or try to give, equal knowledge to all,

without submitting the ignorant to the ordeal of initiation to prove

their worthiness as recipients; but, after all, it amounts to much the

same thing—give to all men truth and light in abundance, but all will

not profit by it. We see this every day in our college system; the

lesson is the same for all, but it is only the few who profit by it;

and although we appear to be obeying a divine law in opening the way of

light and life—the life of knowledge—to all, as God makes His sun to

shine on good and bad equally, still we can, in some sort, understand

the feeling of the ancient Magi, whose motto was: "Know, Dare, Will,

but keep Silence."

To face Chapter XVI.

 

CHAPTER XVI.

THE PRINCIPAL LINES IN THE HAND AND THE MOUNTS

In the plate belonging to this chapter we give a hand on which are

marked the principal lines seen on the palm; three of which, viz., the

Line of Life, the Line of Head and the Line of Heart, are found in a

clearer or fainter degree on all hands, but which vary, as regards

their relative position, in every hand. The first and largest, that

which encircles the thumb, is called the Line of Life; by the length,

colour and evenness, or the reverse, of this line the length of life is

indicated, and also the illnesses and accidents by which the life is

menaced in running its course. The line immediately above it, crossing

the palm of the hand, is the Line of Head; by it we are to judge of the

intellectual powers. Above it is the Line of Heart, from which we form

an opinion of the strength of affection, or the want of it, in the

native.

The lines which are not always to be found are the lines going from the

wrist to the finger of Saturn, which is called the Saturnian line, and

which shows the events of the life; the Line of the Sun, which goes

towards the finger of the Sun and which indicates success in art,

literature, or the pursuit of riches; and the Line of Health, which

goes from the wrist to the finger of Mercury: this line is often absent

in a hand.

All these lines will be more fully discussed further on; at present it

is only necessary to name them in order to explain the plate belonging

to this chapter.

At the base of each figure there is a mount, more or less developed, on

every hand. Now, each of these mounts corresponds with one of the

planets from which it has received more or less influence, according to

its development, and the signs or marks to be found upon it.

It will be seen also, from the plate, that the ancients gave to each

finger the name of one of the planets, thus:—

The first finger represented Jupiter, the mount at its base being

called the Mount of Jupiter.

The second, Saturn, the mount at its root being the Mount of Saturn.

The third, the Sun, the mount below being the Mount of the Sun.

The fourth, Mercury, the mount at its base being called the Mount of

Mercury.

The thumb is sacred to Venus, and the root of the thumb is called the

Mount of Venus.

It will also be seen that the planet Mars (although no finger is

dedicated to it) is twice represented in the hand, along the side of

the palm by the Mount of Mars, and in the palm, between the Line of

Life and the Line of the Head, which is called the Plain of Mars.

The Moon is only represented by the Mount of the Moon, at the lower

part of the palm on the opposite side of the hand to the thumb.

When these mounts are well in their places, and clearly but not too

strongly defined, they give the qualities of the planet they represent;

but when any mount is not well marked, or even, as frequently happens,

is quite deficient, there is a want of the qualities shown to exist

where the mount is clearly defined. If the mounts are not only

ill-defined, but represented by a cavity, that cavity would indicate

the existence of qualities which are the reverse of those indicated by

the mount; whereas an exceeding development would denote an excess of

the qualities given by the mount.

Thus the Mount of Jupiter, which is immediately under the index finger,

when fairly developed, indicates noble ambition, will-power, love of

nature, kindliness, generosity, religion and happy marriage. When in

excess—that is, when the mount is so large as to invade that next

it—the Mount of Saturn—it gives superstition, exaggerated pride and

domineering self-assertion. The total absence of this mount (which is

sometimes, but rarely, seen) indicates coldness, selfishness,

irreligion and that want of dignity which is produced by the utter

absence of self-respect.

The Mount of Saturn is found immediately beneath the second finger,

which the ancients assigned to Saturn, the planet of Fatality. Saturn

gives extreme misfortune, or extreme good fortune, according to the

development of the mount and the signs and lines to be seen upon it,

and the course of the Saturnian Line, or Line of Fate (of which we will

speak further on), in the palm of the hand. This mount also denotes a

tendency to occult science. Those born specially under the influence of

Saturn are timid, lovers of solitude, and very seldom marry, but are

very persistent in their affections when they do love.

Saturn, when well developed, gives prudence, wisdom and, to a certain

extent, success; when in excess it gives sadness, taciturnity,

asceticism, dread of the after-life and yet, sometimes, a

predisposition to suicide. The total absence of the mount indicates an

insignificant existence.

The Mount of the Sun is placed at the root of the third finger, which

was sacred to the Sun; when this mount is well developed it indicates

love of art and literature, which shows itself (according to

temperament) in poetry, painting, sculpture, or music; it gives also

religion of the æsthetic, tolerant sort, grace, riches and celebrity;

in excess it gives love of show, frivolity and vaingloriousness. The

total absence of the mount means a thoroughly material existence;

absence of all taste for art—a life without colour, a day without

sunlight.

The Mount of Mercury is found at the base of the fourth finger, and,

when well defined, indicates intelligence, success in science and in

occult studies, the love of work and activity, both of mind and body

and eloquence; in excess it gives impudence, theft and falsehood:

absence of the mount indicates no aptitude for science, no

intellectuality—a negative existence. Of course, should the Mount of

the Sun be well defined, the last quality would be overridden by the

success which that indicates.

The Mount of Mars is at the side of the hand opposite the thumb, just

below the Mount of Mercury, and, when well developed, indicates

courage, ardour and resolution; in excess it gives cruelty, anger,

revenge and tyranny: the absence of the mount gives cowardice and want

of self-command.

The Mount of the Moon is found immediately below that of Mars, and,

when well developed, gives imagination of the dreamy, sentimental

order, gentle melancholy and love of solitude; in excess it gives

morbid melancholy, caprice and fantastic imagination: the absence of

the mount indicates want of poetry in the nature, positivism.

The Mount of Venus, which is formed by the root of the thumb,

indicates, when fairly developed, love of the beautiful, melody in

music, the desire of pleasing and sensuous tenderness; in excess it

gives love of material pleasures, coquetry, inconstancy and (when other

signs, afterwards to be explained, are also seen in the hand) extreme

sensuality.


