

IV. THE SPIRIT WAIL

TOLD BY THE MERCHANT

"Allah alone can search the hearts of men," said the hakeem, slowly and

reflectively repeating the words with which the astrologer had closed

his tale. He was a man of venerable appearance, with flowing, white

beard that descended to his waist. And yet, although his face was

furrowed with the lines of old age, his eyes were wonderfully youthful

in their contemplative calm.

"No truer words have been spoken to-night," he continued. "Yet must we

further reflect that, while a man cannot sit in judgment upon his

fellows, he can assuredly judge himself, which goes to show that within

the breast of every man there dwells the very spirit of God, the power

to search his own heart, whether in condemnation or for approval. Life

is a problem, and it requires a full lifetime to solve it. Only as we

grow older do we come to know our own souls—our strength and our

weakness, the measure of our true nobility of character and likewise the

measure of our inherent meanness, the temptations not merely from

without but from within that assail us, our power to conquer these or

our miserable yielding at times, with no one, perhaps, even guessing at

our degradation except the divine spark of[Pg 61] conscience that inexorably

turns a searching ray on every thought and on every motive for action."

"So you would argue that man is God?" queried the Rajput.

"Not so, but that the soul of man is of the essence of God, the proof of

which is this very power of searching out our own hearts and sitting in

judgment on our own failings: for the judgment seat belongs to Allah

alone."

"A subtle philosophy which I do not presume fully to understand,"

interposed the merchant from Bombay.

During the night's entertainment he had shown himself to be a man of few

words, yet an attentive listener. He was of middle age, of a mild

dignity of mien, and of robust physique, as befitted one accustomed to

long journeys through regions infested with robbers or with beasts of

prey.

"But in my practical experience of life," he proceeded, "I have come to

realize that, while I may know myself, no other man can I know.

Therefore, if it be right to be sparing of condemnation for another, it

is also wise to be chary of undue commendation. The world too often

acclaims a deed as noble when the real motive prompting it is utterly

ignoble."

"A true philosopher, despite your bales of merchandise," murmured the

hakeem, with a smiling nod of approval for the sentiments expressed.

"Well, I suppose that every one who travels becomes a philosopher, more

or less," assented the[Pg 62] trader. "Change of scene and of companionship

stimulates new ideas. Now will I relate an actual experience which aptly

illustrates that, in our dealings with those around us, we never really

penetrate their minds. Man knows himself; he knows no one else—friend

or intimate, the child of his heart or the very wife of his bosom."

"It is more easy to discover a white crow," muttered the fakir, "than

know what a woman has in her heart."

The merchant paid no heed to the interruption. He went on:

"Each of us is an inscrutable mystery to the other. Each soul is veiled

to every other soul, and is naked to itself alone."

"O prince of philosophers in pedlar's disguise!" murmured the hakeem.

"If our souls sat naked for the common gaze," commented the Rajput, "if

we could all read each other's hearts, then indeed would life be an

abomination—an utter misery, with the twin devils of shame and disgust

seated at our elbows all the time."

"Most true," concurred the trader. "For too much knowledge of another's

inmost thoughts brings only disillusionment and regret, as my tale will

show. The story takes us among humble people, but human nature is the

same everywhere—the same in the hut of the rayat as in the palace of

the rajah.

"Once in every two years it is my custom to travel from Bombay to

Benares, and invariably I break[Pg 63] the journey at a certain village some

six or seven days from my final destination. Here dwells an old friend

and caste brother, formerly, like myself, a merchant in the Bombay

bazaar where silken stuffs are sold, but retired now to his own country

with modest savings sufficient for the rest of his days. Baji Lal, as he

is named, is all the closer to me because his wife Devaka is a sister of

my own wife, and the two are always eager to have news of each other's

welfare.

"At the house of this friend I rest for a day or two, enjoying his

companionship, the reminiscences of old times, and the gossip of the

hour. So, on my long and fatiguing journeyings, I have always looked

forward to these meetings with pleasurable anticipation and remembered

them with tranquil satisfaction.

"But on the occasion of one of my periodical visits judge of my surprise

when I was received in silence and with apathy that made no pretence at

disguise. Devaka did not rise from her cushions on the floor to bid me

welcome, and her husband, similarly irresponsive, returned my customary

cordial greeting with nothing better than a look of wearied dejection.

"Disturbed, I made inquiry:

"'Baji Lal, my friend, what is the matter? Are you ailing?'

"But he only shook his head, and turned away.

"To Devaka I then appealed.

"'What is the meaning of this?' I asked. 'Sadness and silence where

everything used to be joy.'

"She drew aside the sari that had concealed her face, and I was shocked[Pg 64]

at its grief-stricken aspect. Her trembling lips parted to answer me,

but her husband checked her with a sharp word, such as I had never heard

him use to her before. Her eyes filled with tears, and I could see the

big drops rolling down her cheeks as she silently replaced the sari over

her head, and, bending low, rocked herself to and fro.

"For the moment I imagined that I had intruded on some scene of domestic

unhappiness which would be dissipated in an hour. So, hiding my

embarrassment, I turned to the door, intimating that I would seek some

other lodging for the night, and return on the morrow, when I hoped my

friends would be in fitter mood to receive me.

"At last Baji Lal spoke, raising his face but still remaining seated on

the divan we were wont in former times to share.

"'Go thy way, Chunda Das,' he said. 'The sword of fate has descended

upon this house. Come not again to a place accursed.'

"Then did I realize that the trouble was serious.

"'But, my friend and brother,' I protested, 'I cannot depart and leave

you thus. Let me at least understand what calamity has befallen you, so

that I may help toward its repair.'

"'Nothing can be done, so nothing need be said,' he answered, in a tone

and with a look of dignified resignation to the will of God. 'If you

must have the story of our misfortune, you have only to ask the first of

our neighbours you encounter.'

"And he, too, covered his face with his garment, leaving me no choice[Pg 65]

but to withdraw without further attempt at this manifestly inopportune

time to probe the mystery.

"If I was to be of service to my friends, however, knowledge of what had

befallen was the first essential. So I took the road that would lead me

to the great pipul tree in the village square, close to the tank and to

the temple, where all day long there was coming and going, and where

therefore I would be most likely to glean the information I desired. By

a happy chance I found reclining under the pipul tree the village

barber, a loquacious fellow, who counted it as part of his business to

know the last detail about other people's affairs.

"After greetings, and a few remarks about the weather and the crops and

the season's epidemics, I carefully broached the real purpose of my

interview, for a prudent man will never divulge his thoughts to another

until he knows that other's thoughts.

"'I have just come from the house of Baji Lal,' I said, in a seemingly

casual way.

"The barber's face instantly lost the smile it had worn.

"'How did you find him?' he asked.

"'Strangely altered,' I replied.

"'And so does every one,' he concurred.

"'Why so?' I ventured.

"The barber looked at me squarely, and then said:

"'You and he were very good friends, Chunda Das.'

"'Yes, and are still, so far as I am concerned,' I answered.[Pg 66]

"'I thought so. Well, I am his friend likewise. Many years I have known

him and his wife, Devaka. Both are good, kind people, always willing to

help their neighbours, and ready to give their last bowl of rice to a

vagrant beggar. Perhaps you can assist me to clear away the shadows that

have fallen around them and obscured the sunshine of their home. Let me

tell you the story. A few months ago a stranger came to this village. He

was on his way to Fathpur-Sikri, to witness the glories of the court of

the mighty Akbar. But on the road he had fallen ill, and, arriving here,

was too sick to proceed. I am ashamed to say that none of us were

willing to take him in, for sickness goes from one person to another. So

we have to be careful, especially in my calling, where I come into such

close contact with so many.

"'There was quite a little crowd just here by the tank, discussing the

situation, the sick man in their midst resting upon the ground, when

Baji Lal and his wife, who happened to be passing, came forward to see

what the commotion was all about. They listened to the story, and then

told the stranger he might come with them. He gratefully accepted, and,

after whispering some instructions to a servant by whom he was

accompanied, he motioned to Baji Lal to lead the way. The little group

moved off, the servant in the rear, leading the horses, which included a

pack animal laden with the traveller's bedding, cooking pots, and other

belongings.

