the project gutenberg ebook of arthur mervyn, by charles brockden brown 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: arthur mervyn 
or, memoirs of the year 1793 

author: charles brockden brown 

release date: june 5, 2006 [ebook #18508] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook arthur mervyn *** 




produce by graeme mackreth and the online distribute 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 






arthur mervyn; 

or, 

memoirs of the year 1793. 

by 

charles brockden brown. 

"fielding, richardson, and scott occupy pedestals. in a niche was 
deposit the bust of our countryman, the author of 'arthur mervyn.'" 

nathaniel hawthorne. 

philadelphia: david mckay, publisher, 

23 south ninth street. 1889. 




preface. 


the evil of pestilence by which this city has lately been afflict 
will probably form an era in its history. the scheme of reformation and 
improvement to which they will give birth, or, if no effort of human 
wisdom can avail to avert the periodical visitation of this calamity, 
the change in manners and population which they will produce, will be, 
in the highest degree, memorable. they have already supply new and 
copious material for reflection to the physician and the politics 
economist. they have not been less fertile of instruction to the moral 
observer, to whom they have furnish new display of the influence of 
human passion and motives. 

amidst the medical and politics discussion which are now afloat in the 
community relative to this topic, the author of these remark has 
venture to method his own reflections, and to weave into an humble 
narrative such incident as appear to him most instructive and 
remarkable among those which came within the sphere of his own 
observation. it is every one's duty to profit by all opportunity of 
inculcate on mankind the lesson of justice and humanity. the 
influence of hope and fear, the trial of fortitude and constancy, 
which took place in this city in the autumn of 1793, have, perhaps, 
never been exceed in any age. it is but just to snatch some of these 
from oblivion, and to deliver to posterity a brief but faithful sketch 
of the condition of this metropolis during that calamitous period. men 
only require to be made acquaint with distress for their compassion 
and their charity to be awakened. he that depicts, in lively colours, 
the evil of disease and poverty, perform an eminent service to the 
sufferers, by calling forth benevolence in those who are able to afford 
relief; and he who portray example of disinterested and 
intrepid confer on virtue the notoriety and homage that are due to 
it, and rouse in the spectator the spirit of salutary emulation. 

in the following tale a particular series of adventure is brought to a 
close; but these are necessarily connected with the event which 
happen subsequent to the period here described. these event are not 
less memorable than those which form the subject of the present volume, 
and may hereafter be published, either separate or in addition to 
this. 

c.b.b. 




arthur mervyn. 




chapter i. 


i was resident in this city during the year 1793. many motive 
contribute to detain me, though departure was easy and commodious, and 
my friends were generally solicitous for me to go. it is not my purpose 
to enumerate these motives, or to dwell on my present concern and 
transactions, but merely to compose a narrative of some incident with 
which my situation made me acquainted. 

return one evening, somewhat later than usual, to my own house, my 
attention was attracted, just as i enter the porch, by the figure of a 
man recline against the wall at a few pace distant. my sight was 
imperfect assist by a far-off lamp; but the posture in which he sat, 
the hour, and the place, immediately suggest the idea of one disabled 
by sickness. it was obvious to conclude that his disease was 
pestilential. this did not deter me from approach and examine him 
more closely. 

he lean his head against the wall; his eyes were shut, his hand 
clasp in each other, and his body seem to be sustain in an upright 
position merely by the cellar-door against which he rest his left 
shoulder. the lethargy into which he was sunk seem scarcely 
interrupt by my feeling his hand and his forehead. his throb 
temple and burning skin indicate a fever, and his form, already 
emaciated, seem to prove that it had not been of short duration. 

there was only one circumstance that hinder me from form an 
immediate determination in what manner this person should be treated. 
my family consist of my wife and a young child. our servant-maid had 
been seized, three days before, by the reign malady, and, at her own 
request, had been convey to the hospital. we ourselves enjoy good 
health, and were hopeful of escape with our lives. our measure for 
this end had been cautious taken and careful adhere to. they did 
not consist in avoid the receptacle of infection, for my office 
require me to go daily into the midst of them; nor in filling the house 
with the exhalation of gunpowder, vinegar, or tar. they consist in 
cleanliness, reasonable exercise, and wholesome diet. custom had 
likewise blunt the edge of our apprehensions. to take this person into 
my house, and bestow upon him the requisite attendance, was the scheme 
that first occur to me. in this, however, the advice of my wife was 
to govern me. 

i mention the incident to her. i pointed out the danger which was to 
be dread from such an inmate. i desire her to decide with caution, 
and mention my resolution to conform myself implicit to her 
decision. should we refuse to harbour him, we must not forget that there 
was a hospital to which he would, perhaps, consent to be carried, and 
where he would be accommodate in the best manner the times would admit. 

"nay," said she, "talk not of hospitals. at least, let him have his 
choice. i have no fear about me, for my part, in a case where the 
injunction of duty are so obvious. let us take the poor, unfortunate 
wretch into our protection and care, and leave the consequence to 
heaven." 

i expect and was pleased with this proposal. i return to the sick 
man, and, on rousing him from his stupor, found him still in possession 
of his reason. with a candle near, i had an opportunity of view him 
more accurately. 

his garb was plain, careless, and denote rusticity. his aspect was 
simple and ingenuous, and his decay visage still retain trace of 
uncommon but manlike beauty. he had all the appearances of mere youth, 
unspoiled by luxury and uninured to misfortune. i scarcely ever beheld 
an object which laid so powerful and sudden a claim to my affection and 
succour. 

"you are sick," said i, in as cheerful a tone as i could assume. "cold 
brick and night-airs are comfortless attendant for one in your 
condition. rise, i pray you, and come into the house. we will try to 
supply you with accommodations a little more suitable." 

at this address he fixed his languid eyes upon me. "what would you 
have?" said he. "i am very well as i am. while i breathe, which will not 
be long, i shall breathe with more freedom here than elsewhere. let me 
alone--i am very well as i am." 

"nay," said i, "this situation is unsuitable to a sick man. i only ask 
you to come into my house, and receive all the kindness that it is in 
our power to bestow. pluck up courage, and i will answer for your 
recovery, provided you submit to directions, and do as we would have 
you. rise, and come along with me. we will find you a physician and a 
nurse, and all we ask in return is good spirits and compliance." 

"do you not know," he replied, "what my disease is? why should you risk 
your safety for the sake of one whom your kindness cannot benefit, and 
who has nothing to give in return?" 

there was something in the style of this remark, that heighten my 
prepossession in his favour, and made me pursue my purpose with more 
zeal. "let us try what we can do for you," i answered. "if we save your 
life, we shall have done you some service, and, as for recompense, we 
will look to that." 

it was with considerable difficulty that he was persuade to accept our 
invitation. he was conduct to a chamber, and, the critical of his 
case require unusual attention, i spent the night at his bedside. 

my wife was encumber with the care both of her infant and her family. 
the charming babe was in perfect health, but her mother's constitution 
was frail and delicate. we simplify the household duty as much as 
possible, but still these duty were considerably burdensome to one not 
use to the performance, and luxurious educated. the addition of a 
sick man was likely to be productive of much fatigue. my engagement 
would not allow me to be always at home, and the state of my patient, 
and the remedy necessary to be prescribed, were attend with many 
noxious and disgustful circumstances. my fortune would not allow me to 
hire assistance. my wife, with a feeble frame and a mind shrinking, on 
ordinary occasions, from such offices, with fastidious scrupulousness, 
was to be his only or principal nurse. 

my neighbour were fervent in their well-meant zeal, and loud in their 
remonstrance on the imprudence and rash of my conduct. they call 
me presumptuous and cruel in expose my wife and child, as well as 
myself, to such imminent hazard, for the sake of one, too, who most 
probably was worthless, and whose disease had doubtless been, by 
negligence or mistreatment, render incurable. 

i did not turn a deaf ear to these censurers. i was aware of all the 
inconvenience and peril to which i thus spontaneous expose myself. 
no one knew better the value of that woman whom i call mine, or set a 
higher price upon her life, her health, and her ease. the virulence and 
activity of this contagion, the dangerous condition of my patient, and 
the dubious of his character, were not forgotten by me; but still my 
conduct in this affair received my own entire approbation. all 
objection on the score of my friends were remove by her own 
willing and even solicitude to undertake the province. i had more 
confidence than other in the vincible of this disease, and in the 
success of those measure which we had use for our defence against it. 
but, whatever were the evil to accrue to us, we were sure of one thing: 
namely, that the consciousness of have neglect this unfortunate 
person would be a source of more unhappy than could possibly redound 
from the attendance and care that he would claim. 

the more we saw of him, indeed, the more did we congratulate ourselves 
on our proceeding. his torment were acute and tedious; but, in the 
midst even of delirium, his heart seem to overflow with gratitude, and 
to be actuate by no wish but to alleviate our toil and our danger. he 
made prodigious exertion to perform necessary offices for himself. he 
suppress his feelings and struggle to maintain a cheerful tone and 
countenance, that he might prevent that anxiety which the sight of his 
suffering produce in us. he was perpetual furnish reason why his 
nurse should leave him alone, and betray dissatisfaction whenever she 
enter his apartment. 

in a few days, there were reason to conclude him out of danger; and, in 
a fortnight, nothing but exercise and nourishment were wanting to 
complete his restoration. meanwhile nothing was obtain from him but 
general information, that his place of abode was chester county, and 
that some momentous engagement induce him to hazard his safety by 
coming to the city in the height of the epidemic. 

he was far from being talkative. his silence seem to be the joint 
result of modesty and unplease remembrances. his features were 
characterize by pathetic seriousness, and his deportment by a gravity 
very unusual at his age. according to his own representation, he was no 
more than eighteen years old, but the depth of his remark indicate a 
much greater advance. his name was arthur mervyn. he describe himself 
as have pass his life at the plough-tail and the threshing-floor; as 
being destitute of all scholastic instruction; and as being long since 
bereft of the affectionate regards of parent and kinsmen. 

when question as to the course of life which he meant to pursue upon 
his recovery, he professed himself without any precise object. he was 
willing to be guide by the advice of others, and by the lights which 
experience should furnish. the country was open to him, and he supposed 
that there was no part of it in which food could not be purchase by his 
labour. he was unqualified, by his education, for any liberal 
profession. his poverty was likewise an insuperable impediment. he could 
afford to spend no time in the acquisition of a trade. he must labour, 
not for future emolument, but for immediate subsistence. the only 
pursuit which his present circumstances would allow him to adopt was 
that which, he was inclined to believe, was likewise the most eligible. 
without doubt his experience was slender, and it seem absurd to 
pronounce concerning that of which he had no direct knowledge; but so it 
was, he could not outroot from his mind the persuasion that to plough, 
to sow, and to reap, were employment most befitting a reasonable 
creature, and from which the truest pleasure and the least pollution 
would flow. he contemplate no other scheme than to return, as soon as 
his health should permit, into the country, seek employment where it was 
to be had, and acquit himself in his engagement with fidelity and 
diligence. 

i pointed out to him various ways in which the city might furnish 
employment to one with his qualifications. he had said that he was 
somewhat accustomed to the pen. there were station in which the 
possession of a legible hand was all that was requisite. he might add to 
this a knowledge of accounts, and thereby procure himself a post in some 
mercantile or public office. 

to this he objected, that experience had shown him unfit for the life of 
a penman. this had been his chief occupation for a little while, and he 
found it wholly incompatible with his health. he must not sacrifice the 
end for the means. starve was a disease preferable to consumption. 
besides, he labour merely for the sake of living, and he live merely 
for the sake of pleasure. if his task should enable him to live, but, 
at the same time, bereave him of all satisfaction, they inflict 
injury, and were to be shun as worse evil than death. 

i ask to what species of pleasure he alluded, with which the business 
of a clerk was inconsistent. 

he answer that he scarcely knew how to describe it. he read books when 
they came in his way. he had light upon few, and, perhaps, the 
pleasure they afford him was owe to their fewness; yet he confessed 
that a mode of life which entire forbade him to read was by no means 
to his taste. but this was trivial. he knew how to value the thought of 
other people, but he could not part with the privilege of observing and 
thinking for himself. he want business which would suffer at least 
nine-tenths of his attention to go free. if it afford agreeable 
employment to that part of his attention which it applied to its own 
use, so much the better; but, if it did not, he should not repine. he 
should be content with a life whose pleasure were to its pains as nine 
are to one. he had try the trade of a copyist, and in circumstances 
more favourable than it was likely he should ever again have an 
opportunity of try it, and he had found that it did not fulfil the 
requisite conditions. whereas the trade of ploughman was friendly to 
health, liberty, and pleasure. 

the pestilence, if it may so be called, was now declining. the health of 
my young friend allow him to breathe the fresh air and to walk. a 
friend of mine, by name wortley, who had spent two month from the city, 
and to whom, in the course of a familiar correspondence, i had mention 
the foregoing particulars, return from his rural excursion. he was 
posting, on the evening of the day of his arrival, with a friendly 
expedition, to my house, when he overtook mervyn go in the same 
direction. he was surprise to find him go before him into my dwelling, 
and to discover, which he speedy did, that this was the youth whom i 
had so frequent mention to him. i was present at their meeting. 

there was a strange mixture in the countenance of wortley when they were 
present to each other. his satisfaction was mingle with surprise, and 
his surprise with anger. mervyn, in his turn, betray considerable 
embarrassment. wortley's thought were too earnest on some topic to 
allow him to converse. he shortly made some excuse for taking leave, 
and, rising, address himself to the youth with a request that he would 
walk home with him. this invitation, deliver in a tone which left it 
doubtful whether a compliment or menace were meant, augment mervyn's 
confusion. he comply without speaking, and they went out together;--my 
wife and i were left to comment upon the scene. 

it could not fail to excite uneasiness. they were evidently no stranger 
to each other. the indignation that flash from the eyes of wortley, 
and the tremble consciousness of mervyn, were unwelcome tokens. the 
former was my dearest friend, and venerable for his discernment and 
integrity. the latter appear to have drawn upon himself the anger and 
disdain of this man. we already anticipate the shock which the 
discovery of his unworthy would produce. 

in a half-hour mervyn returned. his embarrassment had given place to 
dejection. he was always serious, but his features were now overcast by 
the deepest gloom. the anxiety which i felt would not allow me to 
hesitate long. 

"arthur," said i, "something is the matter with you. will you not 
disclose it to us? perhaps you have brought yourself into some dilemma 
out of which we may help you to escape. has any thing of an unpleasant 
nature pass between you and wortley?" 

the youth did not readily answer. he seem at a loss for a suitable 
reply. at length he said that something disagreeable had indeed pass 
between him and wortley. he had had the misfortune to be connected with 
a man by whom wortley conceive himself to be injured. he had borne no 
part in inflict this injury, but had nevertheless been threaten 
with ill treatment if he did not make disclosure which, indeed, it was 
in his power to make, but which he was bound, by every sanction, to 
withhold. this disclosure would be of no benefit to wortley. it would 
rather operate injurious than otherwise; yet it was endeavour to be 
wrest from him by the heaviest menaces. there he paused. 

we were naturally inquisitive as to the scope of these menaces; but 
mervyn entreat us to forbear any further discussion of this topic. he 
foresaw the difficulty to which his silence would subject him. one of 
its most fearful consequence would be the loss of our good opinion. he 
knew not what he had to dread from the enmity of wortley. mr. wortley's 
violence was not without excuse. it was his mishap to be expose to 
suspicion which could only be obviate by break his faith. but, 
indeed, he knew not whether any degree of explicit would confute the 
charge that were made against him; whether, by trample on his sacred 
promise, he should not multiply his peril instead of lessen their 
number. a difficult part had been assign to him; by much too 
difficult for one young, improvident, and inexperienced as he was. 

sincerity, perhaps, was the best course. perhaps, after have had an 
opportunity for deliberation, he should conclude to adopt it; meanwhile 
he entreat permission to retire to his chamber. he was unable to 
exclude from his mind idea which yet could, with no propriety, at least 
at present, be made the theme of conversation. 

these words were accompany with simplicity and pathos, and with token 
of unaffected distress. 

"arthur," said i, "you are master of your action and time in this 
house. retire when you please; but you will naturally suppose us anxious 
to dispel this mystery. whatever shall tend to obscure or malign your 
character will of course excite our solicitude. wortley is not 
short-sighted or hasty to condemn. so great is my confidence in his 
integrity that i will not promise my esteem to one who has irrecoverable 
lost that of wortley. i am not acquaint with your motive to 
concealment, or what it is you conceal; but take the word of one who 
possess that experience which you complain of wanting, that sincerity 
is always safest." 

as soon as he had retired, my curiosity prompt me to pay an immediate 
visit to wortley. i found him at home. he was no less desirous of an 
interview, and answer my inquiry with as much eager as they were 
made. 

"you know," said he, "my disastrous connection with thomas welbeck. you 
recollect his sudden disappearance last july, by which i was reduce to 
the brink of ruin. nay, i am, even now, far from certain that i shall 
survive that event. i spoke to you about the youth who live with him, 
and by what means that youth was discover to have cross the river in 
his company on the night of his departure. this is that very youth. 

"this will account for my emotion at meeting him at your house; i 
brought him out with me. his confusion sufficient indicate his 
knowledge of transactions between welbeck and me. i question him as to 
the fate of that man. to own the truth, i expect some well-digested 
lie; but he merely said that he had promise secrecy on that subject, 
and must therefore be excuse from give me any information. i ask 
him if he knew that his master, or accomplice, or whatever was his 
relation to him, abscond in my debt? he answer that he knew it well; 
but still plead a promise of inviolable secrecy as to his 
hiding-place. this conduct just exasperate me, and i treat him with 
the severity which he deserved. i am half ashamed to confess the 
excesses of my passion; i even went so far as to strike him. he bore my 
insult with the utmost patience. no doubt the young villain is well 
instruct in his lesson. he know that he may safe defy my power. 
from threat i descended to entreaties. i even endeavour to wind the 
truth from him by artifice. i promise him a part of the debt if he 
would enable me to recover the whole. i offer him a considerable 
reward if he would merely afford me a clue by which i might trace him to 
his retreat; but all was insufficient. he merely put on an air of 
perplexity and shook his head in token of non-compliance." 

such was my friend's account of this interview. his suspicion were 
unquestionable plausible; but i was disposed to put a more favourable 
construction on mervyn's behaviour. i recollect the desolate and 
penniless condition in which i found him, and the uniform complacency 
and rectitude of his deportment for the period during which we had 
witness it. these idea had considerable influence on my judgment, and 
indisposed me to follow the advice of my friend, which was to turn him 
forth from my door that very night. 

my wife's prepossession were still more powerful advocate of this 
youth. she would vouch, she said, before any tribunal, for his 
innocence; but she willing concur with me in allow him the 
continuance of our friendship on no other condition than that of a 
disclosure of the truth. to entitle ourselves to this confidence we were 
willing to engage, in our turn, for the observance of secrecy, so far 
that no detriment should accrue from this disclosure to himself or his 
friend. 

next morning, at breakfast, our guest appear with a countenance less 
expressive of embarrassment than on the last evening. his attention was 
chiefly engaged by his own thoughts, and little was said till the 
breakfast was removed. i then remind him of the incident of the 
former day, and mention that the uneasy which thence arose to us 
had rather been increase than diminish by time. 

"it is in your power, my young friend," continue i, "to add still more 
to this uneasiness, or to take it entire away. i had no personal 
acquaintance with thomas welbeck. i have been informed by other that 
his character, for a certain period, was respectable, but that, at 
length, he contract large debts, and, instead of pay them, 
absconded. you, it seems, live with him. on the night of his departure 
you are known to have accompany him across the river, and this, it 
seems, is the first of your reappear on the stage. welbeck's conduct 
was dishonest. he ought doubtless to be pursue to his asylum and be 
compel to refund his winnings. you confess yourself to know his place 
of refuge, but urge a promise of secrecy. know you not that to assist or 
connive at the escape of this man was wrong? to have promise to favour 
his concealment and impunity by silence was only an aggravation of this 
wrong. that, however, is past. your youth, and circumstances, hitherto 
unexplained, may apologize for that misconduct; but it is certainly your 
duty to repair it to the utmost of your power. think whether, by 
disclose what you know, you will not repair it." 

"i have spent most of last night," said the youth, "in reflect on 
this subject. i had come to a resolution, before you spoke, of confiding 
to you my simple tale. i perceive in what circumstances i am placed, and 
that i can keep my hold of your good opinion only by a candid 
deportment. i have indeed given a promise which it was wrong, or rather 
absurd, in another to exact, and in me to give; yet none but 
consideration of the highest importance would persuade me to break my 
promise. no injury will accrue from my disclosure to welbeck. if there 
should, dishonest as he was, that would be a sufficient reason for my 
silence. wortley will not, in any degree, be benefit by any 
communication that i can make. whether i grant or withhold information, 
my conduct will have influence only on my own happiness, and that 
influence will justify me in grant it. 

"i received your protection when i was friendless and forlorn. you have 
a right to know whom it is that you protected. my own fate is connected 
with the fate of welbeck, and that connection, together with the 
interest you are pleased to take in my concerns, because they are mine, 
will render a tale worthy of attention which will not be recommend by 
variety of fact or skill in the display of them. 

"wortley, though passionate, and, with regard to me, unjust, may yet be 
a good man; but i have no desire to make him one of my auditors. you, 
sir, may, if you think proper, relate to him afterwards what particulars 
concerning welbeck it may be of importance for him to know; but at 
present it will be well if your indulgence shall support me to the end 
of a tedious but humble tale." 

the eyes of my eliza sparkle with delight at this proposal. she 
regard this youth with a sisterly affection, and considered his 
candour, in this respect, as an unerring test of his rectitude. she was 
prepared to hear and to forgive the error of inexperience and 
precipitation. i did not fully participate in her satisfaction, but was 
nevertheless most zealous disposed to listen to his narrative. 

my engagement oblige me to postpone this rehearsal till late in the 
evening. collected then round a cheerful hearth, exempt from all 
likelihood of interrupt from without, and our babe's unpractised 
senses shut up in the sweetest and profoundest sleep, mervyn, after a 
pause of recollection, began. 




chapter ii. 


my natal soil is chester county. my father had a small farm, on which he 
has been able, by industry, to maintain himself and a numerous family. 
he has had many children, but some defect in the constitution of our 
mother has been fatal to all of them but me. they die successive as 
they attain the age of nineteen or twenty, and, since i have not yet 
reach that age, i may reasonably look for the same premature fate. in 
the spring of last year my mother follow her fifth child to the grave, 
and three month afterwards die herself. 

my constitution has always been frail, and, till the death of my mother, 
i enjoy unlimited indulgence. i cheerful sustain my portion of 
labour, for that necessity prescribed; but the interval were always at 
my own disposal, and, in whatever manner i thought proper to employ 
them, my plan were encourage and assisted. fond appellations, tone of 
mildness, solicitous attendance when i was sick, deference to my 
opinions, and venerate for my talents, compose the image which i still 
retain of my mother. i had the thoughtless and presumption of youth, 
and, now that she is gone, my compunction is awaken by a thousand 
recollection of my treatment of her. i was indeed guilty of no flagrant 
acts of contempt or rebellion. perhaps her deportment was inevitable 
calculate to instil into me a froward and refractory spirit. my faults, 
however, were speedy follow by repentance, and, in the midst of 
impatience and passion, a look of tender upbraid from her was always 
sufficient to melt me into tear and make me ductile to her will. if 
sorrow for her loss be an atone for the offence which i committed 
during her life, ample atone has been made. 

my father is a man of slender capacity, but of a temper easy and 
flexible. he was sober and industrious by habit. he was content to be 
guide by the superior intelligence of his wife. under this guidance he 
prospered; but, when that was withdrawn, his affair soon began to 
betray mark of unskilful and negligence. my understanding, perhaps, 
qualified me to counsel and assist my father, but i was wholly 
unaccustomed to the task of superintendence. besides, gentle and 
fortitude did not descend to me from my mother, and these were 
indispensable attribute in a boy who desire to dictate to his 
gray-headed parent. time, perhaps, might have confer dexterity on me, 
or prudence on him, had not a most unexpected event given a different 
direction to my views. 

betty lawrence was a wild girl from the pine-forests of new jersey. at 
the age of ten years she became a bound servant in this city, and, after 
the expiration of her time, came into my father's neighbourhood in 
search of employment. she was hire in our family as milkmaid and 
market-woman. her features were coarse, her frame robust, her mind 
total unlettered, and her morals defective in that point in which 
female excellence is supposed chiefly to consist. she possessed 
super-abundant health and good-humour, and was quite a supportable 
companion in the hay-field or the barnyard. 

on the death of my mother, she was exalted to a somewhat higher station. 
the same task fell to her lot; but the time and manner of perform 
them were, in some degree, submit to her own choice. the cow and the 
dairy were still her province; but in this no one interfere with her or 
pretended to prescribe her measures. for this province she seem not 
unqualified, and, as long as my father was pleased with her management, 
i had nothing to object. 

this state of things continued, without material variation, for several 
months. there were appearances in my father's deportment to betty, which 
excited my reflections, but not my fears. the deference which was 
occasional paid to the advice or the claim of this girl was account 
for by that feeble of mind which degrade my father, in whatever 
scene he should be placed, to be the tool of others. i had no conception 
that her claim extend beyond a temporary or superficial 
gratification. 

at length, however, a visible change took place in her manners. a 
scornful affectation and awkward dignity began to be assumed. a greater 
attention was paid to dress, which was of gay hue and more 
fashionable texture. i rally her on these token of a sweetheart, and 
amuse myself with expatiate to her on the qualifications of her 
lover. a clownish fellow was frequent her visitant. his attention did 
not appear to be discouraged. he therefore was readily supposed to be 
the man. when pointed out as the favourite, great resentment was 
expressed, and obscure insinuation were made that her aim was not quite 
so low as that. these denial i supposed to be customary on such 
occasions, and considered the continuance of his visit as a sufficient 
confute of them. 

i frequent spoke of betty, her newly-acquired dignity, and of the 
probable cause of her change of manners, to my father. when this theme 
was started, a certain cold and reserve overspread his features. he 
dealt in monosyllables, and either labour to change the subject or 
made some excuse for leave me. this behaviour, though it occasion 
surprise, was never very deep reflect on. my father was old, and the 
mournful impression which were made upon him by the death of his wife, 
the lapse of almost half a year seem scarcely to have weakened. betty 
had chosen her partner, and i was in daily expectation of receiving a 
summons to the wedding. 

one afternoon this girl dress herself in the gayest manner and seem 
making preparation for some momentous ceremony. my father had direct 
me to put the horse to the chaise. on my inquiring whither he was going, 
he answer me, in general terms, that he had some business at a few 
miles' distance. i offer to go in his stead, but he said that was 
impossible. i was proceeding to ascertain the possibility of this when 
he left me to go to a field where his workmen were busy, direct me to 
inform him when the chaise was ready, to supply his place, while 
absent, in overlook the workmen. 

this office was performed; but before i call him from the field i 
exchange a few words with the milkmaid, who sat on a bench, in all the 
prim of expectation, and deck with the most gaudy plumage. i rate 
her imaginary lover for his tardiness, and vow eternal hatred to them 
both for not making me a bride's attendant. she listen to me with an 
air in which embarrassment was mingle sometimes with exultation and 
sometimes with malice. i left her at length, and return to the house 
not till a late hour. as soon as i entered, my father present betty to 
me as his wife, and desire she might receive that treatment from me 
which was due to a mother. 

it was not till after repeated and solemn declaration from both of them 
that i was prevail upon to credit this event. its effect upon my 
feelings may be easily conceived. i knew the woman to be rude, ignorant, 
and licentious. had i suspect this event, i might have fortify my 
father's weakness and enable him to shun the gulf to which he was 
tending; but my presumption had been careless of the danger. to think 
that such a one should take the place of my revere mother was 
intolerable. 

to treat her in any way not square with her real merits; to hinder 
anger and scorn from rising at the sight of her in her new condition, 
was not in my power. to be degrade to the rank of her servant, to 
become the sport of her malice and her artifices, was not to be endured. 
i had no independent provision; but i was the only child of my father, 
and had reasonably hope to succeed to his patrimony. on this hope i had 
built a thousand agreeable visions. i had meditate innumerable project 
which the possession of this estate would enable me to execute. i had no 
wish beyond the trade of agriculture, and beyond the opulence which a 
hundred acre would give. 

these vision were now at an end. no doubt her own interest would be, to 
this woman, the supreme law, and this would be considered as 
irreconcilable hostile to mine. my father would easily be mould to 
her purpose, and that act easily extort from him which should reduce 
me to beggary. she had a gross and perverse taste. she had a numerous 
kindred, indigent and hungry. on these his substance would speedy be 
lavished. me she hated, because she was conscious of have injure me, 
because she knew that i held her in contempt, and because i had detect 
her in an illicit intercourse with the son of a neighbour. 

the house in which i live was no long my own, nor even my father's. 
hitherto i had thought and act in it with the freedom of a master; but 
now i was become, in my own conceptions, an alien and an enemy to the 
roof under which i was born. every tie which had bound me to it was 
dissolve or convert into something which repel me to a distance 
from it. i was a guest whose presence was borne with anger and 
impatience. 

i was fully impress with the necessity of removal, but i knew not 
whither to go, or what kind of subsistence to seek. my father had been a 
scotland emigrant, and had no kindred on this side of the ocean. my 
mother's family live in new hampshire, and long separation had 
extinguish all the rights of relationship in her offspring. till 
the earth was my only profession, and, to profit by my skill in it, it 
would be necessary to become a day-labourer in the service of strangers; 
but this was a destiny to which i, who had so long enjoy the pleasure 
of independence and command, could not sudden reconcile myself. it 
occur to me that the city might afford me an asylum. a short day's 
journey would transport me into it. i had been there twice or thrice in 
my life, but only for a few hour each time. i knew not a human face, 
and was a stranger to its mode and dangers. i was qualified for no 
employment, compatible with a town life, but that of the pen. this, 
indeed, had ever been a favourite tool with me; and, though it may 
appear somewhat strange, it is no less true that i had had nearly as 
much practice at the quill as at the mattock. but the sum of my skill 
lay in tracing distinct characters. i had use it merely to transcribe 
what other had written, or to give form to my own conceptions. whether 
the city would afford me employment, as a mere copyist, sufficient 
lucrative, was a point on which i possessed no means of information. 

my determination was hasten by the conduct of my new mother. my 
conjecture as to the course she would pursue with regard to me had not 
been erroneous. my father's deportment, in a short time, grew sullen and 
austere. directions were given in a magisterial tone, and any remiss 
in the execution of his orders was rebuke with an air of authority. at 
length these rebuke were follow by certain intimate that i was now 
old enough to provide for myself; that it was time to think of some 
employment by which i might secure a livelihood; that it was a shame for 
me to spend my youth in idleness; that what he had gain was by his own 
labour; and i must be indebted for my living to the same source. 

these hint were easily understood. at first, they excited indignation 
and grief. i knew the source whence they sprung, and was merely able to 
suppress the utterance of my feelings in her presence. my looks, 
however, were abundant significant, and my company became hourly more 
insupportable. abstracted from these considerations, my father's 
remonstrance were not destitute of weight. he gave me being, but 
sustenance ought surely to be my own gift. in the use of that for which 
he had been indebted to his own exertions, he might reasonably consult 
his own choice. he assume no control over me; he merely did what he 
would with his own, and, so far from fetter my liberty, he exhort 
me to use it for my own benefit, and to make provision for myself. 

i now reflect that there were other manual occupation besides that of 
the plough. among these none had few disadvantage than that of 
carpenter or cabinet-maker. i had no knowledge of this art; but neither 
custom, nor law, nor the impenetrable of the mystery, require me to 
serve a seven years' apprenticeship to it. a master in this trade might 
possibly be persuade to take me under his tuition; two or three years 
would suffice to give me the requisite skill. meanwhile my father would, 
perhaps, consent to bear the cost of my maintenance. nobody could live 
upon less than i was willing to do. 

i mention these idea to my father; but he merely commend my 
intentions without offering to assist me in the execution of them. he 
had full employment, he said, for all the profit of his ground. no 
doubt, if i would bind myself to serve four or five years, my master 
would be at the expense of my subsistence. be that as it would, i must 
look for nothing from him. i had shown very little regard for his 
happiness; i had refuse all mark of respect to a woman who was 
entitle to it from her relation to him. he did not see why he should 
treat as a son one who refuse what was due to him as a father. he 
thought it right that i should henceforth maintain myself. he did not 
want my service on the farm, and the soon i quit his house the 
better. 

i retired from this conference with a resolution to follow the advice 
that was given. i saw that henceforth i must be my own protector, and 
wonder at the folly that detain me so long under his roof. to leave 
it was now become indispensable, and there could be no reason for 
delay my departure for a single hour. i determined to bend my course 
to the city. the scheme foremost in my mind was to apprentice myself to 
some mechanical trade. i did not overlook the evil of constraint and 
the dubious as to the character of the master i should choose. i was 
not without hope that accident would suggest a different expedient, and 
enable me to procure an immediate subsistence without forfeit my 
liberty. 

i determined to commence my journey the next morning. no wonder the 
prospect of so considerable a change in my condition should deprive me 
of sleep. i spent the night ruminate on the future, and in painting to 
my fancy the adventure which i should be likely to meet. the foresight 
of man is in proportion to his knowledge. no wonder that, in my state of 
profound ignorance, not the faintest preconception should be form of 
the event that really befell me. my temper was inquisitive, but there 
was nothing in the scene to which i was go from which my curiosity 
expect to derive gratification. discord and evil smells, unsavoury 
food, unwholesome labour, and irksome companions, were, in my opinion, 
the unavoidable attendant of a city. 

my best clothes were of the homeliest texture and shape. my whole stock 
of linen consist of three check shirts. part of my winter evenings' 
employment, since the death of my mother, consist in knitting my own 
stockings. of these i had three pair, one of which i put on, and the 
rest i formed, together with two shirts, into a bundle. three 
quarter-dollar pieces compose my whole fortune in money. 




chapter iii. 


i rose at the dawn, and, without ask or bestow a blessing, sally 
forth into the highroad to the city, which pass near the house. i left 
nothing behind, the loss of which i regretted. i had purchase most of 
my own books with the product of my own separate industry, and, their 
number being, of course, small, i had, by incessant application, gotten 
the whole of them by rote. they had ceased, therefore, to be of any 
further use. i left them, without reluctance, to the fate for which i 
knew them to be reserved, that of afford food and habitation to mice. 

i trod this unwonted path with all the fearless of youth. in spite 
of the motive to despondent and apprehension incident to my state, my 
heel were light and my heart joyous. "now," said i, "i am mount into 
man. i must build a name and a fortune for myself. strange if this 
intellect and these hand will not supply me with an honest livelihood. 
i will try the city in the first place; but, if that should fail, 
resources are still left to me. i will resume my post in the cornfield 
and threshing-floor, to which i shall always have access, and where i 
shall always be happy." 

i had proceed some mile on my journey, when i began to feel the 
inroad of hunger. i might have stop at any farm-house, and have 
breakfast for nothing. it was prudent to husband, with the utmost 
care, my slender stock; but i felt reluctance to beg as long as i had 
the means of buying, and i imagine that coarse bread and a little milk 
would cost little even at a tavern, when any farmer was willing to 
bestow them for nothing. my resolution was further influence by the 
appearance of a signpost. what excuse could i make for beg a 
breakfast with an inn at hand and silver in my pocket? 

i stopped, accordingly, and breakfasted. the landlord was remarkably 
attentive and obliging, but his bread was stale, his milk sour, and his 
cheese the greenest imaginable. i disdain to animadvert on these 
defects, naturally supposing that his house could furnish no better. 

have finished my meal, i put, without speaking, one of my pieces into 
his hand. this deportment i conceive to be highly becoming, and to 
indicate a liberal and manly spirit. i always regard with contempt a 
scrupulous maker of bargains. he received the money with a complaisant 
obeisance. "right," said he. "_just_ the money, sir. you are on foot, 
sir. a pleasant way of travelling, sir. i wish you a good day, sir." so 
saying, he walk away. 

this proceeding was wholly unexpected. i conceive myself entitle to at 
least three-fourths of it in change. the first impulse was to call him 
back, and contest the equity of his demand; but a moment's reflection 
show me the absurd of such conduct. i resume my journey with 
spirits somewhat depressed. i have heard of voyager and wanderer in 
deserts, who were willing to give a casket of gem for a cup of cold 
water. i had not supposed my own condition to be, in any respect, 
similar; yet i had just given one-third of my estate for a breakfast. 

i stop at noon at another inn. i count on purchase a dinner for 
the same price, since i meant to content myself with the same fare. a 
large company was just sitting down to a smoking banquet. the landlord 
invite me to join them. i took my place at the table, but was furnish 
with bread and milk. being prepared to depart, i took him aside. "what 
is to pay?" said i.--"did you drink any thing, sir?"--"certainly. i 
drank the milk which was furnished."--"but any liquors, sir?"---"no." 

he deliberate a moment, and then, assume an air of disinterestedness, 
"'tis our custom to charge dinner and club; but, as you drank nothing, 
we'll let the club go. a mere dinner is half a dollar, sir." 

he had no leisure to attend to my fluctuations. after debate with 
myself on what was to be done, i conclude that compliance was best, 
and, leave the money at the bar, resume my way. 

i had not perform more than half my journey, yet my purse was entire 
exhausted. this was a specimen of the cost incur by living at an inn. 
if i enter the city, a tavern must, at least for some time, be my 
abode; but i had not a farthing remain to defray my charges. my 
father had formerly entertain a boarder for a dollar per week, and, in 
case of need, i was willing to subsist upon coarse fare and lie on a 
hard bed than those with which our guest had been supplied. these 
fact had been the foundation of my negligence on this occasion. 

what was now to be done? to return to my paternal mansion was 
impossible. to relinquish my design of enter the city and to seek a 
temporary asylum, if not permanent employment, at some one of the 
plantation within view, was the most obvious expedient. these 
deliberation did not slacken my pace. i was almost unmindful of my way, 
when i found i had pass schuylkill at the upper bridge. i was now 
within the precincts of the city, and night was hastening. it behoove 
me to come to a speedy decision. 

sudden i recollect that i had not paid the customary toll at the 
bridge; neither had i money wherewith to pay it. a demand of payment 
would have sudden arrest my progress; and so slight an incident 
would have preclude that wonderful destiny to which i was reserved. the 
obstacle that would have hinder my advance now prevent my return. 
scrupulous honesty did not require me to turn back and awaken the 
vigilance of the toll-gatherer. i had nothing to pay, and by return i 
should only double my debt. "let it stand," said i, "where it does. all 
that honour enjoin is to pay when i am able." 

i adhere to the crossways, till i reach market street. night had 
fallen, and a triple row of lamp present a spectacle enchanting and 
new. my personal care were, for a time, lost in the tumultuous 
sensation with which i was now engrossed. i had never visit the city 
at this hour. when my last visit was paid, i was a mere child. the 
novelty which environed every object was, therefore, nearly absolute. i 
proceed with more cautious steps, but was still absorb in attention 
to passing objects. i reach the market-house, and, enter it, 
indulge myself in new delight and new wonder. 

i need not remark that our idea of magnificence and splendour are 
merely comparative; yet you may be prompt to smile when i tell you 
that, in walking through this avenue, i, for a moment, conceive myself 
transport to the hall "pendent with many a row of starry lamp and 
blazing crescent fed by naphtha and asphaltos." that this transition 
from my homely and quiet retreat had been effect in so few hour wore 
the aspect of miracle or magic. 

i proceed from one of these building to another, till i reach their 
termination in front street. here my progress was checked, and i sought 
repose to my weary limb by seating myself on a stall. no wonder some 
fatigue was felt by me, accustomed as i was to strenuous exertions, 
since, exclusive of the minutes spent at breakfast and dinner, i had 
travelled fifteen hour and forty-five miles. 

i began now to reflect, with some earnestness, on my condition. i was a 
stranger, friendless and moneyless. i was unable to purchase food and 
shelter, and was wholly unused to the business of begging. hunger was 
the only serious inconvenience to which i was immediately exposed. i had 
no objection to spend the night in the spot where i then sat. i had no 
fear that my vision would be trouble by the officer of police. it was 
no crime to be without a home; but how should i supply my present 
craving and the craving of to-morrow? 

at length it occur to me that one of our country neighbour was 
probably at this time in the city. he kept a store as well as cultivated 
a farm. he was a plain and well-meaning man, and, should i be so 
fortunate as to meet him, his superior knowledge of the city might be of 
essential benefit to me in my present forlorn circumstances. his 
generous might likewise induce him to lend me so much as would 
purchase one meal. i had form the resolution to leave the city next 
day, and was astonish at the folly that had led me into it; but, 
meanwhile, my physical wants must be supplied. 

where should i look for this man? in the course of conversation i 
recollect him to have refer to the place of his temporary abode. it 
was an inn; but the sign or the name of the keeper for some time 
withstood all my effort to recall them. 

at length i light on the last. it was lesher's tavern. i immediately 
set out in search of it. after many inquiries, i at last arrive at the 
door. i was prepare to enter the house when i perceive that my bundle 
was gone. i had left it on the stall where i had been sitting. people 
were perpetual passing to and fro. it was scarcely possible not to 
have been noticed. no one that observe it would fail to make it his 
prey. yet it was of too much value to me to allow me to be govern by a 
bare probability. i resolve to lose not a moment in returning. 

with some difficulty i retrace my steps, but the bundle had 
disappeared. the clothes were, in themselves, of small value, but they 
constitute the whole of my wardrobe; and i now reflect that they were 
capable of being transmuted, by the pawn or sale of them, into food. 
there were other wretch as indigent as i was, and i console myself by 
thinking that my shirt and stocking might furnish a seasonable 
covering to their nakedness; but there was a relic conceal within this 
bundle, the loss of which could scarcely be endure by me. it was the 
portrait of a young man who die three years ago at my father's house, 
drawn by his own hand. 

he was discover one morning in the orchard with many mark of insanity 
upon him. his air and dress bespoke some elevation of rank and fortune. 
my mother's compassion was excited, and, as his singular were 
harmless, an asylum was afford him, though he was unable to pay for 
it. he was constant declaiming, in an incoherent manner, about some 
mistress who had prove faithless. his speech seemed, however, like 
the rant of an actor, to be rehearse by rote or for the sake of 
exercise. he was total careless of his person and health, and, by 
repeated negligence of this kind, at last contract a fever of which 
he speedy died. the name which he assume was clavering. 

he gave no distinct account of his family, but stated, in loose terms, 
that they were resident in england, high-born and wealthy. that they 
had deny him the woman whom he love and banish him to america, 
under penalty of death if he should dare to return, and that they had 
refuse him all means of subsistence in a foreign land. he predicted, in 
his wild and declamatory way, his own death. he was very skilful at the 
pencil, and drew this portrait a short time before his dissolution, 
present it to me, and charged me to preserve it in remembrance of him. 
my mother love the youth because he was amiable and unfortunate, and 
chiefly because she fancy a very powerful resemblance between his 
countenance and mine. i was too young to build affection on any rational 
foundation. i love him, for whatever reason, with an ardour unusual at 
my age, and which this portrait had contribute to prolong and to 
cherish. 

in thus finally leave my home, i was careful not to leave this picture 
behind. i wrap it in paper in which a few elegiac stanza were 
inscribe in my own hand, and with my utmost elegance of penmanship. i 
then placed it in a leathern case, which, for greater security, was 
deposit in the centre of my bundle. it will occur to you, perhaps, 
that it would be safe in some fold or pocket of the clothes which i 
wore. i was of a different opinion, and was now to endure the penalty of 
my error. 

it was in vain to heap execrate on my negligence, or to consume the 
little strength left to me in regrets. i return once more to the 
tavern and made inquiry for mr. capper, the person whom i have just 
mention as my father's neighbour. i was informed that cap was now 
in town; that he had lodged, on the last night, at this house; that he 
had expect to do the same to-night, but a gentleman had call ten 
minutes ago, whose invitation to lodge with him to-night had been 
accepted. they had just gone out together. who, i asked, was the 
gentleman? the landlord had no knowledge of him; he knew neither his 
place of abode nor his name. was mr. cap expect to return hither in 
the morning? no; he had heard the stranger propose to mr. cap to go 
with him into the country to-morrow, and mr. capper, he believed, had 
assented. 

this disappointment was peculiarly severe. i had lost, by my own 
negligence, the only opportunity that would offer of meeting my friend. 
had even the recollection of my loss been postpone for three minutes, i 
should have enter the house, and a meeting would have been secured. i 
could discover no other expedient to obviate the present evil. my heart 
began now, for the first time, to droop. i look back, with nameless 
emotions, on the days of my infancy. i call up the image of my mother. 
i reflect on the infatuation of my survive parent, and the 
usurp of the detest betty, with horror. i view myself as the 
most calamitous and desolate of human beings. 

at this time i was sitting in the common room. there were other in the 
same apartment, lounging, or whistling, or singing. i notice them not, 
but, leaning my head upon my hand, i deliver myself up to painful and 
intense meditation. from this i was rouse by some one place himself 
on the bench near me and address me thus:--"pray, sir, if you will 
excuse me, who was the person whom you were look for just now? 
perhaps i can give you the information you want. if i can, you will be 
very welcome to it." i fixed my eyes with some eager on the person 
that spoke. he was a young man, expensive and fashionable dressed, 
whose mien was considerably prepossessing, and whose countenance bespoke 
some portion of discernment. i describe to him the man whom i sought. 
"i am in search of the same man myself," said he, "but i expect to meet 
him here. he may lodge elsewhere, but he promise to meet me here at 
half after nine. i have no doubt he will fulfil his promise, so that you 
will meet the gentleman." 

i was highly gratify by this information, and thank my informant 
with some degree of warmth. my gratitude he did not notice, but 
continued: "in order to beguile expectation, i have ordered supper; 
will you do me the favour to partake with me, unless indeed you have 
sup already?" i was obliged, somewhat awkwardly, to decline his 
invitation, conscious as i was that the means of payment were not in my 
power. he continued, however, to urge my compliance till at length it 
was, though reluctantly, yielded. my chief motive was the certainty of 
seeing capper. 

my new acquaintance was exceedingly conversible, but his conversation 
was chiefly characterize by frank and good-humour. my reserve 
gradual diminished, and i venture to inform him, in general terms, of 
my former condition and present views. he listen to my detail with 
seeming attention, and comment on them with some judiciousness. his 
statements, however, tend to discourage me from remain in the city. 

meanwhile the hour pass and cap did not appear. i notice this 
circumstance to him with no little solicitude. he said that possibly he 
might have forgotten or neglect his engagement. his affair was not of 
the highest importance, and might be readily postpone to a future 
opportunity. he perceive that my vivace was greatly damp by this 
intelligence. he importune me to disclose the cause. he made himself 
very merry with my distress, when it was at length discovered. as to the 
expense of supper, i had partaken of it at his invitation; he therefore 
should of course be charged with it. as to lodging, he had a chamber and 
a bed, which he would insist upon my share with him. 

my faculty were thus kept upon the stretch of wonder. every new act of 
kindness in this man surpass the fondest expectation that i had 
formed. i saw no reason why i should be treat with benevolence. i 
should have act in the same manner if placed in the same 
circumstances; yet it appear incongruous and inexplicable. i know 
whence my idea of human nature were derived. they certainly were not 
the offspring of my own feelings. these would have taught me that 
interest and duty were blend in every act of generosity. 

i did not come into the world without my scruple and suspicions. i was 
more apt to impute kindness to sinister and hidden than to obvious and 
laudable motives. 

i pause to reflect upon the possible designs of this person. what end 
could be serve by this behaviour? i was no subject of violence or 
fraud. i had neither trinket nor coin to stimulate the treachery of 
others. what was offer was merely lodging for the night. was this an 
act of such transcendent disinterested as to be incredible? my garb 
was mean than that of my companion, but my intellectual 
accomplishment were at least upon a level with his. why should he be 
supposed to be insensible to my claim upon his kindness? i was a youth 
destitute of experience, money, and friends; but i was not devoid of all 
mental and personal endowments. that my merit should be discovered, even 
on such slender intercourse, had surely nothing in it that shock 
belief. 

while i was thus deliberating, my new friend was earnest in his 
solicit for my company. he remark my hesitation, but ascribe it 
to a wrong cause. "come," said he, "i can guess your objection and can 
obviate them. you are afraid of being usher into company; and people 
who have pass their lives like you have a wonderful antipathy to 
strange faces; but this is bedtime with our family, so that we can defer 
your introduction to them till to-morrow. we may go to our chamber 
without being seen by any but servants." 

i had not been aware of this circumstance. my reluctance flow from a 
different cause, but, now that the inconvenience of ceremony were 
mentioned, they appear to me of considerable weight. i was well 
pleased that they should thus be avoided, and consent to go along with 
him. 

we pass several street and turn several corners. at last we turn 
into a kind of court which seem to be chiefly occupy by stables. "we 
will go," said he, "by the back way into the house. we shall thus save 
ourselves the necessity of enter the parlour, where some of the 
family may still be." 

my companion was as talkative as ever, but said nothing from which i 
could gather any knowledge of the number, character, and condition of 
his family. 




chapter iv. 


we arrive at a brick wall, through which we pass by a gate into an 
extensive court or yard. the dark would allow me to see nothing but 
outlines. compare with the pigmy dimensions of my father's wooden 
hovel, the building before me were of gigantic loftiness. the horse 
were here far more magnificent accommodate than i had been. by a 
large door we enter an elevated hall. "stay here," said he, "just 
while i fetch a light." 

he returned, bearing a candle, before i had time to ponder on my present 
situation. 

we now ascend a staircase, cover with paint canvas. no one whose 
inexperience is less than mine can imagine to himself the impression 
made upon me by surrounding objects. the height to which this stair 
ascended, its dimensions, and its ornaments, appear to me a 
combination of all that was pompous and superb. 

we stop not till we had reach the third story. here my companion 
unlock and led the way into a chamber. "this," said he, "is my room; 
permit me to welcome you into it." 

i had no time to examine this room before, by some accident, the candle 
was extinguished. "curse upon my carelessness!" said he. "i must go down 
again and light the candle. i will return in a twinkling. meanwhile you 
may undress yourself and go to bed." he went out, and, as i afterwards 
recollected, lock the door behind him. 

i was not indisposed to follow his advice, but my curiosity would first 
be gratify by a survey of the room. its height and spacious were 
imperfect discern by starlight, and by gleam from a street-lamp. 
the floor was cover with a carpet, the wall with brilliant hangings; 
the bed and window were shroud by curtains of a rich texture and 
glossy hues. hitherto i had merely read of these things. i knew them to 
be the decoration of opulence; and yet, as i view them, and 
remember where and what i was on the same hour the preceding day, i 
could scarcely believe myself awake, or that my senses were not beguile 
by some spell. 

"where," said i, "will this adventure terminate? i rise on the morrow 
with the dawn and speed into the country. when this night is remembered, 
how like a vision will it appear! if i tell the tale by a kitchen-fire, 
my veracity will be disputed. i shall be rank with the story-tellers 
of shiraz and bagdad." 

though busy in these reflections, i was not inattentive to the 
progress of time. methought my companion was remarkably dilatory. he 
went merely to relight his candle, but certainly he might, during this 
time, have perform the operation ten times over. some unforeseen 
accident might occasion his delay. 

another interval passed, and no token of his coming. i began now to 
grow uneasy. i was unable to account for his detention. was not some 
treachery designed? i went to the door, and found that it was locked. 
this heighten my suspicions. i was alone, a stranger, in an upper room 
of the house. should my conductor have disappeared, by design or by 
accident, and some one of the family should find me here, what would be 
the consequence? should i not be arrest as a thief, and convey to 
prison? my transition from the street to this chamber would not be more 
rapid than my passage hence to a jail. 

these idea struck me with panic. i revolve them anew, but they only 
acquire greater plausibility. no doubt i had been the victim of 
malicious artifice. inclination, however, conjure up opposite 
sentiments, and my fear began to subside. what motive, i asked, could 
induce a human being to inflict wanton injury? i could not account for 
his delay; but how numberless were the contingency that might occasion 
it! 

i was somewhat comfort by these reflections, but the consolation they 
afford was short-lived. i was listen with the utmost eager to 
catch the sound of a foot, when a noise was indeed heard, but total 
unlike a step. it was human breath struggling, as it were, for passage. 
on the first effort of attention, it appear like a groan. whence it 
arose i could not tell. he that utter it was near; perhaps in the 
room. 

presently the same noise was again heard, and now i perceive that it 
came from the bed. it was accompany with a motion like some one 
change his posture. what i at first conceive to be a groan appear 
now to be nothing more than the expiration of a sleep man. what 
should i infer from this incident? my companion did not apprize me that 
the apartment was inhabited. was his imposture a jestful or a wicked 
one? 

there was no need to deliberate. there were no means of concealment or 
escape. the person would some time awaken and detect me. the interval 
would only be fraught with agony, and it was wise to shorten it. should 
i not withdraw the curtain, awake the person, and encounter at once all 
the consequence of my situation? i glide soft to the bed, when the 
thought occurred, may not the sleeper be a female? 

i cannot describe the mixture of dread and of shame which glow in my 
veins. the light in which such a visitant would be probably regard by 
a woman's fears, the precipitate alarm that might be given, the injury 
which i might unknowing inflict or undeserved suffer, threw my 
thought into painful confusion. my presence might pollute a spotless 
reputation, or furnish fuel to jealousy. 

still, though it were a female, would not less injury be done by gently 
interrupt her slumber? but the question of sex still remain to be 
decided. for this end i once more approach the bed, and drew aside the 
silk. the sleeper was a babe. this i discover by the glimmer of a 
street-lamp. 

part of my solicitude were now removed. it was plain that this chamber 
belong to a nurse or a mother. she had not yet come to bed. perhaps it 
was a married pair, and their approach might be moment expected. i 
picture to myself their entrance and my own detection. i could imagine 
no consequence that was not disastrous and horrible, and from which i 
would not at any price escape. i again examine the door, and found that 
exit by this avenue was impossible. there were other door in this room. 
any practicable expedient in this extremity was to be pursued. one of 
these was bolted. i unfastened it and found a considerable space within. 
should i immure myself in this closet? i saw no benefit that would 
finally result from it. i discover that there was a bolt on the 
inside, which would somewhat contribute to security. this being drawn, 
no one could enter without break the door. 

i had scarcely paused, when the long-expected sound of footstep was 
heard in the entry. was it my companion, or a stranger? if it were the 
latter, i had not yet muster courage sufficient to meet him. i cannot 
applaud the magnanimity of my proceeding; but no one can expect intrepid 
or judicious measure from one in my circumstances. i step into the 
closet, and closed the door. some one immediately after unlock the 
chamber door. he was unattended with a light. the footsteps, as they 
move along the carpet, could scarcely be heard. 

i wait impatient for some token by which i might be governed. i put 
my ear to the keyhole, and at length heard a voice, but not that of my 
companion, exclaim, somewhat above a whisper, "smiling cherub! safe and 
sound, i see. would to god my experiment may succeed, and that thou 
mayest find a mother where i have found a wife!" there he stopped. he 
appear to kiss the babe, and, presently retiring, lock the door 
after him. 

these words were capable of no consistent meaning. they served, at 
least, to assure me that i had been treacherous dealt with. this 
chamber, it was manifest, did not belong to my companion. i put up 
prayer to my deity that he would deliver me from these toils. what a 
condition was mine! immerse in palpable darkness! shut up in this 
unknown recess! lurk like a robber! 

my meditation were disturbed by new sounds. the door was unlocked, 
more than one person enter the apartment, and light stream through 
the keyhole. i looked; but the aperture was too small and the figures 
pass too quick to permit me the sight of them. i bent my ear, and 
this impart some more authentic information. 

the man, as i judge by the voice, was the same who had just departed. 
rustling of silk denote his companion to be female. some words being 
utter by the man, in too low a key to be overheard, the lady burst 
into a passion of tears. he strove to comfort her by soothe tone and 
tender appellations. "how can it be helped?" said he. "it is time to 
resume your courage. your duty to yourself and to me require you to 
subdue this unreasonable grief." 

he spoke frequent in this strain, but all he said seem to have 
little influence in pacify the lady. at length, however, her sob 
began to lessen in vehemence and frequency. he exhort her to seek for 
some repose. apparently she prepared to comply, and conversation was, 
for a few minutes, intermitted. 

i could not but advert to the possibility that some occasion to examine 
the closet, in which i was immured, might occur. i knew not in what 
manner to demean myself if this should take place. i had no option at 
present. by withdraw myself from view i had lost the privilege of an 
upright deportment. yet the thought of spend the night in this spot 
was not to be endured. 

gradual i began to view the project of burst from the closet, and 
trust to the energy of truth and of an artless tale, with more 
complacency. more than once my hand was placed upon the bolt, but 
withdrawn by a sudden falter of resolution. when one attempt failed, 
i recur once more to such reflection as were adapt to renew my 
purpose. 

i preconcerte the address which i should use. i resolve to be 
perfectly explicit; to withhold no particular of my adventure from the 
moment of my arrival. my description must necessarily suit some person 
within their knowledge. all i should want was liberty to depart; but, if 
this were not allowed, i might at least hope to escape any ill 
treatment, and to be confront with my betrayer. in that case i did not 
fear to make him the attest of my innocence. 

influence by these considerations, i once more touched the lock. at 
that moment the lady shrieked, and exclaimed, "good god! what is here?" 
an interesting conversation ensued. the object that excited her 
astonishment was the child. i collected from what pass that the 
discovery was wholly unexpected by her. her husband act as if equally 
unaware of this event. he join in all her exclamation of wonder and 
all her wild conjectures. when these were somewhat exhausted, he 
artful insinuate the propriety of bestow care upon the little 
foundling. i now found that her grief had been occasion by the recent 
loss of her own offspring. she was, for some time, averse to her 
husband's proposal, but at length was persuade to take the babe to her 
bosom and give it nourishment. 

this incident had divert my mind from its favourite project, and 
fill me with speculation on the nature of the scene. one explicate 
was obvious, that the husband was the parent of this child, and had use 
this singular expedient to procure for it the maternal protection of his 
wife. it would soon claim from her all the fond which she 
entertain for her own progeny. no suspicion probably had yet, or would 
hereafter, occur with regard to its true parent. if her character be 
distinguished by the usual attribute of women, the knowledge of this 
truth may convert her love into hatred. i reflect with amaze on 
the slight of that thread by which human passion are led from their 
true direction. with no less amaze did i remark the complexity of 
incident by which i had been empower to communicate to her this 
truth. how baseless are the structure of falsehood, which we build in 
opposition to the system of eternal nature! if i should escape 
undetected from this recess, it will be true that i never saw the face 
of either of these persons, and yet i am acquaint with the most secret 
transaction of their lives. 

my own situation was now more critical than before. the lights were 
extinguished, and the party had sought repose. to issue from the 
closet now would be imminent dangerous. my council were again at a 
stand and my designs frustrated. meanwhile the person did not drop 
their discourse, and i thought myself justified in listening. many fact 
of the most secret and momentous nature were allude to. some allusion 
were unintelligible. to other i was able to affix a plausible meaning, 
and some were palpable enough. every word that was utter on that 
occasion is indelible imprint on my memory. perhaps the singular of 
my circumstances, and my previous ignorance of what was passing in the 
world, contribute to render me a greedy listener. most that was said i 
shall overlook; but one part of the conversation it will be necessary to 
repeat. 

a large company had assemble that evening at their house. they 
criticize the character and manners of several. at last the husband 
said, "what think you of the nabob? especially when he talk about 
riches? how artful he encourage the notion of his poverty! yet not a 
soul believe him. i cannot for my part account for that scheme of his. 
i half suspect that his wealth flow from a bad source, since he is so 
studious of conceal it." 

"perhaps, after all," said the lady, "you are mistaken as to his 
wealth." 

"impossible," exclaim the other. "mark how he lives. have i not seen 
his bank-account? his deposits, since he has been here, amount to no 
less than half a million." 

"heaven grant that it be so!" said the lady, with a sigh. "i shall think 
with less aversion of your scheme. if poor tom's fortune be made, and he 
not the worse, or but little the worse on that account, i shall think it 
on the whole best." 

"that," reply he, "is what reconcile me to the scheme. to him thirty 
thousand are nothing." 

"but will he not suspect you of some hand in it?" 

"how can he? will i not appear to lose as well as himself? tom is my 
brother, but who can be supposed to answer for a brother's integrity? 
but he cannot suspect either of us. nothing less than a miracle can 
bring our plot to light. besides, this man is not what he ought to be. 
he will, some time or other, come out to be a grand impostor. he make 
money by other arts than bargain and sale. he has found his way, by some 
means, to the portugal treasury." 

here the conversation took a new direction, and, after some time, the 
silence of sleep ensued. 

who, thought i, is this nabob who count his dollar by half-millions, 
and on whom it seem as if some fraud was intended to be practised? 
amidst their wary and subtlety, how little are they aware that their 
conversation has been overheard! by means as inscrutable as those which 
conduct me hither, i may hereafter be enable to profit by this 
detection of a plot. but, meanwhile, what was i to do? how was i to 
effect my escape from this perilous asylum? 

after much reflection, it occur to me that to gain the street without 
exciting their notice was not utterly impossible. sleep do not 
commonly end of itself, unless at a certain period. what impediment 
were there between me and liberty which i could not remove, and remove 
with so much caution as to escape notice? motion and sound inevitable go 
together; but every sound is not attend to. the door of the closet 
and the chamber did not creak upon their hinges. the latter might be 
locked. this i was able to ascertain only by experiment. if it were so, 
yet the key was probably in the lock, and might be use without much 
noise. 

i wait till their slow and hoarse inspiration show them to be both 
asleep. just then, on change my position, my head struck against some 
things which depend from the ceiling of the closet. they were 
implement of some kind which rattle against each other in consequence 
of this unlucky blow. i was fearful lest this noise should alarm, as the 
closet was little distant from the bed. the breathing of one instantly 
ceased, and a motion was made as if the head were lift from the 
pillow. this motion, which was made by the husband, awake his 
companion, who exclaimed, "what is the matter?" 

"something, i believe," reply he, "in the closet. if i was not 
dreaming, i heard the pistol strike against each other as if some one 
was taking them down." 

this intimate was well suit to alarm the lady. she besought him to 
ascertain the matter. this, to my utter dismay, he at first consent to 
do, but presently observe that probably his ear had misinform him. 
it was hardly possible that the sound proceed from them. it might be a 
rat, or his own fancy might have fashion it. it is not easy to 
describe my trepidation while this conference was holding. i saw how 
easily their slumber was disturbed. the obstacle to my escape were less 
surmount than i had imagined. 

in a little time all was again still. i wait till the usual token of 
sleep were distinguishable. i once more resume my attempt. the bolt was 
withdrawn with all possible slowness; but i could by no means prevent 
all sound. my state was full of inquietude and suspense; my attention 
being painful divide between the bolt and the condition of the 
sleepers. the difficulty lay in give that degree of force which was 
barely sufficient. perhaps not less than fifteen minutes were consume 
in this operation. at last it was happily effected, and the door was 
cautious opened. 

emerge as i did from utter darkness, the light admitted into three 
window produced, to my eyes, a considerable illumination. object 
which, on my first entrance into this apartment, were invisible, were 
now clearly discerned. the bed was shroud by curtains, yet i shrunk 
back into my covert, fearful of being seen. to facilitate my escape, i 
put off my shoes. my mind was so full of object of more urgent moment, 
that the propriety of taking them along with me never occurred. i left 
them in the closet. 

i now glide across the apartment to the door. i was not a little 
discourage by observing that the key was wanting. my whole hope 
depend on the omission to lock it. in my haste to ascertain this 
point, i made some noise which again rouse one of the sleepers. he 
started, and cried, "who is there?" 

i now regard my case as desperate, and detection as inevitable. my 
apprehensions, rather than my caution, kept me mute. i shrunk to the 
wall, and wait in a kind of agony for the moment that should decide my 
fate. 

the lady was again roused. in answer to her inquiries, her husband said 
that some one, he believed, was at the door, but there was no danger of 
their entering, for he had lock it, and the key was in his pocket. 

my courage was completely annihilate by this piece of intelligence. my 
resources were now at an end. i could only remain in this spot till the 
morning light, which could be at no great distance, should discover me. 
my inexperience disabled me from estimate all the peril of my 
situation. perhaps i had no more than temporary inconvenience to dread. 
my intention was innocent, and i had been betray into my present 
situation, not by my own wickedness, but the wicked of others. 

i was deep impress with the ambiguous which would necessarily 
rest upon my motives, and the scrutiny to which they would be subjected. 
i shudder at the bare possibility of being rank with thieves. these 
reflection again gave edge to my ingenuity in search of the means of 
escape. i had careful attend to the circumstances of their entrance. 
possibly the act of lock had been unnoticed; but was it not likewise 
possible that this person had been mistaken? the key was gone. would 
this have been the case if the door were unlocked? 

my fears, rather than my hopes, impel me to make the experiment. i 
drew back the latch, and, to my unspeakable joy, the door opened. 

i pass through and explore my way to the staircase. i descended till 
i reach the bottom. i could not recollect with accuracy the position 
of the door leading into the court, but, by careful feeling along the 
wall with my hands, i at length discover it. it was fasten by 
several bolt and a lock. the bolt were easily withdrawn, but the key 
was removed. i knew not where it was deposited. i thought i had reach 
the threshold of liberty, but here was an impediment that threaten to 
be insurmountable. 

but, if door could not be passed, window might be unbarred. i 
remember that my companion had gone into a door on the left hand, in 
search of a light. i search for this door. fortunately it was fasten 
only by a bolt. it admitted me into a room which i careful explore 
till i reach a window. i will not dwell on my effort to unbar this 
entrance. suffice it to say that, after much exertion and frequent 
mistakes, i at length found my way into the yard, and thence pass into 
the court. 




chapter v. 


now i was once more on public ground. by so many anxious effort had i 
disengaged myself from the perilous precincts of private property. as 
many stratagem as are usually made to enter a house had been employ 
by me to get out of it. i was urge to the use of them by my fears; yet, 
so far from carry off spoil, i had escape with the loss of an 
essential part of my dress. 

i had now leisure to reflect. i seat myself on the ground and review 
the scene through which i had just passed. i began to think that my 
industry had been misemployed. suppose i had met the person on his first 
entrance into his chamber? was the truth so utterly wild as not to have 
found credit? since the door was locked, and there was no other avenue, 
what other statement but the true one would account for my being found 
there? this deportment had been worthy of an honest purpose. my betray 
probably expect that this would be the issue of his jest. my rustic 
simplicity, he might think, would suggest no more ambiguous or elaborate 
expedient. he might likewise have predetermine to interfere if my 
safety had been really endangered. 

on the morrow the two door of the chamber and the window below would be 
found unclosed. they will suspect a design to pillage, but their 
search will terminate in nothing but in the discovery of a pair of 
clumsy and dusty shoe in the closet. now that i was safe i could not 
help smile at the picture which my fancy drew of their anxiety and 
wonder. these thoughts, however, gave place to more momentous 
considerations. 

i could not imagine to myself a more perfect example of indigence than i 
now exhibited. there was no being in the city on whose kindness i had 
any claim. money i had none, and what i then wore comprise my whole 
stock of movables. i had just lost my shoes, and this loss render my 
stocking of no use. my dignity remonstrate against a barefoot 
pilgrimage, but to this, necessity now reconcile me. i threw my 
stocking between the bar of a stable-window, belonging, as i thought, 
to the mansion i had just left. these, together with my shoes, i left to 
pay the cost of my entertainment. 

i saw that the city was no place for me. the end that i had had in view, 
of procure some mechanical employment, could only be obtain by the 
use of means, but what means to pursue i knew not. this night's peril 
and deception gave me a distaste to a city life, and my ancient 
occupation rose to my view enhance by a thousand imaginary charms, i 
resolve forthwith to strike into the country. 

the day began now to dawn. it was sunday, and i was desirous of elude 
observation. i was somewhat recruit by rest, though the languor of 
sleepless oppress me. i meant to throw myself on the first lap of 
verdure i should meet, and indulge in sleep that i so much wanted. i 
knew not the direction of the streets; but follow that which i first 
enter from the court, trust that, by adhere steady to one 
course, i should some time reach the fields. this street, as i 
afterwards found, tend to schuylkill, and soon extricate me from 
houses. i could not cross this river without payment of toll. it was 
requisite to cross it in order to reach that part of the country whither 
i was desirous of going; but how should i effect my passage? i knew of 
no ford, and the smallest expense exceed my capacity. ten thousand 
guinea and a farthing were equally remote from nothing, and nothing was 
the portion allot to me. 

while my mind was thus occupied, i turn up one of the street which 
tend northward. it was, for some length, uninhabited and unpaved. 
presently i reach a pavement, and a paint fence, along which a row 
of poplar was planted. it bound a garden into which a knot-hole 
permit me to pry. the enclosure was a charming green, which i saw 
append to a house of the loftiest and most stately order. it seem 
like a recent erection, had all the gloss of novelty, and exhibited, to 
my unpractised eyes, the magnificence of palaces. my father's dwelling 
did not equal the height of one story, and might be easily comprise in 
one-fourth of those building which here were design to accommodate 
the menials. my heart dictate the comparison between my own condition 
and that of the proprietor of this domain. how wide and how impassable 
was the gulf by which we were separated! this fair inheritance had 
fallen to one who, perhaps, would only abuse it to the purpose of 
luxury, while i, with intentions worthy of the friend of mankind, was 
doom to wield the flail and the mattock. 

i had been entire unaccustomed to this strain of reflection. my books 
had taught me the dignity and safety of the middle path, and my darling 
writer abound with encomium on rural life. at a distance from luxury 
and pomp, i view them, perhaps, in a just light. a near scrutiny 
confirmed my early prepossessions; but, at the distance at which i now 
stood, the lofty edifices, the splendid furniture, and the copious 
accommodations of the rich excited my admiration and my envy. 

i relinquish my station, and proceeded, in a heartless mood, along the 
fence. i now came to the mansion itself. the principal door was enter 
by a staircase of marble. i had never seen the stone of carrara, and 
wildly supposed this to have been dug from italy quarries. the beauty 
of the poplars, the cool exhale from the dew-besprent bricks, the 
commodious of the seat which these steps afforded, and the 
uncertainty into which i was plunge respecting my future conduct, all 
combine to make me pause. i sat down on the lower step and began to 
meditate. 

by some transition it occur to me that the supply of my most urgent 
wants might be found in some inhabitant of this house. i need at 
present a few cents; and what were a few cent to the tenant of a 
mansion like this? i had an invincible aversion to the calling of a 
beggar, but i regard with still more antipathy the vocation of a 
thief; to this alternative, however, i was now reduced. i must either 
steal or beg; unless, indeed, assistance could be procure under the 
notion of a loan. would a stranger refuse to lend the pittance that i 
wanted? surely not, when the urgent of my wants was explained. 

i recollect other obstacles. to summon the master of the house from 
his bed, perhaps, for the sake of such an application, would be 
preposterous. i should be in more danger of provoking his anger than 
exciting his benevolence. this request might, surely, with more 
propriety be prefer to a passenger. i should, probably, meet several 
before i should arrive at schuylkill. 

a servant just then appear at the door, with bucket and brush. this 
oblige me, much soon than i intended, to decamp. with some reluctance 
i rose and proceeded. this house occupy the corner of the street, and 
i now turn this corner towards the country. a person, at some distance 
before me, was approach in an opposite direction. 

"why," said i, "may i not make my demand of the first man i meet? this 
person exhibit token of ability to lend. there is nothing chill or 
austere in his demeanour." 

the resolution to address this passenger was almost formed; but the 
near he advanced my resolve grew less firm. he notice me not till he 
came within a few paces. he seem busy in reflection; and, had not my 
figure caught his eye, or had he merely bestow a passing glance upon 
me, i should not have been sufficient courageous to have detain him. 
the event, however, was widely different. 

he look at me and started. for an instant, as it were, and till he had 
time to dart at me a second glance, he checked his pace. this behaviour 
decided mine, and he stop on perceive token of a desire to address 
him. i spoke, but my accent and air sufficient denote my 
embarrassments:-- 

"i am go to solicit a favour which my situation make of the highest 
importance to me, and which i hope it will be easy for you, sir, to 
grant. it is not an alms, but a loan, that i seek; a loan that i will 
repay the moment i am able to do it. i am go to the country, but 
have not wherewith to pay my passage over schuylkill, or to buy a morsel 
of bread. may i venture to request of you, sir, the loan of sixpence? as 
i told you, it is my intention to repay it." 

i deliver this address, not without some faltering, but with great 
earnestness. i laid particular stress upon my intention to refund the 
money. he listen with a most inquisitive air. his eye peruse me from 
head to foot. 

after some pause, he said, in a very emphatic manner, "why into the 
country? have you family? kindred? friends?" 

"no," answer i, "i have neither. i go in search of the means of 
subsistence. i have pass my life upon a farm, and propose to die in 
the same condition." 

"whence have you come?" 

"i came yesterday from the country, with a view to earn my bread in some 
way, but have change my plan and propose now to return." 

"why have you change it? in what way are you capable of earn your 
bread?" 

"i hardly know," said i. "i can, as yet, manage no tool, that can be 
manage in the city, but the pen. my habit have, in some small degree, 
qualified me for a writer. i would willing accept employment of that 
kind." 

he fixed his eyes upon the earth, and was silent for some minutes. at 
length, recover himself, he said, "follow me to my house. perhaps 
something may be done for you. if not, i will lend you sixpence." 

it may be supposed that i eager comply with the invitation. my 
companion said no more, his air bespeak him to be absorb by his own 
thoughts, till he reach his house, which prove to be that at the door 
of which i had been seated. we enter a parlour together. 

unless you can assume my ignorance and my simplicity, you will be unable 
to conceive the impression that were made by the size and ornament of 
this apartment. i shall omit these impressions, which, indeed, no 
description could adequate convey, and dwell on incident of greater 
moment. he ask me to give him a specimen of my penmanship. i told you 
that i had bestow very great attention upon this art. implement were 
brought, and i sat down to the task. by some inexplicable connection a 
line in shakspeare occur to me, and i wrote,-- 

"my poverty, but not my will, consents." 

the sentiment convey in this line powerful affected him, but in a 
way which i could not then comprehend. i collected from subsequent 
event that the inference was not unfavourable to my understanding or my 
morals. he question me as to my history. i related my origin and my 
inducement to desert my father's house. with respect to last night's 
adventure i was silent. i saw no useful purpose that could be answer 
by disclosure, and i half suspect that my companion would refuse 
credit to my tale. 

there were frequent interval of abstraction and reflection between his 
questions. my examination last not much less than an hour. at length 
he said, "i want an amanuensis or copyist. on what terms will you live 
with me?" 

i answer that i knew not how to estimate the value of my services. i 
knew not whether these service were agreeable or healthful. my life had 
hitherto been active. my constitution was predispose to disease of the 
lungs, and the change might be hurtful. i was willing, however, to try 
and to content myself for a month or a year, with so much as would 
furnish me with food, clothing, and lodging. 

"'tis well," said he. "you remain with me as long and no long than 
both of us please. you shall lodge and eat in this house. i will supply 
you with clothing, and your task will be to write what i dictate. your 
person, i see, has not share much of your attention. it is in my power 
to equip you instantly in the manner which become a resident in this 
house. come with me." 

he led the way into the court behind and thence into a neat building, 
which contained large wooden vessel and a pump: "there," said he, "you 
may wash yourself; and, when that is done, i will conduct you to your 
chamber and your wardrobe." 

this was speedy performed, and he accordingly led the way to the 
chamber. it was an apartment in the third story, finished and furnish 
in the same costly and superb style with the rest of the house. he 
open closet and drawers which overflow with clothes and linen of 
all and of the best kinds. "these are yours," said he, "as long as you 
stay with me. dress yourself as likes you best. here is every thing your 
naked requires. when dressed, you may descend to breakfast." with 
these words he left me. 

the clothes were all in the france style, as i afterwards, by compare 
my garb with that of others, discovered. they were fitted to my shape 
with the nicest precision. i bedeck myself with all my care. i 
remember the style of dress use by my beloved clavering. my locks 
were of shining auburn, flowing and smooth like his. have wrung the 
wet from them, and combed, i tie them careless in a black riband. 
thus equipped, i survey myself in a mirror. 

you may imagine, if you can, the sensation which this instantaneous 
transformation produced. appearances are wonderful influence by 
dress. check shirt, button at the neck, an awkward fustian coat, check 
trowser and bare feet, were now supplant by linen and muslin, nankeen 
coat striped with green, a white silk waistcoat elegant 
needle-wrought, cassimere pantaloons, stocking of variegated silk, and 
shoe that in their softness, pliancy, and polish surface vie with 
satin. i could scarcely forbear look back to see whether the image in 
the glass, so well proportioned, so gallant, and so graceful, did not 
belong to another. i could scarcely recognise any lineament of my own. 
i walk to the window. "twenty minutes ago," said i, "i was traverse 
that path a barefoot beggar; now i am thus." again i survey myself. 
"surely some insanity has fasten on my understanding. my senses are 
the sport of dreams. some magic that disdain the cumbrous of 
nature's progress has wrought this change." i was rouse from these 
doubt by a summons to breakfast, obsequious deliver by a black 
servant. 

i found welbeck (for i shall henceforth call him by his true name) at 
the breakfast-table. a superb equipage of silver and china was before 
him. he was startle at my entrance. the change in my dress seem for a 
moment to have deceive him. his eye was frequent fixed upon me with 
unusual steadfastness. at these times there was inquietude and wonder in 
his features. 

i had now an opportunity of examine my host. there was nicety but no 
ornament in his dress. his form was of the middle height, spare, but 
vigorous and graceful. his face was cast, i thought, in a foreign mould. 
his forehead recede beyond the usual degree in visage which i had 
seen. his eyes large and prominent, but impart no mark of benignity 
and habitual joy. the rest of his face forcibly suggest the idea of a 
convex edge. his whole figure impress me with emotion of venerate 
and awe. a gravity that almost amount to sad invariable attend 
him when we were alone together. 

he whisper the servant that waited, who immediately retired. he then 
said, turning to me, "a lady will enter presently, whom you are to treat 
with the respect due to my daughter. you must not notice any emotion she 
may betray at the sight of you, nor expect her to converse with you; for 
she do not understand your language." he had scarcely spoken when she 
entered. i was seize with certain misgiving and flutter which a 
clownish education may account for. i so far conquer my timidity, 
however, as to snatch a look at her. i was not born to execute her 
portrait. perhaps the turban that wreathe her head, the brilliant 
texture and inimitable fold of her drapery, and nymphlike port, more 
than the essential attribute of her person, gave splendour to the 
celestial vision. perhaps it was her snowy hues, and the cast rather 
than the position of her features, that were so prolific of enchantment; 
or perhaps the wonder originate only in my own ignorance. 

she did not immediately notice me. when she did she almost shriek with 
surprise. she held up her hands, and, gaze upon me, utter various 
exclamation which i could not understand. i could only remark that her 
accent were thrilling musical. her perturbation refuse to be 
stilled. it was with difficulty that she withdrew her regards from me. 
much conversation pass between her and welbeck, but i could comprehend 
no part of it. i was at liberty to animadvert on the visible part of 
their intercourse. i divert some part of my attention from my own 
embarrassments, and fixed it on their looks. 

in this art, as in most others, i was an unpractised simpleton. in the 
countenance of welbeck, there was somewhat else than sympathy with the 
astonishment and distress of the lady; but i could not interpret these 
additional tokens. when her attention was engross by welbeck, her eyes 
were frequent vagrant or downcast; her cheek contract a deep hue; 
and her breathing was almost prolonged into a sigh. these were mark on 
which i made no comment at the time. my own situation was calculate to 
breed confusion in my thought and awkward in my gestures. breakfast 
being finished, the lady, apparently at the request of welbeck, sat down 
to a piano-forte. 

here again i must be silent. i was not wholly destitute of musical 
practice and musical taste. i had that degree of knowledge which enable 
me to estimate the transcendent skill of this performer. as if the 
pathos of her touch were insufficient, i found after some time that the 
lawless jar of the key were chasten by her own more liquid 
notes. she play without a book, and, though her bass might be 
preconcerted, it was plain that her right-hand note were momentary and 
spontaneous inspirations. meanwhile welbeck stood, leaning his arms on 
the back of a chair near her, with his eyes fixed on her face. his 
features were fraught with a meaning which i was eager to interpret, but 
unable. 

i have read of transition effect by magic; i have read of palace and 
deserts which were subject to the dominion of spells; poet may sport 
with their power, but i am certain that no transition was ever conceive 
more marvellous and more beyond the reach of foresight than that which i 
had just experienced. heath vex by a midnight storm may be change 
into a hall of choral nymph and regal banqueting; forest glade may 
give sudden place to colonnade and carnivals; but he whose senses are 
delude find himself still on his natal earth. these miracle are 
contemptible when compare with that which placed me under this roof and 
gave me to partake in this audience. i know that my emotion are in 
danger of being regard as ludicrous by those who cannot figure to 
themselves the consequence of a limited and rustic education. 




chapter vi. 


in a short time the lady retired. i naturally expect that some 
comment would be made on her behaviour, and that the cause of her 
surprise and distress on seeing me would be explained; but welbeck said 
nothing on that subject. when she had gone, he went to the window and 
stood for some time occupied, as it seemed, with his own thoughts. then 
he turn to me, and, calling me by my name, desire me to accompany him 
up-stairs. there was neither cheerful nor mild in his address, 
but neither was there any thing domineer or arrogant. 

we enter an apartment on the same floor with my chamber, but separate 
from it by a spacious entry. it was supply with bureaus, cabinets, and 
bookcases. "this," said he, "is your room and mine; but we must enter it 
and leave it together. i mean to act not as your master but your friend. 
my maim hand" (so saying, he show me his right hand, the forefinger 
of which was wanting) "will not allow me to write accurate or 
copiously. for this reason i have require your aid, in a work of some 
moment. much haste will not be requisite, and, as to the hour and 
duration of employment, these will be seasonable and short. 

"your present situation is new to you, and we will therefore defer 
enter on our business. meanwhile you may amuse yourself in what 
manner you please. consider this house as your home and make yourself 
familiar with it. stay within or go out, be busy or be idle, as your 
fancy shall prompt: only you will conform to our domestic system as to 
eat and sleep; the servant will inform you of this. next week we 
will enter on the task for which i design you. you may now withdraw." 

i obey this mandate with some awkward and hesitation. i went into 
my own chamber not displease with an opportunity of loneliness. i threw 
myself on a chair and resigned myself to those thought which would 
naturally arise in this situation. i speculate on the character and 
view of welbeck. i saw that he was embosomed in tranquill and 
grandeur. riches, therefore, were his; but in what did his opulence 
consist, and whence did it arise? what were the limit by which it was 
confined, and what its degree of permanence? i was unhabituated to idea 
of floating or transfer wealth. the rent of house and lands was the 
only species of property which was, as yet, perfectly intelligible. my 
previous idea led me to regard welbeck as the proprietor of this 
dwelling and of numerous house and farms. by the same cause i was fain 
to suppose him enrich by inheritance, and that his life had been 
uniform. 

i next advert to his social condition. this mansion appear to have 
but two inhabitant besides servants. who was the nymph who had hover 
for a moment in my sight? had he not call her his daughter? the 
apparent difference in their age would justify this relation; but her 
guise, her features, and her accents, were foreign. her language i 
suspect strong to be that of italy. how should he be the father of 
an italian? but were there not some foreign lineament in his 
countenance? 

this idea seem to open a new world to my view. i had gained, from my 
books, confuse idea of europe government and manners. i knew that 
the present was a period of revolution and hostility. might not these be 
illustrious fugitive from prove or the milanese? their portable 
wealth, which may reasonably be supposed to be great, they have 
transport hither. thus may be explain the sorrow that veil their 
countenance. the loss of estate and honours; the untimely death of 
kindred, and perhaps of his wife, may furnish eternal food for regrets. 
welbeck's utterance, though rapid and distinct, partook, as i conceived, 
in some very slight degree of a foreign idiom. 

such was the dream that haunt my undisciplined and unenlightened 
imagination. the more i revolve it, the more plausible it seemed. on 
due supposition every appearance that i had witness was easily 
solved,--unless it were their treatment of me. this, at first, was a 
source of hopeless perplexity. gradually, however, a clue seem to be 
afforded. welbeck had betray astonishment on my first appearance. the 
lady's wonder was mingle with distress. perhaps they discover a 
remarkable resemblance between me and one who stood in the relation of 
son to welbeck, and of brother to the lady. this youth might have 
perish on the scaffold or in war. these, no doubt, were his clothes. 
this chamber might have been reserved for him, but his death left it to 
be appropriate to another. 

i had hitherto been unable to guess at the reason why all this kindness 
had been lavish on me. will not this conjecture sufficient account 
for it? no wonder that this resemblance was enhance by assume his 
dress. 

taking all circumstances into view, these idea were not, perhaps, 
destitute of probability. appearances naturally suggest them to me. 
they were, also, powerful enforce by inclination. they threw me into 
transport of wonder and hope. when i dwelt upon the incident of my 
past life, and trace the chain of events, from the death of my mother 
to the present moment, i almost acquiesce in the notion that some 
beneficent and ruling genius had prepared my path for me. event which, 
when foreseen, would most ardent have been deprecated, and when they 
happen were account in the highest degree luckless, were now seen to 
be propitious. hence i infer the infatuation of despair, and the 
folly of precipitate conclusions. 

but what was the fate reserved for me? perhaps welbeck would adopt me 
for his own son. wealth has ever been capricious distributed. the mere 
physical relation of birth is all that entitle us to manor and 
thrones. identity itself frequent depend upon a casual likeness or an 
old nurse's imposture. nation have risen in arms, as in the case of the 
stuarts, in the cause of one the genuine of whose birth has been 
deny and can never be proved. but if the cause be trivial and 
fallacious, the effects are momentous and solid. it ascertain our 
portion of felicity and usefulness, and fix our lot among peasant or 
princes. 

something may depend upon my own deportment. will it not behoove me to 
cultivate all my virtue and eradicate all my defects? i see that the 
abilities of this man are venerable. perhaps he will not lightly or 
hasty decide in my favour. he will be govern by the proof that i 
shall give of discernment and integrity. i had always been exempt from 
temptation, and was therefore undepraved; but this view of things had a 
wonderful tendency to invigorate my virtuous resolutions. all within me 
was exhilarate and joy. 

there was but one thing wanting to exalt me to a dizzy height and give 
me place among the stars of heaven. my resemblance to her brother had 
forcibly affected this lady; but i was not her brother. i was raise to 
a level with her and made a tenant of the same mansion. some intercourse 
would take place between us. time would lay level impediment and 
establish familiarity, and this intercourse might foster love and 
terminate in--_marriage_! 

these image were of a nature too glowing and expansive to allow me to 
be long inactive. i sally forth into the open air. this tumult of 
delicious thought in some time subsided, and gave way to image 
relative to my present situation. my curiosity was awake. as yet i had 
seen little of the city, and this opportunity for observation was not to 
be neglected. i therefore course through several streets, attentive 
examine the object that successive present themselves. 

at length, it occur to me to search out the house in which i had 
lately been immured. i was not without hope that at some future period 
i should be able to comprehend the allusion and brighten the 
obscurity that hung about the dialogue of last night. 

the house was easily discovered. i reconnoitre the court and gate 
through which i had passed. the mansion was of the first order in 
magnitude and decoration. this was not the bound of my present 
discovery, for i was gifted with that confidence which would make me set 
on foot inquiry in the neighbourhood. i look around for a suitable 
medium of intelligence. the opposite and adjoin house were small, 
and apparently occupy by person of an indigent class. at one of these 
was a sign denote it to be the residence of a tailor. seat on a 
bench at the door was a young man, with coarse uncombed locks, breeches 
knee-unbuttoned, stocking ungartered, shoe slipshod and unbuckled, and 
a face unwashed, gaze stupid from hollow eyes. his aspect was 
embellish with good nature, though indicative of ignorance. 

this was the only person in sight. he might be able to say something 
concerning his opulent neighbour. to him, therefore, i resolve to 
apply. i went up to him, and, point to the house in question, ask 
him who live there. 

he answered, "mr. matthews." 

"what is his profession,--his way of life?" 

"a gentleman. he do nothing but walk about." 

"how long has he been married?" 

"married! he is not married as i know on. he never has been married. he 
is a bachelor." 

this intelligence was unexpected. it made me pause to reflect whether i 
had not mistaken the house. this, however, seem impossible. i renew 
my questions. 

"a bachelor, say you? are you not mistaken?" 

"no. it would be an odd thing if he was married. an old fellow, with one 
foot in the grave--comical enough for him to _git_ a _vife_!" 

"an old man? do he live alone? what is his family?" 

"no, he do not live alone. he has a niece that lives with him. she is 
married, and her husband lives there too." 

"what is his name?" 

"i don't know. i never heard it as i know on." 

"what is his trade?" 

"he's a merchant; he keeps a store somewhere or other; but i don't know 
where." 

"how long has he been married?" 

"about two years. they lost a child lately. the young woman was in a 
huge taking about it. they say she was quite crazy some days for the 
death of the child; and she is not quite out of _the dumps_ yet. 
to-be-sure, the child was a sweet little thing; but they need not make 
such a rout about it. i'll war'n' they'll have enough of them before 
they die." 

"what is the character of the young man? where was he born and educated? 
has he parent or brothers?" 

my companion was incapable of answer these questions, and i left him 
with little essential addition to the knowledge i already possessed. 




chapter vii. 


after view various parts of the city, intrude into churches, and 
dive into alleys, i returned. the rest of the day i spent chiefly in 
my chamber, reflect on my new condition; survey my apartment, its 
press and closets; and conjecture the cause of appearances. 

at dinner and supper i was alone. venture to inquire of the servant 
where his master and mistress were, i was answer that they were 
engaged. i did not question him as to the nature of their engagement, 
though it was a fertile source of curiosity. 

next morning, at breakfast, i again met welbeck and the lady. the 
incident were nearly those of the preceding morning, if it were not 
that the lady exhibit token of somewhat greater uneasiness. when she 
left us, welbeck sank into apparent meditation. i was at a loss whether 
to retire or remain where i was. at last, however, i was on the point of 
leave the room, when he broke silence and began a conversation with 
me. 

he put question to me, the obvious scope of which was to know my 
sentiment on moral topics. i had no motive to conceal my opinions, and 
therefore deliver them with frankness. at length he introduce 
allusion to my own history, and made more particular inquiry on that 
head. here i was not equally frank; yet i did not feign any thing, but 
merely dealt in generals. i had acquire notions of propriety on this 
head, perhaps somewhat fastidious. minute details, respecting our own 
concerns, are apt to weary all but the narrator himself. i said thus 
much, and the truth of my remark was eager assent to. 

with some mark of hesitation and after various preliminaries, my 
companion hint that my own interest, as well as his, enjoin upon me 
silence to all but himself, on the subject of my birth and early 
adventures. it was not likely that, while in his service, my circle of 
acquaintance would be large or my intercourse with the world frequent; 
but in my communication with other he request me to speak rather of 
other than of myself. this request, he said, might appear singular to 
me, but he had his reason for making it, which it was not necessary, at 
present, to disclose, though, when i should know them, i should readily 
acknowledge their validity. 

i scarcely knew what answer to make. i was willing to oblige him. i was 
far from expect that any exigence would occur, making disclosure my 
duty. the employment was productive of pain more than of pleasure, and 
the curiosity that would useless seek a knowledge of my past life was 
no less impertinent than the loquac that would useless communicate 
that knowledge. i readily promised, therefore, to adhere to his advice. 

this assurance afford him evident satisfaction; yet it did not seem to 
amount to quite as much as he wished. he repeated, in strong terms, 
the necessity there was for caution. he was far from suspect me to 
possess an impertinent and talkative disposition, or that, in my 
eager to expatiate on my own concerns, i should overstep the limit 
of politeness. but this was not enough. i was to govern myself by a 
persuasion that the interests of my friend and myself would be 
material affected by my conduct. 

perhaps i ought to have allow these insinuation to breed suspicion in 
my mind; but, conscious as i was of the benefit which i had received 
from this man; prone, from my inexperience, to rely upon profession and 
confide in appearances; and unaware that i could be placed in any 
condition in which mere silence respecting myself could be injurious or 
criminal, i made no scruple to promise compliance with his wishes. nay, 
i went further than this; i desire to be accurate informed as to what 
it was proper to conceal. he answer that my silence might extend to 
every thing anterior to my arrival in the city and my being incorporated 
with his family. here our conversation ended, and i retired to ruminate 
on what had passed. 

i derive little satisfaction from my reflections. i began now to 
perceive inconvenience that might arise from this precipitate promise. 
whatever should happen in consequence of my being immure in the 
chamber, and of the loss of my clothes and of the portrait of my friend, 
i had bound myself to silence. these inquietudes, however, were 
transient. i trust that these event would operate auspiciously; but 
my curiosity was now awaken as to the motive which _welbeck_ could 
have for exacting from me this concealment. to act under the guidance of 
another, and to wander in the dark, ignorant whither my path tend and 
what effects might flow from my agency, was a new and irksome situation. 

from these thought i was recall by a message from welbeck. he gave me 
a fold paper, which he request me to carry to no.--south fourth 
street. "inquire," said he, "for mrs. wentworth, in order merely to 
ascertain the house, for you need not ask to see her; merely give the 
letter to the servant and retire. excuse me for imposing this service 
upon you. it is of too great moment to be trust to a common messenger; 
i usually perform it myself, but am at present otherwise engaged." 

i took the letter and set out to deliver it. this was a trifling 
circumstance, yet my mind was full of reflection on the consequence 
that might flow from it. i remember the directions that were given, 
but construe them in a manner different, perhaps, from welbeck's 
expectations or wishes. he had charged me to leave the billet with the 
servant who happen to answer my summons; but had he not said that the 
message was important, insomuch that it could not be intrust to common 
hands? he had permitted, rather than enjoined, me to dispense with 
seeing the lady; and this permission i conceive to be dictate merely 
by regard to my convenience. it was incumbent on me, therefore, to take 
some pains to deliver the script into her own hands. 

i arrive at the house and knocked. a female servant appeared. "her 
mistress was up-stairs; she would tell her if i wish to see her," and 
meanwhile invite me to enter the parlour; i did so; and the girl 
retired to inform her mistress that one wait for her. i ought to 
mention that my departure from the directions which i had received was, 
in some degree, owe to an inquisitive temper; i was eager after 
knowledge, and was disposed to profit by every opportunity to survey the 
interior of dwelling and converse with their inhabitants. 

i scan the walls, the furniture, the pictures. over the fireplace was 
a portrait in oil of a female. she was elderly and matron-like. perhaps 
she was the mistress of this habitation, and the person to whom i should 
immediately be introduced. was it a casual suggestion, or was there an 
actual resemblance between the stroke of the pencil which execute this 
portrait and that of clavering? however that be, the sight of this 
picture revive the memory of my friend and call up a fugitive 
suspicion that this was the production of his skill. 

i was busy revolving this idea when the lady herself entered. it was 
the same whose portrait i had been examining. she fixed scrutinize and 
powerful eyes upon me. she look at the superscription of the letter 
which i presented, and immediately resume her examination of me. i was 
somewhat abash by the close of her observation, and gave token of 
this state of mind which did not pass unobserved. they seem instantly 
to remind her that she behave with too little regard to civility. she 
recover herself and began to peruse the letter. have done this, her 
attention was once more fixed upon me. she was evidently desirous of 
enter into some conversation, but seem at a loss in what manner to 
begin. this situation was new to me and was productive of no small 
embarrassment. i was prepare to take my leave when she spoke, though 
not without considerable hesitation:-- 

"this letter is from mr. welbeck--you are his friend--i 
presume--perhaps--a relation?" 

i was conscious that i had no claim to either of these titles, and that 
i was no more than his servant. my pride would not allow me to 
acknowledge this, and i merely said, "i live with him at present, 
madam." 

i imagine that this answer did not perfectly satisfy her; yet she 
received it with a certain air of acquiescence. she was silent for a few 
minutes, and then, rising, said, "excuse me, sir, for a few minutes. i 
will write a few words to mr. welbeck." so saying, she withdrew. 

i return to the contemplation of the picture. from this, however, my 
attention was quick divert by a paper that lay on the mantel. a 
single glance was sufficient to put my blood into motion. i start and 
laid my hand upon the well-known packet. it was that which enclose the 
portrait of clavering! 

i unfold and examine it with eagerness. by what miracle came it 
hither? it was found, together with my bundle, two nights before. i had 
despair of ever seeing it again, and yet here was the same portrait 
enclose in the selfsame paper! i have forborne to dwell upon the 
regret, amount to grief, with which i was affected in consequence of 
the loss of this precious relic. my joy on thus speedy and 
unexpected regain it is not easily described. 

for a time i did not reflect that to hold it thus in my hand was not 
sufficient to entitle me to repossession. i must acquaint this lady with 
the history of this picture, and convince her of my ownership. but how 
was this to be done? was she connected in any way, by friendship or by 
consanguinity, with that unfortunate youth? if she were, some 
information as to his destiny would be anxious sought. i did not, just 
then, perceive any impropriety in impart it. if it came into her 
hand by accident, still, it will be necessary to relate the mode in 
which it was lost in order to prove my title to it. 

i now heard her descend footsteps, and hasty replace the picture 
on the mantel. she entered, and, present me a letter, desire me to 
deliver it to mr. welbeck. i had no pretext for defer my departure, 
but was unwill to go without obtain possession of the portrait. an 
interval of silence and irresolute succeeded. i cast significant 
glance at the spot where it lay, and at length muster up my strength 
of mind, and, point to the paper,--"madam," said i, "_there_ is 
something which i recognise to be mine: i know not how it came into your 
possession, but so lately as the day before yesterday it was in mine. i 
lost it by a strange accident, and, as i deem it of inestimable value, i 
hope you will have no objection to restore it." 

during this speech the lady's countenance exhibit mark of the utmost 
perturbation. "your picture!" she exclaimed; "you lost it! how? where? 
did you know that person? what has become of him?" 

"i knew him well," said i. "that picture was execute by himself. he 
gave it to me with his own hands; and, till the moment i unfortunately 
lost it, it was my dear and perpetual companion." 

"good heaven!" she exclaimed, with increase vehemence; "where did you 
meet with him? what has become of him? is he dead, or alive?" 

these appearances sufficient show me that clavere and this lady 
were connected by some tie of tenderness. i answer that he was dead; 
that my mother and myself were his attendant and nurses, and that this 
portrait was his legacy to me. 

this intelligence melt her into tears, and it was some time before she 
recover strength enough to resume the conversation. she then inquired, 
"when and where was it that he died? how did you lose this portrait? it 
was found wrap in some coarse clothes, lie in a stall in the 
market-house, on saturday evening. two negro women, servant of one of 
my friends, strolling through the market, found it and brought it to 
their mistress, who, recognise the portrait, sent it to me. to whom 
did that bundle belong? was it yours?" 

these question remind me of the painful predicament in which i now 
stood. i had promise welbeck to conceal from every one my former 
condition; but to explain in what manner this bundle was lost, and how 
my intercourse with clavere had taken place, was to violate this 
promise. it was possible, perhaps, to escape the confession of the truth 
by equivocation. falsehood were easily invented, and might lead her far 
away from my true condition; but i was wholly unused to equivocation. 
never yet had a lie pollute my lips. i was not weak enough to be 
ashamed of my origin. this lady had an interest in the fate of 
clavering, and might just claim all the information which i was able 
to impart. yet to forget the compact which i had so lately made, and an 
adherence to which might possibly be in the highest degree beneficial to 
me and to welbeck; i was willing to adhere to it, provided falsehood 
could be avoided. 

these thought render me silent. the pain of my embarrassment amount 
almost to agony. i felt the keenest regret at my own precipitation in 
claim the picture. its value to me was altogether imaginary. the 
affection which this lady had borne the original, whatever was the 
source of that affection, would prompt her to cherish the copy, and, 
however precious it was in my eyes, i should cheerful resign it to 
her. 

in the confusion of my thought an expedient suggest itself 
sufficient inartificial and bold. "it is true, madam, what i have 
said. i saw him breathe his last. this is his only legacy. if you wish 
it i willing resign it; but this is all that i can now disclose. i am 
placed in circumstances which render it improper to say more." 

these words were utter not very distinctly, and the lady's vehemence 
hinder her from notice them. she again repeated her interrogations, 
to which i return the same answer. 

at first she express the utmost surprise at my conduct. from this she 
descended to some degree of asperity. she made rapid allusion to the 
history of clavering. he was the son of the gentleman who own the 
house in which welbeck resided. he was the object of immeasurable 
fond and indulgence. he had sought permission to travel, and, this 
being refuse by the absurd timid of his parents, he had twice been 
frustrate in attempt to embark for europe clandestinely. they 
ascribe his disappearance to a third and successful attempt of this 
kind, and had exercise anxious and unweary diligence in endeavour 
to trace his footsteps. all their effort had failed. one motive for 
their return to europe was the hope of discover some trace of 
him, as they entertain no doubt of his have cross the ocean. the 
vehemence of mrs. wentworth's curiosity as to those particulars of his 
life and death may be easily conceived. my refusal only heighten this 
passion. 

finding me refractory to all her efforts, she at length dismiss me in 
anger. 




chapter viii. 


this extraordinary interview was now past. pleasure as well as pain 
attend my reflection on it. i adhere to the promise i had 
improvident given to welbeck, but had excited displeasure, and perhaps 
suspicion, in the lady. she would find it hard to account for my 
silence. she would probably impute it to perverseness, or imagine it to 
flow from some incident connected with the death of clavering, 
calculate to give a new edge to her curiosity. 

it was plain that some connection subsist between her and welbeck. 
would she drop the subject at the point which it had now attained? would 
she cease to exert herself to extract from me the desire information, 
or would she not rather make welbeck a party in the cause, and prejudice 
my new friend against me? this was an evil proper, by all lawful means, 
to avoid. i knew of no other expedient than to confess to him the truth 
with regard to clavering, and explain to him the dilemma in which my 
adherence to my promise had involved me. 

i found him on my return home, and deliver him the letter with which i 
was charged. at the sight of it, surprise, mingle with some uneasiness, 
appear in his looks. "what!" said he, in a tone of disappointment, 
"you then saw the lady?" 

i now remember his directions to leave my message at the door, and 
apologize for my neglect them by telling my reasons. his chagrin 
vanished, but not without an apparent effort, and he said that all was 
well; the affair was of no moment. 

after a pause of preparation, i entreat his attention to something 
which i had to relate. i then detailed the history of clavere and of 
my late embarrassments. as i went on, his countenance betoken 
increase solicitude. his emotion was particularly strong when i came 
to the interrogatory of mrs. wentworth in relation to clavering; but 
this emotion gave way to profound surprise when i related the manner in 
which i had elude her inquiries. i conclude with observing that, when 
i promise forbearance on the subject of my own adventures, i had not 
foreseen any exigence which would make an adherence to my promise 
difficult or inconvenient; that, if his interest was promote by my 
silence, i was still willing to maintain it, and request his 
directions how to conduct myself on this occasion. 

he appear to ponder deep and with much perplexity on what i had 
said. when he spoke there was hesitation in his manner and circu in 
his expressions, that prove him to have something in his thought which 
he knew not how to communicate. he frequent paused; but my answer and 
remarks, occasional given, appear to deter him from the revelation 
of his purpose. our discourse ended, for the present, by his desire me 
to persist in my present plan; i should suffer no inconvenience from 
it, since it would be my own fault if an interview again took place 
between the lady and me; meanwhile he should see her and effectually 
silence her inquiries. 

i ruminate not superficial or brief on this dialogue. by what means 
would he silence her inquiries? he surely meant not to mislead her by 
fallacious representations. some inquietude now crept into my thoughts. 
i began to form conjecture as to the nature of the scheme to which my 
suppression of the truth was to be thus made subservient. it seem as 
if i were walking in the dark and might rush into snare or drop into 
pit before i was aware of my danger. each moment accumulate my doubts, 
and i cherish a secret foreboding that the event would prove my new 
situation to be far less fortunate than i had, at first, fondly 
believed. the question now occurred, with painful repetition, who and 
what was welbeck? what was his relation to this foreign lady? what was 
the service for which i was to be employed? 

i could not be contented without a solution of these mysteries. why 
should i not lay my soul open before my new friend? considering my 
situation, would he regard my fear and my surmise as criminal? i felt 
that they originate in laudable habit and views. my peace of mind 
depend on the favourable verdict which conscience should pass on my 
proceedings. i saw the empty of fame and luxury, when put in the 
balance against the recompense of virtue. never would i purchase the 
blandishments of adulation and the glare of opulence at the price of my 
honesty. 

amidst these reflection the dinner-hour arrived. the lady and welbeck 
were present. a new train of sentiment now occupy my mind. i regard 
them both with inquisitive eyes. i cannot well account for the 
revolution which had taken place in my mind. perhaps it was a proof of 
the capricious of my temper, or it was merely the fruit of my 
profound ignorance of life and manners. whencesoever it arose, certain 
it is that i contemplate the scene before me with alter eyes. its 
order and pomp was no long the parent of tranquill and awe. my wild 
reverie of inherit this splendour and appropriate the affection 
of this nymph, i now regard as lunatic hope and childish folly. 
education and nature had qualified me for a different scene. this might 
be the mask of misery and the structure of vice. 

my companion as well as myself were silent during the meal. the lady 
retired as soon as it was finished. my inexplicable melancholy 
increased. it did not pass unnoticed by welbeck, who inquired, with an 
air of kindness, into the cause of my visible dejection. i am almost 
ashamed to relate to what extreme my folly transport me. instead of 
answer him, i was weak enough to shed tears. 

this excited afresh his surprise and his sympathy. he renew his 
inquiries; my heart was full, but how to disburden it i knew not. at 
length, with some difficulty, i express my wish to leave his house 
and return into the country. 

what, he asked, had occur to suggest this new plan? what motive could 
incite me to bury myself in rustic obscurity? how did i purpose to 
dispose of myself? had some new friend sprung up more able or more 
willing to benefit me than he had been? 

"no," i answered, "i have no relation who would own me, or friend who 
would protect. if i went into the country it would be to the toilsome 
occupation of a day-labourer; but even that was better than my present 
situation." 

this opinion, he observed, must be newly formed. what was there irksome 
or offensive in my present mode of life? 

that this man condescend to expostulate with me; to dissuade me from 
my new plan; and to enumerate the benefit which he was willing to 
confer, penetrate my heart with gratitude. i could not but acknowledge 
that leisure and literature, copious and elegant accommodation, were 
valuable for their own sake; that all the delight of sensation and 
refinement of intelligence were comprise within my present sphere, and 
would be nearly wanting in that to which i was going. i felt temporary 
compunction for my folly, and determined to adopt a different 
deportment. i could not prevail upon myself to unfold the true cause of 
my dejection, and permit him therefore to ascribe it to a kind of 
homesickness; to inexperience; and to that ignorance which, on being 
usher into a new scene, is oppress with a sensation of forlornness. 
he remark that these chimera would vanish before the influence of 
time, and company, and occupation. on the next week he would furnish me 
with employment; meanwhile he would introduce me into company, where 
intelligence and vivace would combine to dispel my glooms. 

as soon as we separated, my disquietude returned. i contend with them 
in vain, and finally resolve to abandon my present situation. when and 
how this purpose was to be effect i knew not. that was to be the theme 
of future deliberation. 

evening have arrived, welbeck propose to me to accompany me on a 
visit to one of his friends. i cheerful accept the invitation, and 
went with him to your friend mr. wortley's. a numerous party was 
assembled, chiefly of the female sex. i was introduce by welbeck by 
the title of _a young friend of his_. notwithstanding my embarrassment, 
i did not fail to attend to what pass on this occasion. i remark 
that the utmost deference was paid to my companion, on whom his entrance 
into this company appear to operate like magic. his eyes sparkled; his 
features expand into a benign serenity; and his wonted reserve gave 
place to a torrent-like and overflow elocution. 

i marked this change in his deportment with the utmost astonishment. so 
great was it, that i could hardly persuade myself that it was the same 
person. a mind thus susceptible of new impression must be, i conceived, 
of a wonderful texture. nothing was further from my expectations than 
that this vivace was mere dissimulate and would take its leave of 
him when he left the company; yet this i found to be the case. the door 
was no soon closed after him than his accustomed solemnity returned. 
he spake little, and that little was deliver with emphatic and 
monosyllabic brevity. 

we return home at a late hour, and i immediately retired to my 
chamber, not so much from the desire of repose as in order to enjoy and 
pursue my own reflection without interruption. 

the condition of my mind was considerably remote from happiness. i was 
placed in a scene that furnish fuel to my curiosity. this passion is a 
source of pleasure, provided its gratification be practicable. i had no 
reason, in my present circumstances, to despair of knowledge; yet 
suspicion and anxiety beset me. i thought upon the delay and toil which 
the removal of my ignorance would cost, and reap only pain and fear 
from the reflection. 

the air was remarkably sultry. lift sash and lofty ceiling were 
insufficient to attemper it. the perturbation of my thought affected my 
body, and the heat which oppress me was aggravated, by my 
restlessness, almost into fever. some hour were thus painful past, 
when i recollect that the bath, erect in the court below, contained 
a sufficient antidote to the scorching influence of the atmosphere. 

i rose, and descended the stairs softly, that i might not alarm welbeck 
and the lady, who occupy the two rooms on the second floor. i 
proceed to the bath, and, filling the reservoir with water, speedy 
dissipated the heat that incommode me. of all species of sensual 
gratification, that was the most delicious; and i continue for a long 
time lave my limb and moisten my hair. in the midst of this 
amusement, i notice the approach of day, and immediately saw the 
propriety of return to my chamber. i return with the same caution 
which i had use in descending; my feet were bare, so that it was easy 
to proceed unattended by the smallest signal of my progress. 

i had reach the carpet staircase, and was slow ascending, when i 
heard, within the chamber that was occupy by the lady, a noise, as of 
some one moving. though not conscious of have act improperly, yet i 
felt reluctance to be seen. there was no reason to suppose that this 
sound was connected with the detection of me in this situation; yet i 
act as if this reason existed, and made haste to pass the door and 
gain the second flight of steps. 

i was unable to accomplish my design, when the chamber door slow 
opened, and welbeck, with a light in his hand, came out. i was abash 
and disconcert at this interview. he start at seeing me; but, 
discover in an instant who it was, his face assume an expression in 
which shame and anger were powerful blended. he seem on the point of 
opening his mouth to rebuke me; but, sudden check himself, he said, 
in a tone of mildness, "how is this? whence come you?" 

his emotion seem to communicate itself, with an electrical rapidity, 
to my heart. my tongue falter while i made some answer. i said, "i had 
been seek relief from the heat of the weather, in the bath." he heard 
my explanation in silence; and, after a moment's pause, pass into his 
own room, and shut himself in. i hasten to my chamber. 

a different observer might have found in these circumstances no food for 
his suspicion or his wonder. to me, however, they suggest vague and 
tumultuous ideas. 

as i strode across the room i repeated, "this woman is his daughter. 
what proof have i of that? he once assert it; and has frequent 
utter allusion and hint from which no other inference could be 
drawn. the chamber from which he came, in an hour devoted to sleep, was 
hers. for what end could a visit like this be paid? a parent may visit 
his child at all seasons, without a crime. on seeing me, methought his 
features indicate more than surprise. a keen interpreter would be apt 
to suspect a consciousness of wrong. what if this woman be not his 
child! how shall their relationship be ascertained?" 

i was summon at the customary hour to breakfast. my mind was full of 
idea connected with this incident. i was not endow with sufficient 
firm to propose the cool and systematic observation of this man's 
deportment. i felt as if the state of my mind could not but be evident 
to him; and experienced in myself all the confusion which this discovery 
was calculate to produce in him. i would have willing excuse myself 
from meeting him; but that was impossible. 

at breakfast, after the usual salutations, nothing was said. for a time 
i scarcely lift my eyes from the table. steal a glance at welbeck, 
i discover in his features nothing but his wonted gravity. he appear 
occupy with thought that had no relation to last night's adventure. 
this encourage me; and i gradual recover my composure. their 
inattention to me allow me occasional to throw scrutinize and 
compare glance at the face of each. 

the relationship of parent and child is commonly discover in the 
visage; but the child may resemble either of its parents, yet have no 
feature in common with both. here outlines, surfaces, and hue were in 
absolute contrariety. that kindred subsist between them was possible, 
notwithstanding this dissimilitude; but this circumstance contribute to 
envenom my suspicions. 

breakfast being finished, welbeck cast an eye of invitation to the 
piano-forte. the lady rose to comply with his request. my eye chance 
to be, at that moment, fixed on her. in step to the instrument, some 
motion or appearance awaken a thought in my mind which affected my 
feelings like the shock of an earthquake. 

i have too slight acquaintance with the history of the passion to truly 
explain the emotion which now throb in my veins. i had been a 
stranger to what is call love. from subsequent reflection, i have 
contract a suspicion that the sentiment with which i regard this 
lady was not untinctured from this source, and that hence arose the 
turbulence of my feelings on observing what i construe into mark of 
pregnancy. the evidence afford me was slight; yet it exercise an 
absolute sway over my belief. 

it was well that this suspicion had not been soon excited. now 
civility did not require my stay in the apartment, and nothing but 
flight could conceal the state of my mind. i hastened, therefore, to a 
distance, and shroud myself in the friendly secrecy of my own chamber. 

the constitution of my mind is doubtless singular and perverse; yet that 
opinion, perhaps, is the fruit of my ignorance. it may by no means be 
uncommon for men to _fashion_ their conclusion in opposition to 
evidence and _probability_, and so as to feed their malice and subvert 
their happiness. thus it was, in an eminent degree, in my case. the 
simple fact was connected, in my mind, with a train of the most hateful 
consequences. the depravity of welbeck was infer from it. the charm 
of this angel woman were tarnish and withered. i had formerly 
survey her as a precious and perfect monument, but now it was a scene 
of ruin and blast. 

this had been a source of sufficient anguish; but this was not all. i 
recollect that the claim of a parent had been urged. will you believe 
that these claim were now admitted, and that they heighten the 
iniquity of welbeck into the blackest and most stupendous of all crimes? 
these idea were necessarily transient. conclusion more conformable to 
appearances succeeded. this lady might have been lately reduce to 
widowhood. the recent loss of a beloved companion would sufficient 
account for her dejection, and make her present situation compatible 
with duty. 

by this new train of idea i was somewhat comforted. i saw the folly of 
precipitate inference and the injustice of my atrocious imputations, 
and acquire some degree of patience in my present state of uncertainty. 
my heart was lighten of its wonted burden, and i labour to invent 
some harmless explicate of the scene that i had witness the 
preceding night. 

at dinner welbeck appear as usual, but not the lady. i ascribe her 
absence to some casual indisposition, and venture to inquire into the 
state of her health. my companion said she was well, but that she had 
left the city for a month or two, finding the heat of summer 
inconvenient where she was. this was no unplausible reason for 
retirement. a candid mind would have acquiesce in this representation, 
and found in it nothing inconsistent with a supposition respecting the 
cause of appearances favourable to her character; but otherwise was i 
affected. the uneasy which had flown for a moment returned, and i 
sunk into gloomy silence. 

from this i was rouse by my patron, who request me to deliver a 
billet, which he put into my hand, at the counting-house of mr. 
thetford, and to bring him an answer. this message was speedy 
performed. i enter a large building by the river-side. a spacious 
apartment present itself, well furnish with pipes and hogsheads. in 
one corner was a small room, in which a gentleman was busy at writing. 
i advanced to the door of the room, but was there met by a young person, 
who received my paper and deliver it to him within. i stood still at 
the door; but was near enough to overhear what would pass between them. 

the letter was laid upon the desk, and presently he that sat at it 
lift his eyes and glance at the superscription. he scarcely spoke 
above a whisper; but his words, nevertheless, were clearly 
distinguishable. i did not call to mind the sound of his voice, but his 
words call up a train of recollections. 

"lo!" said he, carelessly, "this from the _nabob_!" 

an incident so slight as this was sufficient to open a spacious scene 
of meditation. this little word, half whisper in a thoughtless mood, 
was a key to unlock an extensive cabinet of secrets. thetford was 
probably indifferent whether his exclamation were overheard. little did 
he think on the inference which would be built upon it. 

"the nabob!" by this appellation had some one been denote in the 
chamber dialogue of which i had been an unsuspected auditor. the man who 
pretended poverty, and yet gave proof of inordinate wealth; whom it was 
pardonable to defraud of thirty thousand dollars; first, because the 
loss of that sum would be trivial to one opulent as he; and, secondly, 
because he was imagine to have acquire this opulence by other than 
honest methods. instead of forthwith return home, i wander into the 
fields, to indulge myself in the new thought which were produce by 
this occurrence. 

i entertain no doubt that the person allude to was my patron. no new 
light was thrown upon his character; unless something were deduce 
from the charge vague made, that his wealth was the fruit of illicit 
practices. he was opulent, and the source of his wealth were unknown, 
if not to the rest of the community, at least to thetford. but here had 
a plot been laid. the fortune of thetford's brother was to rise from the 
success of artifice of which the credulous of welbeck was to be the 
victim. to detect and to counterwork this plot was obviously my duty. my 
interference might now indeed be too late to be useful; but this was at 
least to be ascertain by experiment. 

how should my intention be effected? i had hitherto conceal from 
welbeck my adventure at thetford's house. these it was now necessary to 
disclose, and to mention the recent occurrence. my deductions, in 
consequence of my ignorance, might be erroneous; but of their truth his 
knowledge of his own affair would enable him to judge. it was possible 
that thetford and he whose chamber conversation i had overheard were 
different persons. i endeavour in vain to ascertain their identity by 
a comparison of their voices. the words lately heard, my remembrance 
did not enable me certainly to pronounce to be utter by the same 
organs. 

this uncertainty was of little moment. it suffice that welbeck was 
designate by this appellation, and that therefore he was prove to be 
the subject of some fraudulent proceeding. the information that i 
possessed it was my duty to communicate as expeditious as possible. i 
was resolve to employ the first opportunity that offer for this end. 

my meditation had been ardent pursued, and, when i recall my 
attention, i found myself bewilder among field and fences. it was 
late before i extricate myself from unknown paths, and reach home. 

i enter the parlour; but welbeck was not there. a table, with 
tea-equipage for one person, was set; from which i infer that welbeck 
was engaged abroad. this belief was confirmed by the report of the 
servant. he could not inform me where his master was, but merely that he 
should not take tea at home. this incident was a source of vexation and 
impatience. i knew not but that delay would be of the utmost moment to 
the safety of my friend. wholly unacquainted as i was with the nature of 
his contract with thetford, i could not decide whether a single hour 
would not avail to obviate the evil that threaten him. had i known 
whither to trace his footsteps, i should certainly have sought an 
immediate interview; but, as it was, i was oblige to wait, with what 
patience i could collect, for his return to his own house. 

i wait hour after hour in vain. the sun declined, and the shades of 
evening descended; but welbeck was still at a distance. 




chapter ix. 


welbeck did not return, though hour succeed hour till the clock struck 
ten. i inquire of the servants, who informed me that their master was 
not accustomed to stay out so late. i seat myself at a table, in a 
parlour, on which there stood a light, and listen for the signal of 
his coming, either by the sound of steps on the pavement without or by a 
peal from the bell. the silence was uninterrupted and profound, and each 
minute add to my sum of impatience and anxiety. 

to relieve myself from the heat of the weather, which was aggravate by 
the condition of my thoughts, as well as to beguile this torment 
interval, it occur to me to betake myself to the bath. i left the 
candle where it stood, and imagine that even in the bath i should hear 
the sound of the bell which would be rung upon his arrival at the door. 

no such signal occurred, and, after taking this refreshment, i prepared 
to return to my post. the parlour was still unoccupied, but this was not 
all; the candle i had left upon the table was gone. this was an 
inexplicable circumstance. on my promise to wait for their master, the 
servant had retired to bed. no signal of any one's entrance had been 
given. the street door was locked, and the key hung at its customary 
place upon the wall. what was i to think? it was obvious to suppose that 
the candle had been remove by a domestic; but their footstep could not 
be traced, and i was not sufficient acquaint with the house to find 
the way, especially immerse in darkness, to their chamber. one measure, 
however, it was evidently proper to take, which was to supply myself, 
anew, with a light. this was instantly performed; but what was next to 
be done? 

i was weary of the perplexity in which i was embroiled. i saw no 
avenue to escape from them but that which led me to the bosom of nature 
and to my ancient occupations. for a moment i was tempt to resume my 
rustic garb, and, on that very hour, to desert this habitation. one 
thing only detain me; the desire to apprize my patron of the treachery 
of thetford. for this end i was anxious to obtain an interview; but now 
i reflect that this information could by other means be imparted. was 
it not sufficient to write him brief these particulars, and leave him 
to profit by the knowledge? thus i might, likewise, acquaint him with my 
motive for thus abrupt and unseasonable desert his service. 

to the execution of this scheme pen and paper were necessary. the 
business of writing was perform in the chamber on the third story. i 
had been hitherto deny access to this room. in it was a show of papers 
and books. here it was that the task, for which i had been retained, was 
to be performed; but i was to enter it and leave it only in company with 
welbeck. for what reasons, i asked, was this procedure to be adopted? 

the influence of prohibition and an appearance of disguise in awakening 
curiosity is well known. my mind fasten upon the idea of this room 
with an unusual degree of intenseness. i had seen it but for a moment. 
many of welbeck's hour were spent in it. it was not to be infer that 
they were consume in idleness: what then was the nature of his 
employment over which a veil of such impenetrable secrecy was cast? 

will you wonder that the design of enter this recess was insensible 
formed? possibly it was locked, but its accessible was likewise 
possible. i meant not the commission of any crime. my principal purpose 
was to procure the implement of writing, which were elsewhere not to be 
found. i should neither unseal papers nor open drawers. i would merely 
take a survey of the volumes and attend to the object that 
spontaneous present themselves to my view. in this there surely was 
nothing criminal or blameworthy. meanwhile i was not unmindful of the 
sudden disappearance of the candle. this incident fill my bosom with 
the inquietude of fear and the perturbation of wonder. 

once more i pause to catch any sound that might arise from without. all 
was still. i seize the candle and prepared to mount the stairs. i had 
not reach the first landing when i call to mind my midnight meeting 
with welbeck at the door of his daughter's chamber. the chamber was now 
desolate; perhaps it was accessible; if so, no injury was done by 
enter it. my curiosity was strong, but it picture to itself no 
precise object. three steps would bear me to the door. the trial, 
whether it was fastened, might be made in a moment; and i readily 
imagine that something might be found within to reward the trouble of 
examination. the door yield to my hand, and i entered. 

no remarkable object was discoverable. the apartment was supply with 
the usual furniture. i bent my steps towards a table over which a mirror 
was suspended. my glances, which rove with swift from one object to 
another, shortly light on a miniature portrait that hung near. i 
scrutinize it with eagerness. it was impossible to overlook its 
resemblance to my own visage. this was so great that for a moment i 
imagine myself to have been the original from which it had been drawn. 
this flatter conception yield place to a belief merely of 
similitude between me and the genuine original. 

the thought which this opinion was fitted to produce were suspend by 
a new object. a small volume, that had, apparently, been much used, lay 
upon the toilet. i open it, and found it to contain some of the drama 
of apostolo zeno. i turn over the leaves; a written paper salute my 
sight. a single glance informed me that it was english. for the present 
i was insensible to all motive that would command me to forbear. i 
seize the paper with an intention to peruse it. 

at that moment a stunning report was heard. it was loud enough to shake 
the wall of the apartment, and abrupt enough to throw me into tremors. 
i drop the book and yield for a moment to confusion and surprise. 
from what quarter it came, i was unable accurate to determine; but 
there could be no doubt, from its loudness, that it was near, and even 
in the house. it was no less manifest that the sound arose from the 
discharge of a pistol. some hand must have drawn the trigger. i 
recollect the disappearance of the candle from the room below. 
instantly a supposition dart into my mind which made my hair rise and 
my teeth chatter. 

"this," i said, "is the deed of welbeck. he enter while i was absent 
from the room; he hied to his chamber; and, prompt by some unknown 
instigation, has inflict on himself death!" this idea had a tendency 
to palsy my limb and my thoughts. some time pass in painful and 
tumultuous fluctuation. my aversion to this catastrophe, rather than a 
belief of being, by that means, able to prevent or repair the evil, 
induce me to attempt to enter his chamber. it was possible that my 
conjecture were erroneous. 

the door of his room was locked. i knocked; i demand entrance in a low 
voice; i put my eye and my ear to the keyhole and the crevices; nothing 
could be heard or seen. it was unavoidable to conclude that no one was 
within; yet the effluvia of gunpowder was perceptible. 

perhaps the room above had been the scene of this catastrophe. i 
ascend the second flight of stairs. i approach the door. no sound 
could be caught by my most vigilant attention. i put out the light that 
i carried, and was then able to perceive that there was light within the 
room. i scarcely knew how to act. for some minutes i pause at the door. 
i spoke, and request permission to enter. my words were succeed by a 
death-like stillness. at length i venture soft to withdraw the bolt, 
to open and to advance within the room. nothing could exceed the horror 
of my expectation; yet i was startle by the scene that i beheld. 

in a chair, whose back was placed against the front wall, sat welbeck. 
my entrance alarm him not, nor rouse him from the stupor into which 
he was plunged. he rest his hand upon his knees, and his eyes were 
rivet to something that lay, at the distance of a few feet before 
him, on the floor. a second glance was sufficient to inform me of what 
nature this object was. it was the body of a man, bleeding, ghastly, and 
still exhibit the mark of convulsion and agony! 

i shall omit to describe the shock which a spectacle like this 
communicate to my unpractised senses. i was nearly as panic-struck and 
powerless as welbeck himself. i gazed, without power of speech, at one 
time, at welbeck; then i fixed terrify eyes on the distort features 
of the dead. at length, welbeck, recover from his reverie, look up, 
as if to see who it was that had entered. no surprise, no alarm, was 
betray by him on seeing me. he manifest no desire or intention to 
interrupt the fearful silence. 

my thought wander in confusion and terror. the first impulse was to 
fly from the scene; but i could not be long insensible to the exigence 
of the moment. i saw that affair must not be suffer to remain in 
their present situation. the insensibility or despair of welbeck 
require consolation and succour. how to communicate my thoughts, or 
offer my assistance, i knew not. what led to this murderous catastrophe; 
who it was whose breathless corpse was before me; what concern welbeck 
had in produce his death; were as yet unknown. 

at length he rose from his seat, and strode at first with faltering, and 
then with more steadfast steps, across the floor. this motion seem to 
put him in possession of himself. he seem now, for the first time, to 
recognise my presence. he turn to me, and said, in a tone of 
severity,-- 

"how now? what bring you here?" 

this rebuke was unexpected. i stammer out, in reply, that the report 
of the pistol had alarm me, and that i came to discover the cause of 
it. 

he notice not my answer, but resume his perturb steps, and his 
anxious but abstracted looks. sudden he checked himself, and, glancing 
a furious eye at the corpse, he muttered, "yes, the die is cast. this 
worthless and miserable scene shall last no longer. i will at once get 
rid of life and all its humiliations." 

here succeed a new pause. the course of his thought seem now to 
become once more tranquil. sadness, rather than fury, overspread his 
features; and his accent, when he spoke to me, was not faltering, but 
solemn. 

"mervyn," said he, "you comprehend not this scene. your youth and 
inexperience make you a stranger to a deceitful and flagitious world. 
you know me not. it is time that this ignorance should vanish. the 
knowledge of me and of my action may be of use to you. it may teach you 
to avoid the shoal on which my virtue and my peace have been wrecked; 
but to the rest of mankind it can be of no use. the ruin of my fame is, 
perhaps, irretrievable; but the height of my iniquity need not be known. 
i perceive in you a rectitude and firm worthy to be trusted; promise 
me, therefore, that not a syllable of what i tell you shall ever pass 
your lips." 

i had lately experienced the inconvenience of a promise; but i was now 
confused, embarrassed, ardent inquisitive as to the nature of this 
scene, and unapprized of the motive that might afterwards occur, 
persuade or compel me to disclosure. the promise which he exact 
was given. he resumed:-- 

"i have detain you in my service, partly for your own benefit, but 
chiefly for mine. i intended to inflict upon you injury and to do you 
good. neither of these end can i now accomplish, unless the lesson 
which my example may inculcate shall inspire you with fortitude and arm 
you with caution. 

"what it was that made me thus, i know not. i am not destitute of 
understanding. my thirst of knowledge, though irregular, is ardent. i 
can talk and can feel as virtue and justice prescribe; yet the tenor of 
my action has been uniform. one tissue of iniquity and folly has been 
my life; while my thought have been familiar with enlightened and 
disinterested principles. scorn and detest i have heap upon 
myself. yesterday is remember with remorse. to-morrow is contemplate 
with anguish and fear; yet every day is productive of the same crime 
and of the same follies. 

"i was left, by the insolvent of my father, (a trader of liverpool,) 
without any means of support but such as labour should afford me. 
whatever could generate pride, and the love of independence, was my 
portion. whatever can incite to diligence was the growth of my 
condition; yet my indolence was a cureless disease; and there were no 
arts too sordid for me to practise. 

"i was content to live on the bounty of a kinsman. his family was 
numerous, and his revenue small. he forbore to upbraid me, or even to 
insinuate the propriety of providing for myself; but he empower me to 
pursue any liberal or mechanical profession which might suit my taste. i 
was insensible to every generous motive. i labour to forget my 
dependent and disgraceful condition, because the remembrance was a 
source of anguish, without being able to inspire me with a steady 
resolution to change it. 

"i contract an acquaintance with a woman who was unchaste, perverse, 
and malignant. me, however, she found it no difficult task to deceive. 
my uncle remonstrate against the union. he took infinite pains to 
unveil my error, and to convince me that wedlock was improper for one 
destitute, as i was, of the means of support, even if the object of my 
choice were personally unexceptionable. 

"his representations were listen to with anger. that he thwart my 
will in this respect, even by affectionate expostulation, cancel all 
that debt of gratitude which i owe to him. i reward him for all his 
kindness by invective and disdain, and hasten to complete my 
ill-omened marriage. i had deceive the woman's father by assertion of 
possess secret resources. to gratify my passion, i descended to 
dissimulate and falsehood. he admitted me into his family, as the 
husband of his child; but the character of my wife and the fallacy of my 
assertion were quick discovered. he deny me accommodation under his 
roof, and i was turn forth to the world to endure the penalty of my 
rash and my indolence. 

"temptation would have mould me into any villanous shape. my virtuous 
theory and comprehensive erudite would not have save me from the 
basest of crimes. lucky for me, i was, for the present, exempt from 
temptation. i had form an acquaintance with a young america captain. 
on being partially informed of my situation, he invite me to embark 
with him for his own country. my passage was gratuitous. i arrived, in a 
short time, at charleston, which was the place of his abode. 

"he introduce me to his family, every member of which was, like 
himself, imbue with affection and benevolence. i was treat like their 
son and brother. i was hospitable entertain until i should be able to 
select some path of lucrative industry. such was my incurable depravity, 
that i made no haste to select my pursuit. an interval of inoccupation 
succeeded, which i applied to the worst purposes. 

"my friend had a sister, who was married, but during the absence of her 
husband reside with her family. hence originate our acquaintance. the 
purest of human heart and the most vigorous understanding were hers. 
she idolize her husband, who well deserve to be the object of her 
adoration. her affection for him, and her general principles, appear 
to be confirmed beyond the power to be shaken. i sought her intercourse 
without illicit views; i delight in the effusion of her candour and 
the flash of her intelligence; i conformed, by a kind of instinctive 
hypocrisy, to her views; i spoke and felt from the influence of 
immediate and momentary conviction. she imagine she had found in me a 
friend worthy to partake in all her sympathies and forward all her 
wishes. we were mutual deceived. she was the victim of self-delusion; 
but i must charge myself with practise deceit both upon myself and 
her. 

"i reflect with astonishment and horror on the steps which led to her 
degrade and to my calamity. in the high career of passion all 
consequence were overlooked. she was the dupe of the most audacious 
sophistry and the grossest delusion. i was the slave of sensual impulse 
and voluntary blindness. the effect may be easily conceived. not till 
symptom of pregnancy began to appear were our eyes open to the ruin 
which impende over us. 

"then i began to revolve the consequences, which the mist of passion had 
hitherto concealed. i was torment by the pang of remorse, and pursue 
by the phantom of ingratitude. to complete my despair, this unfortunate 
lady was apprize of my marriage with another woman; a circumstance 
which i had anxious conceal from her. she flee from her father's 
house at a time when her husband and brother were hourly expected. what 
became of her i knew not. she left behind her a letter to her father, in 
which the melancholy truth was told. 

"shame and remorse had no power over my life. to elude the storm of 
invective and upbraiding, to quiet the uproar of my mind, i did not 
betake myself to voluntary death. my pusillanim still clung to this 
wretched existence. i abrupt retired from the scene, and, repair to 
the port, embark in the first vessel which appeared. the ship chance 
to belong to wilmington, in delaware, and here i sought out an obscure 
and cheap abode. 

"i possessed no means of subsistence. i was unknown to my neighbours, 
and desire to remain unknown. i was unqualified for manual labour by 
all the habit of my life; but there was no choice between penury and 
diligence,--between honest labour and criminal inactivity. i muse 
incessant on the forlorn of my condition. hour after hour passed, 
and the horrors of want began to encompass me. i sought with eager 
for an avenue by which i might escape from it. the perverse of my 
nature led me on from one guilty thought to another. i took refuge in my 
customary sophistries, and reconcile myself at length to a scheme 
of--_forgery_!" 




chapter x. 


"having ascertain my purpose, it was requisite to search out the means 
by which i might effect it. these were not clearly or readily suggested. 
the more i contemplate my project, the more numerous and arduous its 
difficulty appeared. i had no associate in my undertaking. a due 
regard to my safety, and the unextinguished sense of honour, deter me 
from seek auxiliary and co-agents. the esteem of mankind was the 
spring of all my activity, the parent of all my virtue and all my vice. 
to preserve this, it was necessary that my guilty project should have 
neither witness nor partaker. 

"i quick discover that to execute this scheme demand time, 
application, and money, none of which my present situation would permit 
me to devote to it. at first it appear that an attain degree of 
skill and circumspect would enable me to arrive, by means of 
counterfeit bills, to the pinnacle of affluence and honour. my error was 
detect by a close scrutiny, and i finally saw nothing in this path 
but enormous peril and insurmountable impediments. 

"yet what alternative was offer me? to maintain myself by the labour 
of my hands, to perform any toilsome or prescribed task, was 
incompatible with my nature. my habit debar me from country 
occupations. my pride regard as vile and ignominious drudgery any 
employment which the town could afford. meanwhile, my wants were as 
urgent as ever, and my funds were exhausted. 

"there are few, perhaps, whose external situation resemble mine, who 
would have found in it any thing but incite to industry and 
invention. a thousand method of subsistence, honest but laborious, 
were at my command, but to these i entertain an irreconcilable 
aversion. ease and the respect attendant upon opulence i was willing to 
purchase at the price of ever-wakeful suspicion and eternal remorse; 
but, even at this price, the purchase was impossible. 

"the desperate of my condition became hourly more apparent. the 
further i extend my view, the dark grew the cloud which hung over 
futurity. anguish and infamy appear to be the inseparable conditions 
of my existence. there was one mode of evade the evil that impended. 
to free myself from self-upbraiding and to shun the persecution of my 
fortune was possible only by shake off life itself. 

"one evening, as i traverse the bank of the creek, these dismal 
meditation were uncommonly intense. they at length terminate in a 
resolution to throw myself into the stream. the first impulse was to 
rush instantly to my death; but the remembrance of papers, lie at my 
lodgings, which might unfold more than i desire to the curiosity of 
survivors, induce me to postpone this catastrophe till the next 
morning. 

"my purpose being formed, i found my heart lighten of its usual 
weight. by you it will be thought strange, but it is nevertheless true, 
that i derive from this new prospect not only tranquill but 
cheerfulness. i hasten home. as soon as i entered, my landlord 
informed me that a person had been searching for me in my absence. this 
was an unexampled incident, and forebode me no good. i was strong 
persuade that my visitant had been led hither not by friendly but 
hostile purposes. this persuasion was confirmed by the description of 
the stranger's guise and demeanour given by my landlord. my fear 
instantly recognise the image of watson, the man by whom i had been so 
eminently benefited, and whose kindness i had compensate by the ruin of 
his sister and the confusion of his family. 

"an interview with this man was less to be endure than to look upon the 
face of an avenge deity. i was determined to avoid this interview, 
and, for this end, to execute my fatal purpose within the hour. my 
papers were collected with a tremulous hand, and consign to the 
flames. i then bade my landlord inform all visitant that i should not 
return till the next day, and once more hasten towards the river. 

"my way led past the inn where one of the stage from baltimore was 
accustomed to stop. i was not unaware that watson had possibly been 
brought in the coach which had recently arrived, and which now stood 
before the door of the inn. the danger of my being descry or 
encounter by him as i pass did not fail to occur. this was to be 
elude by deviate from the main street. 

"scarcely had i turn a corner for this purpose when i was accost by 
a young man whom i knew to be an inhabitant of the town, but with whom i 
had hitherto had no intercourse but what consist in a transient 
salutation. he apologize for the liberty of address me, and, at the 
same time, inquire if i understood the france language. 

"being answer in the affirmative, he proceed to tell me that in the 
stage, just arrived, had come a passenger, a youth who appear to be 
french, who was wholly unacquainted with our language, and who had been 
seize with a violent disease. 

"my informant had felt compassion for the forlorn condition of the 
stranger, and had just been seek me at my lodgings, in hope that my 
knowledge of france would enable me to converse with the sick man, and 
obtain from him a knowledge of his situation and views. 

"the apprehension i had precipitate form were thus removed, and i 
readily consent to perform this service. the youth was, indeed, in a 
deplorable condition. besides the pains of his disease, he was 
overpower by dejection. the innkeeper was extremely anxious for the 
removal of his guest. he was by no means willing to sustain the trouble 
and expense of a sick or a die man, for which it was scarcely probable 
that he should ever be reimbursed. the traveller had no baggage, and his 
dress betoken the pressure of many wants. 

"my compassion for this stranger was powerful awakened. i was in 
possession of a suitable apartment, for which i had no power to pay the 
rent that was accruing; but my inability in this respect was unknown, 
and i might enjoy my lodgings unmolested for some weeks. the fate of 
this youth would be speedy decided, and i should be left at liberty to 
execute my first intentions before my embarrassment should be visibly 
increased. 

"after a moment's pause, i conduct the stranger to my home, placed him 
in my own bed, and became his nurse. his malady was such as is known in 
the tropical island by the name of the yellow or malignant fever, and 
the physician who was call speedy pronounced his case desperate. 

"it was my duty to warn him of the death that was hastening, and to 
promise the fulfilment of any of his wish not inconsistent with my 
present situation. he received my intelligence with fortitude, and 
appear anxious to communicate some information respecting his own 
state. his pang and his weakness scarcely allow him to be 
intelligible. from his feeble effort and broken narrative i collected 
thus much concerning his family and fortune. 

"his father's name was vincentio lodi. from a merchant at leghorn, he 
had change himself into a planter in the island of guadaloupe. his son 
had been sent, at an early age, for the benefit of education, to 
europe. the young vincentio was, at length, informed by his father, 
that, being weary of his present mode of existence, he had determined to 
sell his property and transport himself to the united states. the son 
was direct to hasten home, that he might embark, with his father, on 
this voyage. 

"the summons was cheerful obeyed. the youth, on his arrival at the 
island, found preparation making for the funeral of his father. it 
appear that the elder lodi had flatter one of his slave with the 
prospect of his freedom, but had, nevertheless, included this slave in 
the sale that he had made of his estate. actuate by revenge, the slave 
assassinate lodi in the open street, and resigned himself, without a 
struggle, to the punishment which the law had provided for such a deed. 

"the property had been recently transferred, and the price was now 
present to young vincentio by the purchaser. he was by no means 
inclined to adopt his father's project, and was impatient to return with 
his inheritance to france. before this could be done, the conduct of his 
father had render a voyage to the continent indispensable. 

"lodi had a daughter, whom, a few week previous to his death, he had 
intrust to an america captain for whom he had contract a 
friendship. the vessel was bound to philadelphia; but the conduct she 
was to pursue, and the abode she was to select, on her arrival, were 
known only to the father, whose untimely death involved the son in 
considerable uncertainty with regard to his sister's fate. his anxiety 
on this account induce him to seize the first conveyance that offered. 
in a short time he landed at baltimore. 

"as soon as he recover from the fatigues of his voyage, he prepared to 
go to philadelphia. thither his baggage was immediately sent under the 
protection of a passenger and countryman. his money consist in 
portugal gold, which, in pursuance of advice, he had change into 
bank-notes. he besought me, in pathetic terms, to search out his sister, 
whose youth and poverty, and ignorance of the language and manners of 
the country, might expose her to innumerable hardships. at the same 
time, he put a pocket-book and small volume into my hand, indicating, by 
his countenance and gestures, his desire that i would deliver them to 
his sister. 

"his obsequies being decent performed, i had leisure to reflect upon 
the change in my condition which this incident had produced. in the 
pocket-book were found bill to the amount of twenty thousand dollars. 
the volume prove to be a manuscript, written by the elder lodi in 
italian, and contained memoirs of the ducal house of visconti, from whom 
the writer believe himself to have lineal descended. 

"thus had i arrived, by an avenue so much beyond my foresight, at the 
possession of wealth. the evil which impel me to the brink of 
suicide, and which was the source, though not of all, yet of the large 
portion, of my anguish, was now removed. what claim to honour or to 
ease were consequent on riches were, by an extraordinary fortune, now 
confer upon me. 

"such, for a time, were my new-born but transitory raptures. i forgot 
that this money was not mine. that it had been received, under every 
sanction of fidelity, for another's use. to retain it was equivalent to 
robbery. the sister of the deceased was the rightful claimant; it was my 
duty to search her out, and perform my tacit but sacred obligations, by 
putt the whole into her possession. 

"this conclusion was too adverse to my wish not to be strenuous 
combated. i ask what it was that gave man the power of ascertain 
the successor to his property. during his life, he might transfer the 
actual possession; but, if vacant at his death, he into whose hand 
accident should cast it was the genuine proprietor. it is true, that the 
law had sometimes otherwise decreed, but in law there was no valid 
further than it was able, by investigate and punishment, to enforce 
its decrees: but would the law extort this money from me? 

"it was rather by gesture than by words that the will of lodi was 
imparted. it was the topic of remote inference and vague conjecture 
rather than of explicit and unerring declarations. besides, if the lady 
were found, would not prudence dictate the reservation of her fortune to 
be administer by me, for her benefit? of this her age and education 
had disqualify herself. it was sufficient for the maintenance of both. 
she would regard me as her benefactor and protector. by supply all 
her wants and watch over her safety without apprize her of the 
means by which i shall be enable to do this, i shall lay irresistible 
claim to her love and her gratitude. 

"such were the sophistry by which reason was seduce and my integrity 
annihilated. i hasten away from my present abode. i easily trace the 
baggage of the deceased to an inn, and gain possession of it. it 
contained nothing but clothes and books. i then institute the most 
diligent search after the young lady. for a time, my exertion were 
fruitless. 

"meanwhile, the possessor of this house thought proper to embark with 
his family for europe. the sum which he demand for his furniture, 
though enormous, was precipitate paid by me. his servant were 
continue in their former stations, and in the day at which he 
relinquish the mansion, i enter on possession. 

"there was no difficulty in persuade the world that welbeck was a 
personage of opulence and rank. my birth and previous adventure it was 
proper to conceal. the facility with which mankind are misle in their 
estimate of characters, their prone to multiply inference and 
conjectures, will not be readily conceive by one destitute of my 
experience. my sudden appearance on the stage, my stately reserve, my 
splendid habitation, and my circumspect deportment, were sufficient to 
entitle me to homage. the artifice that were use to unveil the truth, 
and the guess that were current respecting me, were adapt to gratify 
my ruling passion. 

"i did not remit my diligence to discover the retreat of mademoiselle 
lodi. i found her, at length, in the family of a kinsman of the captain 
under whose care she had come to america. her situation was irksome and 
perilous. she had already experienced the evil of being protectorless 
and indigent, and my seasonable interference snatch her from impending 
and less supportable ills. 

"i could safe unfold all that i knew of her brother's history, except 
the legacy which he had left. i ascribe the diligence with which i had 
sought her to his death-bed injunctions, and prevail upon her to 
accept from me the treatment which she would have received from her 
brother if he had continue to live, and if his power to benefit had 
been equal to my own. 

"though less can be said in praise of the understanding than of the 
sensibility of this woman, she is one whom no one could refrain from 
loving, though placed in situation far less favourable to the 
generation of that sentiment than mine. in habit of domestic and 
incessant intercourse, in the perpetual contemplation of features 
animate by boundless gratitude and ineffable sympathies, it could not 
be expect that either she or i should escape enchantment. 

"the poison was too sweet not to be swallow with avid by me. too 
late i remember that i was already enslave by inextricable 
obligations. it was easy to have hidden this impediment from the eyes of 
my companion, but here my integrity refuse to yield. i can, indeed, lay 
claim to little merit on account of this forbearance. if there had been 
no alternative between deceit and the frustration of my hopes, i should 
doubtless have dissemble the truth with as little scruple on this as on 
a different occasion; but i could not be blind to the weakness of her 
with whom i had to contend. 




chapter xi. 


"meanwhile large deduction had been made from my stock of money, and 
the remnant would be speedy consume by my present mode of life. my 
expenses far exceed my previous expectations. in no long time i should 
be reduce to my ancient poverty, which the luxurious existence that i 
now enjoyed, and the regard due to my beloved and helpless companion, 
would render more irksome than ever. some scheme to rescue me from this 
fate was indispensable; but my aversion to labour, to any pursuit the 
end of which was merely gain, and which would require application and 
attention, continue undiminished. 

"i was plunge anew into dejection and perplexity. from this i was 
somewhat relieved by a plan suggest by mr. thetford. i thought i had 
experience of his knowledge and integrity, and the scheme that he 
propose seem liable to no possibility of miscarriage. a ship was to 
be purchased, supply with a suitable cargo, and despatch to a port 
in the west indies. loss from storm and enemy was to be preclude by 
insurance. every hazard was to be enumerated, and the ship and cargo 
value at the highest rate. should the voyage be safe performed, the 
profit would be double the original expense. should the ship be taken 
or wrecked, the insurer would have bound themselves to make ample, 
speedy, and certain indemnification. thetford's brother, a wary and 
experienced trader, was to be the supercargo. 

"all my money was laid out upon this scheme. scarcely enough was 
reserved to supply domestic and personal wants. large debt were 
likewise incurred. our caution had, as we conceived, annihilate every 
chance of failure. too much could not be expend on a project so 
infallible; and the vessel, ample fitted and freighted, departed on her 
voyage. 

"an interval, not devoid of suspense and anxiety, succeeded. my 
mercantile inexperience made me distrust the clear of my own 
discernment, and i could not but remember that my utter and 
irretrievable destruction was connected with the failure of my scheme. 
time add to my distrust and apprehensions. the time at which tidings 
of the ship were to be expect elapse without afford any 
information of her destiny. my anxieties, however, were to be careful 
hidden from the world. i had taught mankind to believe that this project 
had been adopt more for amusement than gain; and the debt which i had 
contract seem to arise from willing to adhere to establish 
maxims, more than from the pressure of necessity. 

"month succeed month, and intelligence was still withheld. the note 
which i had given for one-third of the cargo, and for the premium of 
insurance, would shortly become due. for the payment of the former, and 
the cancel of the latter, i had rely upon the expeditious return 
or the demonstrate loss of the vessel. neither of these event had 
taken place. 

"my care were augment from another quarter. my companion's situation 
now appear to be such as, if our intercourse had been sanctify by 
wedlock, would have been regard with delight. as it was, no symptom 
were equally to be deplored. consequences, as long as they were involved 
in uncertainty, were extenuate or overlooked; but now, when they became 
apparent and inevitable, were fertile of distress and upbraiding. 

"indefinable fears, and a desire to monopolize all the meditation and 
affection of this being, had induce me to perpetuate her ignorance of 
any but her native language, and debar her from all intercourse with the 
world. my friends were of course inquisitive respecting her character, 
adventures, and particularly her relation to me. the consciousness how 
much the truth redound to my dishonour made me solicitous to lead 
conjecture astray. for this purpose i did not discountenance the 
conclusion that was adopt by some,--that she was my daughter. i 
reflect that all dangerous surmise would be effectually preclude by 
this belief. 

"these precaution afford me some consolation in my present 
difficulties. it was requisite to conceal the lady's condition from the 
world. if this should be ineffectual, it would not be difficult to 
divert suspicion from my person. the secrecy that i had practised would 
be justified, in the apprehension of those to whom the personal 
condition of clemenza should be disclosed, by the feelings of a father. 

"meanwhile, it was an obvious expedient to remove the unhappy lady to a 
distance from impertinent observers. a rural retreat, lonely and 
sequestered, was easily procured, and hither she consent to repair. 
this arrangement being concerted, i had leisure to reflect upon the 
evil which every hour brought nearer, and which threaten to 
exterminate me. 

"my inquietude forbade me to sleep, and i was accustomed to rise before 
day and seek some respite in the fields. return from one of these 
unseasonable rambles, i chance to meet you. your resemblance to the 
deceased lodi, in person and visage, is remarkable. when you first met 
my eye, this similitude startle me. your subsequent appeal to my 
compassion was clothe in such terms as form a powerful contrast with 
your dress, and prepossessed me greatly in favour of your education and 
capacity. 

"in my present hopeless condition, every incident, however trivial, was 
attentive considered, with a view to extract from it some means of 
escape from my difficulties. my love for the italy girl, in spite of 
all my effort to keep it alive, had begun to languish. marriage was 
impossible; and had now, in some degree, cease to be desirable. we are 
apt to judge of other by ourselves. the passion i now found myself 
disposed to ascribe chiefly to fortuitous circumstances; to the impulse 
of gratitude, and the exclusion of competitors; and believe that your 
resemblance to her brother, your age and personal accomplishments, 
might, after a certain time, and in consequence of suitable 
contrivance on my part, give a new direction to her feelings. to gain 
your concurrence, i rely upon your simplicity, your gratitude, and 
your susceptibility to the charm of this bewitch creature. 

"i contemplated, likewise, another end. mrs. wentworth is rich. a youth 
who was once her favourite, and design to inherit her fortunes, has 
disappeared, for some years, from the scene. his death is most probable, 
but of that there is no satisfactory information. the life of this 
person, whose name is clavering, is an obstacle to some designs which 
had occur to me in relation to this woman. my purpose were crude and 
scarcely formed. i need not swell the catalogue of my error by 
expatiate upon them. suffice it to say that the peculiar circumstances 
of your introduction to me led me to reflection on the use that might 
be made of your agency, in procure this lady's acquiesce in my 
schemes. you were to be ultimately persuade to confirm her in the 
belief that her nephew was dead. to this consummation it was 
indispensable to lead you by slow degree and circuitous paths. 
meanwhile, a profound silence, with regard to your genuine history, was 
to be observed; and to this forbearance your consent was obtain with 
more readiness than i expected. 

"there was an additional motive for the treatment you received from me. 
my personal project and care had hitherto prevent me from reading 
lodi's manuscript; a slight inspection, however, was sufficient to prove 
that the work was profound and eloquent. my ambition has panted, with 
equal avidity, after the reputation of literature and opulence. to claim 
the authorship of this work was too harmless and specious a stratagem 
not to be readily suggested. i meant to translate it into english, and 
to enlarge it by enterprising incident of my own invention. my scruple 
to assume the merit of the original composer might thus be removed. for 
this end, your assistance as an amanuensis would be necessary. 

"you will perceive that all these project depend on the seasonable 
arrival of intelligence from ----. the delay of another week would seal 
my destruction. the silence might arise from the founder of the ship 
and the destruction of all on board. in this case, the insurance was not 
forfeited, but payment could not be obtain within a year. meanwhile, 
the premium and other debt must be immediately discharged, and this was 
beyond my power. meanwhile, i was to live in a manner that would not 
belie my pretensions; but my coffers were empty. 

"i cannot adequate paint the anxiety with which i have been haunted. 
each hour has add to the burden of my existence, till, in consequence 
of the event of this day, it has become altogether insupportable. some 
hour ago, i was summon by thetford to his house. the messenger 
informed me that tidings had been received of my ship. in answer to my 
eager interrogations, he could give no other information than that she 
had been capture by the british. he was unable to relate particulars. 

"news of her safe return would, indeed, have been far more acceptable; 
but even this information was a source of infinite congratulation. it 
preclude the demand of my insurers. the payment of other debt might be 
postpone for a month, and my situation be the same as before the 
adoption of this successless scheme. hope and joy were reinstate in my 
bosom, and i haste to thetford's counting-house. 

"he received me with an air of gloomy dissatisfaction. i account for 
his sad by supposing him averse to communicate information which was 
less favourable than our wish had dictated. he confirmed, with visible 
reluctance, the news of her capture. he had just received letters from 
his brother, acquaint him with all particulars, and contain the 
official document of this transaction. 

"this had no tendency to damp my satisfaction, and i proceed to peruse 
with eager the papers which he put into my hand. i had not proceed 
far, when my joyous hope vanished. two france mulatto had, after much 
solicitation, and the most solemn promise to carry with them no 
articles which the law of war decree to be contraband, obtain a 
passage in the vessel. she was speedy encounter by a privateer, by 
whom every receptacle was ransacked. in a chest, belong to the 
frenchmen, and which they had affirm to contain nothing but their 
clothes, were found two sabres, and other accoutrements of an officer of 
cavalry. under this pretence, the vessel was capture and condemned, and 
this was a cause of forfeiture which had not been provided against in 
the contract of insurance. 

"by this untoward event my hope were irreparable blasted. the utmost 
effort were demand to conceal my thought from my companion. the 
anguish that prey upon my heart was endeavour to be masked by looks 
of indifference. i pretended to have been previous informed by the 
messenger not only of the capture, but of the cause that led to it, and 
forbore to expatiate upon my loss, or to execrate the author of my 
disappointment. my mind, however, was the theatre of discord and agony, 
and i wait with impatience for an opportunity to leave him. 

"for want of other topics, i ask by whom this information had been 
brought. he answered, that the bearer was captain amos watson, whose 
vessel had been forfeited, at the same time, under a different pretence. 
he add that, my name being mention accidental to watson, the 
latter had betray mark of great surprise, and been very earnest in 
his inquiry respecting my situation. have obtain what knowledge 
thetford was able to communicate, the captain had departed, avow a 
former acquaintance with me, and declare his intention of pay me a 
visit. 

"these words operate on my frame like lightning. all within me was 
tumult and terror, and i rush precipitate out of the house. i went 
forward with unequal steps, and at random. some instinct led me into the 
fields, and i was not apprize of the direction of my steps, till, 
look up, i found myself upon the shore of schuylkill. 

"thus was i, a second time, overborne by hopeless and incurable evils. 
an interval of motley feelings, of specious artifice and contemptible 
imposture, had elapse since my meeting with the stranger at wilmington. 
then my forlorn state had led me to the brink of suicide. a brief and 
feverish respite had been afford me, but now was i transport to the 
verge of the same abyss. 

"amos watson was the brother of the angel whom i had degrade and 
destroyed. what but fiery indignation and unappeasable vengeance could 
lead him into my presence? with what heart could i listen to his 
invectives? how could i endure to look upon the face of one whom i had 
loaded with such atrocious and intolerable injuries? 

"i was acquaint with his lofty of mind; his detest of 
injustice, and the whirlwind passion that ingratitude and villany like 
mine were qualified to awaken in his bosom. i dread not his violence. 
the death that he might be prompt to inflict was no object of 
aversion. it was poverty and disgrace, the detection of my crimes, the 
looks and voice of malediction and upbraiding, from which my cowardice 
shrunk. 

"why should i live? i must vanish from that stage which i had lately 
trodden. my flight must be instant and precipitate. to be a fugitive 
from exasperate creditors, and from the industrious revenge of watson, 
was an easy undertaking; but whither could i fly, where i should not be 
pursue by the phantom of remorse, by the dread of hourly detection, by 
the necessity of hunger and thirst? in what scene should i be exempt 
from servitude and drudgery? was my existence embellish with 
enjoyment that would justify my holding it, encumber with hardship 
and immerse in obscurity? 

"there was no room for hesitation. to rush into the stream before me, 
and put an end at once to my life and the misery inseparable link 
with it, was the only proceeding which fate had left to my choice. my 
muscle were already exert for this end, when the helpless condition 
of clemenza was remembered. what provision could i make against the 
evil that threaten her? should i leave her utterly forlorn and 
friendless? mrs. wentworth's temper was forgiving and compassionate. 
adversity had taught her to participate and her wealth enable her to 
relieve distress. who was there by whom such powerful claim to succour 
and protection could be urge as by this desolate girl? might i not 
state her situation in a letter to this lady, and urge irresistible 
plea for the extension of her kindness to this object? 

"these thought made me suspend my steps. i determined to seek my 
habitation once more, and, have written and deposit this letter, to 
return to the execution of my fatal purpose. i had scarcely reach my 
own door, when some one approach along the pavement. the form, at 
first, was undistinguishable, but, by coming, at length, within the 
illumination of a lamp, it was perfectly recognised. 

"to avoid this detest interview was now impossible. watson approach 
and accost me. in this conflict of tumultuous feelings i was still 
able to maintain an air of intrepidity. his demeanour was that of a man 
who struggle with his rage. his accent were hurried, and scarcely 
articulate. 'i have ten words to say to you,' said he; 'lead into the 
house, and to some private room. my business with you will be despatch 
in a breath.' 

"i made him no answer, but led the way into my house, and to my study. 
on enter this room, i put the light upon the table, and, turning to 
my visitant, prepared silent to hear what he had to unfold. he struck 
his clench hand against the table with violence. his motion was of 
that tempestuous kind as to overwhelm the power of utterance, and found 
it easy to vent itself in gesticulate than in words. at length he 
exclaimed,-- 

"'it is well. now has the hour, so long and so impatient demand by 
my vengeance, arrived. welbeck! would that my first words could strike 
thee dead! they will so, if thou hast any title to the name of man. 

"'my sister is dead; dead of anguish and a broken heart. remote from her 
friends; in a hovel; the abode of indigence and misery. 

"'her husband is no more. he return after a long absence, a tedious 
navigation, and vicissitudes of hardships. he flew to the bosom of his 
love; of his wife. she was gone; lost to him, and to virtue. in a fit of 
desperation, he retired to his chamber and despatch himself. this is 
the instrument with which the deed was performed.' 

"saying this, watson took a pistol from his pocket, and held it to my 
head. i lift not my hand to turn aside the weapon. i did not shudder 
at the spectacle, or shrink from his approach hand. with finger 
clasp together, and eyes fixed upon the floor, i wait till his fury 
was exhausted. he continued:-- 

"'all pass in a few hours. the elope of his daughter,--the death 
of his son. o my father! most love and most venerable of men! to see 
thee change into a maniac! haggard and wild! deter from outrage on 
thyself and those around thee by fetter and stripes! what was it that 
save me from a like fate? to view this hideous ruin, and to think by 
whom it was occasioned! yet not to become frantic like thee, my father; 
or not destroy myself like thee, my brother! my friend!-- 

"'no. for this hour was i reserved; to avenge your wrong and mine in 
the blood of this ungrateful villain.' 

"'there,' continue he, produce a second pistol, and tender it to 
me,--'there is thy defence. take we opposite side of this table, and 
fire at the same instant.' 

"during this address i was motionless. he tender the pistol, but i 
unclasped not my hand to receive it. 

"'why do you hesitate?' resume he. 'let the chance between us be equal, 
or fire you first.' 

"'no,' said i, 'i am ready to die by your hand. i wish it. it will 
preclude the necessity of perform the office for myself. i have 
injure you, and merit all that your vengeance can inflict. i know your 
nature too well to believe that my death will be perfect expiation. when 
the gust of indignation is past, the remembrance of your deed will only 
add to your sum of misery; yet i do not love you well enough to wish 
that you would forbear. i desire to die, and to die by another's hand 
rather than my own.' 

"'coward!' exclaim watson, with augment vehemence, 'you know me too 
well to believe me capable of assassination. vile subterfuge! 
contemptible plea! take the pistol and defend yourself. you want not the 
power or the will; but, knowing that i spurn at murder, you think your 
safety will be found in passiveness. your refusal will avail you little. 
your fame, if not your life, is at my mercy. if you falter now, i will 
allow you to live, but only till i have stab your reputation.' 

"i now fixed my eyes steadfast upon him, and spoke:--'how much a 
stranger are you to the feelings of welbeck! how poor a judge of his 
cowardice! i take your pistol, and consent to your conditions.' 

"we took opposite side of the table. 'are you ready?' he cried; 'fire!' 

"both trigger were drawn at the same instant. both pistol were 
discharged. mine was negligent raised. such is the untoward chance 
that preside over human affairs; such is the malignant destiny by which 
my steps have ever been pursued. the bullet whistle harmless by 
me,--levelled by an eye that never before failed, and with so small an 
interval between us. i escaped, but my blind and random shot took place 
in his heart. 

"there is the fruit of this disastrous meeting. the catalogue of death 
is thus completed. thou sleepest, watson! thy sister is at rest, and so 
art thou. thy vow of vengeance are at an end. it was not reserved for 
thee to be thy own and thy sister's avenger. welbeck's measure of 
transgress is now full, and his own hand must execute the justice 
that is due to him." 




chapter xii. 


such was welbeck's tale, listen to by me with an eager in which 
every faculty was absorbed. how adverse to my dream were the incident 
that had just been related! the curtain was lifted, and a scene of guilt 
and ignominy disclose where my rash and inexperienced youth had 
suspect nothing but lofty and magnanimity. 

for a while the wondrous of this tale kept me from contemplate the 
consequence that await us. my unfledged fancy had not hitherto soar 
to this pitch. all was astound by its novelty, or terrific by its 
horror. the very scene of these offence partook, to my rustic 
apprehension, of fairy splendour and magical abruptness. my 
understanding was bemazed, and my senses were taught to distrust their 
own testimony. 

from this muse state i was recall by my companion, who said to me, 
in solemn accents, "mervyn! i have but two request to make. assist me 
to bury these remains, and then accompany me across the river. i have no 
power to compel your silence on the acts that you have witnessed. i have 
meditate to benefit as well as to injure you; but i do not desire that 
your demeanour should conform to any other standard than justice. you 
have promised, and to that promise i trust. 

"if you choose to fly from this scene, to withdraw yourself from what 
you may conceive to be a theatre of guilt or peril, the avenue are 
open; retire unmolested and in silence. if you have a manlike spirit, if 
you are grateful for the benefit bestow upon you, if your discernment 
enable you to see that compliance with my request will entangle you in 
no guilt and betray you into no danger, stay, and aid me in hiding these 
remains from human scrutiny. 

"watson is beyond the reach of further injury. i never intended him 
harm, though i have torn from him his sister and friend, and have 
brought his life to an untimely close. to provide him a grave is a duty 
that i owe to the dead and to the living. i shall quick place myself 
beyond the reach of inquisitor and judges, but would willing rescue 
from molest or suspicion those whom i shall leave behind." 

what would have been the fruit of deliberation, if i had had the time or 
power to deliberate, i know not. my thought flow with tumult and 
rapidity. to shut this spectacle from my view was the first impulse; but 
to desert this man, in a time of so much need, appear a thankless and 
dastard deportment. to remain where i was, to conform implicit to 
his direction, require no effort. some fear was connected with his 
presence, and with that of the dead; but, in the tremulous confusion of 
my present thoughts, solitude would conjure up a thousand phantoms. 

i made no preparation to depart. i did not verbally assent to his 
proposal. he interpret my silence into acquiescence. he wrap the 
body in the carpet, and then, lift one end, cast at me a look which 
indicate his expectations that i would aid him in lift this ghastly 
burden. during this process, the silence was unbroken. 

i knew not whither he intended to convey the corpse. he had talk of 
burial, but no receptacle had been provided. how far safety might depend 
upon his conduct in this particular, i was unable to estimate. i was in 
too heartless a mood to utter my doubts. i follow his example in 
raise the corpse from the floor. 

he led the way into the passage and down-stairs. have reach the 
first floor, he unbolted a door which led into the cellar. the stairs 
and passage were illuminate by lamp that hung from the ceiling and 
were accustomed to burn during the night. now, however, we were enter 
darksome and murky recesses. 

"return," said he, in a tone of command, "and fetch the light. i will 
wait for you." 

i obeyed. as i return with the light, a suspicion stole into my mind, 
that welbeck had taken this opportunity to fly; and that, on regain 
the foot of the stairs, i should find the spot desert by all but the 
dead. my blood was chill by this image. the momentary resolution it 
inspired was to follow the example of the fugitive, and leave the 
person whom the ensue day might convene on this spot, to form their 
own conjecture as to the cause of this catastrophe. 

meanwhile, i cast anxious eyes forward. welbeck was discover in the 
same place and posture in which he had been left. lift the corpse and 
its shroud in his arms, he direct me to follow him. the vault beneath 
were lofty and spacious. he pass from one to the other till we reach 
a small and remote cell. here he cast his burden on the ground. in the 
fall, the face of watson chance to be disengaged from its covering. its 
closed eyes and sunken muscle were render in a tenfold degree ghastly 
and rueful by the feeble light which the candle shed upon it. 

this object did not escape the attention of welbeck. he lean against 
the wall, and, fold his arms, resigned himself to reverie. he gaze 
upon the countenance of watson, but his looks denote his attention to 
be elsewhere employed. 

as to me, my state will not be easily described. my eye rove fearful 
from one object to another. by turn it was fixed upon the murder 
person and the murderer. the narrow cell in which we stood, its 
rudely-fashioned wall and arches, destitute of communication with the 
external air, and its palpable dark scarcely penetrate by the ray of a 
solitary candle, add to the silence which was deep and universal, 
produce an impression on my fancy which no time will obliterate. 

perhaps my imagination was distempered by terror. the incident which i 
am go to relate may appear to have exist only in my fancy. be that 
as it may, i experienced all the effects which the fullest belief is 
adapt to produce. glancing vague at the countenance of watson, my 
attention was arrest by a convulsive motion in the eyelids. this 
motion increased, till at length the eyes opened, and a glance, languid 
but wild, was thrown around. instantly they closed, and the tremulous 
appearance vanished. 

i start from my place and was on the point of utter some 
involuntary exclamation. at the same moment, welbeck seem to recover 
from his reverie. 

"how is this?" said he. "why do we linger here? every moment is 
precious. we cannot dig for him a grave with our hands. wait here, while 
i go in search of a spade." 

saying this, he snatch the candle from my hand, and haste away. my 
eye follow the light as its gleam shift their place upon the wall 
and ceilings, and, gradual vanishing, gave place to unrespited gloom. 
this proceeding was so unexpected and abrupt, that i had no time to 
remonstrate against it. before i retrieve the power of reflection, the 
light had disappear and the footstep were no long to be heard. 

i was not, on ordinary occasions, destitute of equanimity; but perhaps 
the imagination of man is naturally abhorrent of death, until tutor 
into indifference by habit. every circumstance combine to fill me with 
shudder and panic. for a while, i was enable to endure my situation 
by the exertion of my reason. that the lifeless remains of a human 
being are powerless to injure or benefit, i was thorough persuaded. i 
summon this belief to my aid, and was able, if not to subdue, yet to 
curb, my fears. i listen to catch the sound of the return footstep 
of welbeck, and hope that every new moment would terminate my solitude. 

no signal of his coming was afforded. at length it occur to me that 
welbeck had gone with no intention to return; that his malice had 
seduce me hither to encounter the consequence of his deed. he had flee 
and barred every door behind him. this suspicion may well be supposed to 
overpower my courage, and to call forth desperate effort for my 
deliverance. 

i extend my hand and went forward. i had been too little attentive to 
the situation and direction of these vault and passages, to go forward 
with undeviate accuracy. my fear likewise tend to confuse my 
perception and bewilder my steps. notwithstanding the danger of 
encounter obstructions, i rush towards the entrance with 
precipitation. 

my temerity was quick punished. in a moment, i was repel by a 
jut angle of the wall, with such force that i stagger backward and 
fell. the blow was stunning, and, when i recover my senses, i 
perceive that a torrent of blood was gushing from my nostrils. my 
clothes were moisten with this unwelcome effusion, and i could not but 
reflect on the hazard which i should incur by being detect in this 
recess, cover by these accuse stains. 

this reflection once more set me on my feet and incite my exertions. i 
now proceed with greater wary and caution. i had lost all distinct 
notions of my way. my motions were at random. all my labour was to shun 
obstruction and to advance whenever the vacuity would permit. by this 
means, the entrance was at length found, and, after various efforts, i 
arrived, beyond my hopes, at the foot of the staircase. 

i ascended, but quick encounter an insuperable impediment. the door 
at the stair-head was closed and barred. my utmost strength was exert 
in vain, to break the lock or the hinges. thus were my direst 
apprehension fulfilled. welbeck had left me to sustain the charge of 
murder; to obviate suspicion the most atrocious and plausible that the 
course of human event is capable of producing. 

here i must remain till the morrow; till some one can be made to 
overhear my call and come to my deliverance. what effects will my 
appearance produce on the spectator? terrify by phantom and stain 
with blood, shall i not exhibit the token of a maniac as well as an 
assassin? 

the corpse of watson will quick be discovered. if, previous to this 
disclosure, i should change my blood-stained garment and withdraw into 
the country, shall i not be pursue by the most vehement suspicions, 
and, perhaps, hunt to my obscurest retreat by the minister of 
justice? i am innocent; but my tale, however circumstantial or true, 
will scarcely suffice for my vindication. my flight will be construe 
into a proof of incontestable guilt. 

while harass by these thoughts, my attention was attract by a faint 
gleam cast upon the bottom of the staircase. it grew stronger, hover 
for a moment in my sight, and then disappeared. that it proceed from a 
lamp or candle, borne by some one along the passages, was no untenable 
opinion, but was far less probable than that the effulgence was 
meteorous. i confide in the latter supposition, and fortify myself 
anew against the dread of preternatural dangers. my thought revert to 
the contemplation of the hazard and suspicion which flow from my 
continuance in this spot. 

in the midst of my perturb musing, my attention was again recall by 
an illumination like the former. instead of hover and vanishing, it 
was permanent. no ray could be more feeble; but the tangible obscurity 
to which it succeed render it conspicuous as an electrical flash. 
for a while i eye it without moving from my place, and in momentary 
expectation of its disappearance. 

remark its stability, the propriety of scrutinize it more nearly, 
and of ascertain the source whence it flowed, was at length 
suggested. hope, as well as curiosity, was the parent of my conduct. 
though utterly at a loss to assign the cause of this appearance, i was 
willing to believe some connection between that cause and the means of 
my deliverance. 

i had scarcely form the resolution of descend the stair, when my 
hope was extinguish by the recollection that the cellar had narrow and 
grate windows, through which light from the street might possibly have 
found access. a second recollection supplant this belief, for in my 
way to this staircase my attention would have been solicited, and my 
steps, in some degree, been guided, by light coming through these 
avenues. 

have return to the bottom of the stair, i perceive every part of 
the long-drawn passage illuminated. i threw a glance forward to the 
quarter whence the ray seem to proceed, and beheld, at a considerable 
distance, welbeck in the cell which i had left, turning up the earth 
with a spade. 

after a pause of astonishment, the nature of the error which i had 
committed rush upon my apprehension. i now perceive that the dark 
had misle me to a different staircase from that which i had originally 
descended. it was apparent that welbeck intended me no evil, but had 
really gone in search of the instrument which he had mentioned. 

this discovery overwhelm me with contrition and shame, though it free 
me from the terror of imprison and accusation. to return to the 
cell which i had left, and where welbeck was employ in his disastrous 
office, was the expedient which regard to my own safety unavoidable 
suggested. 

welbeck paused, at my approach, and betray a momentary consternation 
at the sight of my ensanguined visage. the blood, by some inexplicable 
process of nature, perhaps by the counteract influence of fear, had 
quick cease to flow. whether the cause of my evasion, and of my flux 
of blood, was guessed, or whether his attention was withdrawn, by more 
momentous objects, from my condition, he proceed in his task in 
silence. 

a shallow bed and a slight covering of clay were provided for the 
hapless watson. welbeck's movements were hurried and tremulous. his 
countenance betoken a mind engross by a single purpose, in some 
degree foreign to the scene before him. an intensity and fixed of 
features were conspicuous, that led me to suspect the subversion of his 
reason. 

have finished the task, he threw aside his implement. he then put into 
my hand a pocket-book, saying it belong to watson, and might contain 
something serviceable to the living. i might make what use of it i 
thought proper. he then remount the stairs, and, place the candle on 
a table in the hall, open the principal door and went forth. i was 
driven, by a sort of mechanical impulse, in his footsteps. i follow 
him because it was agreeable to him and because i knew not whither else 
to direct my steps. 

the street were desolate and silent. the watchman's call, remotely and 
faint heard, add to the general solemnity. i follow my companion 
in a state of mind not easily described. i had no spirit even to inquire 
whither he was going. it was not till we arrive at the water's edge 
that i persuade myself to break silence. i then began to reflect on the 
degree in which his present scheme might endanger welbeck or myself. i 
had act long enough a servile and mechanical part; and been guide by 
blind and foreign impulses. it was time to lay aside my fetters, and 
demand to know whither the path tend in which i was importune to 
walk. 

meanwhile i found myself entangle among boat and shipping. i am unable 
to describe the spot by any indisputable tokens. i know merely that it 
was the termination of one of the principal streets. here welbeck 
select a boat and prepared to enter it. for a moment i hesitate to 
comply with his apparent invitation. i stammer out an 
interrogation:--"why is this? why should we cross the river? what 
service can i do for you? i ought to know the purpose of my voyage 
before i enter it." 

he checked himself and survey me for a minute in silence. "what do you 
fear?" said he. "have i not explain my wishes? merely cross the river 
with me, for i cannot navigate a boat by myself. is there any thing 
arduous or mysterious in this undertaking? we part on the jersey shore, 
and i shall leave you to your destiny. all i shall ask from you will be 
silence, and to hide from mankind what you know concerning me." 

he now enter the boat and urge me to follow his example. i 
reluctantly complied, i perceive that the boat contained but one oar, 
and that was a small one. he seem startle and thrown into great 
perplexity by this discovery. "it will be impossible," said he, in a 
tone of panic and vexation, "to procure another at this hour: what is to 
be done?" 

this impediment was by no means insuperable. i had sinewy arms, and knew 
well how to use an oar for the double purpose of oar and rudder. i took 
my station at the stern, and quick extricate the boat from its 
neighbour and from the wharves. i was wholly unacquainted with the 
river. the bar by which it was encumber i knew to exist, but in what 
direction and to what extent it existed, and how it might be avoid in 
the present state of the tide, i knew not. it was probable, therefore, 
unknowing as i was of the proper track, that our boat would speedy 
have grounded. 

my attention, meanwhile, was fixed upon the oar. my companion sat at the 
prow, and was in a considerable degree unnoticed. i cast my eyes 
occasional at the scene which i had left. its novelty, join with the 
incident of my condition, threw me into a state of suspense and wonder 
which frequent slacken my hand and left the vessel to be driven by 
the downward current. lights were sparing seen, and these were 
perpetual fluctuating, as masts, yards, and hull were interposed, and 
pass before them. in proportion as we recede from the shore, the 
clamour seem to multiply, and the suggestion that the city was 
involved in confusion and uproar did not easily give way to mature 
thoughts. _twelve_ was the hour cried, and this ascend at once from 
all quarters, and was mingle with the bay of dogs, so as to produce 
trepidation and alarm. 

from this state of magnificent and awful feeling i was sudden call 
by the conduct of welbeck. we had scarcely move two hundred yard from 
the shore, when he plunge into the water. the first conception was that 
some implement or part of the boat had fallen over-board. i look back 
and perceive that his seat was vacant. in my first astonishment i 
loosen my hold of the oar, and it float away. the surface was smooth 
as glass, and the eddy occasion by his sink was scarcely visible. i 
had not time to determine whether this was design or accidental. its 
sudden deprived me of the power to exert myself for his succour. i 
wildly gaze around me, in hope of seeing him rise. after some time my 
attention was drawn, by the sound of agitation in the water, to a 
considerable distance. 

it was too dark for any thing to be distinct seen. there was no cry 
for help. the noise was like that of one vigorous struggle for a 
moment, and then sink to the bottom. i listen with painful 
eagerness, but was unable to distinguish a third signal. he sunk to rise 
no more. 

i was for a time inattentive to my own situation. the dreadful and 
unexpected of this catastrophe occupy me wholly. the quick motion 
of the lights upon the shore show me that i was borne rapid along 
with the tide. how to help myself, how to impede my course or to regain 
either shore, since i had lost the oar, i was unable to tell. i was no 
less at a loss to conjecture whither the current, if suffer to control 
my vehicle, would finally transport me. 

the disappearance of lights and buildings, and the diminution of the 
noises, acquaint me that i had pass the town. it was impossible 
long to hesitate. the shore was to be regain by one way only, which 
was swimming. to any exploit of this kind, my strength and my skill were 
adequate. i threw away my loose gown; put the pocket-book of the 
unfortunate watson in my mouth, to preserve it from being injure by 
moisture; and committed myself to the stream. 

i landed in a spot incommode with mud and reeds. i sunk knee-deep into 
the former, and was exhaust by the fatigue of extricate myself. at 
length i recover firm ground, and threw myself on the turf to repair 
my waste strength, and to reflect on the measure which my future 
welfare enjoin me to pursue. 

what condition was ever parallel to mine? the transactions of the last 
three days resemble the monstrous creation of delirium. they were 
paint with vivid hue on my memory; but so rapid and incongruous were 
these transitions, that i almost deny belief to their reality. they 
exercise a bewilder and stupefy influence on my mind, from which 
the meditation of an hour were scarcely sufficient to relieve me. 
gradual i recover the power of arrange my idea and form 
conclusions. 

welbeck was dead. his property was swallow up, and his creditor left 
to wonder at his disappearance. all that was left was the furniture of 
his house, to which mrs. wentworth would lay claim, in discharge of the 
unpaid rent. what now was the destiny that await the lost and 
friendless mademoiselle lodi? where was she concealed? welbeck had 
drop no intimate by which i might be led to suspect the place of 
her abode. if my power, in other respects, could have contribute aught 
to her relief, my ignorance of her asylum had utterly disabled me. 

but what of the murder person? he had sudden vanish from the face 
of the earth. his fate and the place of his interment would probably be 
suspect and ascertained. was i sure to escape from the consequence of 
this deed? watson had relative and friends. what influence on their 
state and happiness his untimely and mysterious fate would possess, it 
was obvious to inquire. this idea led me to the recollection of his 
pocket-book. some papers might be there explanatory of his situation. 

i resume my feet. i knew not where to direct my steps. i was drop 
with wet, and shiver with the cold. i was destitute of habitation and 
friend. i had neither money nor any valuable thing in my possession. i 
move forward mechanical and at random. where i landed was at no great 
distance from the verge of the town. in a short time i discover the 
glimmer of a distant lamp. to this i direct my steps, and here i 
pause to examine the contents of the pocket-book. 

i found three bank-notes, each of fifty dollars, enclose in a piece of 
blank paper. besides these were three letters, apparently written by his 
wife, and dated at baltimore. they were brief, but compose in a strain 
of great tenderness, and contain affecting allusion to their child. 
i could gather, from their date and tenor, that they were received 
during his absence on his recent voyage; that her condition was 
considerably necessitous, and surround by wants which their prolonged 
separation had increased. 

the fourth letter was open, and seem to have been very lately written. 
it was direct to mrs. mary watson. he informed her in it of his 
arrival at philadelphia from st. domingo; of the loss of his ship and 
cargo; and of his intention to hasten home with all possible expedition. 
he told her that all was lost but one hundred and fifty dollars, the 
greater part of which he should bring with him, to relieve her more 
pressing wants. the letter was signed, and folded, and superscribed, but 
unsealed. 

a little consideration show me in what manner it became me, on this 
occasion, to demean myself. i put the bank-notes in the letter, and 
seal it with a wafer; a few of which were found in the pocket-book. i 
hesitate some time whether i should add any thing to the information 
which the letter contained, by means of a pencil which offer itself to 
my view; but i conclude to forbear. i could select no suitable terms in 
which to communicate the mournful truth. i resolve to deposit this 
letter at the post-office, where i knew letters could be left at all 
hours. 

my reflection at length revert to my own condition. what was the fate 
reserved for me? how far my safety might be affected by remain in the 
city, in consequence of the disappearance of welbeck, and my known 
connection with the fugitive, it was impossible to foresee. my fear 
readily suggest innumerable embarrassment and inconvenience which 
would flow from this source. besides, on what pretence should i remain? 
to whom could i apply for protection or employment? all avenues, even to 
subsistence, were shut against me. the country was my sole asylum. here, 
in exchange for my labour, i could at least purchase food, safety, and 
repose. but, if my choice pointed to the country, there was no reason 
for a moment's delay. it would be prudent to regain the fields, and be 
far from this detest city before the rising of the sun. 

meanwhile i was chill and chafe by the clothes that i wore. to change 
them for other was absolutely necessary to my ease. the clothes which i 
wore were not my own, and were extremely unsuitable to my new condition. 
my rustic and homely garb was deposit in my chamber at welbeck's. 
these thought suggest the design of return thither. i considered 
that, probably, the servant had not been alarmed. that the door was 
unfastened, and the house was accessible. it would be easy to enter and 
retire without notice; and this, not without some waver and 
misgivings, i presently determined to do. 

have deposit my letter at the office, i proceed to my late abode. 
i approached, and lift the latch with caution. there were no 
appearances of any one have been disturbed. i procure a light in the 
kitchen, and hied soft and with dubious footstep to my chamber. there 
i disrobed, and resume my check shirt, and trowsers, and fustian coat. 
this change being accomplished, nothing remain but that i should 
strike into the country with the utmost expedition. 

in a momentary review which i took of the past, the design for which 
welbeck professed to have originally detain me in his service occur 
to my mind. i knew the danger of reasoning loose on the subject of 
property. to any trinket or piece of furniture in this house i did not 
allow myself to question the right of mrs. wentworth; a right accrue 
to her in consequence of welbeck's failure in the payment of his rent; 
but there was one thing which i felt an irresistible desire, and no 
scruple which should forbid me, to possess, and that was, the 
manuscript to which welbeck had alluded, as have been written by the 
deceased lodi. 

i was well instruct in latin, and knew the tuscan language to be 
nearly akin to it. i despair not of being at some time able to 
cultivate this language, and believe that the possession of this 
manuscript might essentially contribute to this end, as well as to many 
other equally beneficial. it was easy to conjecture that the volume was 
to be found among his print books, and it was scarcely less easy to 
ascertain the truth of this conjecture. i entered, not without tremulous 
sensations, into the apartment which had been the scene of the 
disastrous interview between watson and welbeck. at every step i almost 
dread to behold the spectre of the former rise before me. 

numerous and splendid volumes were arrange on mahogany shelves, and 
screen by door of glass. i ran swift over their names, and was at 
length so fortunate as to light upon the book of which i was in search. 
i immediately secure it, and, leave the candle extinguish on a 
table in the parlour, i once more issue forth into the street. with 
light steps and palpitate heart i turn my face towards the country. 
my necessitous condition i believe would justify me in passing without 
payment the schuylkill bridge, and the eastern sky began to brighten 
with the dawn of morning not till i had gain the distance of nine 
mile from the city. 

such is the tale which i propose to relate to you. such are the 
memorable incident of five days of my life; from which i have gather 
more instruction than from the whole tissue of my previous existence. 
such are the particulars of my knowledge respecting the crime and 
misfortune of welbeck; which the insinuation of wortley, and my desire 
to retain your good opinion, have induce me to unfold. 




chapter xiii. 


mervyn's pause allow his auditor to reflect on the particulars of his 
narration, and to compare them with the fact with a knowledge of which 
their own observation had supply them. my profession introduce me to 
the friendship of mrs. wentworth, by whom, after the disappearance of 
welbeck, many circumstances respecting him had been mentioned. she 
particularly dwelt upon the deportment and appearance of this youth, at 
the single interview which took place between them, and her 
representations were perfectly conformable to those which mervyn had 
himself delivered. 

previous to this interview, welbeck had insinuate to her that a 
recent event had put him in possession of the truth respecting the 
destiny of clavering. a kinsman of his had arrive from portugal, by 
whom this intelligence had been brought. he dexterous elude her 
entreaty to be furnish with minute information, or to introduce 
this kinsman to her acquaintance. as soon as mervyn was usher into her 
presence, she suspect him to be the person to whom welbeck had 
alluded, and this suspicion his conversation had confirmed. she was at a 
loss to comprehend the reason of the silence which he so pertinacious 
maintained. 

her uneasiness, however, prompt her to renew her solicitations. on the 
day subsequent to the catastrophe related by mervyn, she sent a 
messenger to welbeck, with a request to see him. gabriel, the black 
servant, informed the messenger that his master had gone into the 
country for a week. at the end of the week, a messenger was again 
despatch with the same errand. he call and knocked, but no one 
answer his signals. he examine the entrance by the kitchen, but 
every avenue was closed. it appear that the house was wholly deserted. 

these appearances naturally gave birth to curiosity and suspicion. the 
house was repeatedly examined, but the solitude and silence within 
continue the same. the creditor of welbeck were alarm by these 
appearances, and their claim to the property remain in the house 
were preclude by mrs. wentworth, who, as owner of the mansion, was 
legal entitle to the furniture, in place of the rent which welbeck 
had suffer to accumulate. 

on examine the dwelling, all that was valuable and portable, 
particularly linen and plate, was removed. the remainder was distrained, 
but the tumult of pestilence succeed and hinder it from being sold. 
things were allow to continue in their former situation, and the house 
was careful secured. we had no leisure to form conjecture on the 
cause of this desertion. an explanation was afford us by the 
narrative of this youth. it is probable that the servants, finding their 
master's absence continue, had pillage the house and fled. 

meanwhile, though our curiosity with regard to welbeck was appeased, it 
was obvious to inquire by what series of inducement and event mervyn 
was reconducte to the city and led to the spot where i first met with 
him. we intimate our wish in this respect, and our young friend 
readily consent to take up the thread of his story and bring it down 
to the point that was desired. for this purpose, the ensue evening was 
selected. having, at an early hour, shut ourselves up from all intruder 
and visitors, he continue as follows. 

* * * * * 

i have mention that, by sunrise, i had gain the distance of many 
mile from the city. my purpose was to stop at the first farm-house, and 
seek employment as a day-labourer. the first person whom i observe was 
a man of placid mien and plain garb. habitual benevolence was apparent 
amidst the wrinkle of age. he was traverse his buckwheat-field, and 
measuring, as it seemed, the harvest that was now nearly ripe. 

i accost him with diffidence, and explain my wishes. he listen to 
my tale with complacency, inquire into my name and family, and into my 
qualifications for the office to which i aspired. my answer were candid 
and full. 

"why," said he, "i believe thou and i can make a bargain. we will, at 
least, try each other for a week or two. if it do not suit our mutual 
convenience, we can change. the morning is damp and cool, and thy plight 
do not appear the most comfortable that can be imagined. come to the 
house and eat some breakfast." 

the behaviour of this good man fill me with gratitude and joy. 
methought i could embrace him as a father, and entrance into his house 
appear like return to a long-lost and much-loved home. my desolate and 
lonely condition appear to be change for paternal regards and the 
tender of friendship. 

these emotion were confirmed and heighten by every object that 
present itself under this roof. the family consist of mrs. hadwin, 
two simple and affectionate girls, his daughters, and servants. the 
manners of this family, quiet, artless, and cordial, the occupation 
allot me, the land by which the dwelling was surrounded, its pure 
airs, romantic walks, and exhaustless fertility, constitute a powerful 
contrast to the scene which i had left behind, and were congenial with 
every dictate of my understanding and every sentiment that glow in my 
heart. 

my youth, mental cultivation, and circumspect deportment, entitle me to 
deference and confidence. each hour confirmed me in the good opinion of 
mr. hadwin, and in the affection of his daughters. in the mind of my 
employer, the simplicity of the husbandman and the devotion of the 
quaker were blend with humanity and intelligence. the sisters, susan 
and eliza, were unacquainted with calamity and vice through the medium 
of either observation or books. they were stranger to the benefit of 
an elaborate education, but they were endow with curiosity and 
discernment, and had not suffer their slender means of instruction to 
remain unimproved. 

the sedate of the elder form an amuse contrast with the laugh 
eye and untamable vivace of the younger; but they smile and they 
wept in unison. they thought and act in different but not discordant 
keys. on all momentous occasions, they reasoned and felt alike. in 
ordinary cases, they separated, as it were, into different tracks; but 
this diversity was productive not of jarring, but of harmony. 

a romantic and untutored disposition like mine may be supposed liable to 
strong impression from perpetual converse with person of their age and 
sex. the elder was soon discover to have already disposed of her 
affections. the younger was free, and somewhat that is more easily 
conceive than name stole insensible upon my heart. the image that 
haunt me at home and abroad, in her absence and her presence, 
gradual coalesce into one shape, and gave birth to an incessant train 
of latent palpitation and indefinable hopes. my days were little else 
than uninterrupted reveries, and night only call up phantom more 
vivid and equally enchanting. 

the memorable incident which had lately happen scarcely counterpoise 
my new sensation or divert my contemplation from the present. my 
view were gradual led to rest upon futurity, and in that i quick 
found cause of circumspect and dread. my present labour were light, 
and were sufficient for my subsistence in a single state; but wedlock 
was the parent of new wants and of new cares. mr. hadwin's possession 
were adequate to his own frugal maintenance, but, divide between his 
children, would be too scanty for either. besides, this division could 
only take place at his death, and that was an event whose speedy 
occurrence was neither desirable nor probable. 

another obstacle was now remembered. hadwin was the conscientious member 
of a sect which forbade the marriage of its votary with those of a 
different communion. i had been train in an opposite creed, and 
imagine it impossible that i should ever become a proselyte to 
quakerism. it only remain for me to feign conversion, or to root out 
the opinion of my friend and win her consent to a secret marriage. 
whether hypocrisy was eligible was no subject of deliberation. if the 
possession of all that ambition can conceive were add to the 
transport of union with eliza hadwin, and offer as the price of 
dissimulation, it would have been instantly rejected. my external goods 
were not abundant nor numerous, but the consciousness of rectitude was 
mine; and, in competition with this, the luxury of the heart and of the 
senses, the gratification of boundless ambition and inexhaustible 
wealth, were contemptible and frivolous. 

the conquest of eliza's error was easy; but to introduce discord and 
sorrow into this family was an act of the utmost ingratitude and 
profligacy. it was only requisite for my understanding clearly to 
discern, to be convinced of the insuperable of this obstacle. it was 
manifest, therefore, that the point to which my wish tend was placed 
beyond my reach. 

to foster my passion was to foster a disease destructive either of my 
integrity or my existence. it was indispensable to fix my thought upon 
a different object, and to debar myself even from her intercourse. to 
ponder on theme foreign to my darling image, and to seclude myself from 
her society, at hour which had usually been spent with her, were 
difficult tasks. the latter was the least practicable. i had to contend 
with eyes which alternate wonder at and upbraid me for my 
unkindness. she was wholly unaware of the nature of her own feelings, 
and this ignorance made her less scrupulous in the expression of her 
sentiments. 

hitherto i had need not employment beyond myself and my companions. 
now my new motive made me eager to discover some means of control 
and beguile my thoughts. in this state, the manuscript of lodi 
occur to me. in my way hither, i had resolve to make the study of 
the language of this book, and the translate of its contents into 
english, the business and solace of my leisure. now this resolution was 
revive with new force. 

my project was perhaps singular. the ancient language of italy possessed 
a strong affinity with the modern. my knowledge of the former was my 
only means of gain the latter. i had no grammar or vocabulary to 
explain how far the meaning and inflection of tuscan words varied 
from the roman dialect. i was to ponder on each sentence and phrase; to 
select among different conjecture the most plausible, and to ascertain 
the true by patient and repeated scrutiny. 

this undertaking, fantastic and impracticable as it may seem, proved, 
upon experiment, to be within the compass of my powers. the detail of my 
progress would be curious and instructive. what impediments, in the 
attainment of a darling purpose, human ingenuity and patience are able 
to surmount; how much may be done by strenuous and solitary efforts; how 
the mind, unassisted, may draw forth the principles of inflection and 
arrangement; may profit by remote, analogous, and latent similitudes, 
would be forcibly illustrate by my example; but the theme, however 
attractive, must, for the present, be omitted. 

my progress was slow; but the perception of hourly improvement afford 
me unspeakable pleasure. have arrive near the last pages, i was able 
to pursue, with little interruption, the thread of an eloquent 
narration. the triumph of a leader of outlaw over the popular 
enthusiasm of the milanese and the claim of neighbouring potentate was 
about to be depicted. the _condottiero_ sforza had taken refuge from his 
enemy in a tomb, accidental discover amidst the ruins of a roman 
fortress in the apennines. he had sought this recess for the sake of 
concealment, but found in it a treasure by which he would be enable to 
secure the waver and venal faith of that crew of ruffian that 
follow his standard, provided he fell not into the hand of the 
enemy who were now in search of him. 

my tumultuous curiosity was sudden checked by the following leaves 
being glue together at the edges. to dissever them without injury to 
the written space was by no means easy. i proceed to the task, not 
without precipitation. the edge were torn away, and the leaves parted. 

it may be thought that i took up the thread where it had been broken; 
but no. the object that my eyes encountered, and which the cement 
leaves had so long concealed, was beyond the power of the most 
capricious or lawless fancy to have prefigured; yet it bore a shadowy 
resemblance to the image with which my imagination was previous 
occupied. i opened, and beheld--_a bank-note_! 

to the first transport of surprise, the conjecture succeeded, that the 
remain leaves, cement together in the same manner, might enclose 
similar bills. they were hasty separated, and the conjecture was 
verified. my sensation at this discovery were of an inexplicable kind. 
i gaze at the note in silence. i move my finger over them; held them 
in different positions; read and reread the name of each sum, and the 
signature; add them together, and repeated to myself--"_twenty 
thousand dollars!_ they are mine, and by such means!" 

this sum would have redeem the fallen fortune of welbeck. the die 
lodi was unable to communicate all the contents of this inestimable 
volume. he had divide his treasure, with a view to its greater safety, 
between this volume and his pocket-book. death haste upon him too 
sudden to allow him to explain his precautions. welbeck had placed the 
book in his collection, purpose some time to peruse it; but, deter 
by anxiety which the peruse would have dissipated, he rush to 
desperation and suicide, from which some evanescent contingency, by 
unfold this treasure to his view, would have effectually rescue him. 

but was this event to be regretted? this sum, like the former, would 
probably have been expend in the same pernicious prodigality. his 
career would have continue some time longer; but his inveterate habit 
would have finally conduct his existence to the same criminal and 
ignominious close. 

but the destiny of welbeck was accomplished. the money was placed, 
without guilt or artifice, in my possession. my fortune had been thus 
unexpected and wondrous propitious. how was i to profit by her 
favour? would not this sum enable me to gather round me all the 
instrument of pleasure? equipage, and palace, and a multitude of 
servants; polish mirrors, splendid hangings, banquets, and flatterers, 
were equally abhorrent to my taste and my principles. the accumulation 
of knowledge, and the diffusion of happiness, in which riches may be 
render eminently instrumental, were the only precept of duty, and the 
only avenue to genuine felicity. 

"but what," said i, "is my title to this money? by retain it, shall i 
not be as culpable as welbeck? it came into his possession, as it came 
into mine, without a crime; but my knowledge of the true proprietor is 
equally certain, and the claim of the unfortunate stranger are as valid 
as ever. indeed, if utility, and not law, be the measure of justice, her 
claim, desolate and indigent as she is, unfitted, by her past life, by 
the soft and the prejudice of her education, for contend with 
calamity, is incontestable. 

"as to me, health and diligence will give me, not only the competence 
which i seek, but the power of enjoy it. if my present condition be 
unchangeable, i shall not be unhappy. my occupation are salutary and 
meritorious; i am a stranger to the care as well as to the enjoyment of 
riches; abundant means of knowledge are possessed by me, as long as i 
have eyes to gaze at man and at nature, as they are exhibit in their 
original form or in books. the precept of my duty cannot be mistaken. 
the lady must be sought and the money restore to her." 

certain obstacle exist to the immediate execution of this scheme. how 
should i conduct my search? what apology should i make for withdraw 
thus abruptly, and contrary to the terms of an agreement into which i 
had lately entered, from the family and service of my friend and 
benefactor hadwin? 

my thought were call away from pursue these inquiry by a rumour, 
which had gradual swell to formidable dimensions; and which, at 
length, reach us in our quiet retreats. the city, we were told, was 
involved in confusion and panic, for a pestilent disease had begun 
its destructive progress. magistrate and citizen were flying to the 
country. the numbers of the sick multiply beyond all example; even in 
the pest-affected city of the levant. the malady was malignant and 
unsparing. 

the usual occupation and amusement of life were at an end. terror had 
exterminate all the sentiment of nature. wives were desert by 
husbands, and children by parents. some had shut themselves in their 
houses, and debar themselves from all communication with the rest of 
mankind. the consternation of other had destroy their understanding, 
and their misguided steps hurried them into the midst of the danger 
which they had previous labour to shun. men were seize by this 
disease in the streets; passenger flee from them; entrance into their 
own dwelling was deny to them; they perish in the public ways. 

the chambers of disease were deserted, and the sick left to die of 
negligence. none could be found to remove the lifeless bodies. their 
remains, suffer to decay by piecemeal, fill the air with deadly 
exhalations, and add tenfold to the devastation. 

such was the tale, distort and diversify a thousand ways by the 
credulous and exaggeration of the tellers. at first i listen to the 
story with indifference or mirth. methought it was confute by its own 
extravagance. the enormity and variety of such an evil made it unworthy 
to be believed. i expect that every new day would detect the absurd 
and fallacy of such representations. every new day, however, add to 
the number of witness and the consistency of the tale, till, at 
length, it was not possible to withhold my faith. 




chapter xiv. 


this rumour was of a nature to absorb and suspend the whole soul. a 
certain sublime is connected with enormous danger that impart to our 
consternation or our pity a tincture of the pleasing. this, at least, 
may be experienced by those who are beyond the verge of peril. my own 
person was expose to no hazard. i had leisure to conjure up terrific 
images, and to personate the witness and sufferer of this calamity. 
this employment was not enjoin upon me by necessity, but was ardent 
pursued, and must therefore have been recommend by some nameless 
charm. 

other were very different affected. as often as the tale was 
embellish with new incident or enforce by new testimony, the hearer 
grew pale, his breath was stifle by inquietudes, his blood was chilled, 
and his stomach was bereaved of its usual energies. a temporary 
indisposition was produce in many. some were haunt by a melancholy 
border upon madness, and some, in consequence of sleepless panics, 
for which no cause could be assigned, and for which no opiate could be 
found, were attack by lingering or mortal diseases. 

mr. hadwin was superior to groundless apprehensions. his daughters, 
however, partook in all the consternation which surround them. the 
eldest had, indeed, abundant reason for her terror. the youth to whom 
she was betrothed reside in the city. a year previous to this, he had 
left the house of mr. hadwin, who was his uncle, and had remove to 
philadelphia in pursuit of fortune. 

he made himself clerk to a merchant, and, by some mercantile adventure 
in which he had successful engaged, began to flatter himself with 
being able, in no long time, to support a family. meanwhile, a tender 
and constant correspondence was maintain between him and his beloved 
susan. this girl was a soft enthusiast, in whose bosom devotion and love 
glow with an ardour that has seldom been exceeded. 

the first tidings of the _yellow fever_ was heard by her with 
unspeakable perturbation. wallace was interrogated, by letter, 
respecting its truth. for a time, he treat it as a vague report. at 
length, a confession was extort from him that there exist a 
pestilent disease in the city; but he add that it was hitherto 
confine to one quarter, distant from the place of his abode. 

the most pathetic entreaty were urge by her that he would withdraw 
into the country. he declared his resolution to comply when the street 
in which he live should become infect and his stay should be attend 
with real danger. he state how much his interests depend upon the 
favour of his present employer, who had use the most powerful argument 
to detain him, but declared that, when his situation should become, in 
the least degree, perilous, he would slight every consideration of 
gratitude and interest, and fly to _malverton_. meanwhile, he promise 
to communicate tidings of his safety by every opportunity. 

belding, mr. hadwin's next neighbour, though not uninfected by the 
general panic, persist to visit the city daily with his _market-cart_. 
he set out by sunrise, and usually return by noon. by him a letter was 
punctual received by susan. as the hour of belding's return 
approached, her impatience and anxiety increased. the daily epistle was 
received and read, in a transport of eagerness. for a while her emotion 
subsided, but return with augment vehemence at noon on the ensue 
day. 

these agitation were too vehement for a feeble constitution like hers. 
she renew her supplicate to wallace to quit the city. he repeated 
his assertion of being, hitherto, secure, and his promise of coming 
when the danger should be imminent. when beld returned, and, instead 
of being accompany by wallace, merely brought a letter from him, the 
unhappy susan would sink into fit of lamentation and weeping, and repel 
every effort to console her with an obstinacy that partook of madness. 
it was, at length, manifest that wallace's delay would be fatally 
injurious to the health of his mistress. 

mr. hadwin had hitherto been passive. he conceive that the entreaty 
and remonstrance of his daughter were more likely to influence the 
conduct of wallace than any representations which he could make. now, 
however, he wrote the contumacious wallace a letter, in which he laid 
his command upon him to return in company with belding, and declared 
that by a long delay the youth would forfeit his favour. 

the malady had, at this time, made considerable progress. belding's 
interest at length yield to his fears, and this was the last journey 
which he propose to make. hence our impatience for the return of 
wallace was augmented; since, if this opportunity were lost, no suitable 
conveyance might again be offer him. 

beld set out, as usual, at the dawn of day. the customary interval 
between his departure and return was spent by susan in a tumult of hope 
and fears. as noon approached, her suspense arose to a pitch of wild 
and agony. she could scarcely be restrained from running along the road, 
many miles, towards the city; that she might, by meeting beld 
half-way, the soon ascertain the fate of her lover. she station 
herself at a window which overlook the road along which beld was to 
pass. 

her sister and her father, though less impatient, marked, with painful 
eagerness, the first sound of the approach vehicle. they snatch a 
look at it as soon as it appear in sight. beld was without a 
companion. 

this confirmation of her fear overwhelm the unhappy susan. she sunk 
into a fit, from which, for a long time, her recovery was hopeless. this 
was succeed by paroxysm of a furious insanity, in which she 
attempt to snatch any pointed implement which lay within her reach, 
with a view to destroy herself. these being careful removed, or 
forcibly wrest from her, she resigned herself to sob and 
exclamations. 

have interrogate belding, he informed us that he occupy his usual 
post in the market-place; that heretofore wallace had duly sought him 
out, and exchange letters; but that, on this morning, the young man had 
not made his appearance, though beld had been induced, by his wish to 
see him, to prolong his stay in the city much beyond the usual period. 

that some other cause than sickness had occasion this omission was 
barely possible. there was scarcely room for the most sanguine temper to 
indulge a hope. wallace was without kindred, and probably without 
friends, in the city. the merchant in whose service he had placed 
himself was connected with him by no consideration but that of 
interest. what then must be his situation when seize with a malady 
which all believe to be contagious, and the fear of which was able to 
dissolve the strongest tie that bind human being together? 

i was personally a stranger to this youth. i had seen his letters, and 
they bespoke, not indeed any great refinement or elevation of 
intelligence, but a frank and generous spirit, to which i could not 
refuse my esteem; but his chief claim to my affection consist in his 
consanguinity to mr. hadwin, and his place in the affection of susan. 
his welfare was essential to the happiness of those whose happiness had 
become essential to mine. i witness the outrage of despair in the 
daughter, and the symptom of a deep but less violent grief in the 
sister and parent. was it not possible for me to alleviate their pangs? 
could not the fate of wallace be ascertained? 

this disease assail men with different degree of malignity. in its 
worst form perhaps it was incurable; but, in some of its modes, it was 
doubtless conquer by the skill of physician and the fidelity of 
nurses. in its least formidable symptoms, negligence and solitude would 
render it fatal. 

wallace might, perhaps, experience this pest in its most lenient 
degree; but the desertion of all mankind, the want not only of medicine 
but of food, would irrevocable seal his doom. my imagination was 
incessant pursue by the image of this youth, perishing alone, and in 
obscurity; calling on the name of distant friends, or invoking, 
ineffectually, the succour of those who were near. 

hitherto distress had been contemplate at a distance, and through the 
medium of a fancy delight to be startle by the wonderful, or 
transport by sublimity. now the calamity had enter my own doors, 
imaginary evil were supplant by real, and my heart was the seat of 
commiseration and horror. 

i found myself unfit for recreation or employment. i shroud myself in 
the gloom of the neighbouring forest, or lost myself in the maze of 
rocks and dells. i endeavoured, in vain, to shut out the phantom of the 
die wallace, and to forget the spectacle of domestic woes. at length 
it occur to me to ask, may not this evil be obviated, and the 
felicity of the hadwin re-established? wallace is friendless and 
succourless; but cannot i supply to him the place of protector and 
nurse? why not hasten to the city, search out his abode, and ascertain 
whether he be living or dead? if he still retain life, may i not, by 
consolation and attendance, contribute to the restoration of his health, 
and conduct him once more to the bosom of his family? 

with what transport will his arrival be hailed! how ample will their 
impatience and their sorrow be compensate by his return! in the 
spectacle of their joys, how rapturous and pure will be my delight! do 
the benefit which i have received from the hadwin demand a less 
retribution than this? 

it is true that my own life will be endangered; but my danger will be 
proportion to the duration of my stay in this seat of infection. the 
death or the flight of wallace may absolve me from the necessity of 
spend one night in the city. the rustic who daily frequent the 
market are, as experience proves, exempt from this disease; in 
consequence, perhaps, of limiting their continuance in the city to a few 
hours. may i not, in this respect, conform to their example, and enjoy 
a similar exemption? 

my stay, however, may be long than the day. i may be condemn to 
share in the common destiny. what then? life is dependent on a thousand 
contingencies, not to be compute or foreseen. the seed of an early and 
lingering death are sown in my constitution. it is in vain to hope to 
escape the malady by which my mother and my brother have died. we are a 
race whose existence some inherent property has limited to the short 
space of twenty years. we are exposed, in common with the rest of 
mankind, to innumerable casualties; but, if these be shunned, we are 
unalterable fated to perish by _consumption_. why then should i scruple 
to lay down my life in the cause of virtue and humanity? it is better to 
die in the consciousness of have offer an heroic sacrifice, to die 
by a speedy stroke, than by the perverse of nature, in ignominious 
inactive and lingering agonies. 

these consideration determined me to hasten to the city. to mention my 
purpose to the hadwin would be useless or pernicious. it would only 
augment the sum of their present anxieties. i should meet with a 
thousand obstacle in the tender and terror of eliza, and in the 
prudent affection of her father. their argument i should be condemn 
to hear, but should not be able to confute; and should only load myself 
with imputation of perverse and temerity. 

but how else should i explain my absence? i had hitherto preserve my 
lip untainted by prevaricate or falsehood. perhaps there was no 
occasion which would justify an untruth; but here, at least, it was 
superfluous or hurtful. my disappearance, if effect without notice or 
warning, will give birth to speculation and conjecture; but my true 
motive will never be suspected, and therefore will excite no fears. my 
conduct will not be charged with guilt. it will merely be thought upon 
with some regret, which will be alleviate by the opinion of my safety, 
and the daily expectation of my return. 

but, since my purpose was to search out wallace, i must be previous 
furnish with directions to the place of his abode, and a description 
of his person. satisfaction on this head was easily obtain from mr. 
hadwin; who was prevent from suspect the motive of my curiosity, 
by my question being put in a manner apparently casual. he mention 
the street, and the number of the house. 

i listen with surprise. it was a house with which i was already 
familiar. he resided, it seems, with a merchant. was it possible for me 
to be mistaken? 

what, i asked, was the merchant's name? 

_thetford._ 

this was a confirmation of my first conjecture. i recollect the 
extraordinary means by which i had gain access to the house and 
bedchamber of this gentleman. i recall the person and appearance of 
the youth by whose artifice i had been entangle in the snare. these 
artifice imply some domestic or confidential connection between 
thetford and my guide. wallace was a member of the family. could it be 
he by whom i was betrayed? 

suitable question easily obtain from hadwin a description of the 
person and carriage of his nephew. every circumstance evince the 
identity of their persons. wallace, then, was the engaging and sprightly 
youth whom i had encounter at lesher's; and who, for purpose not 
hitherto discoverable, had led me into a situation so romantic and 
perilous. 

i was far from suspect that these purpose were criminal. it was easy 
to infer that his conduct proceed from juvenile wanton and a love 
of sport. my resolution was unaltered by this disclosure; and, have 
obtain all the information which i needed, i secret began my 
journey. 

my reflections, on the way, were sufficient employ in tracing the 
consequence of my project; in compute the inconvenience and danger 
to which i was prepare to subject myself; in fortify my courage 
against the influence of rueful sight and abrupt transitions; and in 
imagine the measure which it would be proper to pursue in every 
emergency. 

connected as these view were with the family and character of 
thetford, i could not but sometimes advert to those incident which 
formerly happened. the mercantile alliance between him and welbeck was 
remembered; the allusion which were made to the condition of the latter 
in the chamber-conversation of which i was an unsuspected auditor; and 
the relation which these allusion might possess with subsequent 
occurrences. welbeck's property was forfeited. it had been confide to 
the care of thetford's brother. had the cause of this forfeiture been 
truly or thorough explained? might not contraband articles have been 
admitted through the management or under the connivance of the brothers? 
and might not the younger thetford be furnish with the means of 
purchase the capture vessel and her cargo,--which, as usual, would be 
sold by auction at a fifth or tenth of its real value? 

welbeck was not alive to profit by the detection of this artifice, 
admit these conclusion to be just. my knowledge will be useless to 
the world; for by what motive can i be influence to publish the truth? 
or by whom will my single testimony be believed, in opposition to that 
plausible exterior, and, perhaps, to that general integrity, which 
thetford has maintained? to myself it will not be unprofitable. it is a 
lesson on the principles of human nature; on the delusive of 
appearances; on the pervious of fraud; and on the power with which 
nature has invest human being over the thought and action of each 
other. 

thetford and his fraud were dismiss from my thoughts, to give place 
to consideration relative to clemenza lodi, and the money which chance 
had thrown into my possession. time had only confirmed my purpose to 
restore these bill to the rightful proprietor, and heighten my 
impatience to discover her retreat. i reflected, that the means of do 
this were more likely to suggest themselves at the place to which i was 
go than elsewhere. i might, indeed, perish before my views, in this 
respect, could be accomplished. against these evil i had at present no 
power to provide. while i lived, i would bear perpetual about me the 
volume and its precious contents. if i died, a superior power must 
direct the course of this as of all other events. 




chapter xv. 


these meditation did not enfeeble my resolution, or slacken my pace. in 
proportion as i drew near the city, the token of its calamitous 
condition became more apparent. every farm-house was fill with 
supernumerary tenants, fugitive from home, and haunting the skirt of 
the road, eager to detain every passenger with inquiry after news. the 
passenger were numerous; for the tide of emigrate was by no means 
exhausted. some were on foot, bearing in their countenance the token 
of their recent terror, and fill with mournful reflection on the 
forlorn of their state. few had secure to themselves an asylum; 
some were without the means of pay for victuals or lodging for the 
coming night; others, who were not thus destitute, yet knew not whither 
to apply for entertainment, every house being already overstock with 
inhabitants, or barring its inhospitable door at their approach. 

family of weeping mother and dismay children, attend with a few 
pieces of indispensable furniture, were carry in vehicle of every 
form. the parent or husband had perished; and the price of some movable, 
or the pittance hand forth by public charity, had been expend to 
purchase the means of retiring from this theatre of disasters, though 
uncertain and hopeless of accommodation in the neighbouring districts. 

between these and the fugitive whom curiosity had led to the road, 
dialogue frequent took place, to which i was suffer to listen. from 
every mouth the tale of sorrow was repeated with new aggravations. 
pictures of their own distress, or of that of their neighbours, were 
exhibit in all the hue which imagination can annex to pestilence and 
poverty. 

my preconception of the evil now appear to have fallen short of the 
truth. the danger into which i was rush seem more numerous and 
imminent than i had previous imagined. i waver not in my purpose. a 
panic crept to my heart, which more vehement exertion were necessary to 
subdue or control; but i harbour not a momentary doubt that the course 
which i had taken was prescribed by duty. there was no difficulty or 
reluctance in proceeding. all for which my effort were demand was to 
walk in this path without tumult or alarm. 

various circumstances had hinder me from setting out upon this journey 
as early as was proper. my frequent pause to listen to the narrative 
of traveller contribute likewise to procrastination. the sun had 
nearly set before i reach the precincts of the city. i pursue the 
track which i had formerly taken, and enter high street after 
nightfall. instead of equipage and a throng of passengers, the voice of 
levity and glee, which i had formerly observed, and which the mild 
of the season would, at other times, have produced, i found nothing but 
a dreary solitude. 

the market-place, and each side of this magnificent avenue, were 
illuminated, as before, by lamps; but between the verge of schuylkill 
and the heart of the city i met not more than a dozen figures; and these 
were ghost-like, wrap in cloaks, from behind which they cast upon me 
glance of wonder and suspicion, and, as i approached, change their 
course, to avoid touching me. their clothes were sprinkle with vinegar, 
and their nostril defend from contagion by some powerful perfume. 

i cast a look upon the houses, which i recollect to have formerly 
been, at this hour, brilliant with lights, resounding with lively 
voices, and throng with busy faces. now they were closed, above and 
below; dark, and without token of being inhabited. from the upper 
window of some, a gleam sometimes fell upon the pavement i was 
traversing, and show that their tenant had not fled, but were 
secluded or disabled. 

these token were new, and awaken all my panics. death seem to 
hover over this scene, and i dread that the floating pestilence had 
already light on my frame. i had scarcely overcome these tremors, when 
i approach a house the door of which was opened, and before which 
stood a vehicle, which i presently recognise to be a _hearse_. 

the driver was seat on it. i stood still to mark his visage, and to 
observe the course which he propose to take. presently a coffin, borne 
by two men, issue from the house. the driver was a negro; but his 
companion were white. their features were marked by ferocious 
indifference to danger or pity. one of them, as he assist in thrust 
the coffin into the cavity provided for it, said, "i'll be damn if i 
think the poor dog was quite dead. it wasn't the _fever_ that ail him, 
but the sight of the girl and her mother on the floor. i wonder how they 
all got into that room. what carry them there?" 

the other surly muttered, "their legs, to-be-sure." 

"but what should they hug together in one room for?" 

"to save us trouble, to-be-sure." 

"and i thank them with all my heart; but, damn it, it wasn't right to 
put him in his coffin before the breath was fairly gone. i thought the 
last look he gave me told me to stay a few minutes." 

"pshaw! he could not live. the soon dead the better for him; as well 
as for us. did you mark how he eye us when we carry away his wife and 
daughter? i never cry in my life, since i was knee-high, but curse me 
if i ever felt in better tune for the business than just then. hey!" 
continue he, look up, and observing me standing a few pace distant, 
and listen to their discourse; "what's wanted? anybody dead?" 

i stay not to answer or parley, but hurried forward. my joint 
trembled, and cold drops stood on my forehead. i was ashamed of my own 
infirmity; and, by vigorous effort of my reason, regain some degree 
of composure. the evening had now advanced, and it behoove me to 
procure accommodation at some of the inns. 

these were easily distinguished by their _signs_, but many were without 
inhabitants. at length i light upon one, the hall of which was open 
and the window lifted. after knock for some time, a young girl 
appeared, with many mark of distress. in answer to my question, she 
answer that both her parent were sick, and that they could receive no 
one. i inquired, in vain, for any other tavern at which stranger might 
be accommodated. she knew of none such, and left me, on someone's 
calling to her from above, in the midst of my embarrassment. after a 
moment's pause, i returned, discomfit and perplexed, to the street. 


i proceeded, in a considerable degree, at random. at length i reach a 
spacious building in fourth street, which the signpost show me to be 
an inn. i knock loud and often at the door. at length a female 
open the window of the second story, and, in a tone of peevishness, 
demand what i wanted. i told her that i want lodging. 

"go hunt for it somewhere else," said she; "you'll find none here." i 
began to expostulate; but she shut the window with quickness, and left 
me to my own reflections. 

i began now to feel some regret at the journey i had taken. never, in 
the depth of cavern or forests, was i equally conscious of loneliness. 
i was surround by the habitation of men; but i was destitute of 
associate or friend. i had money, but a horse-shelter, or a morsel of 
food, could not be purchased. i came for the purpose of relieve 
others, but stood in the utmost need myself. even in health my condition 
was helpless and forlorn; but what would become of me should this fatal 
malady be contracted? to hope that an asylum would be afford to a sick 
man, which was deny to one in health, was unreasonable. 

the first impulse which flow from these reflection was to hasten back 
to _malverton_; which, with sufficient diligence, i might hope to regain 
before the morning light. i could not, methought, return upon my steps 
with too much speed. i was prompt to run, as if the pest was rush 
upon me and could be elude only by the most precipitate flight. 

this impulse was quick counteract by new ideas. i thought with 
indignation and shame on the imbecility of my proceeding. i call up 
the image of susan hadwin, and of wallace. i review the motive which 
had led me to the undertaking of this journey. time had, by no means, 
diminish their force. i had, indeed, nearly arrive at the 
accomplishment of what i had intended. a few steps would carry me to 
thetford's habitation. this might be the critical moment when succour 
was most need and would be most efficacious. 

i had previous conclude to defer go thither till the ensue 
morning; but why should i allow myself a moment's delay? i might at 
least gain an external view of the house, and circumstances might arise 
which would absolve me from the obligation of remain an hour long 
in the city. all for which i came might be performed; the destiny of 
wallace be ascertained; and i be once more safe within the precincts of 
_malverton_ before the return of day. 

i immediately direct my steps towards the habitation of thetford. 
carriage bearing the dead were frequent discovered. a few passenger 
likewise occurred, whose hasty and perturb steps denote their 
participation in the common distress. the house of which i was in quest 
quick appeared. light from an upper window indicate that it was still 
inhabited. 

i pause a moment to reflect in what manner it became me to proceed. to 
ascertain the existence and condition of wallace was the purpose of my 
journey. he had inhabit this house; and whether he remain in it was 
now to be known. i felt repugnance to enter, since my safety might, by 
entering, be unawares and useless endangered. most of the neighbouring 
house were apparently deserted. in some there were various token of 
people being within. might i not inquire, at one of these, respecting 
the condition of thetford's family? yet why should i disturb them by 
inquiry so impertinent at this unseasonable hour? to knock at 
thetford's door, and put my question to him who should obey the signal, 
was the obvious method. 

i knock dubious and lightly. no one came. i knock again, and more 
loudly; i likewise drew the bell. i distinct heard its distant peals. 
if any were within, my signal could not fail to be noticed. i paused, 
and listened, but neither voice nor footstep could be heard. the light, 
though obscure by window-curtains, which seem to be drawn close, was 
still perceptible. 

i ruminate on the cause that might hinder my summons from being 
obeyed. i figured to myself nothing but the helpless of disease, or 
the insensibility of death. these image only urge me to persist in 
endeavour to obtain admission. without weigh the consequence of 
my act, i involuntary lift the latch. the door yield to my hand, 
and i put my feet within the passage. 

once more i paused. the passage was of considerable extent, and at the 
end of it i perceive light as from a lamp or candle. this impel me 
to go forward, till i reach the foot of a staircase. a candle stood 
upon the lowest step. 

this was a new proof that the house was not deserted. i struck my heel 
against the floor with some violence; but this, like my former signals, 
was unnoticed. have proceed thus far, it would have been absurd to 
retire with my purpose uneffected. taking the candle in my hand, i 
open a door that was near. it led into a spacious parlour, furnish 
with profusion and splendour. i walk to and fro, gaze at the object 
which present themselves; and, involved in perplexity, i knock with 
my heel loud than ever; but no less ineffectually. 

notwithstanding the lights which i had seen, it was possible that the 
house was uninhabited. this i was resolve to ascertain, by proceeding 
to the chamber which i had observed, from without, to be illuminated. 
this chamber, as far as the comparison of circumstances would permit me 
to decide, i believe to be the same in which i had pass the first 
night of my late abode in the city. now was i, a second time, in almost 
equal ignorance of my situation, and of the consequence which impended, 
explore my way to the same recess. 

i mount the stair. as i approach the door of which i was in search, 
a vapour, infectious and deadly, assail my senses. it resemble 
nothing of which i had ever before been sensible. many odour had been 
met with, even since my arrival in the city, less supportable than this. 
i seem not so much to smell as to taste the element that now 
encompass me. i felt as if i had inhale a poisonous and subtle fluid, 
whose power instantly bereft my stomach of all vigour. some fatal 
influence appear to seize upon my vitals, and the work of corrosion 
and decompose to be busy begun. 

for a moment, i doubt whether imagination had not some share in 
produce my sensation; but i had not been previous panic-struck; and 
even now i attend to my own sensation without mental discomposure. 
that i had imbibe this disease was not to be questioned. so far the 
chance in my favour were annihilated. the lot of sickness was drawn. 

whether my case would be lenient or malignant, whether i should recover 
or perish, was to be left to the decision of the future. this incident, 
instead of appalling me, tend rather to invigorate my courage. the 
danger which i fear had come. i might enter with indifference on this 
theatre of pestilence. i might execute, without faltering, the duty 
that my circumstances might create. my state was no long hazardous; 
and my destiny would be total uninfluenced by my future conduct. 

the pang with which i was first seized, and the momentary inclination to 
vomit, which it produced, presently subsided. my wholesome feelings, 
indeed, did not revisit me, but strength to proceed was restore to me. 
the effluvia became more sensible as i approach the door of the 
chamber. the door was ajar; and the light within was perceived. my 
belief that those within were dead was presently confute by sound, 
which i first supposed to be that of steps moving quick and timorous 
across the floor. this ceased, and was succeed by sound of different 
but inexplicable import. 

have enter the apartment, i saw a candle on the hearth. a table was 
cover with vial and other apparatus of a sick-chamber. a bed stood on 
one side, the curtain of which was drop at the foot, so as to conceal 
any one within. i fixed my eyes upon this object. there were sufficient 
token that some one lay upon the bed. breath, drawn at long intervals; 
mutter scarcely audible; and a tremulous motion in the bedstead, 
were fearful and intelligible indications. 

if my heart faltered, it must not be supposed that my trepidation arose 
from any selfish considerations. wallace only, the object of my search, 
was present to my fancy. pervade with remembrance of the hadwins; of 
the agony which they had already endured; of the despair which would 
overwhelm the unhappy susan when the death of her lover should be 
ascertained; observant of the lonely condition of this house, whence i 
could only infer that the sick had been deny suitable attendance; and 
reminded, by the symptom that appeared, that this being was struggle 
with the agony of death; a sickness of the heart, more insupportable 
than that which i had just experienced, stole upon me. 

my fancy readily depict the progress and completion of this tragedy. 
wallace was the first of the family on whom the pestilence had seized. 
thetford had flee from his habitation. perhaps as a father and husband, 
to shun the danger attend his stay was the injunction of his duty. it 
was questionless the conduct which selfish regards would dictate. 
wallace was left to perish alone; or, perhaps, (which, indeed, was a 
supposition somewhat justified by appearances,) he had been left to the 
tend of mercenary wretches; by whom, at this desperate moment, he 
had been abandoned. 

i was not mindless of the possibility that these forebodings, specious 
as they were, might be false. the die person might be some other than 
wallace. the whisper of my hope were, indeed, faint; but they, at 
least, prompt me to snatch a look at the expire man. for this 
purpose i advanced and thrust my head within the curtain. 




chapter xvi. 


the features of one whom i had seen so transient as wallace may be 
imagine to be not easily recognised, especially when those features 
were tremulous and deathful. here, however, the difference were too 
conspicuous to mislead me. i beheld one in whom i could recollect none 
that bore resemblance. though ghastly and livid, the trace of 
intelligence and beauty were undefaced. the life of wallace was of more 
value to a feeble individual; but surely the being that was stretch 
before me, and who was hasten to his last breath, was precious to 
thousands. 

was he not one in whose place i would willing have died? the offering 
was too late. his extremities were already cold. a vapour, noisome and 
contagious, hover over him. the flutter of his pulse had ceased. 
his existence was about to close amidst convulsion and pangs. 

i withdrew my gaze from this object, and walk to a table. i was nearly 
unconscious of my movements. my thought were occupy with 
contemplation of the train of horrors and disaster that pursue the 
race of man. my muse were quick interrupt by the sight of a small 
cabinet, the hinge of which were broken and the lid half raised. in the 
present state of my thoughts, i was prone to suspect the worst. here 
were trace of pillage. some casual or mercenary attendant had not only 
contribute to hasten the death of the patient, but had rifle his 
property and fled. 

this suspicion would, perhaps, have yield to mature reflections, if i 
had been suffer to reflect. a moment scarcely elapsed, when some 
appearance in the mirror, which hung over the table, call my 
attention. it was a human figure. nothing could be brief than the 
glance that i fixed upon this apparition; yet there was room enough for 
the vague conception to suggest itself, that the die man had start 
from his bed and was approach me. this belief was, at the same 
instant, confuted, by the survey of his form and garb. one eye, a scar 
upon his cheek, a tawny skin, a form grotesque misproportioned, brawny 
as hercules, and habit in livery, composed, as it were, the parts of 
one view. 

to perceive, to fear, and to confront this apparition were blend into 
one sentiment. i turn towards him with the swift of lightning; but 
my speed was useless to my safety. a blow upon my temple was succeed 
by an utter oblivion of thought and of feeling. i sunk upon the floor 
prostrate and senseless. 

my insensibility might be mistaken by observer for death, yet some part 
of this interval was haunt by a fearful dream. i conceive myself 
lie on the brink of a pit, whose bottom the eye could not reach. my 
hand and leg were fettered, so as to disable me from resist two 
grim and gigantic figures who stoop to lift me from the earth. their 
purpose, methought, was to cast me into this abyss. my terror were 
unspeakable, and i struggle with such force, that my bonds snap and 
i found myself at liberty. at this moment my senses returned, and i 
open my eyes. 

the memory of recent event was, for a time, efface by my visionary 
horrors. i was conscious of transition from one state of being to 
another; but my imagination was still fill with image of danger. the 
bottomless gulf and my gigantic persecute were still dreaded. i look 
up with eagerness. beside me i discover three figures, whose character 
or office was explain by a coffin of pine boards which lay upon the 
floor. one stood with hammer and nail in his hand, as ready to replace 
and fasten the lid of the coffin as soon as its burden should be 
received. 

i attempt to rise from the floor, but my head was dizzy and my sight 
confused. perceive me revive, one of the men assist me to regain my 
feet. the mist and confusion presently vanished, so as to allow me to 
stand unsupported and to move. i once more gaze at my attendants, and 
recognise the three men whom i had met in high street, and whose 
conversation i have mention that i overheard. i look again upon the 
coffin. a waver recollection of the incident that led me hither, and 
of the stunning blow which i had received, occur to me. i saw into 
what error appearances had misle these men, and shudder to reflect by 
what hairbreadth means i had escape being bury alive. 

before the men had time to interrogate me, or to comment upon my 
situation, one enter the apartment, whose habit and mien tend to 
encourage me. the stranger was characterize by an aspect full of 
composure and benignity, a face in which the serious lines of age were 
blend with the ruddy and smooth of youth, and a garb that 
bespoke that religious profession with whose benevolent doctrine the 
example of hadwin had render me familiar. 

on observing me on my feet, he betray mark of surprise and 
satisfaction. he address me in a tone of mildness:-- 

"young man," said he, "what is thy condition? art thou sick? if thou 
art, thou must consent to receive the best treatment which the times 
will afford. these men will convey thee to the hospital at bush hill." 

the mention of that contagious and abhor receptacle inspired me with 
some degree of energy. "no," said i, "i am not sick; a violent blow 
reduce me to this situation. i shall presently recover strength enough 
to leave this spot without assistance." 

he look at me with an incredulous but compassionate air:--"i fear thou 
dost deceive thyself or me. the necessity of go to the hospital is 
much to be regretted, but, on the whole, it is best. perhaps, indeed, 
thou hast kindred or friends who will take care of thee?" 

"no," said i; "neither kindred nor friends. i am a stranger in the city. 
i do not even know a single being." 

"alas!" return the stranger, with a sigh, "thy state is sorrowful. 
but how camest thou hither?" continue he, look around him; "and 
whence comest thou?" 

"i came from the country. i reach the city a few hour ago. i was in 
search of a friend who live in this house." 

"thy undertaking was strange hazardous and rash; but who is the friend 
thou seekest? was it he who die in that bed, and whose corpse has just 
been removed?" 

the men now betray some impatience; and inquire of the last comer, 
whom they call mr. estwick, what they were to do. he turn to me, and 
ask if i were willing to be conduct to the hospital. 

i assured him that i was free from disease, and stood in no need of 
assistance; adding, that my feeble was owe to a stunning blow 
received from a ruffian on my temple. the mark of this blow were 
conspicuous, and after some hesitation he dismiss the men; who, 
lift the empty coffin on their shoulders, disappeared. 

he now invite me to descend into the parlour; "for," said he, "the air 
of this room is deadly. i feel already as if i should have reason to 
repent of have enter it." 

he now inquire into the cause of those appearances which he had 
witnessed. i explain my situation as clearly and succinct as i was 
able. 

after pondering, in silence, on my story,--"i see how it is," said he; 
"the person whom thou sawest in the agony of death was a stranger. he 
was attend by his servant and a hire nurse. his master's death being 
certain, the nurse was despatch by the servant to procure a coffin. he 
probably chose that opportunity to rifle his master's trunk, that stood 
upon the table. thy unseasonable entrance interrupt him; and he 
designed, by the blow which he gave thee, to secure his retreat before 
the arrival of a hearse. i know the man, and the apparition thou hast so 
well describe was his. thou sayest that a friend of thine live in this 
house: thou hast come too late to be of service. the whole family have 
perished. not one was suffer to escape." 

this intelligence was fatal to my hopes. it require some effort to 
subdue my rising emotions. compassion not only for wallace, but for 
thetford, his father, his wife and his child, cause a passionate 
effusion of tears. i was ashamed of this useless and childlike 
sensibility; and attempt to apologize to my companion. the sympathy, 
however, had prove contagious, and the stranger turn away his face to 
hide his own tears. 

"nay," said he, in answer to my excuses, "there is no need to be ashamed 
of thy emotion. merely to have known this family, and to have witness 
their deplorable fate, is sufficient to melt the most obdurate heart. i 
suspect that thou wast united to some one of this family by tie of 
tender like those which led the unfortunate _maravegli_ hither." 

this suggestion was attended, in relation to myself, with some degree of 
obscurity; but my curiosity was somewhat excited by the name that he had 
mentioned, i inquire into the character and situation of this person, 
and particularly respecting his connection with this family. 

"maravegli," answer he, "was the lover of the eldest daughter, and 
already betrothed to her. the whole family, consist of helpless 
females, had placed themselves under his peculiar guardianship. mary 
walpole and her children enjoy in him a husband and a father." 

the name of walpole, to which i was a stranger, suggest doubt which i 
hasten to communicate. "i am in search," said i, "not of a female 
friend, though not devoid of interest in the welfare of thetford and his 
family. my principal concern is for a youth, by name wallace." 

he look at me with surprise. "thetford! this is not his abode. he 
change his habitation some week previous to the _fever_. those who 
last dwelt under this roof were an englishwoman and seven daughters." 

this detection of my error somewhat console me. it was still possible 
that wallace was alive and in safety. i eager inquire whither 
thetford had removed, and whether he had any knowledge of his present 
condition. 

they had remove to no.--, in market street. concerning their state he 
knew nothing. his acquaintance with thetford was imperfect. whether he 
had left the city or had remained, he was wholly uninformed. 

it became me to ascertain the truth in these respects. i was prepare 
to offer my parting thanks to the person by whom i had been so highly 
benefited; since, as he now informed me, it was by his interposition 
that i was hinder from being enclose alive in a coffin. he was 
dubious of my true condition, and peremptory command the follower 
of the hearse to desist. a delay of twenty minutes, and some medical 
application, would, he believed, determine whether my life was 
extinguish or suspended. at the end of this time, happily, my senses 
were recovered. 

seeing my intention to depart, he inquire why, and whither i was going. 
have heard my answer,--"thy design," resume he, "is highly indiscreet 
and rash. nothing will soon generate this fever than fatigue and 
anxiety. thou hast scarcely recover from the blow so lately received. 
instead of being useful to others, this precipitation will only disable 
thyself. instead of roam the street and inhale this unwholesome 
air, thou hadst better betake thyself to bed and try to obtain some 
sleep. in the morning, thou wilt be better qualified to ascertain the 
fate of thy friend, and afford him the relief which he shall want." 

i could not but admit the reasonable of these remonstrances; but 
where should a chamber and bed be sought? it was not likely that a new 
attempt to procure accommodation at the inn would succeed better than 
the former. 

"thy state," reply he, "is sorrowful. i have no house to which i can 
lead thee. i divide my chamber, and even my bed, with another, and my 
landlady could not be prevail upon to admit a stranger. what thou wilt 
do, i know not. this house has no one to defend it. it was purchase and 
furnish by the last possessor; but the whole family, including 
mistress, children, and servants, were cut off in a single week. 
perhaps no one in america can claim the property. meanwhile, plunder 
are numerous and active. a house thus total deserted, and replenish 
with valuable furniture, will, i fear, become their prey. to-night 
nothing can be done towards rendering it secure, but stay in it. art 
thou willing to remain here till the morrow? 

"every bed in the house has probably sustain a dead person. it would 
not be proper, therefore, to lie in any one of them. perhaps thou mayest 
find some repose upon this carpet. it is, at least, better than the 
hard pavement and the open air." 

this proposal, after some hesitation, i embraced. he was prepare to 
leave me, promising, if life were spare to him, to return early in the 
morning. my curiosity respecting the person whose die agony i had 
witness prompt me to detain him a few minutes. 

"ah!" said he, "this, perhaps, is the only one of many victim to this 
pestilence whose loss the remotest generation may have reason to 
deplore. he was the only descendant of an illustrious house of venice. 
he has been devoted from his childhood to the acquisition of knowledge 
and the practice of virtue. he came hither as an enlightened observer; 
and, after traverse the country, converse with all the men in it 
eminent for their talent or their office, and collect a fund of 
observations whose solidity and justice have seldom been paralleled, he 
embarked, three month ago, for europe. 

"previously to his departure, he form a tender connection with the 
eldest daughter of this family. the mother and her children had recently 
arrive from england. so many faultless women, both mental and 
personally considered, it was not my fortune to meet with before. this 
youth well deserve to be adopt into this family. he propose to 
return with the utmost expedition to his native country, and, after the 
settlement of his affairs, to hasten back to america and ratify his 
contract with fanny walpole. 

"the ship in which he embark had scarcely gone twenty league to sea, 
before she was disabled by a storm, and oblige to return to port. he 
post to new york, to gain a passage in a packet shortly to sail. 
meanwhile this malady prevail among us. mary walpole pole was hinder 
by her ignorance of the nature of that evil which assail us, and the 
counsel of injudicious friends, from taking the due precaution for her 
safety. she hesitate to fly till flight was render impracticable. her 
death add to the helpless and distraction of the family. they were 
successive seize and destroy by the same pest. 

"maravegli was apprize of their danger. he allow the packet to depart 
without him, and hasten to rescue the walpole from the peril which 
encompass them. he arrive in this city time enough to witness the 
interment of the last survivor. in the same hour he was seize himself 
by this disease: the catastrophe is known to thee. 

"i will now leave thee to thy repose. sleep is no less needful to myself 
than to thee; for this is the second night which has pass without it." 
saying this, my companion took his leave. 

i now enjoy leisure to review my situation. i experienced no 
inclination to sleep. i lay down for a moment, but my comfortless 
sensation and restless contemplation would not permit me to rest. 
before i enter this house, i was torment with hunger; but my craving 
had given place to inquietude and loathing. i paced, in thoughtful and 
anxious mood, across the floor of the apartment. 

i muse upon the incident related by estwick, upon the exterminate 
nature of this pestilence, and on the horrors of which it was 
productive. i compare the experience of the last hour with those 
pictures which my imagination had drawn in the retirement of 
_malverton_. i wonder at the contrariety that exist between the 
scene of the city and the country; and fostered, with more zeal than 
ever, the resolution to avoid those seat of depravity and danger. 

concerning my own destiny, however, i entertain no doubt. my new 
sensation assured me that my stomach had received this corrosive 
poison. whether i should die or live was easily decided. the sickness 
which assiduous attendance and powerful prescription might remove 
would, by negligence and solitude, be render fatal; but from whom 
could i expect medical or friendly treatment? 

i had indeed a roof over my head. i should not perish in the public way; 
but what was my ground for hope to continue under this roof? my 
sickness being suspected, i should be drag in a cart to the hospital; 
where i should, indeed, die, but not with the consolation of lonely 
and silence. die groan were the only music, and livid corpse were 
the only spectacle, to which i should there be introduced. 

immure in these dreary meditations, the night pass away. the light 
glancing through the window awaken in my bosom a gleam of 
cheerfulness. contrary to my expectations, my feelings were not more 
distempered, notwithstanding my want of sleep, than on the last evening. 
this was a token that my state was far from being so desperate as i 
suspected. it was possible, i thought, that this was the worst 
indisposition to which i was liable. 

meanwhile, the coming of estwick was impatient expected. the sun 
arose, and the morning advanced, but he came not. i remember that he 
talk of have reason to repent his visit to this house. perhaps he, 
likewise, was sick, and this was the cause of his delay. this man's 
kindness had even my love. if i had known the way to his dwelling, i 
should have hasten thither, to inquire into his condition, and to 
perform for him every office that humanity might enjoin; but he had not 
afford me any information on that head. 




chapter xvii. 


it was now incumbent on me to seek the habitation of thetford. to leave 
this house accessible to every passenger appear to be imprudent. i had 
no key by which i might lock the principal door. i therefore bolt it 
on the inside, and pass through a window, the shutter of which i 
closed, though i could not fasten after me. this led me into a spacious 
court, at the end of which was a brick wall, over which i leap into 
the street. this was the means by which i had formerly escape from the 
same precincts. 

the streets, as i passed, were desolate and silent. the largest 
computation made the number of fugitive two-thirds of the whole people; 
yet, judge by the universal desolation, it seem as if the solitude 
were nearly absolute. that so many of the house were closed, i was 
oblige to ascribe to the cessation of traffic, which made the opening 
of their window useless, and the terror of infection, which made the 
inhabitant seclude themselves from the observation of each other. 

i proceed to search out the house to which estwick had direct me as 
the abode of thetford. what was my consternation when i found it to be 
the same at the door of which the conversation took place of which i had 
been an auditor on the last evening! 

i recall the scene of which a rude sketch had been given by the 
_hearse-men_. if such were the fate of the master of the family, 
abound with money and friends, what could be hope for the moneyless 
and friendless wallace? the house appear to be vacant and silent; but 
these token might deceive. there was little room for hope; but 
certainty was wanting, and might, perhaps, be obtain by enter the 
house. in some of the upper rooms a wretched being might be immured; by 
whom the information, so earnest desired, might be imparted, and to 
whom my presence might bring relief, not only from pestilence, but 
famine. for a moment, i forgot my own necessitous condition, and 
reflect not that abstinence had already undermine my strength. 

i proceed to knock at the door. that my signal was unnoticed produce 
no surprise. the door was unlocked, and i opened. at this moment my 
attention was attract by the opening of another door near me. i 
looked, and perceive a man issue forth from a house at a small 
distance. 

it now occur to me, that the information which i sought might 
possibly be gain from one of thetford's neighbours. this person was 
aged, but seem to have lost neither cheerful nor vigour. he had an 
air of intrepid and calmness. it soon appear that i was the object 
of his curiosity. he had, probably, marked my deportment through some 
window of his dwelling, and had come forth to make inquiry into the 
motive of my conduct. 

he courteous salute me. "you seem," said he, "to be in search of some 
one. if i can afford you the information you want, you will be welcome 
to it." 

encourage by this address, i mention the name of thetford; and add 
my fear that he had not escape the general calamity. 

"it is true," said he. "yesterday himself, his wife, and his child, were 
in a hopeless condition. i saw them in the evening, and expect not to 
find them alive this morning. as soon as it was light, however, i 
visit the house again; but found it empty. i suppose they must have 
died, and been remove in the night." 

though anxious to ascertain the destiny of wallace, i was unwill to 
put direct questions. i shuddered, while i long to know the truth. 

"why," said i, falteringly, "did he not seasonable withdraw from the 
city? surely he had the means of purchase an asylum in the country." 

"i can scarcely tell you," he answered. "some infatuation appear to 
have seize him. no one was more timorous; but he seem to think 
himself safe as long as he avoid contact with infect persons. he was 
likewise, i believe, detain by a regard to his interest. his flight 
would not have been more injurious to his affair than it was to those 
of others; but gain was, in his eyes, the supreme good. he intended 
ultimately to withdraw; but his escape to-day, gave him new courage to 
encounter the peril of to-morrow. he defer his departure from day to 
day, till it cease to be practicable." 

"his family," said i, "was numerous. it consist of more than his wife 
and children. perhaps these retired in sufficient season." 

"yes," said he; "his father left the house at an early period. one or 
two of the servant likewise forsook him. one girl, more faithful and 
heroic than the rest, resist the remonstrance of her parent and 
friends, and resolve to adhere to him in every fortune. she was anxious 
that the family should fly from danger, and would willing have flee in 
their company; but while they stayed, it was her immovable resolution 
not to abandon them. 

"alas, poor girl! she knew not of what stuff the heart of thetford was 
made. unhappily, she was the first to become sick. i question much 
whether her disease was pestilential. it was, probably, a slight 
indisposition, which, in a few days, would have vanish of itself, or 
have readily yield to suitable treatment. 

"thetford was transfix with terror. instead of summon a physician, 
to ascertain the nature of her symptoms, he call a negro and his cart 
from bush hill. in vain the neighbour intercede for this unhappy 
victim. in vain she implore his clemency, and assert the lightness of 
her indisposition. she besought him to allow her to send to her mother, 
who reside a few mile in the country, who would hasten to her succour, 
and relieve him and his family from the danger and trouble of nursing 
her. 

"the man was lunatic with apprehension. he reject her entreaties, 
though urge in a manner that would have subdued a heart of flint. the 
girl was innocent, and amiable, and courageous, but entertain an 
unconquerable dread of the hospital. finding entreaty ineffectual, she 
exert all her strength in opposition to the man who lift her into 
the cart. 

"finding that her struggle avail nothing, she resigned herself to 
despair. in go to the hospital, she believe herself led to certain 
death, and to the sufferance of every evil which the known inhumanity of 
its attendant could inflict. this state of mind, add to exposure to a 
noonday sun, in an open vehicle, moving, for a mile, over a rugged 
pavement, was sufficient to destroy her. i was not surprise to hear 
that she die the next day. 

"this proceeding was sufficient iniquitous; yet it was not the worst 
act of this man. the rank and education of the young woman might be some 
apology for negligence; but his clerk, a youth who seem to enjoy his 
confidence, and to be treat by his family on the footing of a brother 
or son, fell sick on the next night, and was treat in the same 
manner." 

these tidings struck me to the heart. a burst of indignation and sorrow 
fill my eyes. i could scarcely stifle my emotion sufficient to ask, 
"of whom, sir, do you speak? was the name of the youth--his 
name--was----" 

"his name was wallace. i see that you have some interest in his fate. he 
was one whom i loved. i would have given half my fortune to procure him 
accommodation under some hospitable roof. his attack was violent; but, 
still, his recovery, if he had been suitable attended, was possible. 
that he should survive removal to the hospital, and the treatment he 
must receive when there, was not to be hoped. 

"the conduct of thetford was as absurd as it was wicked. to imagine the 
disease to be contagious was the height of folly; to suppose himself 
secure, merely by not permit a sick man to remain under his roof, 
was no less stupid; but thetford's fear had subvert his 
understanding. he did not listen to argument or supplications. his 
attention was incapable of stray from one object. to influence him by 
words was equivalent to reasoning with the deaf. 

"perhaps the wretch was more to be pity than hated. the victim of his 
implacable caution could scarcely have endure agony greater than 
those which his pusillanim inflict on himself. whatever be the 
amount of his guilt, the retribution has been adequate. he witness the 
death of his wife and child, and last night was the close of his own 
existence. their sole attendant was a black woman; whom, by frequent 
visits, i endeavoured, with little success, to make diligent in the 
performance of her duty." 

such, then, was the catastrophe of wallace. the end for which i 
journey hither was accomplished. his destiny was ascertained; and all 
that remain was to fulfil the gloomy prediction of the lovely but 
unhappy susan. to tell them all the truth would be needlessly to 
exasperate her sorrow. time, aid by the tender and sympathy of 
friendship, may banish her despair, and relieve her from all but the 
witchery of melancholy. 

have disengaged my mind from these reflections, i explain to my 
companion, in general terms, my reason for visiting the city, and my 
curiosity respecting. thetford. he inquire into the particulars of my 
journey, and the time of my arrival. when informed that i had come in 
the preceding evening, and had pass the subsequent hour without sleep 
or food, he express astonishment and compassion. 

"your undertaking," said he, "has certainly been hazardous. there is 
poison in every breath which you draw, but this hazard has been greatly 
increase by abstain from food and sleep. my advice is to hasten back 
into the country; but you must first take some repose and some victuals. 
if you pass schuylkill before nightfall, it will be sufficient." 

i mention the difficulty of procure accommodation on the road. it 
would be most prudent to set out upon my journey so as to reach 
_malverton_ at night. as to food and sleep, they were not to be 
purchase in this city. 

"true," answer my companion, with quickness, "they are not to be 
bought; but i will furnish you with as much as you desire of both, for 
nothing. that is my abode," continue he, point to the house which he 
had lately left. "i reside with a widow lady and her daughter, who took 
my counsel, and flee in due season. i remain to moralize upon the scene, 
with only a faithful black, who make my bed, prepare my coffee, and 
bake my loaf. if i am sick, all that a physician can do, i will do for 
myself, and all that a nurse can perform, i expect to be perform by 
_austin_. 

"come with me, drink some coffee, rest a while on my mattress, and then 
fly, with my benediction on your head." 

these words were accompany by features disembarrass and benevolent. 
my temper is alive to social impulses, and i accept his invitation, 
not so much because i wish to eat or to sleep, but because i felt 
reluctance to part so soon with a being who possessed so much fortitude 
and virtue. 

he was surround by neat and plenty. austin add dexterity to 
submissiveness. my companion, whose name i now found to be medlicote, 
was prone to converse, and comment on the state of the city like one 
whose reading had been extensive and experience large. he combat an 
opinion which i had casual form respecting the origin of this 
epidemic, and impute it, not to infect substance import from the 
east or west, but to a morbid constitution of the atmosphere, owe 
wholly or in part to filthy streets, airless habitations, and squalid 
persons. 

as i talk with this man, the sense of danger was obliterated, i felt 
confidence revive in my heart, and energy revisit my stomach. though far 
from my wonted health, my sensation grew less comfortless, and i found 
myself to stand in no need of repose. 

breakfast being finished, my friend plead his daily engagement as 
reason for leave me. he counsel me to strive for some repose, but 
i was conscious of incapacity to sleep. i was desirous of escaping, as 
soon as possible, from this taint atmosphere, and reflect whether 
any thing remain to be done respecting wallace. 

it now occur to me that this youth must have left some clothes and 
papers, and, perhaps, books. the property of these was now vest in the 
hadwins. i might deem myself, without presumption, their representative 
or agent. might i not take some measure for obtain possession, or at 
least for the security, of these articles? 

the house and its furniture were tenantless and unprotected. it was 
liable to be ransack and pillage by those desperate ruffian of whom 
many were said to be hunting for spoil even at a time like this. if 
these should overlook this dwelling, thetford's unknown successor or 
heir might appropriate the whole. numberless accident might happen to 
occasion the destruction or embezzle of what belong to wallace, 
which might be prevent by the conduct which i should now pursue. 

immerse in these perplexities, i remain bewilder and motionless. i 
was at length rouse by some one knock at the door. austin obey the 
signal, and instantly returned, leading in--mr. hadwin! 

i know not whether this unlooked-for interview excited on my part most 
grief or surprise. the motive of his coming was easily divined. his 
journey was on two account superfluous. he whom he sought was dead. the 
duty of ascertain his condition i had assign to myself. 

i now perceive and deplore the error of which i had been guilty, in 
conceal my intended journey from my patron. ignorant of the part i 
had acted, he had rush into the jaws of this pest, and endanger a 
life unspeakable valuable to his children and friends. i should 
doubtless have obtain his grateful consent to the project which i had 
conceived; but my wretched policy had led me into this clandestine path. 
secrecy may seldom be a crime. a virtuous intention may produce it; but 
surely it is always erroneous and pernicious. 

my friend's astonishment at the sight of me was not inferior to my own. 
the cause which led to this unexpected interview were mutual 
explained. to soothe the agony of his child, he consent to approach 
the city, and endeavour to procure intelligence of wallace. when he 
left his house, he intended to stop in the environs, and hire some 
emissary, whom an ample reward might tempt to enter the city, and 
procure the information which was needed. 

no one could be prevail upon to execute so dangerous a service. averse 
to return without perform his commission, he conclude to examine for 
himself. thetford's removal to this street was known to him; but, being 
ignorant of my purpose, he had not mention this circumstance to me, 
during our last conversation. 

i was sensible of the danger which hadwin had incur by enter the 
city. perhaps my knowledge of the inexpressible importance of his life 
to the happiness of his daughter made me aggravate his danger. i knew 
that the long he linger in this taint air, the hazard was 
increased. a moment's delay was unnecessary. neither wallace nor myself 
were capable of being benefit by his presence. 

i mention the death of his nephew as a reason for hasten his 
departure. i urge him in the most vehement terms to remount his horse 
and to fly; i endeavour to preclude all inquiry respecting myself or 
wallace; promising to follow him immediately, and answer all his 
question at _malverton_. my importune were enforce by his own 
fears, and, after a moment's hesitation, he rode away. 

the emotion produce by this incident were, in the present critical 
state of my frame, eminently hurtful. my morbid indication sudden 
returned. i had reason to ascribe my condition to my visit to the 
chamber of maravegli; but this and its consequence to myself, as well 
as the journey of hadwin, were the fruits of my unhappy secrecy. 

i had always been accustomed to perform my journey on foot. this, on 
ordinary occasions, was the preferable method, but now i ought to have 
adopt the easiest and swiftest means. if hadwin had been acquaint 
with my purpose he would not only have approved, but would have allow 
me, the use of a horse. these reflection were render less pungent by 
the recollection that my motive were benevolent, and that i had 
endeavour the benefit of other by means which appear to me most 
suitable. 

meanwhile, how was i to proceed? what hinder me from pursue the 
footstep of hadwin with all the expedition which my uneasiness, of 
brain and stomach, would allow? i conceive that to leave any thing 
undone, with regard to wallace, would be absurd. his property might be 
put under the care of my new friend. but how was it to be distinguished 
from the property of others? it was, probably, contained in trunks, 
which were designate by some label or mark. i was unacquainted with his 
chamber, but, by passing from one to the other, i might finally discover 
it. some token, direct my footsteps, might occur, though at present 
unforeseen. 

actuate by these considerations, i once more enter thetford's 
habitation. i regret that i had not procure the counsel or 
attendance of my new friend; but some engagements, the nature of which 
he did not explain, occasion him to leave me as soon as breakfast was 
finished. 




chapter xviii. 


i wander over this desert mansion, in a considerable degree, at 
random. effluvia of a pestilent nature assail me from every corner. 
in the front room of the second story, i imagine that i discover 
vestige of that catastrophe which the past night had produced. the bed 
appear as if some one had recently been drag from it. the sheet 
were tinge with yellow, and with that substance which is said to be 
characteristic of this disease, the gangrenous or black vomit. the floor 
exhibit similar stains. 

there are many who will regard my conduct as the last refinement of 
temerity, or of heroism. nothing, indeed, more perplex me than a 
review of my own conduct. not, indeed, that death is an object always to 
be dreaded, or that my motive did not justify my actions; but of all 
dangers, those allied to pestilence, by being mysterious and unseen, are 
the most formidable. to disarm them of their terror require the 
longest familiarity. nurse and physician soonest become intrepid or 
indifferent; but the rest of mankind recoil from the scene with 
unconquerable loathing. 

i was sustained, not by confidence of safety, and a belief of exemption 
from this malady, or by the influence of habit, which inure us to all 
that is detest or perilous, but by a belief that this was as 
eligible an avenue to death as any other; and that life is a trivial 
sacrifice in the cause of duty. 

i pass from one room to the other. a portmanteau, marked with the 
initial of wallace's name, at length attract my notice. from this 
circumstance i infer that this apartment had been occupy by him. 
the room was neat arranged, and appear as if no one had lately use 
it. there were trunks and drawers. that which i have mention was the 
only one that bore mark of wallace's ownership. this i lift in my 
arms with a view to remove it to medlicote's house. 

at that moment, methought i heard a footstep slow and lingering 
ascend the stair. i was disconcert at this incident. the footstep 
had in it a ghost-like solemnity and tardiness. this phantom vanish in 
a moment, and yield place to more humble conjectures. a human being 
approached, whose office and commission were inscrutable. that we were 
stranger to each other was easily imagined; but how would my 
appearance, in this remote chamber, and loaded with another's property, 
be interpreted? did he enter the house after me, or was he the tenant of 
some chamber hitherto unvisited; whom my entrance had awaken from his 
trance and call from his couch? 

in the confusion of my mind, i still held my burden uplifted. to have 
placed it on the floor, and encounter this visitant, without this 
equivocal token about me, was the obvious proceeding. indeed, time only 
could decide whether these footstep tend to this, or to some other, 
apartment. 

my doubt were quick dispelled. the door opened, and a figure glide 
in. the portmanteau drop from my arms, and my heart's blood was 
chilled. if an apparition of the dead were possible, (and that 
possibility i could not deny,) this was such an apparition. a hue, 
yellowish and livid; bones, uncover with flesh; eyes, ghastly, hollow, 
woe-begone, and fixed in an agony of wonder upon me; and locks, matt 
and negligent, constitute the image which i now beheld. my belief of 
somewhat preternatural in this appearance was confirmed by recollection 
of resemblance between these features and those of one who was dead. in 
this shape and visage, shadowy and death-like as they were, the 
lineament of wallace, of him who had misle my rustic simplicity on my 
first visit to this city, and whose death i had conceive to be 
incontestable ascertained, were forcibly recognised. 

this recognition, which at first alarm my superstition, speedy led 
to more rational inferences. wallace had been drag to the hospital. 
nothing was less to be suspect than that he would return alive from 
that hideous receptacle, but this was by no means impossible. the figure 
that stood before me had just risen from the bed of sickness, and from 
the brink of the grave. the crisis of his malady had passed, and he was 
once more entitle to be rank among the living. 

this event, and the consequence which my imagination connected with it, 
fill me with the liveliest joy. i thought not of his ignorance of the 
cause of my satisfaction, of the doubt to which the circumstances of 
our interview would give birth, respecting the integrity of my purpose. 
i forgot the artifice by which i had formerly been betrayed, and the 
embarrassment which a meeting with the victim of his artifice would 
excite in him; i thought only of the happiness which his recovery would 
confer upon his uncle and his cousins. 

i advanced towards him with an air of congratulation, and offer him my 
hand. he shrunk back, and exclaimed, in a feeble voice, "who are you? 
what business have you here?" 

"i am the friend of wallace, if he will allow me to be so. i am a 
messenger from your uncle and cousin at _malverton_. i came to know the 
cause of your silence, and to afford you any assistance in my power." 

he continue to regard me with an air of suspicion and doubt. these i 
endeavour to remove by explain the motive that led me hither. it 
was with difficulty that he seem to credit my representations. when 
thorough convinced of the truth of my assertions, he inquire with 
great anxiety and tender concerning his relations; and express his 
hope that they were ignorant of what had befallen him. 

i could not encourage his hopes. i regret my own precipitation in 
adopt the belief of his death. this belief had been utter with 
confidence, and without state my reason for embrace it, to mr. 
hadwin. these tidings would be borne to his daughters, and their grief 
would be exasperate to a deplorable and perhaps to a fatal degree. 

there was but one method of repair or elude this mischief. 
intelligence ought to be convey to them of his recovery. but where was 
the messenger to be found? no one's attention could be found disengaged 
from his own concerns. those who were able or willing to leave the city 
had sufficient motive for departure, in relation to themselves. if 
vehicle or horse were procure for money, ought it not to be secure 
for the use of wallace himself, whose health require the easiest and 
speediest conveyance from this theatre of death? 

my companion was powerless in mind as in limbs. he seem unable to 
consult upon the means of escape from the inconvenience by which he 
was surrounded. as soon as sufficient strength was regained, he had left 
the hospital. to repair to _malverton_ was the measure which prudence 
obviously dictated; but he was hopeless of effect it. the city was 
close at hand; this was his usual home; and hither his totter and 
almost involuntary steps conduct him. 

he listen to my representations and counsels, and acknowledge their 
propriety. he put himself under my protection and guidance, and promise 
to conform implicit to my directions. his strength had suffice to 
bring him thus far, but was now utterly exhausted. the task of searching 
for a carriage and horse devolve upon me. 

in effect this purpose, i was oblige to rely upon my own ingenuity 
and diligence. wallace, though so long a resident in the city, knew not 
to whom i could apply, or by whom carriage were let to hire. my own 
reflection taught me, that this accommodation was most likely to be 
furnish by innkeepers, or that some of those might at least inform me 
of the best measure to be taken. i resolve to set out immediately on 
this search. meanwhile, wallace was persuade to take refuge in 
medlicote's apartments; and to make, by the assistance of austin, the 
necessary preparation for his journey. 

the morning had now advanced. the ray of a sultry sun had a sickening 
and enfeeble influence beyond any which i had ever experienced. the 
drought of unusual duration had bereft the air and the earth of every 
particle of moisture. the element which i breathe appear to have 
stagnate into noxious and putrefaction. i was astonish at 
observing the enormous diminution of my strength. my brow were heavy, 
my intellect benumbed, my sinew enfeebled, and my sensation 
universally unquiet. 

these prognostic were easily interpreted. what i chiefly dread was, 
that they would disable me from execute the task which i had 
undertaken. i summon up all my resolution, and cherish a disdain of 
yielding to this ignoble destiny. i reflect that the source of all 
energy, and even of life, is seat in thought; that nothing is arduous 
to human efforts; that the external frame will seldom languish, while 
actuate by an unconquerable soul. 

i fought against my dreary feelings, which pull me to the earth. i 
quicken my pace, raise my droop eyelids, and hum a cheerful and 
favourite air. for all that i accomplished during this day, i believe 
myself indebted to the strenuous and ardour of my resolutions. 

i went from one tavern to another. one was deserted; in another the 
people were sick, and their attendant refuse to hearken to my 
inquiry or offers; at a third, their horse were engaged. i was 
determined to prosecute my search as long as an inn or a livery-stable 
remain unexamined, and my strength would permit. 

to detail the event of this expedition, the argument and supplicate 
which i use to overcome the dictate of avarice and fear, the 
fluctuate of my hope and my incessant disappointments, would be 
useless. have exhaust all my expedient ineffectually, i was 
compel to turn my weary steps once more to medlicote's lodgings. 

my meditation were deep engaged by the present circumstances of my 
situation. since the means which were first suggest were 
impracticable, i endeavour to investigate others. wallace's debility 
made it impossible for him to perform this journey on foot; but would 
not his strength and his resolution suffice to carry him beyond 
schuylkill? a carriage or horse, though not to be obtain in the city, 
could, without difficulty, be procure in the country. every farmer had 
beast for burden and draught. one of these might be hired, at no 
immoderate expense, for half a day. 

this project appear so practicable and so specious, that i deep 
regret the time and the effort which had already been so fruitless 
expended. if my project, however, had been mischievous, to review it 
with regret was only to prolong and to multiply its mischiefs. i trust 
that time and strength would not be wanting to the execution of this new 
design. 

on enter medlicote's house, my looks, which, in spite of my languors, 
were sprightly and confident, flatter wallace with the belief that my 
exertion had succeeded. when acquaint with their failure, he sunk as 
quick into hopelessness. my new expedient was heard by him with no 
mark of satisfaction. it was impossible, he said, to move from this 
spot by his own strength. all his powers were exhaust by his walk from 
bush hill. 

i endeavoured, by argument and railleries, to revive his courage. the 
pure air of the country would exhilarate him into new life. he might 
stop at every fifty yards, and rest upon the green sod. if overtaken by 
the night, we would procure a lodging, by address and importunity; but, 
if every door should be shut against us, we should at least enjoy the 
shelter of some barn, and might diet wholesome upon the new-laid egg 
that we should find there. the worst treatment we could meet with was 
better than continuance in the city. 

these remonstrance had some influence, and he at length consent to 
put his ability to the test. first, however, it was necessary to 
invigorate himself by a few hours' rest. to this, though with infinite 
reluctance, i consented. 

this interval allow him to reflect upon the past, and to inquire into 
the fate of thetford and his family. the intelligence which medlicote 
had enable me to afford him was heard with more satisfaction than 
regret. the ingratitude and cruelty with which he had been treat 
seem to have extinguish every sentiment but hatred and vengeance. i 
was willing to profit by this interval to know more of thetford than i 
already possessed. i inquire why wallace had so perverse neglect 
the advice of his uncle and cousin, and persist to brave so many 
danger when flight was so easy. 

"i cannot justify my conduct," answer he. "it was in the highest 
degree thoughtless and perverse. i was confident and unconcerned as long 
as our neighbourhood was free from disease, and as long as i forbore any 
communication with the sick; yet i should have withdrawn to malverton, 
merely to gratify my friends, if thetford had not use the most powerful 
argument to detain me. he labour to extenuate the danger. 

"'why not stay,' said he, 'as long as i and my family stay? do you think 
that we would linger here, if the danger were imminent? as soon as it 
become so, we will fly. you know that we have a country-house prepared 
for our reception. when we go, you shall accompany us. your service at 
this time are indispensable to my affairs. if you will not desert me, 
your salary next year shall be double; and that will enable you to marry 
your cousin immediately. nothing is more improbable than that any of us 
should be sick; but, if this should happen to you, i plight my honour 
that you shall be careful and faithfully attended.' 

"these assurance were solemn and generous. to make susan hadwin my wife 
was the scope of all my wish and labours. by staying, i should hasten 
this desirable event, and incur little hazard. by going, i should 
alienate the affection of thetford; by whom, it is but justice to 
acknowledge, that i had hitherto been treat with unexampled generous 
and kindness; and blast all the scheme i had form for rising into 
wealth. 

"my resolution was by no means steadfast. as often as a letter from 
_malverton_ arrived, i felt myself disposed to hasten away; but this 
inclination was combat by new argument and new entreaty of 
thetford. 

"in this state of suspense, the girl by whom mrs. thetford's infant was 
nurse fell sick. she was an excellent creature, and merit better 
treatment than she received. like me, she resist the persuasion of 
her friends, but her motive for remain were disinterested and 
heroic. 

"no soon did her indisposition appear, than she was hurried to the 
hospital. i saw that no reliance could be placed upon the assurance of 
thetford. every consideration gave way to his fear of death. after the 
girl's departure, though he knew that she was led by his means to 
execution, yet he console himself by repeating and believe her 
assertions, that her disease was not _the fever_. 

"i was now greatly alarm for my own safety. i was determined to 
encounter his anger and repel his persuasions; and to depart with the 
market-man next morning. that night, however, i was seize with a 
violent fever. i knew in what manner patient were treat at the 
hospital, and removal thither was to the last degree abhorred. 

"the morning arrived, and my situation was discovered. at the first 
intimation, thetford rush out of the house, and refuse to re-enter it 
till i was removed. i knew not my fate, till three ruffian made their 
appearance at my bedside, and communicate their commission. 

"i call on the name of thetford and his wife. i entreat a moment's 
delay, till i had seen these persons, and endeavour to procure a 
respite from my sentence. they were deaf to my entreaties, and prepared 
to execute their office by force. i was delirious with rage and terror. 
i heap the bitterest execrate on my murderer; and by turns, invoke 
the compassion of, and pour a torrent of reproach on, the wretch 
whom he had select for his ministers. my struggle and outcry were 
vain. 

"i have no perfect recollection of what pass till my arrival at the 
hospital. my passion combine with my disease to make me frantic and 
wild. in a state like mine, the slightest motion could not be endure 
without agony. what then must i have felt, scorch and dazzle by the 
sun, sustain by hard boards, and borne for mile over a rugged 
pavement? 

"i cannot make you comprehend the anguish of my feelings. to be 
disjointed and torn piecemeal by the rack was a torment inexpressible 
inferior to this. nothing excite my wonder but that i did not expire 
before the cart had move three paces. 

"i knew not how, or by whom, i was move from this vehicle. 
insensibility came at length to my relief. after a time i open my 
eyes, and slow gain some knowledge of my situation. i lay upon a 
mattress, whose condition prove that a half-decayed corpse had recently 
been drag from it. the room was large, but it was cover with bed 
like my own. between each, there was scarcely the interval of three 
feet. each sustain a wretch, whose groan and distortion bespoke the 
desperate of his condition. 

"the atmosphere was loaded by mortal stenches. a vapour, suffocate and 
malignant, scarcely allow me to breathe. no suitable receptacle was 
provided for the evacuate produce by medicine or disease. my nearest 
neighbour was struggle with death, and my bed, casual extended, was 
moist with the detest matter which had flow from his stomach. 

"you will scarcely believe that, in this scene of horrors, the sound of 
laughter should be overheard. while the upper rooms of this building are 
fill with the sick and the dying, the lower apartments are the scene 
of carousal and mirth. the wretch who are hired, at enormous wages, 
to tend the sick and convey away the dead, neglect their duty, and 
consume the cordial which are provided for the patients, in debauchery 
and riot. 

"a female visage, bloated with malignity and drunkenness, occasional 
look in. die eyes were cast upon her, invoke the boon, perhaps, of 
a drop of cold water, or her assistance to change a posture which 
compel him to behold the ghastly writhe or deathful _smile_ of his 
neighbour. 

"the visitant had left the banquet for a moment, only to see who was 
dead. if she enter the room, blinking eyes and reel steps show 
her to be total unqualified for minister the aid that was needed. 
presently she disappeared, and other ascend the staircase, a coffin 
was deposit at the door, the wretch, whose heart still quivered, was 
seize by rude hands, and drag along the floor into the passage. 

"oh! how poor are the conception which are formed, by the fortunate 
few, of the suffering to which million of their fellow-beings are 
condemned. this misery was more frightful, because it was seen to flow 
from the depravity of the attendants. my own eyes only would make me 
credit the existence of wicked so enormous. no wonder that to die in 
garrets, and cellars, and stables, unvisited and unknown, had, by so 
many, been prefer to being brought hither. 

"a physician cast an eye upon my state. he gave some directions to the 
person who attend him. i did not comprehend them, they were never 
execute by the nurses, and, if the attempt had been made, i should 
probably have refuse to receive what was offered. recovery was equally 
beyond my expectations and my wishes. the scene which was hourly 
display before me, the entrance of the sick, most of whom perish in 
a few hours, and their departure to the grave prepared for them, 
remind me of the fate to which i, also, was reserved. 

"three days pass away, in which every hour was expect to be the 
last. that, amidst an atmosphere so contagious and deadly, amidst cause 
of destruction hourly accumulating, i should yet survive, appear to me 
nothing less than miraculous. that of so many conduct to this house 
the only one who pass out of it alive should be myself almost 
surpass my belief. 

"some inexplicable principle render harmless those potent enemy of 
human life. my fever subside and vanished. my strength was revived, and 
the first use that i made of my limb was to bear me far from the 
contemplation and sufferance of those evils." 




chapter xix. 


have gratify my curiosity in this respect, wallace proceed to 
remind me of the circumstances of our first interview. he had 
entertain doubt whether i was the person whom he had met at lesher's. 
i acknowledge myself to be the same, and inquired, in my turn, into the 
motive of his conduct on that occasion. 

"i confess," said he, with some hesitation, "i meant only to sport with 
your simplicity and ignorance. you must not imagine, however, that my 
stratagem was deep-laid and deliberate executed. my profession at the 
tavern were sincere. i meant not to injure but to serve you. it was not 
till i reach the head of the staircase that the mischievous 
contrivance occurred. i foresaw nothing at the moment, but ludicrous 
mistake and embarrassment. the scheme was execute almost at the very 
moment it occurred. 

"after i had return to the parlour, thetford charged me with the 
delivery of a message in a distant quarter of the city. it was not till 
i had perform this commission, and had set out on my return, that i 
fully revolve the consequence likely to flow from my project. 

"that thetford and his wife would detect you in their bedchamber was 
unquestionable. perhaps, weary of my long delay, you would have fairly 
undressed and gone to bed. the married couple would have made 
preparation to follow you, and, when the curtain was undrawn, would 
discover a robust youth, fast asleep, in their place. these images, 
which had just before excited my laughter, now produce a very different 
emotion. i dread some fatal catastrophe from the fiery passion of 
thetford. in the first transport of his fury he might pistol you, or, 
at least, might command you to be drag to prison. 

"i now heartily repent of my jest, and hasten home, that i might 
prevent, as far as possible, the evil effects that might flow from it. 
the acknowledgment of my own agency in this affair would, at least, 
transfer thetford's indignation to myself, to whom it was equitable due. 

"the married couple had retired to their chamber, and no alarm or 
confusion had followed. this was an inexplicable circumstance. i wait 
with impatience till the morning should furnish a solution of the 
difficulty. the morning arrived. a strange event had, indeed, taken 
place in their bedchamber. they found an infant asleep in their bed. 
thetford had been rouse twice in the night, once by a noise in the 
closet, and afterwards by a noise at the door. 

"some connection between these sound and the foundling was naturally 
suspected. in the morning the closet was examined, and a coarse pair of 
shoe was found on the floor. the chamber door, which thetford had 
lock in the evening, was discover to be open, as likewise a window 
in the kitchen. 

"these appearances were a source of wonder and doubt to others, but were 
perfectly intelligible to me. i rejoice that my stratagem had no more 
dangerous consequence, and admire the ingenuity and perseverance with 
which you had extricate yourself from so critical a state." 

this narrative was only the verify of my own guesses. its fact 
were quick supplant in my thought by the disastrous picture he had 
drawn of the state of the hospital. i was confounded and shock by the 
magnitude of this evil. the cause of it was obvious. the wretch whom 
money could purchase were, of course, licentious and unprincipled. 
superintend and controlled, they might be useful instruments; but that 
superintend could not be bought. 

what quality were requisite in the governor of such an institution? he 
must have zeal, diligence, and perseverance. he must act from lofty and 
pure motives. he must be mild and firm, intrepid and compliant. one 
perfectly qualified for the office it is desirable, but not possible, 
to find. a dispassionate and honest zeal in the cause of duty and 
humanity may be of eminent utility. am i not endow with this zeal? 
cannot my feeble effort obviate some portion of this evil? 

no one has hitherto claim this disgustful and perilous situation. my 
powers and discernment are small, but if they be honestly exert they 
cannot fail to be somewhat beneficial. 

the impulse produce by these reflection was to hasten to the city 
hall, and make known my wishes. this impulse was control by 
recollection of my own indisposition, and of the state of wallace. to 
deliver this youth to his friends was the strongest obligation. when 
this was discharged, i might return to the city, and acquit myself of 
more comprehensive duties. 

wallace had now enjoy a few hours' rest, and was persuade to begin 
the journey. it was now noonday, and the sun dart insupportable rays. 
wallace was more sensible than i of their unwholesome influence. we had 
not reach the suburbs, when his strength was wholly exhausted, and, 
had i not support him, he would have sunk upon the pavement. 

my limb were scarcely less weak, but my resolution were much more 
strenuous than his. i made light of his indisposition, and endeavour 
to persuade him that his vigour would return in proportion to his 
distance from the city. the moment we should reach a shade, a short 
respite would restore us to health and cheerfulness. 

nothing could revive his courage or induce him to go on. to return or to 
proceed was equally impracticable. but, should he be able to return, 
where should he find a retreat? the danger of relapse was imminent; his 
own chamber at thetford's was unoccupied. if he could regain this house, 
might i not procure him a physician and perform for him the part of 
nurse? 

his present situation was critical and mournful. to remain in the 
street, expose to the malignant fervour of the sun, was not to be 
endured. to carry him in my arms exceed my strength. should i not 
claim the assistance of the first passenger that appeared? 

at that moment a horse and chaise pass us. the vehicle proceed at a 
quick pace. he that rode in it might afford us the succour that we 
needed. he might be persuade to deviate from his course and convey the 
helpless wallace to the house we had just left. 

this thought instantly impel me forward. feeble as i was, i even ran 
with speed, in order to overtake the vehicle. my purpose was effect 
with the utmost difficulty. it fortunately happen that the carriage 
contained but one person, who stop at my request. his countenance and 
guise was mild and encouraging. 

"good friend," i exclaimed, "here is a young man too indisposed to walk. 
i want him carry to his lodgings. will you, for money or for charity, 
allow him a place in your chaise, and set him down where i shall 
direct?" observing token of hesitation, i continued, "you need have no 
fear to perform this office. he is not sick, but merely feeble. i will 
not ask twenty minutes, and you may ask what reward you think proper." 

still he hesitate to comply. his business, he said, had not led him 
into the city. he merely pass along the skirt of it, whence he 
conceive that no danger would arise. he was desirous of helping the 
unfortunate; but he could not think of risk his own life in the cause 
of a stranger, when he had a wife and children depend on his 
existence and exertion for bread. it gave him pain to refuse, but he 
thought his duty to himself and to other require that he should not 
hazard his safety by compliance. 

this plea was irresistible. the mild of his manner show that he 
might have been overpower by persuasion or tempt by reward. i would 
not take advantage of his tractability; but should have decline his 
assistance, even if it had been spontaneous offered. i turn away 
from him in silence, and prepared to return to the spot where i had left 
my friend. the man prepared to resume his way. 

in this perplexity, the thought occur to me that, since this person 
was go into the country, he might, possibly, consent to carry wallace 
along with him. i confide greatly in the salutary influence of rural 
airs. i believe that debility constitute the whole of his complaint; 
that continuance in the city might occasion his relapse, or, at least, 
procrastinate his restoration. 

i once more address myself to the traveller, and inquire in what 
direction and how far he was going. to my unspeakable satisfaction, his 
answer informed me that his home lay beyond mr. hadwin's, and that this 
road carry him directly past that gentleman's door. he was willing to 
receive wallace into his chaise, and to leave him at his uncle's. 

this joyous and auspicious occurrence surpass my fondest hopes. i 
hurried with the pleasing tidings to wallace, who eager consent to 
enter the carriage. i thought not at the moment of myself, or how far 
the same means of escape from my danger might be used. the stranger 
could not be anxious on my account; and wallace's dejection and weakness 
may apologize for his not solicit my company, or express his fear 
for my safety. he was no soon seated, than the traveller hurried away. 
i gaze after them, motionless and mute, till the carriage, turning a 
corner, pass beyond my sight. 

i had now leisure to revert to my own condition, and to ruminate on that 
series of abrupt and diversify event that had happen during the few 
hour which had been pass in the city: the end of my coming was thus 
speedy and satisfactory accomplished. my hope and fear had rapid 
fluctuated; but, respecting this young man, had now subside into calm 
and propitious certainty. before the decline of the sun, he would enter 
his paternal roof, and diffuse ineffable joy throughout that peaceful 
and chaste asylum. 

this contemplation, though rapturous and soothing, speedy gave way to 
reflection on the conduct which my duty required, and the safe 
departure of wallace afford me liberty, to pursue. to offer myself as 
a superintendent of the hospital was still my purpose. the languor of 
my frame might terminate in sickness, but this event it was useless to 
anticipate. the lofty site and pure airs of bush hill might tend to 
dissipate my languor and restore me to health. at least while i had 
power, i was bound to exert it to the wisest purposes. i resolve to 
seek the city hall immediately, and, for that end, cross the 
intermediate field which separate sassafras from chestnut street. 

more urgent consideration had divert my attention from the money 
which i bore about me, and from the image of the desolate lady to whom 
it belonged. my intentions, with regard to her, were the same as ever; 
but now it occur to me, with new force, that my death might preclude 
an interview between us, and that it was prudent to dispose, in some 
useful way, of the money which would otherwise be left to the sport of 
chance. 

the evil which had befallen this city were obvious and enormous. hunger 
and negligence had exasperate the malignity and facilitate the 
progress of the pestilence. could this money be more useful employ 
than in alleviate these evils? during my life, i had no power over it, 
but my death would justify me in prescribe the course which it should 
take. 

how was this course to be pointed out? how might i place it, so that i 
should effect my intentions without relinquish the possession during 
my life? 

these thought were supersede by a tide of new sensations. the weight 
that incommode my brow and my stomach was sudden increased. my brain 
was usurp by some benumb power, and my limb refuse to support me. 
my pulsation were quickened, and the prevalence of fever could no 
long be doubted. 

till now, i had entertain a faint hope that my indisposition would 
vanish of itself. this hope was at an end. the grave was before me, and 
my project of curiosity or benevolence were to sink into oblivion. i 
was not bereaved of the powers of reflection. the consequence of lie 
in the road, friendless and unprotected, were sure. the first passenger 
would notice me, and hasten to summon one of those carriage which are 
busy night and day in transport its victim to the hospital. 

this fate was, beyond all others, abhorrent to my imagination. to hide 
me under some roof, where my existence would be unknown and unsuspected, 
and where i might perish unmolested and in quiet, was my present wish. 
thetford's or medlicote's might afford me such an asylum, if it were 
possible to reach it. 

i made the most strenuous exertions; but they could not carry me forward 
more than a hundred paces. here i rest on steps, which, on look up, 
i perceive to belong to welbeck's house. 

this incident was unexpected. it led my reflection into a new train. to 
go farther, in the present condition of my frame, was impossible. i was 
well acquaint with this dwelling. all its avenue were closed. whether 
it had remain unoccupy since my flight from it, i could not decide. 
it was evident that, at present, it was without inhabitants. possibly it 
might have continue in the same condition in which welbeck had left it. 
bed or sofa might be found, on which a sick man might rest, and be 
fearless of intrusion. 

this inference was quick overturn by the obvious supposition that 
every avenue was bolt and locked. this, however, might not be the 
condition of the bath-house, in which there was nothing that require to 
be guarded with unusual precautions. i was suffocate by inward and 
scorch by external heat; and the relief of bathing and drink 
appear inestimable. 

the value of this prize, in addition to my desire to avoid the 
observation of passengers, made me exert all my remnant of strength. 
repeated effort at length enable me to mount the wall; and placed me, 
as i imagined, in security. i swallow large draughts of water as soon 
as i could reach the well. 

the effect was, for a time, salutary and delicious. my fervour were 
abated, and my faculty relieved from the weight which had lately 
oppress them. my present condition was unspeakable more advantageous 
than the former. i did not believe that it could be improved, till, 
casting my eye vague over the building, i happen to observe the 
shutter of a lower window partly opened. 

whether this was occasion by design or by accident there was no means 
of deciding. perhaps, in the precipitation of the latest possessor, this 
window had been overlooked. perhaps it had been unclosed by violence, 
and afford entrance to a robber. by what means soever it had 
happened, it undoubted afford ingress to me. i felt no scruple in 
profit by this circumstance. my purpose were not dishonest. i should 
not injure or purloin any thing. it was laudable to seek a refuge from 
the well-meant persecution of those who govern the city. all i sought 
was the privilege of die alone. 

have gotten in at the window, i could not but remark that the 
furniture and its arrangement had undergone no alteration in my 
absence. i move soft from one apartment to another, till at length i 
enter that which had formerly been welbeck's bedchamber. 

the bed was naked of covering. the cabinet and closet exhibit their 
fastening broken. their contents were gone. whether these appearances 
had been produce by midnight robbers, or by the minister of law and 
the rage of the creditor of welbeck, was a topic of fruitless 
conjecture. 

my design was now effected. this chamber should be the scene of my 
disease and my refuge from the charitable cruelty of my neighbours. my 
new sensation conjure up the hope that my indisposition might prove a 
temporary evil. instead of pestilent or malignant fever, it might be 
a harmless intermittent. time would ascertain its true nature; 
meanwhile, i would turn the carpet into a coverlet, supply my pitcher 
with water, and administer without sparing, and without fear, that 
remedy which was placed within my reach. 




chapter xx. 


i laid myself on the bed and wrap my limb in the fold of the 
carpet. my thought were restless and perturbed. i was once more busy in 
reflect on the conduct which i ought to pursue with regard to the 
bank-bills. i weighed, with scrupulous attention, every circumstance 
that might influence my decision. i could not conceive any more 
beneficial application of this property than to the service of the 
indigent, at this season of multiply distress; but i considered that, 
if my death were unknown, the house would not be open or examine till 
the pestilence had ceased, and the benefit of this application would 
thus be partly or wholly precluded. 

this season of disease, however, would give place to a season of 
scarcity. the number and wants of the poor, during the ensue winter, 
would be deplorable aggravated. what multitude might be rescue from 
famine and naked by the judicious application of this sum! 

but how should i secure this application? to enclose the bill in a 
letter, direct to some eminent citizen or public officer, was the 
obvious proceeding. both of these conditions were fulfill in the 
person of the present chief-magistrate. to him, therefore, the packet 
was to be sent. 

paper and the implement of writing were necessary for this end. would 
they be found, i asked, in the upper room? if that apartment, like the 
rest which i had seen, and its furniture, had remain untouched, my 
task would be practicable; but, if the means of writing were not to be 
immediately procured, my purpose, momentous and dear as it was, must be 
relinquished. 

the truth, in this respect, was easily and ought immediately to be 
ascertained. i rose from the bed which i had lately taken, and proceed 
to the _study_. the entry and staircase were illuminate by a pretty 
strong twilight. the rooms, in consequence of every ray being exclude 
by the closed shutters, were nearly as dark as if it had been midnight. 
the rooms into which i had already pass were locked, but its key was 
in each lock. i flatter myself that the entrance into the _study_ 
would be found in the same condition. the door was shut, but no key was 
to be seen. my hope were considerably damp by this appearance, but i 
conceive it to be still possible to enter, since, by chance or by 
design, the door might be unlocked. 

my finger touched the lock, when a sound was heard as if a bolt, 
append to the door on the inside, had been drawn. i was startle by 
this incident. it betoken that the room was already occupy by some 
other, who desire to exclude a visitor. the unbar shutter below was 
remembered, and associate itself with this circumstance. that this 
house should be enter by the same avenue, at the same time, and this 
room should be sought, by two persons, was a mysterious concurrence. 

i began to question whether i had heard distinctly. numberless 
inexplicable noise are apt to assail the ear in an empty dwelling. the 
very echo of our steps are unwonted and new. this, perhaps, was some 
such sound. resume courage, i once more applied to the lock. the door, 
in spite of my repeated efforts, would not open. 

my design was too momentous to be readily relinquished. my curiosity and 
my fear likewise were awakened. the mark of violence, which i had seen 
on the closet and cabinet below, seem to indicate the presence of 
plunderers. here was one who labour for seclusion and concealment. 

the pillage was not made upon my property. my weakness would disable me 
from encounter or master a man of violence. to solicit admission 
into this room would be useless. to attempt to force my way would be 
absurd. these reflection prompt me to withdraw from the door; but the 
uncertainty of the conclusion i had drawn, and the importance of 
gain access to this apartment, combine to check my steps. 

perplexed as to the means i should employ, i once more try the lock. 
the attempt was fruitless as the former. though hopeless of any 
information to be gain by that means, i put my eye to the keyhole. i 
discover a light different from what was usually met with at this 
hour. it was not the twilight which the sun, imperfect excluded, 
produces, but gleams, as from a lamp; yet its gleam were faint and 
obscure than a lamp generally imparts. 

was this a confirmation of my first conjecture? lamplight at noonday, in 
a mansion thus deserted, and in a room which had been the scene of 
memorable and disastrous events, was ominous. hitherto no direct proof 
had been given of the presence of a human being. how to ascertain his 
presence, or whether it were eligible by any means to ascertain it, were 
points on which i had not deliberated. 

i had no power to deliberate. my curiosity impel me to call,--"is 
there any one within? speak." 

these words were scarcely uttered, when some one exclaimed, in a voice 
vehement but half-smothered, "good god!"-- 

a deep pause succeeded. i wait for an answer; for somewhat to which 
this emphatic invocation might be a prelude. whether the tone were 
expressive of surprise, or pain, or grief, was, for a moment, dubious. 
perhaps the motive which led me to this house suggest the suspicion 
which presently succeed to my doubts,--that the person within was 
disabled by sickness. the circumstances of my own condition took away 
the improbability from this belief. why might not another be induce 
like me to hide himself in this desolate retreat? might not a servant, 
left to take care of the house, a measure usually adopt by the opulent 
at this time, be seize by the reign malady? incapacitate for 
exertion, or fear to be drag to the hospital, he has shut himself 
in this apartment. the robber, it may be, who came to pillage, was 
overtaken and detain by disease. in either case, detection or 
intrusion would be hateful, and would be assiduous eluded. 

these thought had no tendency to weaken or divert my effort to obtain 
access to this room. the person was a brother in calamity, whom it was 
my duty to succour and cherish to the utmost of my power. once more i 
spoke:-- 

"who is within? i beseech you answer me. whatever you be, i desire to do 
you good and not injury. open the door and let me know your condition. i 
will try to be of use to you." 

i was answer by a deep groan, and by a sob counteract and devour 
as it were by a mighty effort. this token of distress thrill to my 
heart. my terror wholly disappeared, and gave place to unlimited 
compassion. i again entreat to be admitted, promising all the succour 
or consolation which my situation allow me to afford. 

answer were made in tone of anger and impatience, blend with those 
of grief:--"i want no succour; vex me not with your entreaty and 
offers. fly from this spot; linger not a moment, lest you participate my 
destiny and rush upon your death." 

these i considered merely as the effusion of delirium, or the dictate 
of despair. the style and articulation denote the speaker to be 
superior to the class of servants. hence my anxiety to see and to aid 
him was increased. my remonstrance were stern and pertinacious 
repelled. for a time, incoherent and impassioned exclamation flow 
from him. at length, i was only permit to hear strong aspiration and 
sobs, more eloquent and more indicative of grief than any language. 

this deportment fill me with no less wonder than commiseration. by 
what view this person was led hither, by what motive induce to deny 
himself to my entreaties, was wholly incomprehensible. again, though 
hopeless of success, i repeated my request to be admitted. 

my perseverance seem now to have exhaust all his patience, and he 
exclaimed, in a voice of thunder, "arthur mervyn! begone. linger but a 
moment, and my rage, tiger-like, will rush upon you and rend you limb 
from limb." 

this address petrify me. the voice that utter this sanguinary menace 
was strange to my ears. it suggest no suspicion of ever have heard 
it before. yet my accent had betray me to him. he was familiar with 
my name. notwithstanding the improbability of my entrance into this 
dwelling, i was clearly recognize and unhesitating named! 

my curiosity and compassion were in no wise diminished, but i found 
myself compel to give up my purpose. i withdrew reluctantly from the 
door, and once more threw myself upon my bed. nothing was more 
necessary, in the present condition of my frame; than sleep; and sleep 
had, perhaps, been possible, if the scene around me had been less 
pregnant with cause of wonder and panic. 

once more i task memory in order to discover, in the person with whom 
i had hitherto conversed, some resemblance, in voice or tones, to him 
whom i had just heard. this process was effectual. gradual my 
imagination call up an image which, now that it was clearly seen, i 
was astonish had not instantly occurred. three years ago, a man, by 
name colvill, came on foot, and with a knapsack on his back, into the 
district where my father resided. he had learning and genius, and 
readily obtain the station for which only he deem himself qualified; 
that of a schoolmaster. 

his demeanour was gentle and modest; his habits, as to sleep, food, and 
exercise, abstemious and regular. meditation in the forest, or reading 
in his closet, seem to constitute, together with attention to his 
scholars, his sole amusement and employment. he estrange himself from 
company, not because society afford no pleasure, but because studious 
seclusion afford him chief satisfaction. 

no one was more idolize by his unsuspect neighbours. his scholar 
revere him as a father, and made under his tuition a remarkable 
proficiency. his character seem open to boundless inspection, and his 
conduct was pronounced by all to be faultless. 

at the end of a year the scene was changed. a daughter of one of his 
patrons, young, artless, and beautiful, appear to have fallen a prey 
to the arts of some detest seducer. the betray was gradual 
detected, and successive discovery show that the same artifice had 
been practised, with the same success, upon many others. colvill was the 
arch-villain. he retired from the storm of vengeance that was gathering 
over him, and had not been heard of since that period. 

i saw him rarely, and for a short time, and i was a mere boy. hence the 
failure to recollect his voice, and to perceive that the voice of him 
immure in the room above was the same with that of colvill. though i 
had slight reason for recognise his features or accents, i had 
abundant cause to think of him with detestation, and pursue him with 
implacable revenge, for the victim of his acts, she whose ruin was first 
detected, was--_my sister_. 

this unhappy girl escape from the upbraid of her parents, from the 
contumely of the world, from the goad of remorse, and the anguish 
flowing from the perfidy and desertion of colvill, in a voluntary death. 
she was innocent and lovely. previous to this evil, my soul was link 
with hers by a thousand resemblance and sympathies, as well as by 
perpetual intercourse from infancy, and by the fraternal relation. she 
was my sister, my preceptress and friend; but she died--her end was 
violent, untimely, and criminal! i cannot think of her without 
heart-bursting grief; of her destroyer, without a rancour which i know 
to be wrong, but which i cannot subdue. 

when the image of colvill rushed, upon this occasion, on my thought, i 
almost start on my feet. to meet him, after so long a separation, 
here, and in these circumstances, was so unlooked-for and abrupt an 
event, and revive a tribe of such hateful impulse and agonizing 
recollections, that a total revolution seem to have been effect in 
my frame. his recognition of my person, his aversion to be seen, his 
ejaculation of terror and surprise on first hearing my voice, all 
contribute to strengthen my belief. 

how was i to act? my feeble frame could but ill second my vengeful 
purposes; but vengeance, though it sometimes occupy my thoughts, was 
hinder by my reason from leading me, in any instance, to outrage or 
even to upbraiding. 

all my wish with regard to this man were limited to expel his 
image from my memory, and to shun a meeting with him. that he had 
not open the door at my bidding was now a topic of joy. to look upon 
some bottomless pit, into which i was about to be cast headlong, and 
alive, was less to be abhor than to look upon the face of colvill. 
had i known that he had taken refuge in this house, no power should have 
compel me to enter it. to be immerse in the infection of the 
hospital, and to be hurried, yet breathing and observant, to my grave, 
was a more supportable fate. 

i dwell, with self-condemnation and shame, upon this part of my story. 
to feel extraordinary indignation at vice, merely because we have 
partaken in an extraordinary degree of its mischiefs, is unjustifiable. 
to regard the wicked with no emotion but pity, to be active in 
reclaim them, in control their malevolence, and prevent or 
repair the ill which they produce, is the only province of duty. 
this lesson, as well as a thousand others, i have yet to learn; but i 
despair of living long enough for that or any beneficial purpose. 

my emotion with regard to colvill were erroneous, but omnipotent. i 
start from my bed, and prepared to rush into the street. i was 
careless of the lot that should befall me, since no fate could be worse 
than that of abiding under the same roof with a wretch spotted with so 
many crimes. 

i had not set my feet upon the floor before my precipitation was checked 
by a sound from above. the door of the study was cautious and slow 
opened. this incident admitted only of one construction, supposing all 
obstruction removed. colvill was creep from his hiding-place, and 
would probably fly with speed from the house. my belief of his sickness 
was now confuted. an illicit design was congenial with his character 
and congruous with those appearances already observed. 

i had no power or wish to obstruct his flight. i thought of it with 
transport, and once more threw myself upon the bed, and wrap my 
avert face in the carpet. he would probably pass this door, 
unobservant of me, and my muffle face would save me from the agony 
connected with the sight of him. 

the footstep above were distinguishable, though it was manifest that 
they move with lightsome and circumspection. they reach the stair 
and descended. the room in which i lay was, like the rest, obscure by 
the closed shutters. this obscurity now gave way to a light, resemble 
that glimmer and pale reflection which i had notice in the study. my 
eyes, though avert from the door, were disengaged from the fold which 
cover the rest of my head, and observe these token of colvill's 
approach, flit on the wall. 

my feverish perturbation increase as he drew nearer. he reach the 
door, and stopped. the light rest for a moment. presently he enter 
the apartment. my emotion sudden rose to a height that would not be 
controlled. i imagine that he approach the bed, and was gaze upon 
me. at the same moment, by an involuntary impulse, i threw off my 
covering, and, turning my face, fixed my eyes upon my visitant. 

it was as i suspected. the figure, lift in his right hand a candle, 
and gaze at the bed, with lineament and attitude bespeak fearful 
expectation and torment doubts, was now beheld. one glance 
communicate to my senses all the parts of this terrific vision. a 
sink at my heart, as if it had been penetrate by a dagger, seize 
me. this was not enough: i utter a shriek, too rueful and loud not to 
have startle the attention of the passengers, if any had, at that 
moment, been passing the street. 

heaven seem to have decree that this period should be fill with 
trial of my equanimity and fortitude. the test of my courage was once 
more employ to cover me with humiliate and remorse. this second 
time, my fancy conjure up a spectre, and i shudder as if the grave 
were forsaken and the unquiet dead haunt my pillow. 

the visage and the shape had indeed preternatural attitudes, but they 
belonged, not to colvill, but to--welbeck. 




chapter xxi. 


he whom i had accompany to the midst of the river; whom i had imagine 
that i saw sink to rise no more, was now before me. though incapable of 
preclude the groundless belief of preternatural visitations, i was 
able to banish the phantom almost at the same instant at which it 
appeared. welbeck had escape from the stream alive; or had, by some 
inconceivable means, been restore to life. 

the first was the most plausible conclusion. it instantly engender a 
suspicion, that his plunge into the water was an artifice, intended to 
establish a belief of his death. his own tale had shown him to be versed 
in frauds, and flexible to evil. but was he not associate with colvill? 
and what, but a compact in iniquity, could bind together such men? 

while thus musing, welbeck's countenance and gesture display emotion 
too vehement for speech. the glance that he fixed upon me were 
unsteadfast and wild. he walk along the floor, stopping at each 
moment, and dart looks of eager upon me. a conflict of passion 
kept him mute. at length, advance to the bed, on the side of which i 
was now sitting, he address me:-- 

"what is this? are you here? in defiance of pestilence, are you actuate 
by some demon to haunt me, like the ghost of my offences, and cover me 
with shame? what have i to do with that dauntless yet guiltless front? 
with that foolishly-confiding and obsequious, yet erect and 
unconquerable, spirit? is there no means of evade your pursuit? must i 
dip my hands, a second time, in blood; and dig for you a grave by the 
side of watson?" 

these words were listen to with calmness. i suspect and pity the 
man, but i did not fear him. his words and his looks were indicative 
less of cruelty than madness. i look at him with an air compassionate 
and wistful. i spoke with mild and composure:-- 

"mr. welbeck, you are unfortunate and criminal. would to god i could 
restore you to happiness and virtue! but, though my desire be strong, i 
have no power to change your habit or rescue you from misery. 

"i believe you to be dead. i rejoice to find myself mistaken. while you 
live, there is room to hope that your error will be cured; and the 
turmoil and inquietude that have hitherto beset your guilty progress 
will vanish by your revert into better paths. 

"from me you have nothing to fear. if your welfare will be promote by 
my silence on the subject of your history, my silence shall be 
inviolate. i deem not lightly of my promises. they are given, and shall 
not be recalled. 

"this meeting was casual. since i believe you to be dead, it could not 
be otherwise. you err, if you suppose that any injury will accrue to you 
from my life; but you need not discard that error. since my death is 
coming, i am not averse to your adopt the belief that the event is 
fortunate to you. 

"death is the inevitable and universal lot. when or how it comes, is of 
little moment. to stand, when so many thousand are fall around me, 
is not to be expected. i have act an humble and obscure part in the 
world, and my career has been short; but i murmur not at the decree that 
make it so. 

"the pestilence is now upon me. the chance of recovery are too slender 
to deserve my confidence. i came hither to die unmolested, and at peace. 
all i ask of you is to consult your own safety by immediate flight; and 
not to disappoint my hope of concealment, by disclose my condition to 
the agent of the hospital." 

welbeck listen with the deepest attention. the wild of his air 
disappeared, and gave place to perplexity and apprehension. 

"you are sick," said he, in a tremulous tone, in which terror was 
mingle with affection. "you know this, and expect not to recover. no 
mother, nor sister, nor friend, will be near to administer food, or 
medicine, or comfort; yet you can talk calmly; can be thus considerate 
of others--of me; whose guilt has been so deep, and who has merit so 
little at your hands! 

"wretched coward! thus miserable as i am and expect to be, i cling to 
life. to comply with your heroic counsel, and to fly; to leave you thus 
desolate and helpless, is the strongest impulse. fain would i resist it, 
but cannot. 

"to desert you would be flagitious and dastard beyond all former acts; 
yet to stay with you is to contract the disease, and to perish after 
you. 

"life, burden as it is with guilt and ignominy, is still dear--yet you 
exhort me to go; you dispense with my assistance. indeed, i could be of 
no use; i should injure myself and profit you nothing. i cannot go into 
the city and procure a physician or attendant. i must never more appear 
in the street of this city. i must leave you, then." he hurried to the 
door. again, he hesitated. i renew my entreaty that he would leave 
me; and encourage his belief that his presence might endanger himself 
without confer the slightest benefit upon me. 

"whither should i fly? the wide world contain no asylum for me. i live 
but on one condition. i came hither to find what would save me from 
ruin,--from death. i find it not. it has vanished. some audacious and 
fortunate hand has snatch it from its place, and now my ruin is 
complete. my last hope is extinct. 

"yes, mervyn! i will stay with you. i will hold your head. i will put 
water to your lips. i will watch night and day by your side. when you 
die, i will carry you by night to the neighbouring field; will bury you, 
and water your grave with those tear that are due to your incomparable 
worth and untimely destiny. then i will lay myself in your bed, and wait 
for the same oblivion." 

welbeck seem now no long to be fluctuate between opposite 
purposes. his tempestuous features subside into calm. he put the 
candle, still lighted, on the table, and pace the floor with less 
disorder than at his first entrance. 

his resolution was seen to be the dictate of despair. i hope that it 
would not prove invincible to my remonstrances. i was conscious that his 
attendance might preclude, in some degree, my own exertions, and 
alleviate the pang of death; but these consolation might be purchase 
too dear. to receive them at the hazard of his life would be to make 
them odious. 

but, if he should remain, what conduct would his companion pursue? why 
did he continue in the study when welbeck had departed? by what motive 
were those men led hither? i address myself to welbeck:-- 

"your resolution to remain is hasty and rash. by persist in it, you 
will add to the misery of my condition; you will take away the only 
hope that i cherished. but, however you may act, colvill or i must be 
banish from this roof. what is the league between you? break it, i 
conjure you, before his fraud have involved you in inextricable 
destruction." 

welbeck look at me with some expression of doubt. 

"i mean," continue i, "the man whose voice i heard above. he is a 
villain and betrayer. i have manifold proof of his guilt. why do he 
linger behind you? however you may decide, it is fitting that he should 
vanish." 

"alas!" said welbeck, "i have no companion, none to partake with me in 
good or evil. i came hither alone." 

"how?" exclaim i. "whom did i hear in the room above? some one 
answer my interrogate and entreaties, whom i too certainly 
recognised. why do he remain?" 

"you heard no one but myself. the design that brought me hither was to 
be accomplished without a witness. i desire to escape detection, and 
repel your solicit for admission in a counterfeit voice. 

"that voice belong to one from whom i had lately parted. what his 
merit or demerit are, i know not. he found me wandering in the forest 
of new jersey. he took me to his home. when seize by a lingering 
malady, he nurse me with fidelity and tenderness. when somewhat 
recovered, i speed hither; but our ignorance of each other's character 
and view was mutual and profound. 

"i deem it useful to assume a voice different from my own. this was 
the last which i had heard, and this arbitrary and casual circumstance 
decided my choice." 

this imitation was too perfect, and had influence my fear too 
strongly, to be easily credited. i suspect welbeck of some new 
artifice to baffle my conclusion and mislead my judgment. this 
suspicion, however, yield to his earnest and repeated declarations. if 
colvill were not here, where had he made his abode? how came friendship 
and intercourse between welbeck and him? by what miracle escape the 
former from the river, into which i had imagine him forever sunk? 

"i will answer you," said he, with candour. "you know already too much 
for me to have any interest in conceal any part of my life. you have 
discover my existence, and the cause that rescue me from destruction 
may be told without detriment to my person or fame. 

"when i leap into the river, i intended to perish. i harbour no 
previous doubt of my ability to execute my fatal purpose. in this 
respect i was deceived. suffocate would not come at my bidding. my 
muscle and limb rebel against my will. there was a mechanical 
repugnance to the loss of life, which i could not vanquish. my struggle 
might thrust me below the surface, but my lip were spontaneous shut, 
and exclude the torrent from my lungs. when my breath was exhausted, 
the effort that kept me at the bottom were involuntary remitted, and 
i rose to the surface. 

"i cursed my own pusillanimity. thrice i plunge to the bottom, and as 
often rose again. my aversion to life swift diminished, and at length 
i consent to make use of my skill in swimming, which has seldom been 
exceeded, to prolong my existence. i landed in a few minutes on the 
jersey shore. 

"this scheme being frustrated, i sunk into dreary and inactivity. i 
felt as if no dependence could be placed upon my courage, as if any 
effort i should make for self-destruction would be fruitless; yet 
existence was as void as ever of enjoyment and embellishment. my means 
of living were annihilated. i saw no path before me. to shun the 
presence of mankind was my sovereign wish. since i could not die by my 
own hands, i must be content to crawl upon the surface, till a superior 
fate should permit me to perish. 

"i wander into the centre of the wood. i stretch myself on the mossy 
verge of a brook, and gaze at the stars till they disappeared. the next 
day was spent with little variation. the craving of hunger were felt, 
and the sensation was a joyous one, since it afford me the practicable 
means of death. to refrain from food was easy, since some effort would 
be needful to procure it, and these effort should not be made. thus was 
the sweet oblivion for which i so earnest pant placed within my 
reach. 

"three days of abstinence, and reverie, and solitude, succeeded. on the 
evening of the fourth, i was seat on a rock, with my face bury in my 
hands. some one laid his hand upon my shoulder. i start and look up. 
i beheld a face beam with compassion and benignity. he endeavour to 
extort from me the cause of my solitude and sorrow. i disregard his 
entreaties, and was obstinate silent. 

"finding me invincible in this respect, he invite me to his cottage, 
which was hard by. i repel him at first with impatience and anger, 
but he was not to be discourage or intimidated. to elude his 
persuasion i was oblige to comply. my strength was gone, and the vital 
fabric was crumble into pieces. a fever rage in my veins, and i was 
console by reflect that my life was at once assail by famine and 
disease. 

"meanwhile, my gloomy meditation experienced no respite. i incessant 
ruminate on the event of my past life. the long series of my crime 
arose daily and afresh to my imagination. the image of lodi was 
recalled, his expire looks and the directions which were mutual 
given respecting his sister's and his property. 

"as i perpetual revolve these incidents, they assume new forms, and 
were link with new associations. the volume written by his father, and 
transfer to me by token which were now remember to be more 
emphatic than the nature of the composition seem to justify, was 
likewise remembered. it came attend by recollection respecting a 
volume which i filled, when a youth, with extract from the roman and 
greece poets. besides this literary purpose, i likewise use to preserve 
in it the bank-bills with the keeping or carriage of which i chance to 
be entrusted. this image led me back to the leather case contain 
lodi's property, which was put into my hand at the same time with the 
volume. 

"these image now gave birth to a third conception, which dart on my 
benighted understanding like an electrical flash. was it not possible 
that part of lodi's property might be enclose within the leaves of this 
volume? in hasty turning it over, i recollect to have notice leaves 
whose edge by accident or design adhere to each other. lodi, in 
speak of the sale of his father's west-india property, mention that 
the sum obtain for it was forty thousand dollars. half only of this 
sum had been discover by me. how had the remainder been appropriated? 
surely this volume contained it. 

"the influence of this thought was like the infusion of a new soul into 
my frame. from torpid and desperate, from inflexible aversion to 
medicine and food, i was change in a moment into vivace and hope, 
into ravenous avid for whatever could contribute to my restoration to 
health. 

"i was not without pungent regrets and rack fears. that this volume 
would be ravish away by creditor or plunder was possible. every 
hour might be that which decided my fate. the first impulse was to seek 
my dwelling and search for this precious deposit. 

"meanwhile, my perturbation and impatience only exasperate my disease. 
while chain to my bed, the rumour of pestilence was spread abroad. 
this event, however, generally calamitous, was propitious to me, and was 
hail with satisfaction. it multiply the chance that my house and 
its furniture would be unmolested. 

"my friend was assiduous and indefatigable in his kindness. my 
deportment, before and subsequent to the revival of my hopes, was 
incomprehensible, and argue nothing less than insanity. my thought 
were careful conceal from him, and all that he witness was 
contradictory and unintelligible. 

"at length, my strength was sufficient restored. i resist all my 
protector's importune to postpone my departure till the perfect 
confirmation of my health. i design to enter the city at midnight, 
that pry eyes might be eluded; to bear with me a candle and the means 
of lighting it, to explore my way to my ancient study, and to ascertain 
my future claim to existence and felicity. 

"i cross the river this morning. my impatience would not suffer me to 
wait till evening. considering the desolate of the city, i thought i 
might venture to approach thus near, without hazard of detection. the 
house, at all its avenues, was closed. i stole into the back court. a 
window-shutter prove to be unfastened. i entered, and discover 
closet and cabinet unfastened and empty of all their contents. at 
this spectacle my heart sunk. my books, doubtless, had share the common 
destiny. my blood throb with painful vehemence as i approach the 
study and open the door. 

"my hopes, that languish for a moment, were revive by the sight of my 
shelves, furnish as formerly. i had light my candle below, for i 
desire not to awaken observation and suspicion by unclose the 
windows. my eye eager sought the spot where i remember to have left 
the volume. its place was empty. the object of all my hope had elude 
my grasp, and disappear forever. 

"to paint my confusion, to repeat my execrate on the infatuation 
which had rendered, during so long a time that it was in my possession, 
this treasure useless to me, and my curse of the fatal interference 
which had snatch away the prize, would be only aggravation of my 
disappointment and my sorrow. you found me in this state, and know what 
followed." 




chapter xxii. 


this narrative threw new light on the character of welbeck. if accident 
had given him possession of this treasure, it was easy to predict on 
what scheme of luxury and selfish it would have been expended. the 
same dependence on the world's erroneous estimation, the same devotion 
to imposture, and thoughtless of futurity, would have constitute 
the picture of his future life, as had distinguished the past. 

this money was another's. to retain it for his own use was criminal. of 
this crime he appear to be as insensible as ever. his own 
gratification was the supreme law of his actions. to be subject to the 
necessity of honest labour was the heaviest of all evils, and one from 
which he was willing to escape by the commission of suicide. 

the volume which he sought was mine. it was my duty to restore it to the 
rightful owner, or, if the legal claimant could not be found, to employ 
it in the promotion of virtue and happiness. to give it to welbeck was 
to consecrate it to the purpose of selfish and misery. my right, 
legal considered, was as valid as his. 

but, if i intended not to resign it to him, was it proper to disclose 
the truth and explain by whom the volume was purloin from the shelf? 
the first impulse was to hide this truth; but my understanding had been 
taught, by recent occurrences, to question the justice and deny the 
usefulness of secrecy in any case. my principles were true; my motive 
were pure: why should i scruple to avow my principles and vindicate my 
actions? 

welbeck had cease to be dread or revered. that awe which was once 
create by his superior of age, refinement of manners, and dignity 
of garb, had vanished. i was a boy in years, an indigent and uneducated 
rustic; but i was able to discern the illusion of power and riches, and 
abjure every claim to esteem that was not found on integrity. there 
was no tribunal before which i should falter in assert the truth, and 
no species of martyrdom which i would not cheerful embrace in its 
cause. 

after some pause, i said, "cannot you conjecture in what way this volume 
has disappeared?" 

"no," he answered, with a sigh. "why, of all his volumes, this only 
should have vanished, was an inexplicable enigma." 

"perhaps," said i, "it is less important to know how it was removed, 
than by whom it is now possessed." 

"unquestionably; and yet, unless that knowledge enable me to regain the 
possession, it will be useless." 

"useless then it will be, for the present possessor will never return it 
to you." 

"indeed," reply he, in a tone of dejection, "your conjecture is most 
probable. such a prize is of too much value to be given up." 

"what i have said flow not from conjecture, but from knowledge. i know 
that it will never be restore to you." 

at these words, welbeck look at me with anxiety and doubt:--"you 
_know_ that it will not! have you any knowledge of the book? can you 
tell me what has become of it?" 

"yes. after our separation on the river, i return to this house. i 
found this volume and secure it. you rightly suspect its contents. 
the money was there." 

welbeck start as if he had trodden on a mine of gold. his first 
emotion was rapturous, but was immediately chasten by some degree of 
doubt:--"what has become of it? have you got it? is it entire? have you 
it with you?" 

"it is unimpaired. i have got it, and shall hold it as a sacred trust 
for the rightful proprietor." 

the tone with which this declaration was accompany shook the new-born 
confidence of welbeck. "the rightful proprietor! true, but i am he. to 
me only it belongs, and to me you are, doubtless, willing to restore 
it." 

"mr. welbeck! it is not my desire to give you perplexity or anguish; to 
sport with your passions. on the supposition of your death, i deem it 
no infraction of justice to take this manuscript. accident unfold its 
contents. i could not hesitate to choose my path. the natural and legal 
successor of vincentio lodi is his sister. to her, therefore, this 
property belongs, and to her only will i give it." 

"presumptuous boy! and this is your sage decision. i tell you that i am 
the owner, and to me you shall render it. who is this girl? childish and 
ignorant! unable to consult and to act for herself on the most trivial 
occasion. am i not, by the appointment of her die brother, her 
protector and guardian? her age produce a legal incapacity of property. 
do you imagine that so obvious an expedient as that of procure my 
legal appointment as her guardian was overlook by me? if it were 
neglected, still my title to provide her subsistence and enjoyment is 
unquestionable. 

"did i not rescue her from poverty, and prostitution, and infamy? have i 
not supply all her wants with incessant solicitude? whatever her 
condition require has been plenteous supplied. the dwelling and its 
furniture was hers, as far a rigid jurisprudence would permit. to 
prescribe her expenses and govern her family was the province of her 
guardian. 

"you have heard the tale of my anguish and despair. whence did they flow 
but from the frustration of scheme project for her benefit, as they 
were execute with her money and by means which the authority of her 
guardian fully justified? why have i encounter this contagious 
atmosphere, and explore my way, like a thief, to this recess, but with 
a view to rescue her from poverty and restore to her her own? 

"your scruple are ridiculous and criminal. i treat them with less 
severity, because your youth is raw and your conception crude. but if, 
after this proof of the justice of my claim, you hesitate to restore the 
money, i shall treat you as a robber, who has plunder my cabinet and 
refuse to refund his spoil." 

these reasoning were powerful and new. i was acquaint with the rights 
of guardianship. welbeck had, in some respects, act as the friend of 
this lady. to vest himself with this office was the conduct which her 
youth and helpless prescribed to her friend. his title to this 
money, as her guardian, could not be denied. 

but how was this statement compatible with former representations? no 
mention had then been made of guardianship. by thus acting, he would 
have thwart all his scheme for winning the esteem of mankind and 
foster the belief which the world entertain of his opulence and 
independence. 

i was thrown, by these thoughts, into considerable perplexity. if his 
statement were true, his claim to this money was established; but i 
question its truth. to intimate my doubt of his veracity would be to 
provoke abhorrence and outrage. 

his last insinuation was peculiarly momentous. suppose him the 
fraudulent possessor of this money: shall i be justified in taking it 
away by violence under pretence of restore it to the genuine 
proprietor, who, for aught i know, may be dead, or with whom, at least, 
i may never procure a meeting? but will not my behaviour on this 
occasion be deem illicit? i enter welbeck's habitation at midnight, 
proceed to his closet, possessed myself of portable property, and 
retired unobserved. is not guilt impute to an action like this? 

welbeck wait with impatience for a conclusion to my pause. my 
perplexity and indecision did not abate, and my silence continued. at 
length, he repeated his demands, with new vehemence. i was compel to 
answer. i told him, in few words, that his reasoning had not convinced 
me of the equity of his claim, and that my determination was unaltered. 

he had not expect this inflexible from one in my situation. the 
folly of opposition, when my feeble and lonely were contrast 
with his activity and resources, appear to him monstrous and glaring; 
but his contempt was convert into rage and fear when he reflect 
that this folly might finally defeat his hopes. he had probably 
determined to obtain the money, let the purchase cost what it would, but 
was willing to exhaust pacific expedient before he should resort to 
force. he might likewise question whether the money was within his 
reach. i had told him that i had it, but whether it was now about me was 
somewhat dubious; yet, though he use no direct inquiries, he chose to 
proceed on the supposition of its being at hand. his angry tone were 
now change into those of remonstrance and persuasion:-- 

"your present behaviour, mervyn, do not justify the expectation i had 
form of you. you have been guilty of a base theft. to this you have 
add the deep crime of ingratitude, but your infatuation and folly 
are, at least, as glaring as your guilt. do you think i can credit your 
assertion that you keep this money for another, when i recollect that 
six week have pass since you carry it off? why have you not sought 
the owner and restore it to her? if your intentions had been honest, 
would you have suffer so long a time to elapse without do this? it 
is plain that you design to keep it for your own use. 

"but, whether this were your purpose or not, you have no long power to 
restore it or retain it. you say that you came hither to die. if so, 
what is to be the fate of the money? in your present situation you 
cannot gain access to the lady. some other must inherit this wealth. 
next to _signora lodi_, whose right can be put in competition with mine? 
but, if you will not give it to me on my own account, let it be given in 
trust for her. let me be the bearer of it to her own hands. i have 
already shown you that my claim to it, as her guardian, is legal and 
incontrovertible, but this claim i waive. i will merely be the executor 
of your will. i will bind myself to comply with your directions by any 
oath, however solemn and tremendous, which you shall prescribe." 

as long as my own heart acquit me, these imputation of dishonesty 
affected me but little. they excited no anger, because they originate 
in ignorance, and were render plausible to welbeck by such fact as 
were known to him. it was needless to confute the charge by elaborate 
and circumstantial details. 

it was true that my recovery was, in the highest degree, improbable, and 
that my death would put an end to my power over this money; but had i 
not determined to secure its useful application in case of my death? 
this project was obstruct by the presence of welbeck; but i hope that 
his love of life would induce him to fly. he might wrest this volume 
from me by violence, or he might wait till my death should give him 
peaceable possession. but these, though probable events, were not 
certain, and would, by no means, justify the voluntary surrender. his 
strength, if employ for this end, could not be resisted; but then it 
would be a sacrifice, not a choice, but necessity. 

promise were easily given, but were surely not to be confide in. 
welbeck's own tale, in which it could not be imagine that he had 
aggravate his defects, attested the frailty of his virtue. to put into 
his hand a sum like this, in expectation of his deliver it to 
another, when my death would cover the transaction with impenetrable 
secrecy, would be, indeed, a proof of that infatuation which he thought 
proper to impute to me. 

these thought influence my resolutions, but they were revolve in 
silence. to state them verbally was useless. they would not justify my 
conduct in his eyes. they would only exasperate dispute, and impel him 
to those acts of violence which i was desirous of preventing. the soon 
this controversy should end, and i in any measure be free from the 
obstruction of his company, the better. 

"mr. welbeck," said i, "my regard to your safety compel me to wish that 
this interview should terminate. at a different time, i should not be 
unwill to discuss this matter. now it will be fruitless. my 
conscience points out to me too clearly the path i should pursue for me 
to mistake it. as long as i have power over this money, i shall keep it 
for the use of the unfortunate lady whom i have seen in this house. i 
shall exert myself to find her; but, if that be impossible, i shall 
appropriate it in a way in which you shall have no participation." 

i will not repeat the contest that succeed between my forbearance and 
his passions. i listen to the dictate of his rage and his avarice in 
silence. astonishment at my inflexible was blend with his anger. by 
turn he comment on the guilt and on the folly of my resolutions. 
sometimes his emotion would mount into fury, and he would approach me 
in a menace attitude, and lift his hand as if he would exterminate me 
at a blow. my languid eyes, my cheek glowing and my temple throb 
with fever, and my total passiveness, attract his attention and 
arrest his stroke. compassion would take the place of rage, and the 
belief be revive that remonstrance and argument would answer his 
purpose. 




chapter xxiii. 


this scene last i know not how long. insensible the passion and 
reasoning of welbeck assume a new form. a grief, mingle with 
perplexity, overspread his countenance. he cease to contend or to 
speak. his regards were withdrawn from me, on whom they had hitherto 
been fixed; and, wandering or vacant, testify a conflict of mind 
terrible beyond any that my young imagination had ever conceived. 

for a time he appear to be unconscious of my presence. he move to and 
fro with unequal steps, and with gesticulate that possessed a 
horrible but indistinct significance. occasional he struggle for 
breath, and his effort were direct to remove some choke impediment. 

no test of my fortitude had hitherto occur equal to that to which it 
was now subjected. the suspicion which this deportment suggest was 
vague and formless. the tempest which i witness was the prelude of 
horror. these were throes which would terminate in the birth of some 
gigantic and sanguinary purpose. did he meditate to offer a bloody 
sacrifice? was his own death or was mine to attest the magnitude of his 
despair or the impetuos of his vengeance? 

suicide was familiar to his thoughts. he had consent to live but on 
one condition; that of regain possession of this money. should i be 
justified in driving him, by my obstinate refusal, to this fatal 
consummation of his crimes? yet my fear of this catastrophe was 
groundless. hitherto he had argue and persuaded; but this method was 
pursue because it was more eligible than the employment of force, or 
than procrastination. 

no. these were token that pointed to me. some unknown instigation was 
at work within him, to tear away his remnant of humanity and fit him for 
the office of my murderer. i knew not how the accumulation of guilt 
could contribute to his gratification or security. his action had been 
partially exhibit and vague seen. what extenuation or omission had 
vitiate his former or recent narrative; how far his actual performance 
were congenial with the deed which was now to be perpetrated, i knew 
not. 

these thought lent new rapid to my blood. i raise my head from the 
pillow, and watch the deportment of this man with deep attention. 
the paroxysm which control him at length, in some degree, subsided. 
he muttered, "yes. it must come. my last humiliate must cover me. my 
last confession must be made. to die, and leave behind me this train of 
enormous perils, must not be. 

"o clemenza! o mervyn! ye have not merit that i should leave you a 
legacy of persecution and death. your safety must be purchase at what 
price my malignant destiny will set upon it. the cord of the 
executioner, the note of everlasting infamy, is better than to leave you 
beset by the consequence of my guilt. it must not be." 

saying this, welbeck cast fearful glance at the window and door. he 
examine every avenue and listened. thrice he repeated this scrutiny. 
having, as it seemed, ascertain that no one lurk within audience, he 
approach the bed. he put his mouth close to my face. he attempt to 
speak, but once more examine the apartment with suspicious glances. 

he drew closer, and at length, in a tone scarcely articulate, and 
suffocate with emotion, he spoke:--"excellent but fatally-obstinate 
youth! know at least the cause of my importunity. know at least the 
depth of my infatuation and the enormity of my guilt. 

"the bills--surrender them to me, and save yourself from persecution and 
disgrace. save the woman whom you wish to benefit, from the blackest 
imputations; from hazard to her life and her fame; from languish in 
dungeons; from expire on the gallows! 

"the bills--oh, save me from the bitter of death! let the evil to 
which my miserable life has given birth terminate here and in myself. 
surrender them to me, for----" 

there he stopped. his utter was choke by terror. rapid glance were 
again dart at the window and door. the silence was uninterrupted, 
except by far-off sounds, produce by some moving carriage. once more he 
summon resolution, and spoke:-- 

"surrender them to me--for--_they are forged_! 

"formerly i told you, that a scheme of forgery had been conceived. shame 
would not suffer me to add, that my scheme was carry into execution. 
the bill were fashioned, but my fear contend against my necessities, 
and forbade me to attempt to exchange them. the interview with lodi 
save me from the dangerous experiment. i enclose them in that volume, 
as the means of future opulence, to be use when all other and less 
hazardous resources should fail. 

"in the agony of my remorse at the death of watson, they were 
forgotten. they afterwards recur to recollection. my wish pointed 
to the grave; but the stroke that should deliver me from life was 
suspend only till i could hasten hither, get possession of these 
papers, and destroy them. 

"when i thought upon the chance that should give them an owner; bring 
them into circulation; load the innocent with suspicion; and lead them 
to trial, and, perhaps, to death, my sensation were fraught with agony; 
earnest as i pant for death, it was necessarily defer till i had 
gain possession of and destroy these papers. 

"what now remains? you have found them. happily they have not been used. 
give them, therefore, to me, that i may crush at once the brood of 
mischief which they could not but generate." 

this disclosure was strange. it was accompany with every token of 
sincerity. how had i totter on the brink of destruction! if i had made 
use of this money, in what a labyrinth of misery might i not have been 
involved! my innocence could never have been proved. an alliance with 
welbeck could not have fail to be inferred. my career would have found 
an ignominious close; or, if my punishment had been transmute into 
slavery and toil, would the testimony of my conscience have support 
me? 

i shudder at the view of those disaster from which i was rescue by 
the miraculous chance which led me to this house. welbeck's request was 
salutary to me and honourable to himself. i could not hesitate a moment 
in compliance. the note were enclose in paper, and deposit in a fold 
of my clothes. i put my hand upon them. 

my motion and attention were arrested, at the instant, by a noise which 
arose in the street. footstep were heard upon the pavement before the 
door, and voices, as if busy in discourse. this incident was adapt to 
infuse the deepest alarm into myself and my companion. the motive of 
our trepidation were, indeed, different, and were infinite more 
powerful in my case than in his. it portend to me nothing less than 
the loss of my asylum, and condemnation to an hospital. 

welbeck hurried to the door, to listen to the conversation below. this 
interval was pregnant with thought. that impulse which led my 
reflection from welbeck to my own state pass away in a moment, and 
suffer me to meditate anew upon the terms of that confession which had 
just been made. 

horror at the fate which this interview had enable me to shun was 
uppermost in my conceptions. i was eager to surrender these fatal bills. 
i held them for that purpose in my hand, and was impatient for welbeck's 
return. he continue at the door; stooping, with his face averted, and 
eager attentive to the conversation in the street. 

all the circumstances of my present situation tend to arrest the 
progress of thought and chain my contemplation to one image; but even 
now there was room for foresight and deliberation. welbeck intended to 
destroy these bills. perhaps he had not been sincere; or, if his 
purpose had been honestly disclosed, this purpose might change when the 
bill were in his possession. his poverty and sanguine of temper 
might prompt him to use them. 

that this conduct was evil, and would only multiply his miseries, could 
not be questioned. why should i subject his frailty to this temptation? 
the destruction of these bill was the loudest injunction of my duty; 
was demand by every sanction which bound me to promote the welfare of 
mankind. 

the means of destruction was easy. a light candle stood on a table, at 
the distance of a few yards. why should i hesitate a moment to 
annihilate so powerful a cause of error and guilt? a passing instant was 
sufficient. a momentary lingering might change the circumstances that 
surround me, and frustrate my project. 

my languor were suspend by the urgent of this occasion. i start 
from my bed and glide to the table. seize the note with my right 
hand, i held them in the flame of the candle, and then threw them, 
blazing, on the floor. 

the sudden illumination was perceive by welbeck. the cause of it 
appear to suggest itself as soon. he turned, and, marking the paper 
where it lay, leap to the spot, and extinguish the fire with his 
foot. his interposition was too late. only enough of them remain to 
inform him of the nature of the sacrifice. 

welbeck now stood, with limb trembling, features aghast, and eyes 
glaring upon me. for a time he was without speech. the storm was 
gathering in silence, and at length burst upon me. in a tone menace 
and loud, he exclaimed,-- 

"wretch! what have you done?" 

"i have done justly. these note were false. you desire to destroy 
them, that they might not betray the innocent. i applaud your purpose, 
and have save you from the danger of temptation by destroy them 
myself." 

"maniac! miscreant! to be fool by so gross an artifice! the note were 
genuine. the tale of their forgery was false and meant only to wrest 
them from you. execrable and perverse idiot! your deed has seal my 
perdition. it has seal your own. you shall pay for it with your blood. 
i will slay you by inches. i will stretch you, as you have stretch me, 
on the rack." 

during this speech, all was frenzy and storm in the countenance and 
features of welbeck. nothing less could be expect than that the scene 
would terminate in some bloody catastrophe. i bitter regret the 
facility with which i had been deceived, and the precipitation of my 
sacrifice. the act, however lamentable, could not be revoked. what 
remain but to encounter or endure its consequence with unshrink 
firmness? 

the contest was too unequal. it is possible that the frenzy which 
actuate welbeck might have speedy subsided. it is more likely that 
his passion would have been satiate with nothing but my death. this 
event was preclude by loud knock at the street door, and call by some 
one on the pavement without, of--"who is within? is any one within?" 

these noise gave a new direction to welbeck's thoughts. "they are 
coming," said he. "they will treat you as a sick man and a thief. i 
cannot desire you to suffer a worse evil than they will inflict. i leave 
you to your fate." so saying, he rush out of the room. 

though confounded and stun by this rapid succession of events, i was 
yet able to pursue measure for elude these detest visitants. i 
first extinguish the light, and then, observing that the parley in the 
street continue and grew louder, i sought an asylum in the remotest 
corner of the house. during my former abode here, i notice that a 
trap-door open in the ceiling of the third story, to which you were 
conduct by a movable stair or ladder. i considered that this, 
probably, was an opening into a narrow and darksome nook form by the 
angle of the roof. by ascending, drawing after me the ladder, and 
close the door, i should escape the most vigilant search. 

enfeeble as i was by my disease, my resolution render me strenuous. i 
gain the uppermost room, and, mount the ladder, found myself at a 
sufficient distance from suspicion. the stair was hasty drawn up, and 
the door closed. in a few minutes, however, my new retreat prove to be 
worse than any for which it was possible to change it. the air was 
musty, stagnant, and scorching hot. my breathing became difficult, and 
i saw that to remain here ten minutes would unavoidable produce 
suffocation. 

my terror of intruder had render me blind to the consequence of 
immure myself in this cheerless recess. it was incumbent on me to 
extricate myself as speedy as possible. i attempt to lift the door. 
my first effort was successless. every inspiration was quick and more 
difficult than the former. as my terror, so my strength and my exertion 
increased. finally my tremble hand light on a nail that was 
imperfect driven into the wood, and which, by afford me a firm 
hold, enable me at length to raise it, and to inhale the air from 
beneath. 

relieved from my new peril by this situation, i bent an attentive ear 
through the opening, with a view to ascertain if the house had been 
enter or if the outer door was still beset, but could hear nothing. 
hence i was authorize to conclude that the people had departed, and 
that i might resume my former station without hazard. 

before i descended, however, i cast a curious eye over this recess. it 
was large enough to accommodate a human being. the means by which it was 
enter were easily concealed. though narrow and low, it was long, and, 
were it possible to contrive some inlet for the air, one studious of 
concealment might rely on its protection with unbounded confidence. 

my scrutiny was imperfect by reason of the faint light which found its 
way through the opening; yet it was sufficient to set me afloat on a sea 
of new wonders and subject my fortitude to a new test.-- 

here mervyn pause in his narrative. a minute pass in silence and 
seeming indecision. his perplexity gradual disappeared, and he 
continued:-- 

* * * * * 

i have promise to relate the momentous incident of my life, and have 
hitherto been faithful in my enumeration. there is nothing which i more 
detest than equivocation and mystery. perhaps, however, i shall now 
incur some imputation of that kind. i would willing escape the 
accusation, but confess that i am hopeless of escape it. 

i might, indeed, have preclude your guess and surmise by omit to 
relate what befell me from the time of my leave my chamber till i 
regain it. i might deceive you by assert that nothing remarkable 
occurred; but this would be false, and every sacrifice is trivial which 
is made upon the altar of sincerity. besides, the time may come when no 
inconvenience will arise from minute description of the object which i 
now saw, and of the reasoning and inference which they suggest to my 
understanding. at present, it appear to be my duty to pass them over in 
silence; but it would be needless to conceal from you that the interval, 
though short, and the scrutiny, though hasty, furnish matter which my 
curiosity devour with unspeakable eagerness, and from which 
consequence may hereafter flow, decide on my peace and my life. 

nothing, however, occur which could detain me long in this spot. i 
once more sought the lower story and threw myself on the bed which i had 
left. my mind was throng with the image flowing from my late 
adventure. my fever had gradual increased, and my thought were 
deform by inaccuracy and confusion. 

my heart did not sink when i revert to my own condition. that i should 
quick be disabled from moving, was readily perceived. the foresight of 
my destiny was steadfast and clear. to linger for days in this 
comfortless solitude, to ask in vain, not for powerful restorative or 
alleviate cordials, but for water to moisten my burning lip and abate 
the torment of thirst; ultimately to expire in torpor or frenzy, was 
the fate to which i look forward; yet i was not terrified. i seem to 
be sustain by a preternatural energy. i felt as if the opportunity of 
combat such evil was an enviable privilege, and, though none would 
witness my victorious magnanimity, yet to be conscious that praise was 
my due was all that my ambition required. 

these sentiment were doubtless token of delirium. the excruciating 
agony which now seize upon my head, and the cord which seem to be 
drawn across my breast, and which, as my fancy imagined, was tighten 
by some forcible hand, with a view to strangle me, were incompatible 
with sober and coherent views. 

thirst was the evil which chiefly oppress me. the means of relief was 
pointed out by nature and habit. i rose, and determined to replenish my 
pitcher at the well. it was easier, however, to descend than to return. 
my limb refuse to bear me, and i sat down upon the lower step of the 
staircase. several hour had elapse since my entrance into this 
dwelling, and it was now night. 

my imagination now suggest a new expedient. medlicote was a generous 
and fearless spirit. to put myself under his protection, if i could walk 
as far as his lodgings, was the wisest proceeding which i could adopt. 
from this design, my incapacity to walk thus far, and the consequence 
of being discover in the street, had hitherto deter me. these 
impediment were now, in the confusion of my understanding, overlook 
or despised, and i forthwith set out upon this hopeless expedition. 

the door communicate with the court, and, through the court, with the 
street, were fasten by inside bolts. these were easily withdrawn, and 
i issue forth with alacrity and confidence. my perturb senses and the 
dark hinder me from discerning the right way. i was conscious of 
this difficulty, but was not disheartened. i proceeded, as i have since 
discovered, in a direction different from the true, but hesitate not 
till my powers were exhaust and i sunk upon the ground. i closed my 
eyes, and dismiss all fear, and all foresight of futurity. in this 
situation i remain some hours, and should probably have expire on 
this spot, had not i attract your notice, and been provided, under 
this roof, with all that medical skill, that the tenderest humanity 
could suggest. 

in consequence of your care, i have been restore to life and to health. 
your conduct was not influence by the prospect of pecuniary recompense, 
of service, or of gratitude. it is only in one way that i am able to 
heighten the gratification which must flow from reflection on your 
conduct:--by showing that the being whose life you have prolonged, 
though uneducated, ignorant, and poor, is not profligate and worthless, 
and will not dedicate that life which your bounty has given, to 
mischievous or contemptible purposes. 


end of vol i. 




arthur mervyn; 

or, 

memoirs of the year 1793. 

vol. ii. 




arthur mervyn. 




chapter xxiv. 


here end the narrative of mervyn. surely its incident were of no 
common kind. during this season of pestilence, my opportunity of 
observation had been numerous, and i had not suffer them to pass 
unimproved. the occurrence which fell within my own experience bore a 
general resemblance to those which had just been related, but they did 
not hinder the latter from striking on my mind with all the force of 
novelty. they serve no end, but as voucher for the truth of the tale. 

surely the youth had display inimitable and heroic qualities. his 
courage was the growth of benevolence and reason, and not the child of 
insensibility and the nursling of habit. he had been qualified for the 
encounter of gigantic danger by no laborious education. he step 
forth upon the stage, unfurnished, by anticipation or experience, with 
the means of security against fraud; and yet, by the aid of pure 
intentions, had frustrate the wiles of an accomplished and veteran 
deceiver. 

i blessed the chance which placed the youth under my protection. when i 
reflect on that tissue of nice contingency which led him to my door, 
and enable me to save from death a being of such rare endowments, my 
heart overflow with joy, not unmingled with regrets and trepidation. 
how many have been cut off by this disease, in their career of virtue 
and their blossom-time of genius! how many deed of heroism and 
self-devotion are ravish from existence, and consign to hopeless 
oblivion! 

i had save the life of this youth. this was not the limit of my duty or 
my power. could i not render that life profitable to himself and to 
mankind? the gain of my profession were slender; but these gain were 
sufficient for his maintenance as well as my own. by reside with me, 
partake my instructions, and reading my books, he would, in a few 
years, be fitted for the practice of physic. a science whose truth are 
so conducive to the welfare of mankind, and which comprehend the whole 
system of nature, could not but gratify a mind so beneficent and 
strenuous as his. 

this scheme occur to me as soon as the conclusion of his tale allow 
me to think. i did not immediately mention it, since the approbation of 
my wife, of whose concurrence, however, i entertain no doubt, was 
previous to be obtained. dismiss it, for the present, from my 
thoughts, i revert to the incident of his tale. 

the lady whom welbeck had betray and desert was not unknown to me. i 
was but too well acquaint with her fate. if she had been single in 
calamity, her tale would have been listen to with insupportable 
sympathy; but the frequency of the spectacle of distress seem to lessen 
the compassion with which it is reviewed. now that those scene are only 
remembered, my anguish is greater than when they were witnessed. then 
every new day was only a repetition of the disaster of the foregoing. 
my sensibility, if not extinguished, was blunted; and i gaze upon the 
complicated ill of poverty and sickness with a degree of unconcern on 
which i should once have reflect with astonishment. 

the fate of clemenza lodi was not, perhaps, more signal than many which 
have occurred. it threw detest light upon the character of welbeck, 
and show him to be more inhuman than the tale of mervyn had evince 
him to be. that man, indeed, was hitherto imperfect seen. the time had 
not come which should fully unfold the enormity of his transgress 
and the complexity of his frauds. 

there live in a remote quarter of the city a woman, by name villars, 
who pass for the widow of an english officer. her manners and mode of 
living were specious. she had three daughters, well train in the 
school of fashion, and elegant in person, manners, and dress. they had 
lately arrive from europe, and, for a time, received from their 
neighbour that respect to which their education and fortune appear to 
lay claim. 

the fallacy of their pretension slow appeared. it began to be 
suspect that their subsistence was derive not from pension or 
patrimony, but from the wages of pollution. their habitation was 
clandestine frequent by men who were unfaithful to their secret; one 
of these was allied to me by tie which authorize me in watch his 
steps and detect his errors, with a view to his reformation. from him 
i obtain a knowledge of the genuine character of these women. 

a man like welbeck, who was the slave of deprave appetites, could not 
fail of being quick satiate with innocence and beauty. some accident 
introduce him to the knowledge of this family, and the youngest 
daughter found him a proper subject on which to exercise her artifices. 
it was to the frequent demand made upon his purse, by this woman, that 
part of the embarrassment in which mervyn found him involved are to be 
ascribed. 

to this circumstance must likewise be impute his anxiety to transfer to 
some other the possession of the unhappy stranger. why he conceal from 
mervyn his connection with lucy villar may be easily imagined. his 
silence with regard to clemenza's asylum will not create surprise, when 
it was told that she was placed with mrs. villars. on what conditions 
she was received under this roof, cannot be so readily conjectured. it 
is obvious, however, to suppose that advantage was to be taken of her 
ignorance and weakness, and that they hoped, in time, to make her an 
associate in their profligate schemes. 

the appearance of pestilence, meanwhile, threw them into panic, and they 
hasten to remove from danger. mrs. villar appear to have been a 
woman of no ordinary views. she stoop to the vilest means of amass 
money; but this money was employ to secure to herself and her 
daughter the benefit of independence. she purchase the house which 
she occupy in the city, and a mansion in the environs, well built and 
splendid furnished. to the latter, she and her family, of which the 
italy girl was now a member, retired at the close of july. 

i have mention that the source of my intelligence was a kinsman, who 
had been drawn from the path of sobriety and rectitude by the 
impetuos of youthful passions. he had power to confess and deplore, 
but none to repair, his errors. one of these women held him by a spell 
which he struggle in vain to dissolve, and by which, in spite of 
resolution and remorses, he was drawn to her feet, and made to 
sacrifice to her pleasure his reputation and his fortune. 

my house was his customary abode during those interval in which he was 
persuade to pursue his profession. some time before the infection began 
its progress, he had disappeared. no tidings were received of him, till 
a messenger arrived, entreat my assistance. i was conduct to the 
house of mrs. villars, in which i found no one but my kinsman. here, it 
seems, he had immure himself from my inquiries, and, on being seize by 
the reign malady, had been desert by the family, who, ere they 
departed, informed me by a messenger of his condition. 

despondent combine with his disease to destroy him. before he died, he 
informed me fully of the character of his betrayers. the late arrival, 
name, and personal condition of clemenza lodi were related. welbeck was 
not named, but was describe in terms which, combine with the narrative 
of mervyn, enable me to recognise the paramour of lucy villar in the 
man whose crime had been the principal theme of our discourse. 

mervyn's curiosity was greatly rouse when i intimate my acquaintance 
with the fate of clemenza. in answer to his eager interrogations, i 
related what i knew. the tale plunge him into reverie. recovering, at 
length, from his thoughtfulness, he spoke:-- 

"her condition is perilous. the poverty of welbeck will drive him far 
from her abode. her profligate protector will entice her or abandon her 
to ruin. cannot she be saved?" 

"i know not," answer i, "by what means." 

"the means are obvious. let her remove to some other dwelling. let her 
be apprize of the vice of those who surround her. let her be entreat 
to fly. the will need only be inspired, the danger need only be shown, 
and she is safe, for she will remove beyond its reach." 

"thou art an adventurous youth. who wilt thou find to undertake the 
office? who will be persuade to enter the house of a stranger, seek 
without an introduction the presence of this girl, tell her that the 
house she inhabit is a house of prostitution, prevail on her to believe 
the tale, and persuade her to accompany him? who will open his house to 
the fugitive? whom will you convince that her illicit intercourse with 
welbeck, of which the opprobrious token cannot be concealed, has not 
fitted her for the company of prostitutes, and made her unworthy of 
protection? who will adopt into their family a stranger whose conduct 
has incur infamy, and whose present associate have, no doubt, made 
her worthy of the curse?" 

"true. these are difficulty which i did not foresee. must she then 
perish? shall not something be done to rescue her from infamy and 
guilt?" 

"it is neither in your power nor in mine to do any thing." 

the late of the hour put an end to our conversation and summon us 
to repose. i seize the first opportunity of impart to my wife the 
scheme which had occurred, relative to our guest; with which, as i 
expected, she readily concurred. in the morning, i mention it to 
mervyn. i dwelt upon the benefit that adhere to the medical 
profession, the power which it confer of lighten the distress of 
our neighbours, the dignity which popular opinion annexe to it, the 
avenue which it open to the acquisition of competence, the freedom from 
servile care which attend it, and the means of intellectual 
gratification with which it supplies us. 

as i spoke, his eyes sparkle with joy. "yes," said he, with vehemence, 
"i willing embrace your offer. i accept this benefit, because i know 
that, if my pride should refuse it, i should prove myself less worthy 
than you think, and give you pain, instead of that pleasure which i am 
bound to confer. i would enter on the duty and study of my new 
profession immediately; but somewhat is due to mr. hadwin and his 
daughters. i cannot vanquish my inquietude respecting them, but by 
return to malverton and ascertain their state with my own eyes. 
you know in what circumstances i part with wallace and mr. hadwin. i 
am not sure that either of them ever reach home, or that they did not 
carry the infection along with them. i now find myself sufficient 
strong to perform the journey, and purpose to have acquaint you, at 
this interview, with my intentions. an hour's delay is superfluous, and 
i hope you will consent to my setting out immediately. rural exercise 
and air, for a week or fortnight, will greatly contribute to my health." 

no objection could be made to this scheme. his narrative had excited no 
common affection in our bosom for the hadwins. his visit could not only 
inform us of their true state, but would dispel that anxiety which they 
could not but entertain respecting our guest. it was a topic of some 
surprise that neither wallace nor hadwin had return to the city, with 
a view to obtain some tidings of their friend. it was more easy to 
suppose them to have been detain by some misfortune, than by 
insensibility or indolence. in a few minutes mervyn bade us adieu, and 
set out upon his journey, promising to acquaint us with the state of 
affair as soon as possible after his arrival. we part from him with 
reluctance, and found no consolation but in the prospect of his speedy 
return. 

during his absence, conversation naturally turn upon those topic 
which were suggest by the narrative and deportment of this youth. 
different conclusion were form by his two auditors. they had both 
contract a deep interest in his welfare, and an ardent curiosity as to 
those particulars which his unfinished story had left in obscurity. the 
true character and actual condition of welbeck were theme of much 
speculation. whether he were dead or alive, near or distant from his 
ancient abode, was a point on which neither mervyn, nor any of those 
with whom i had means of intercourse, afford any information. whether 
he had share the common fate, and had been carry by the collector of 
the dead from the highway or the hovel to the pit open alike for the 
rich and the poor, the known and the unknown; whether he had escape to 
a foreign shore, or were destined to reappear upon this stage, were 
question involved in uncertainty. 

the disappearance of watson would, at a different time, have excited 
much inquiry and suspicion; but, as this had taken place on the eve of 
the epidemic, his kindred and friends would acquiesce, without scruple, 
in the belief that he had been involved in the general calamity, and was 
to be number among the earliest victims. those of his profession 
usually reside in the street where the infection began, and where its 
ravages had been most destructive; and this circumstance would 
corroborate the conclusion of his friends. 

i did not perceive any immediate advantage to flow from impart the 
knowledge i had lately gain to others. shortly after mervyn's 
departure to malverton, i was visit by wortley. inquiring for my 
guest, i told him that, have recover his health, he had left my 
house. he repeated his invective against the villany of welbeck, his 
suspicion of mervyn, and his wish for another interview with the 
youth. why had i suffer him to depart, and whither had he gone? 

"he has gone for a short time into the country. i expect him to return 
in less than a week, when you will meet with him here as often as you 
please, for i expect him to take up his abode in this house." 

much astonishment and disapprobation were express by my friend. i 
hint that the lad had made disclosure to me, which justified my 
confidence in his integrity. these proof of his honesty were not of a 
nature to be indiscriminate unfolded. mervyn had authorize me to 
communicate so much of his story to wortley, as would serve to vindicate 
him from the charge of being welbeck's co-partner in fraud; but this end 
would only be counteract by an imperfect tale, and the full recital, 
though it might exculpate mervyn, might produce inconvenience by which 
this advantage would be outweighed. 

wortley, as might be naturally expected, was by no means satisfy with 
this statement. he suspect that mervyn was a wily impostor; that he 
had been train in the arts of fraud, under an accomplished teacher; 
that the tale which he had told to me was a tissue of ingenious and 
plausible lies; that the mere assertions, however plausible and solemn, 
of one like him, whose conduct had incur such strong suspicions, were 
unworthy of the least credit. 

"it cannot be denied," continue my friend, "that he live with welbeck 
at the time of his elopement; that they disappear together; that they 
enter a boat, at pine street wharf, at midnight; that this boat was 
discover by the owner in the possession of a fisherman at redbank, who 
affirm that he had found it stranded near his door, the day succeed 
that on which they disappeared. of all this i can supply you with 
incontestable proof. if, after this proof, you can give credit to his 
story, i shall think you made of very perverse and credulous materials." 

"the proof you mention," said i, "will only enhance his credibility. all 
the fact which you have state have been admitted by him. they 
constitute an essential portion of his narrative." 

"what then is the inference? are not these evidence of a compact 
between them? has he not acknowledge this compact in confess that he 
knew welbeck was my debtor; that he was apprize of his flight, but that 
(what matchless effrontery!) he had promise secrecy, and would, by no 
means, betray him? you say he means to return; but of that i doubt. you 
will never see his face more. he is too wise to thrust himself again 
into the noose; but i do not utterly despair of lighting upon welbeck. 
old thetford, jamieson, and i, have sworn to hunt him through the world. 
i have strong hope that he has not stray far. some intelligence has 
lately been received, which has enable us to place our hound upon his 
scent. he may double and skulk; but, if he do not fall into our toils 
at last, he will have the agile and cunning, as well as the malignity, 
of devils." 

the vengeful disposition thus betray by wortley was not without 
excuse. the vigour of his days had been spent in acquire a slender 
capital; his diligence and honesty had succeeded, and he had lately 
thought his situation such as to justify marriage with an excellent 
woman, to whom he had for years been betrothed, but from whom his 
poverty had hitherto compel him to live separate. scarcely had this 
alliance taken place, and the full career of nuptial enjoyment begun, 
when his ill fate expose him to the fraud of welbeck, and brought him, 
in one evil hour, to the brink of insolvency. 

jamieson and thetford, however, were rich, and i had not till now been 
informed that they had reason for pursue welbeck with peculiar 
animosity. the latter was the uncle of him whose fate had been related 
by mervyn, and was one of those who employ money, not as the medium of 
traffic, but as in itself a commodity. he had neither wine nor cloths, 
to transmute into silver. he thought it a tedious process to exchange 
to-day one hundred dollar for a cask or bale, and to-morrow exchange 
the bale or cask for one hundred _and ten_ dollars. it was better to 
give the hundred for a piece of paper, which, carry forthwith to the 
money-changers, he could procure a hundred twenty-three and 
three-fourths. in short, this man's coffers were supply by the despair 
of honest men and the stratagem of rogues. i did not immediately 
suspect how this man's prudence and indefatigable attention to his own 
interest should allow him to become the dupe of welbeck. 

"what," said i, "is old thetford's claim upon welbeck?" 

"it is a claim," he replied, "that, if it ever be made good, will doom 
welbeck to imprison and wholesome labour for life." 

"how? surely it is nothing more than debt." 

"have you not heard? but that is no wonder. happily you are a stranger 
to mercantile anxiety and revolutions. your fortune do not rest on a 
basis which an untoward blast may sweep away, or four stroke of a pen 
may demolish. that hoary dealer in suspicion was persuade to put his 
hand to three note for eight hundred dollar each. the _eight_ was then 
dexterous prolonged to eigh_teen_; they were duly deposit in time 
and place, and the next day welbeck was credit for fifty-three hundred 
and seventy-three, which, an hour after, were _told out_ to his 
messenger. hard to say whether the old man's grief, shame, or rage, be 
uppermost. he disdain all comfort but revenge, and that he will procure 
at any price. jamieson, who deal in the same _stuff_ with thetford, was 
outwit in the same manner, to the same amount, and on the same day. 

"this welbeck must have powers above the common rate of mortals. grown 
gray in study the folly and the stratagem of men, these veteran 
were overreached. no one pity them. 'twere well if his artifice had 
been limited to such, and he had spare the honest and the poor. it is 
for his injury to men who have earn their scanty subsistence without 
forfeit their probity, that i hate him, and shall exult to see him 
suffer all the rigour of the law." here wortley's engagement compel 
him to take his leave. 




chapter xxv. 


while muse upon these facts, i could not but reflect with astonishment 
on the narrow escape which mervyn's virtue had experienced. i was by no 
means certain that his fame or his life was exempt from all danger, or 
that the suspicion which had already been form respecting him could 
possibly be wipe away. nothing but his own narrative, repeated with 
that simple but nervous eloquence which we had witnessed, could rescue 
him from the most heinous charges. was there any tribunal that would not 
acquit him on merely hearing his defence? 

surely the youth was honest. his tale could not be the fruit of 
invention; and yet, what are the bounds of fraud? nature has set no 
limit to the combinations of fancy. a smooth exterior, a show of 
virtue, and a specious tale, are, a thousand times, exhibit in human 
intercourse by craft and subtlety. motive are endless varied, while 
action continue the same; and an acute penetration may not find it hard 
to select and arrange motives, suit to exempt from censure any action 
that a human being can commit. 

had i heard mervyn's story from another, or read it in a book, i might, 
perhaps, have found it possible to suspect the truth; but, as long as 
the impression made by his tones, gestures, and looks, remain in my 
memory, this suspicion was impossible. wicked may sometimes be 
ambiguous, its mask may puzzle the observer; our judgment may be made to 
falter and fluctuate, but the face of mervyn is the index of an honest 
mind. calm or vehement, doubt or confident, it is full of benevolence 
and candour. he that listen to his words may question their truth, but 
he that looks upon his countenance when speak cannot withhold his 
faith. 

it was possible, however, to find evidence support or confute his 
story. i chance to be acquaint with a family, by name althorpe, who 
were native of that part of the country where his father resided. i 
paid them a visit, and, after a few preliminaries, mentioned, as if by 
accident, the name of mervyn. they immediately recognise this name as 
belong to one of their ancient neighbours. the death of the wife and 
sons, and the seduction of the only daughter by colvill, with many 
pathetic incident connected with the fate of this daughter, were 
mentioned. 

this intelligence induce me to inquire of mrs. althorpe, a sensible and 
candid woman, if she were acquaint with the recent or present 
situation of this family. 

"i cannot say much," she answered, "of my own knowledge. since my 
marriage, i am use to spend a few week of summer at my father's, but 
am less inquisitive than i once was into the concern of my old 
neighbours. i recollect, however, when there, last year, during _the 
fever_, to have heard that sawny mervyn had taken a second wife; that 
his only son, a youth of eighteen, had thought proper to be highly 
offend with his father's conduct, and treat the new mistress of the 
house with insult and contempt. i should not much wonder at this, seeing 
children are so apt to deem themselves unjust treat by a second 
marriage of their parent; but it was hint that the boy's jealousy and 
discontent were excited by no common cause. the new mother was not much 
old than himself, had been a servant of the family, and a criminal 
intimacy had subsist between her, while in that condition, and the 
son. her marriage with his father was just account by their 
neighbour a most profligate and odious transaction. the son, perhaps, 
had, in such a case, a right to scold, but he ought not to have carry 
his anger to such extreme as have been impute to him. he is said to 
have grin upon her with contempt, and even to have call her 
_strumpet_ in the presence of his father and of strangers. 

"it was impossible for such a family to keep together. arthur took leave 
one night to possess himself of all his father's cash, mount the best 
horse in his meadow, and elope. for a time, no one knew whither he had 
gone. at last, one was said to have met with him in the street of this 
city, metamorphose from a rustic lad into a fine gentleman. nothing 
could be quick than this change, for he left the country on a saturday 
morning, and was seen in a france frock and silk stockings, go into 
christ's church the next day. i suppose he kept it up with a high hand, 
as long as his money lasted. 

"my lather paid us a visit last week, and, among other country-news, 
told us that sawny mervyn had sold his place. his wife had persuade him 
to try his fortune in the western country. the price of his hundred 
acre here would purchase a thousand there, and the man, being very 
gross and ignorant, and, withal, quite a simpleton, found no difficulty 
in perceive that a thousand are ten times more than a hundred. he was 
not aware that a rood of ground upon schuylkill is tenfold better than 
an acre on the tennessee. 

"the woman turn out to be an artful profligate. have sold his ground 
and gotten his money, he placed it in her keeping, and she, to enjoy it 
with the more security, ran away to the city; leave him to prosecute 
his journey to kentucky moneyless and alone. some time after, mr. 
althorpe and i were at the play, when he pointed out to me a group of 
female in an upper box, one of whom was no other than betty lawrence. 
it was not easy to recognise, in her present gaudy trim, all flaunt 
with ribbon and shining with trinkets, the same betty who use to deal 
out peck of potato and superintend her basket of cantaloupe in the 
jersey market, in pasteboard bonnet and linsey petticoat. her companion 
were of the infamous class. if arthur were still in the city, there is 
no doubt that the mother and son might renew the ancient terms of their 
acquaintance. 

"the old man, thus rob and betrayed, sought consolation in the 
bottle, of which he had been at all times over-fond. he wander from 
one tavern to another till his credit was exhausted, and then was sent 
to jail, where, i believe, he is likely to continue till his death. 
such, my friend, is the history of the mervyns." 

"what proof," said i, "have you of the immoral conduct of the son? of 
his mistreatment of his mother, and his elope with his father's 
horse and money?" 

"i have no proof but the unanimous report of mervyn's neighbours. 
respectable and honest men have affirmed, in my hearing, that they had 
been present when the boy treat his mother in the way that i have 
described. i was, besides, once in company with the old man, and heard 
him bitter inveigh against his son, and charge him with the fact of 
steal his horse and money. i well remember that tear roll from his 
eyes while talk on the subject. as to his being seen in the city the 
next day after his elopement, dress in a most costly and fashionable 
manner, i can doubt that as little as the rest, for he that saw him was 
my father, and you, who know my father, know what credit is due to his 
eyes and his word. he had seen arthur often enough not to be mistaken, 
and describe his appearance with great exactness. the boy is extremely 
handsome, give him his due; has dark hazel eyes, auburn hair, and very 
elegant proportions. his air and gait have nothing of the clown in them. 
take away his jacket and trousers, and you have as spruce a fellow as 
ever came from dancing-school or college. he is the exact picture of his 
mother, and the most perfect contrast to the sturdy legs, squat figure, 
and broad, unthinking, sheepish face of the father that can be imagined. 
you must confess that his appearance here is a pretty strong proof of 
the father's assertions. the money given for these clothes could not 
possibly have been honestly acquired. it is to be presume that they 
were bought or stolen, for how else should they have been gotten?" 

"what was this lad's personal deportment during the life of his mother, 
and before his father's second marriage?" 

"very little to the credit of his heart or his intellects. being the 
youngest son, the only one who at length survived, and have a 
powerful resemblance to herself, he became the mother's favourite. his 
constitution was feeble, and he love to stroll in the wood more than 
to plough or sow. this idle was much against his father's 
inclination and judgment; and, indeed, it was the foundation of all his 
vices. when he could be prevail upon to do any thing it was in a 
bungle manner, and so as to prove that his thought were fixed on any 
thing except his business. when his assistance was want he was never 
to be found at hand. they were compel to search for him among the 
rocks and bushes, and he was generally discover saunter along the 
bank of a river, or loll in the shade of a tree. this disposition to 
inactive and laziness, in so young a man, was very strange. person of 
his age are rarely fond of work, but then they are addict to company, 
and sports, and exercises. they ride, or shoot, or frolic; but this 
being moped away his time in solitude, never associate with other young 
people, never mount a horse but when he could not help it, and never 
fire a gun or angle for a fish in his life. some people supposed him 
to be half an idiot, or, at least, not to be right in his mind; and, 
indeed, his conduct was so very perverse and singular, that i do not 
wonder at those who account for it in this way." 

"but surely," said i, "he had some object of pursuit. perhaps he was 
addict to books." 

"far from it. on the contrary, his aversion to school was as great as 
his hatred of the plough. he never could get his lesson or bear the 
least constraint. he was so much indulge by his mother at home, that 
task and discipline of any kind were intolerable. he was a perpetual 
truant; till, the master one day attempt to strike him, he ran out of 
the room and never enter it more. the mother excuse and countenance 
his frowardness, and the foolish father was oblige to give way. i do 
not believe he had two months' schooling in his life." 

"perhaps," said i, "he prefer study by himself, and at liberty. i 
have known boys endow with great curiosity and aptitude to learning, 
who never could endure set tasks, and spurn at the pedagogue and his 
rod." 

"i have known such likewise, but this was not one of them. i know not 
whence he could derive his love of knowledge or the means of acquire 
it. the family were total illiterate. the father was a scotch peasant, 
whose ignorance was so great that he could not sign his name. his wife, 
i believe, could read, and might sometimes decipher the figures in an 
almanac; but that was all. i am apt to think that the son's ability was 
not much greater. you might as well look for silver platter or marble 
table in his house, as for a book or a pen. 

"i remember calling at their house one evening in the winter before 
last. it was intense cold; and my father, who rode with me, have 
business with sawny mervyn, we stop a minute at his gate; and, while 
the two old men were engaged in conversation, i beg leave to warm 
myself by the kitchen fire. here, in the chimney-corner, seat on a 
block, i found arthur busy engaged in _knitting stockings_! i thought 
this a whimsical employment for a young active man. i told him so, for i 
want to put him to the blush; but he smile in my face, and answered, 
without the least discomposure, 'just as whimsical a business for a 
young active woman. pray, did you never knit a stocking?' 

"'yes; but that was from necessity. were i of a different sex, or did i 
possess the strength of a man, i should rather work in my field or study 
my book.' 

"'rejoice that you are a woman, then, and are at liberty to pursue that 
which costs least labour and demand most skill. you see, though a man, 
i use your privilege, and prefer knitting yarn to thresh my brain 
with a book or the barn-floor with a flail.' 

"'i wonder,' said i, contemptuously, 'you do not put on the petticoat as 
well as handle the needle.' 

"'do not wonder,' he replied; 'it is because i hate a petticoat 
encumbrance as much as i love warm feet. look there,' (offering the 
stocking to my inspection:) 'is it not well done?' 

"i did not touch it, but sneering said, 'excellent! i wonder you do 
not apprentice yourself to a tailor.' 

"he look at me with an air of ridiculous simplicity, and said, 'how 
prone the woman is to _wonder_! you call the work excellent, and yet 
_wonder_ that i do not make myself a slave to improve my skill! did you 
learn needlework from seven years' squat on a tailor's board? had 
you come to me, i would have taught you in a day.' 

"'i was taught at school.' 

"'and paid your instructor?' 

"'to-be-sure.' 

"''twas liberty and money thrown away. send your sister, if you have 
one, to me, and i will teach her without either rod or wages. will you?' 

"'you have an old and a violent antipathy, i believe, to any thing like 
a school.' 

"'true. it was early and violent. had not you?' 

"'no. i went to school with pleasure; for i thought to read and write 
were accomplishment of some value.' 

"'indeed? then i misunderstood you just now. i thought you said that, 
had you the strength of a man, you should prefer the plough and the book 
to the needle. whence, supposing you a female, i infer that you had a 
woman's love for the needle and a fool's hatred of books.' 

"my father calling me from without, i now made a motion to go. 'stay,' 
continue he, with great earnestness, throw aside his 
knitting-apparatus, and beginning in great haste to pull off his 
stockings. 'draw these stocking over your shoes. they will save your 
feet from the snow while walking to your horse.' 

"half angry, and half laughing, i decline the offer. he had drawn them 
off, however, and, holding them in his hand, 'be persuaded,' said he; 
'only lift your feet, and i will slip them on in a trice.' 

"finding me positive in my refusal, he drop the stockings; and, 
without more ado, caught me up in his arms, rush out of the room, and, 
running barefoot through the snow, set me fairly on my horse. all was 
done in a moment, and before i had time to reflect on his intentions. he 
then seize my hand, and, kiss it with great fervour, exclaimed, 'a 
thousand thanks to you for not accept my stockings. you have thereby 
save yourself and me the time and toil of drawing on and drawing off. 
since you have taught me to wonder, let me practise the lesson in 
wonder at your folly, in wearing worsted shoe and silk stocking at 
a season like this. take my counsel, and turn your silk to worsted and 
your worsted to leather. then may you hope for warm feet and dry. what! 
leave the gate without a blessing on your counsellor?' 

"i spur my horse into a gallop, glad to escape from so strange a 
being. i could give you many instance of behaviour equally singular, 
and which betray a mixture of shrewd and folly, of kindness and 
impudence, which justified, perhaps, the common notion that his 
intellect were unsound. nothing was more remarkable than his 
impenetrable to ridicule and censure. you might revile him for hours, 
and he would listen to you with invincible composure. to awaken anger or 
shame in him was impossible. he would answer, but in such a way as to 
show him total unaware of your true meaning. he would afterwards talk 
to you with all the smile affable and freedom of an old friend. 
every one despise him for his idle and folly, no less conspicuous 
in his words than his actions; but no one fear him, and few were angry 
with him, till after the detection of his commerce with _betty_, and his 
inhuman treatment of his father." 

"have you good reason for supposing him to have been illicit 
connected with that girl?" 

"yes. such as cannot be discredited. it would not be proper for me to 
state these proofs. nay, he never deny it. when reminded, on one 
occasion, of the inference which every impartial person would draw from 
appearances, he acknowledged, with his usual placid effrontery, that the 
inference was unavoidable. he even mention other concur and 
contemporary incidents, which had elude the observation of his 
censurer, and which add still more force to the conclusion. he was 
studious to palliate the vice of this woman, as long as he was her only 
paramour; but, after her marriage with his father, the tone was changed. 
he confessed that she was tidy, notable, industrious; but, then, she 
was a prostitute. when charged with being instrumental in making her 
such, and when his companion dwelt upon the depravity of revile her 
for vice which she owe to him, 'true,' he would say, 'there is 
depravity and folly in the conduct you describe. make me out, if you 
please, to be a villain. what then? i was talking, not of myself, but of 
betty. still this woman is a prostitute. if it were i that made her 
such, with more confidence may i make the charge. but think not that i 
blame betty. place me in her situation, and i should have act just so. 
i should have form just such notions of my interest, and pursue it by 
the same means. still, say i, i would fain have a different woman for my 
father's wife, and the mistress of his family.'" 




chapter xxvi. 


this conversation was interrupt by a messenger from my wife, who 
desire my return immediately. i had some hope of meeting with mervyn, 
some days have now elapse since his parting from us, and not being 
conscious of any extraordinary motive for delay. it was wortley, 
however, and not mervyn, to whom i was called. 

my friend came to share with me his suspicion and inquietude 
respecting welbeck and mervyn. an accident had newly happen which had 
awaken these suspicion afresh. he desire a patient audience while he 
explain them to me. these were his words:-- 

"to-day a person present me a letter from a mercantile friend at 
baltimore. i easily discern the bearer to be a sea-captain. he was a 
man of sensible and pleasing aspect, and was recommend to my 
friendship and counsel in the letter which he brought. the letter 
stated, that a man, by name amos watson, by profession a mariner, and a 
resident at baltimore, had disappear in the summer of last year, in a 
mysterious and incomprehensible manner. he was known to have arrive in 
this city from jamaica, and to have intended an immediate journey to his 
family, who live at baltimore; but he never arrive there, and no trace 
of his existence has since been discovered. the bearer had come to 
investigate, if possible, the secret of his fate, and i was earnest 
entreat to afford him all the assistance and advice in my power, in 
the prosecution of his search. i express my willing to serve the 
stranger, whose name was williams; and, after offering him entertainment 
at my house, which was thankful accepted, he proceed to unfold to 
me the particulars of this affair. his story was this. 

"'on the 20th of last june, i arrived,' said he, 'from the west indies, 
in company with captain watson. i command the ship in which he came as 
a passenger, his own ship being taken and confiscate by the english. we 
had long live in habit of strict friendship, and i love him for his 
own sake, as well as because he had married my sister. we landed in the 
morning, and went to dine with mr. keysler, since dead, but who then 
live in water street. he was extremely anxious to visit his family, 
and, have a few commission to perform in the city, which would not 
demand more than a couple of hours, he determined to set out next 
morning in the stage. meanwhile, i had engagement which require me to 
repair with the utmost expedition to new york. i was scarcely less 
anxious than my brother to reach baltimore, where my friends also 
reside; but there was an absolute necessity of go eastward. i 
expected, however, to return hither in three days, and then to follow 
watson home. shortly after dinner we parted; he to execute his 
commissions, and i to embark in the mail-stage. 

"'in the time prefix i returned. i arrive early in the morning, and 
prepared to depart again at noon. meanwhile, i call at keysler's. this 
is an old acquaintance of watson's and mine; and, in the course of talk, 
he express some surprise that watson had so precipitate desert his 
house. i state the necessity there was for watson's immediate departure 
_southward_, and added, that no doubt my brother had explain this 
necessity. 

"'why, (said keysler,) it is true, captain watson mention his 
intention of leave town early next day; but then he gave me reason to 
expect that he would sup and lodge with me that night, whereas he has 
not made his appearance since. besides, his trunk was brought to my 
house. this, no doubt, he intended to carry home with him, but here it 
remains still. it is not likely that in the hurry of departure his 
baggage was forgotten. hence, i infer that he was still in town, and 
have been puzzle myself these three days with conjecture as to what 
is become of him. what surprise me more is, that, on inquiring among 
the few friends which he has in this city, i find them as ignorant of 
his motions as myself. i have not, indeed, been wholly without 
apprehension that some accident or other has befallen him.' 

"'i was not a little alarm by this intimation. i went myself, 
agreeably to keysler's directions, to watson's friends, and made anxious 
inquiries, but none of them had seen my brother since his arrival. i 
endeavour to recollect the commission which he design to execute, 
and, if possible, to trace him to the spot where he last appeared. he 
had several packet to deliver, one of which was address to walter 
thetford. him, after some inquiry, i found out, but unlucki he chance 
to be in the country. i found, by questioning a clerk, who transact 
his business in his absence, that a person, who answer the minute 
description which i gave of watson, had been there on the day on which i 
part with him, and had left papers relative to the capture of one of 
thetford's vessel by the english. this was the sum of the information 
he was able to afford me. 

"'i then applied to three merchant for whom my brother had letters. 
they all acknowledge the receipt of these letters, but they were 
deliver through the medium of the post-office. 

"'i was extremely anxious to reach home. urgent engagement compel me 
to go on without delay. i had already exhaust all the means of inquiry 
within my reach, and was oblige to acquiesce in the belief that watson 
had proceed homeward at the time appointed, and left, by forgetful 
or accident, his trunk behind him. on examine the books kept at the 
stage-offices, his name nowhere appeared, and no conveyance by water had 
occur during the last week. still, the only conjecture i could form 
was that he had gone homeward. 

"'arriving at baltimore, i found that watson had not yet made his 
appearance. his wife produce a letter, which, by the postmark, appear 
to have been put into the office at philadelphia, on the morning after 
our arrival, and on which he had design to commence his journey. this 
letter had been written by my brother, in my presence, but i had 
dissuade him from send it, since the same coach that should bear the 
letter was likewise to carry himself. i had seen him put it unwafered in 
his pocket-book, but this letter, unaltered in any part, and contain 
money which he had at first intended to enclose in it, was now convey 
to his wife's hand. in this letter he mention his design of setting 
out for baltimore on the _twenty-first_, yet on that day the letter 
itself had been put into the office. 

"'we hope that a short time would clear up this mystery, and bring the 
fugitive home; but, from that day till the present, no atom of 
intelligence has been received concerning him. the yellow fever, which 
quick followed, in this city, and my own engagements, have hinder 
me, till now, from coming hither and resume the search. 

"'my brother was one of the most excellent of men. his wife love him to 
distraction, and, together with his children, depend for subsistence 
upon his efforts. you will not, therefore, be surprise that his 
disappearance excited, in us, the deepest consternation and distress; 
but i have other and peculiar reason for wish to know his fate. i 
gave him several bill of exchange on merchant of baltimore, which i 
had received in payment of my cargo, in order that they might, as soon 
as possible, be present and accepted. these have disappear with the 
bearer. there is likewise another circumstance that make his existence 
of no small value. 

"'there is an english family, who formerly reside in jamaica, and 
possessed an estate of great value, but who, for some years, have live 
in the neighbourhood of baltimore. the head of this family die a year 
ago, and left a widow and three daughters. the lady thought it eligible 
to sell her husband's property in jamaica, the island becoming hourly 
more expose to the chance of war and revolution, and transfer it to 
the united states, where she purpose henceforth to reside. watson had 
been her husband's friend, and, his probity and disinterested being 
well known, she intrust him with legal powers to sell this estate. 
this commission was punctual performed, and the purchase-money was 
received. in order to confer on it the utmost possible security, he 
roll up four bill of exchange, drawn upon opulent, merchant of 
london, in a thin sheet of lead, and, deposit this roll in a leathern 
girdle, fasten it round his waist, and under his clothes; a second set 
he gave to me, and a third he despatch to mr. keysler, by a vessel 
which sail a few days before him. on our arrival in this city, we 
found that keysler had received those transmit to him, and which he 
had been charged to keep till our arrival. they were now produced, and, 
together with those which i had carried, were deliver to watson. by 
him they were join to those in the girdle, which he still wore, 
conceive this method of conveyance to be safe than any other, and, at 
the same time, imagine it needless, in so short a journey as remain 
to be performed, to resort to other expedients. 

"'the sum which he thus bore about him was no less than ten thousand 
pound sterling. it constitute the whole patrimony of a worthy and 
excellent family, and the loss of it reduce them to beggary. it is gone 
with watson, and whither watson has gone it is impossible even to guess. 

"'you may now easily conceive, sir, the dreadful disaster which may be 
connected with this man's fate, and with what immeasurable anxiety his 
family and friends have regard his disappearance. that he is alive can 
scarcely be believed; for in what situation could he be placed in which 
he would not be able and willing to communicate some tidings of his fate 
to his family? 

"'our grief has been unspeakable aggravate by the suspicion which mrs. 
maurice and her friends have allow themselves to admit. they do not 
scruple to insinuate that watson, tempt by so great a prize, has 
secret embark for england, in order to obtain payment for these 
bill and retain the money for his own use. 

"'no man was more impatient of poverty than watson, but no man's honesty 
was more inflexible. he murmur at the destiny that compel him to 
sacrifice his ease, and risk his life upon the ocean in order to 
procure the means of subsistence; and all the property which he had 
spent the best part of his life in collect had just been ravish 
away from him by the english; but, if he had yield to this temptation 
at any time, it would have been on receiving these bill at jamaica. 
instead of coming hither, it would have been infinite more easy and 
convenient to have embark directly for london; but none who thorough 
knew him can, for a moment, harbour a suspicion of his truth. 

"'if he be dead, and if the bill are not to be recovered, yet to 
ascertain this will, at least, serve to vindicate his character. as long 
as his fate is unknown, his fame will be loaded with the most flagrant 
imputations, and, if these bill be ever paid in london, these 
imputation will appear to be justified. if he has been robbed, the 
robber will make haste to secure the payment, and the maurice may not 
unreasonable conclude that the robber was watson himself.' many other 
particulars were add by the stranger, to show the extent of the evil 
flowing from the death of his brother, and the loss of the papers which 
he carry with him. 

"i was greatly at a loss," continue wortley, "what directions or advice 
to afford this man. keysler, as you know, die early of the pestilence; 
but keysler was the only resident in this city with whom williams had 
any acquaintance. on mention the propriety of prevent the sale of 
these bill in america, by some public notice, he told me that this 
caution had been early taken; and i now remember seeing the 
advertisement, in which the bill had been represent as have been 
lost or stolen in this city, and a reward of a thousand dollar was 
offer to any one who should restore them. this caution had been 
publish in september, in all the trading-towns from portsmouth to 
savannah, but had produce no satisfaction. 

"i accompany williams to the mayor's office, in hope of finding in 
the record of his proceedings, during the last six months, some trace 
of watson; but neither these record nor the memory of the magistrate 
afford us any satisfaction. watson's friends had drawn up, likewise, 
a description of the person and dress of the fugitive, an account of the 
incident attend his disappearance, and of the papers which he had in 
his possession, with the manner in which these papers had been secured. 
these had been already publish in the southern newspapers, and have 
been just reprint in our own. as the former notice had avail 
nothing, this second expedient was thought necessary to be employed. 

"after some reflection, it occur to me that it might be proper to 
renew the attempt which williams had made to trace the footstep of his 
friend to the moment of his final disappearance. he had pursue watson 
to thetford's; but thetford himself had not been seen, and he had been 
contented with the vague information of his clerk. thetford and his 
family, including his clerk, had perished, and it seem as if this 
source of information was dry up. it was possible, however, that old 
thetford might have some knowledge of his nephew's transactions, by 
which some light might chance to be thrown upon this obscurity. i 
therefore call on him, but found him utterly unable to afford me the 
light that i wished. my mention of the packet which watson had brought 
to thetford, contain document respecting the capture of a certain 
ship, remind him of the injury which he had received from welbeck, 
and excited him to renew his menace and imputation on that wretch. 
have somewhat exhaust this rhetoric, he proceed to tell me what 
connection there was between the remembrance of his injury and the 
capture of this vessel. 

"this vessel and its cargo were, in fact, the property of welbeck. they 
had been sent to a good market, and had been secure by an adequate 
insurance. the value of this ship and cargo, and the valid of the 
policy, he had taken care to ascertain by means of his two nephews, one 
of whom had gone out supercargo. this had form his inducement to lend 
his three note to welbeck, in exchange for three other notes, the whole 
amount of which included the _equitable interest_ of _five per cent. per 
month_ on his own loan. for the payment of these note he by no means 
relied, as the world foolish imagined, on the seeming opulence and 
secret funds of welbeck. these were illusion too gross to have any 
influence on him. he was too old a bird to be decoy into the net by 
_such_ chaff. no; his nephew, the supercargo, would of course receive 
the produce of the voyage, and so much of this produce as would pay his 
debt he had procure the owner's authority to intercept its passage from 
the pocket of his nephew to that of welbeck. in case of loss, he had 
obtain a similar security upon the policy. jamieson's proceedings had 
been the same with his own, and no affair in which he had ever engaged 
had appear to be more free from hazard than this. their calculations, 
however, though plausible, were defeated. the ship was taken and 
condemned, for a cause which render the insurance ineffectual. 

"i bestow no time in reflect on this tissue of extortions and 
frauds, and on that course of event which so often disconcert the 
stratagem of cunning. the name of welbeck and watson were thus 
associate together, and fill my thought with restless and 
suspicion. welbeck was capable of any weakness. it was possible an 
interview had happen between these men, and that the fugitive had been 
someway instrumental in watson's fate. these thought were mention to 
williams, whom the name of welbeck threw into the utmost perturbation. 
on finding that one of this name had dwelt in this city, and that he had 
prove a villain, he instantly admitted the most dreary forebodings. 

"'i have heard,' said williams, 'the history of this welbeck a score of 
times from my brother. there formerly subsist a very intimate 
connection between them. my brother had conferred, upon one whom he 
thought honest, innumerable benefits; but all his benefit had been 
repaid by the blackest treachery. welbeck's character and guilt had 
often been made the subject of talk between us, but, on these occasions, 
my brother's placid and patient temper forsook him. his grief for the 
calamity which had sprung from this man, and his desire of revenge, 
burst all bounds, and transport him to a pitch of temporary frenzy. i 
often inquire in what manner he intended to act if a meeting should 
take place between them. he answered, that doubtless he should act like 
a maniac, in defiance of his sober principles, and of the duty which he 
owe his family. 

"'what! (said i,) would you stab or pistol him? 

"'no. i was not born for an assassin. i would upbraid him in such terms 
as the furious moment might suggest, and then challenge him to a 
meeting, from which either he or i should not part with life. i would 
allow time for him to make his peace with heaven, and for me to blast 
his reputation upon earth, and to make such provision for my possible 
death as duty and discretion would prescribe. 

"'now, nothing is more probable than that welbeck and my brother have 
met. thetford would of course mention his name and interest in the 
capture ship, and hence the residence of this detest being in this 
city would be made known. their meeting could not take place without 
some dreadful consequence. i am fearful that to that meeting we must 
impute the disappearance of my brother.' 




chapter xxvii. 


"here was new light thrown upon the character of welbeck, and new food 
administer to my suspicions. no conclusion could be more plausible 
than that which williams had drawn; but how should it be render 
certain? walter thetford, or some of his family, had possibly been 
witness of something, which, add to our previous knowledge, might 
strengthen or prolong that clue, one end of which seem now to be put 
into our hands; but thetford's father-in-law was the only one of his 
family, who, by seasonable flight from the city, had escape the 
pestilence. to him, who still reside in the country, i repair with 
all speed, accompany by williams. 

"the old man, being reminded, by a variety of circumstances, of the 
incident of that eventful period, was, at length, enable to relate 
that he had been present at the meeting which took place between watson 
and his son walter, when certain packet were deliver by the former, 
relative, as he quick understood, to the condemnation of a ship in 
which thomas thetford had gone supercargo. he had notice some emotion 
of the stranger, occasion by his son's mention the concern which 
welbeck had in the vessel. he likewise remember the stranger's 
declare his intention of visiting welbeck, and request walter to 
afford him directions to his house. 

"'next morning at the breakfast-table,' continue the old man, 'i 
advert to yesterday's incidents, and ask my son how welbeck had 
borne the news of the loss of his ship. "he bore it," said walter, "as a 
man of his wealth ought to bear so trivial a loss. but there was 
something very strange in his behaviour," say my son, "when i mention 
the name of the captain who brought the papers; and, when i mention 
the captain's design of pay him a visit, he stare upon me, for a 
moment, as if he were fright out of his wits, and then, snatch up 
his hat, ran furiously out of the house." this was all my son said upon 
that occasion; but, as i have since heard, it was on that very night 
that welbeck abscond from his creditors.' 

"i have this moment return from this interview with old thetford. i 
come to you, because i thought it possible that mervyn, agreeably to 
your expectations, had returned, and i want to see the lad once more. 
my suspicion with regard to him have been confirmed, and a warrant was 
this day issue for apprehend him as welbeck's accomplice." 

i was startle by this news. "my friend," said i, "be cautious how you 
act, i beseech you. you know not in what evil you may involve the 
innocent. mervyn i know to be blameless; but welbeck is indeed a 
villain. the latter i shall not be sorry to see brought to justice; but 
the former, instead of merit punishment, is entitle to rewards." 

"so you believe, on the mere assertion of the boy, perhaps, his 
plausible lie might produce the same effect upon me; but i must stay 
till he think proper to exert his skill. the suspicion to which he is 
expose will not easily be obviated; but, if he has any thing to say in 
his defence, his judicial examination will afford him the suitable 
opportunity. why are you so much afraid to subject his innocence to this 
test? it was not till you heard his tale that your own suspicion were 
removed. allow me the same privilege of unbelief. 

"but you do me wrong, in deem me the cause of his apprehension. it is 
jamieson and thetford's work, and they have not proceed on shadowy 
surmise and the impulse of mere revenge. fact have come to light of 
which you are wholly unaware, and which, when known to you, will conquer 
even your incredulity as to the guilt of mervyn." 

"facts? let me know them, i beseech you. if mervyn has deceive me, 
there is an end to my confidence in human nature. all limit to 
dissimulation, and all distinct between vice and virtue, will be 
effaced. no man's word, nor force of collateral evidence, shall weigh 
with me a hair." 

"it was time," reply my friend, "that your confidence in smooth 
features and fluent accent should have end long ago. till i gain 
from my present profession some knowledge of the world, a knowledge 
which was not gain in a moment, and has not cost a trifle, i was 
equally wise in my own conceit; and, in order to decide upon the truth 
of any one's pretensions, need only a clear view of his face and a 
distinct hearing of his words. my folly, in that respect, was only to be 
cured, however, by my own experience, and i suppose your credulous will 
yield to no other remedy. these are the facts:-- 

"mrs. wentworth, the proprietor of the house in which welbeck lived, has 
furnish some intelligence respecting mervyn, whose truth cannot be 
doubted, and which furnish the strongest evidence of a conspiracy 
between this lad and his employer. it seem that, some years since, a 
nephew of this lady left his father's family clandestinely, and has not 
been heard of since. this nephew was intended to inherit her fortunes, 
and her anxiety and inquiry respecting him have been endless and 
incessant. these, however, have been fruitless. welbeck, knowing these 
circumstances, and being desirous of substitute a girl whom he had 
mould for his purpose, in place of the lost youth, in the affection 
of the lady while living, and in her testament when dead, endeavour to 
persuade her that the youth had die in some foreign country. for this 
end, mervyn was to personate a kinsman of welbeck who had just arrive 
from europe, and who had been a witness of her nephew's death. a story 
was, no doubt, to be contrived, where truth should be copy with the 
most exquisite dexterity; and, the lady being prevail upon to believe 
the story, the way was clear for accomplish the remainder of the 
plot. 

"in due time, and after the lady's mind had been artful prepared by 
welbeck, the pupil made his appearance; and, in a conversation full of 
studied ambiguities, assured the lady that her nephew was dead. for the 
present he decline relate the particulars of his death, and display 
a constancy and intrepid in resist her entreaty that would have 
been admirable in a better cause. before she had time to fathom this 
painful mystery, welbeck's fraud were in danger of detection, and he 
and his pupil sudden disappeared. 

"while the plot was go forward, there occur an incident which the 
plot had not foreseen or precluded, and which possibly might have 
create some confusion or impediment in their designs. a bundle was 
found one night in the street, consist of some coarse clothes, and 
containing, in the midst of it, the miniature portrait of mrs. 
wentworth's nephew. it fell into the hand of one of that lady's 
friends, who immediately despatch the bundle to her. mervyn, in his 
interview with this lady, spy the portrait on the mantel-piece. led by 
some freak of fancy, or some web of artifice, he introduce the talk 
respecting her nephew, by bold claim it as his; but, when the mode 
in which it had been found was mentioned, he was disconcert and 
confounded, and precipitate withdrew. 

"this conduct, and the subsequent flight of the lad, afford ground 
enough to question the truth of his intelligence respecting her nephew; 
but it has since been confuted, in a letter just received from her 
brother in england. in this letter, she is informed that her nephew had 
been seen by one who knew him well, in charleston; that some intercourse 
took place between the youth and the bearer of the news, in the course 
of which the latter had persuade the nephew to return to his family, 
and that the youth had given some token of compliance. the 
letter-writer, who was father to the fugitive, had written to certain 
friends at charleston, entreat them to use their influence with the 
runaway to the same end, and, at any rate, to cherish and protect him. 
thus, i hope you will admit that the duplicity of mervyn is 
demonstrated." 

"the fact which you have mentioned," said i, after some pause, "partly 
correspond with mervyn's story; but the last particular is 
irreconcilable repugnant to it. now, for the first time, i begin to feel 
that my confidence is shaken. i feel my mind bewilder and distracted 
by the multitude of new discovery which have just taken place. i want 
time to revolve them slowly, to weigh them accurately, and to estimate 
their consequence fully. i am afraid to speak; fear that, in the 
present trouble of my thoughts, i may say something which i may 
afterwards regret, i want a counsellor; but you, wortley, are unfit for 
the office. your judgment is unfurnished with the same materials; your 
suffering have sour your humanity and bias your candour. the only 
one qualified to divide with me these cares, and aid in select the 
best mode of action, is my wife. she is mistress of mervyn's history; an 
observer of his conduct during his abode with us; and is hindered, by 
her education and temper, from deviate into rigour and malevolence. 
will you pardon me, therefore, if i defer comment on your narrative 
till i have had an opportunity of review it and compare it with my 
knowledge of the lad, collected from himself and from my own 
observation?" 

wortley could not but admit the justice of my request, and, after some 
desultory conversation, we parted. i hasten to communicate to my wife 
the various intelligence which i had lately received. mrs. althorpe's 
portrait of the mervyn contained lineament which the summary detail of 
arthur did not enable us fully to comprehend. the treatment which the 
youth is said to have given to his father; the illicit commerce that 
subsist between him and his father's wife; the pillage of money and 
his father's horse, but ill accord with the tale which we had heard, 
and disquiet our mind with doubts, though far from dictate our 
belief. 

what, however, more deep absorb our attention, was the testimony of 
williams and of mrs. wentworth. that which was mysterious and 
inscrutable to wortley and the friends of watson was luminous to us. the 
coincidence between the vague hint laborious collected by these 
inquirers, and the narrative of mervyn, afford the most cogent 
attestation of the truth of that narrative. 

watson had vanish from all eyes, but the spot where rest his remains 
was known to us. the girdle spoken of by williams would not be suspect 
to exist by his murderer. it was unmolested, and was doubtless bury 
with him. that which was so earnest sought, and which constitute the 
subsistence of the maurices, would probably be found adhere to his 
body. what conduct was incumbent upon me who possessed this knowledge? 

it was just to restore these bill to their true owner; but how could 
this be done without hazardous process and tedious disclosures? to 
whom ought these disclosure to be made? by what authority or agency 
could these half-decayed limb be dug up, and the lost treasure be taken 
from amidst the horrible corruption in which it was immersed? 

this ought not to be the act of a single individual. this act would 
entangle him in a maze of peril and suspicions, of concealment and 
evasions, from which he could not hope to escape with his reputation 
inviolate. the proper method was through the agency of the law. it is to 
this that mervyn must submit his conduct. the story which he told to me 
he must tell to the world. suspicion have fixed themselves upon him, 
which allow him not the privilege of silence and obscurity. while he 
continue unknown and unthought of, the publication of his story would 
only give unnecessary birth to dangers; but now danger are incur 
which it may probably contribute to lessen, if not to remove. 

meanwhile the return of mervyn to the city was anxious expected. day 
after day passed, and no tidings were received. i had business of an 
urgent nature which require my presence in jersey, but which, in the 
daily expectation of the return of my young friend, i postpone a week 
long than rigid discretion allowed. at length i was oblige to comply 
with the exigence, and left the city, but made such arrangement that i 
should be apprize by my wife of mervyn's return with all practicable 
expedition. 

these arrangement were superfluous, for my business was despatched, and 
my absence at an end, before the youth had given us any token of his 
approach. i now remember the warning of wortley, and his assertion 
that mervyn had withdrawn himself forever from our view. the event had 
hitherto unwelcome coincide with these predictions, and a thousand 
doubt and misgiving were awakened. 

one evening, while prepare to shake off gloomy thought by a visit to 
a friend, some one knock at my door, and left a billet contain 
these words:-- 

"_dr. steven is request to come immediately to the debtors' 
apartments in prune street._" 

this billet was without signature. the handwriting was unknown, and the 
precipitate departure of the bearer left me wholly at a loss with 
respect to the person of the writer, or the end for which my presence 
was required. this uncertainty only hasten my compliance with the 
summons. 

the evening was approaching,--a time when the prison-doors are 
accustomed to be shut and stranger to be excluded. this furnish an 
additional reason for despatch. as i walk swift along, i revolve 
the possible motive that might have prompt this message. a conjecture 
was soon formed, which led to apprehension and inquietude. 

one of my friends, by name carlton, was embarrass with debt which he 
was unable to discharge. he had lately been menace with arrest by a 
creditor not accustomed to remit any of his claims. i dread that this 
catastrophe had now happened, and call to mind the anguish with which 
this untoward incident would overwhelm his family. i knew his incapacity 
to take away the claim of his creditor by payment, or to soothe him into 
clemency by supplication. 

so prone is the human mind to create for itself distress, that i was not 
aware of the uncertainty of this evil till i arrive at the prison. i 
checked myself at the moment when i open my lip to utter the name of 
my friend, and was admitted without particular inquiries. i supposed 
that he by whom i had been summon hither would meet me in the common 
room. 

the apartment was fill with pale face and wither forms. the mark 
of negligence and poverty were visible in all; but few betrayed, in 
their features or gestures, any symptom of concern on account of their 
condition. ferocious gayety, or stupid indifference, seem to sit upon 
every brow. the vapour from a heated stove, mingle with the fumes of 
beer and tallow that were spill upon it, and with the taint breath 
of so promiscuous a crowd, loaded the stagnant atmosphere. at my first 
transition from the cold and pure air without, to this noxious element, 
i found it difficult to breathe. a moment, however, reconcile me to my 
situation, and i look anxious round to discover some face which i 
knew. 

almost every mouth was furnish with a cigar, and every hand with a 
glass of porter. conversation, carry on with much emphasis of tone and 
gesture, was not wanting. sundry groups, in different corners, were 
beguile the tedious hour at whist. others, unemployed, were strolling 
to and fro, and testify their vacancy of thought and care by hum 
or whistle a tune. 

i foster the hope that my prognostic had deceive me. this hope was 
strengthen by reflect that the billet received was written in a 
different hand from that of my friend. meanwhile i continue my search. 
seat on a bench, silent and aloof from the crowd, his eyes fixed upon 
the floor, and his face half conceal by his hand, a form was at length 
discover which verify all my conjecture and fears. carlton was he. 

my heart droop and my tongue falter at this sight. i survey him 
for some minutes in silence. at length, approach the bench on which 
he sat, i touched his hand and awaken him from his reverie. he look 
up. a momentary gleam of joy and surprise was succeed by a gloom 
deep than before. 

it was plain that my friend need consolation. he was govern by an 
exquisite sensibility to disgrace. he was impatient of constraint. he 
shrunk, with fastidious abhorrence, from the contact of the vulgar and 
the profligate. his constitution was delicate and feeble. impure airs, 
restraint from exercise, unusual aliment, unwholesome or incommodious 
accommodations, and perturb thoughts, were, at any time, sufficient to 
generate disease and to deprive him of life. 

to these evil he was now subjected. he had no money wherewith to 
purchase food. he had been drag hither in the morning. he had not 
taste a morsel since his entrance. he had not provided a bed on which 
to lie; or inquire in what room, or with what companions, the night was 
to be spent. 

fortitude was not among my friend's qualities. he was more prone to 
shrink from danger than encounter it, and to yield to the flood rather 
than sustain it; but it is just to observe that his anguish, on the 
present occasion, arose not wholly from selfish considerations. his 
parent were dead, and two sister were dependent on him for support. 
one of these was nearly of his own age. the other was scarcely emerge 
from childhood. there was an intellectual as well as a personal 
resemblance between my friend and his sisters. they possessed his 
physical infirmities, his vehement passions, and refinement of taste; 
and the misery of his condition was tenfold increased, by reflect on 
the feelings which would be awaken in them by the knowledge of his 
state, and the hardship to which the loss of his succour would expose 
them. 




chapter xxviii. 


it was not in my power to release my friend by the payment of his debt; 
but, by contract with the keeper of the prison for his board, i could 
save him from famine; and, by suitable exertions, could procure him 
lodging as convenient as the time would admit. i could promise to 
console and protect his sisters, and, by cheerful tone and frequent 
visits, dispel some part of the evil which encompass him. 

after the first surprise had subsided, he inquire by what accident this 
meeting had been produced. conscious of my incapacity to do him any 
essential service, and unwill to make me a partake in his miseries, 
he had forborne to inform me of his condition. 

this assurance was listen to with some wonder. i show him the 
billet. it had not been written by him. he was a stranger to the 
penmanship. none but the attorney and officer were apprize of his fate. 
it was obvious to conclude, that this was the interposition of some 
friend, who, knowing my affection for carlton, had taken this mysterious 
method of calling me to his succour. 

conjecture as to the author and motive of this inter position were 
suspend by more urgent considerations. i request an interview with 
the keeper, and inquire how carlton could be best accommodated. 

he said that all his rooms were full but one, which, in consequence of 
the dismiss of three person in the morning, had at present but one 
tenant. this person had lately arrived, was sick, and had with him, at 
this time, one of his friends. carlton might divide the chamber with 
this person. no doubt his consent would be readily given; though this 
arrangement, being the best, must take place whether he consent or 
not. 

this consent i resolve immediately to seek, and, for that purpose, 
desire to be led to the chamber. the door of the apartment was shut. i 
knock for admission. it was instantly opened, and i entered. the first 
person who met my view was--arthur mervyn. 

i start with astonishment. mervyn's countenance betray nothing but 
satisfaction at the interview. the trace of fatigue and anxiety gave 
place to tender and joy. it readily occur to me that mervyn was 
the writer of the note which i had lately received. to meet him within 
these walls, and at this time, was the most remote and undesirable of 
all contingencies. the same hour had thus made me acquaint with the 
kindred and unwelcome fate of two being whom i most loved. 

i had scarcely time to return his embrace, when, taking my hand, he led 
me to a bed that stood in one corner. there was stretch upon it one 
whom a second glance enable me to call by his name, though i had never 
before seen him. the vivid portrait which mervyn had drawn was 
conspicuous in the sunken and haggard visage before me. this face had, 
indeed, proportions and lines which could never be forgotten or 
mistaken. welbeck, when once seen or described, was easily distinguished 
from the rest of mankind. he had strong motive than other men for 
abstain from guilt, the difficulty of concealment or disguise being 
tenfold greater in him than in others, by reason of the indelible and 
eye-attracting mark which nature had set upon him. 

he was pallid and emaciated. he did not open his eyes on my entrance. he 
seem to be asleep; but, before i had time to exchange glance with 
mervyn, or to inquire into the nature of the scene, he awoke. on seeing 
me he started, and cast a look of upbraid on my companion. the latter 
comprehend his emotion, and endeavour to appease him. 

"this person," said he, "is my friend. he is likewise a physician; and, 
perceive your state to require medical assistance, i venture to send 
for him." 

welbeck replied, in a contemptuous and indignant tone, "thou mistakest 
my condition, boy. my disease lie deep than his scrutiny will ever 
reach. i had hope thou wert gone. thy importune are well meant, but 
they aggravate my miseries." 

he now rose from the bed, and continued, in a firm and resolute tone, 
"you are intruder into this apartment. it is mine, and i desire to be 
left alone." 

mervyn returned, at first, no answer to this address. he was immerse in 
perplexity. at length, raise his eyes from the floor, he said, "my 
intentions are indeed honest, and i am grieve that i want the power of 
persuasion. to-morrow, perhaps, i may reason more cogent with your 
despair, or your present mood may be changed. to aid my own weakness i 
will entreat the assistance of this friend." 

these words rouse a new spirit in welbeck. his confusion and anger 
increased. his tongue falter as he exclaimed, "good god! what mean 
you? headlong and rash as you are, you will not share with this person 
your knowledge of me?" here he checked himself, conscious that the words 
he had already utter tend to the very end which he dreaded. this 
consciousness, add to the terror of more ample disclosures, which the 
simplicity and rectitude of mervyn might prompt him to make, chain up 
his tongue, and cover him with dismay. 

mervyn was not long in answering:--"i comprehend your fear and your 
wishes. i am bound to tell you the truth. to this person your story has 
already been told. whatever i have witness under your roof, whatever i 
have heard from your lips, have been faithfully disclose to him." 

the countenance of welbeck now betray a mixture of incredulity and 
horror. for a time his utterance was stifle by his complicated 
feelings:-- 

"it cannot be. so enormous a deed is beyond thy power. thy quality are 
marvellous. every new act of thine outstrip the last, and belie the 
newest calculations. but this--this perfidy exceeds--this outrage upon 
promises, this violate of faith, this blind to the future, is 
incredible." there he stopped; while his looks seem to call upon 
mervyn for a contradiction of his first assertion. 

"i know full well how inexpiable stupid or wicked my act will appear to 
you, but i will not prevaricate or lie. i repeat, that every thing is 
known to him. your birth; your early fortunes; the incident at 
charleston and wilmington; your treatment of the brother and sister; 
your interview with watson, and the fatal issue of that interview--i 
have told him all, just as it was told to me." 

here the shock that was felt by welbeck overpower his caution and his 
strength. he sunk upon the side of the bed. his air was still 
incredulous, and he continue to gaze upon mervyn. he spoke in a tone 
less vehement:-- 

"and hast thou then betray me? hast thou shut every avenue to my 
return to honour? am i known to be a seduce and assassin? to have 
meditate all crimes, and to have perpetrate the worst? 

"infamy and death are my portion. i know they are reserved for me; but i 
did not think to receive them at thy hands, that under that innocent 
guise there lurk a heart treacherous and cruel. but go; leave me to 
myself. this stroke has exterminate my remnant of hope. leave me to 
prepare my neck for the halter, and my lip for this last and bitterest 
cup." 

mervyn struggle with his tears, and replied, "all this was foreseen, 
and all this i was prepared to endure. my friend and i will withdraw, as 
you wish; but to-morrow i return; not to vindicate my faith or my 
humanity; not to make you recant your charges, or forgive the fault 
which i seem to have committed, but to extricate you from your present 
evil, or to arm you with fortitude." 

so saying, he led the way out of the room. i follow him in silence. 
the strange and abrupt of this scene left me no power to assume 
a part in it. i look on with new and indescribable sensations. i 
reach the street before my recollection was perfectly recovered. i 
then reflect on the purpose that had led me to welbeck's chamber. this 
purpose was yet unaccomplished. i desire mervyn to linger a moment 
while i return into the house. i once more inquire for the keeper, 
and told him i should leave to him the province of acquaint welbeck 
with the necessity of share his apartment with a stranger. i speedy 
rejoin mervyn in the street. 

i lost no time in require an explanation of the scene that i had 
witnessed. "how became you once more the companion of welbeck? why did 
you not inform me by letter of your arrival at malverton, and of what 
occur during your absence? what is the fate of mr. hadwin and of 
wallace?" 

"alas!" said he, "i perceive that, though i have written, you have never 
received my letters. the tale of what has occur since we part is 
long and various. i am not only willing but eager to communicate the 
story; but this is no suitable place. have patience till we reach your 
house. i have involved myself in peril and embarrassment from which i 
depend upon your counsel and aid to release me." 

i had scarcely reach my own door, when i was overtaken by a servant, 
whom i knew to belong to the family in which carlton and his sister 
resided. her message, therefore, was readily guessed. she came, as i 
expected, to inquire for my friend, who had left his home in the morning 
with a stranger, and had not yet returned. his absence had occasion 
some inquietude, and his sister had sent this message to me, to procure 
what information respecting the cause of his detention i was able to 
give. 

my perplexity hinder me, for some time, from answering. i was willing 
to communicate the painful truth with my own mouth. i saw the necessity 
of putt an end to her suspense, and of prevent the news from 
reach her with fallacious aggravation or at an unseasonable time. 

i told the messenger that i had just part with mr. carlton, that he 
was well, and that i would speedy come and acquaint his sister with 
the cause of his absence. 

though burning with curiosity respecting mervyn and welbeck, i readily 
postpone its gratification till my visit to miss carlton was performed. 
i had rarely seen this lady; my friendship for her brother, though 
ardent, have been lately formed, and chiefly mature by interview at 
my house. i had design to introduce her to my wife, but various 
accident had hinder the execution of my purpose. now consolation and 
counsel were more need than ever, and delay or reluctance in bestow 
it would have been, in a high degree, unpardonable. 

i therefore part with mervyn, request him to await my return, and 
promising to perform the engagement which compel me to leave him, 
with the utmost despatch. on enter miss carlton's apartment, i 
assume an air of as much tranquill as possible. i found the lady 
seat at a desk, with pen in hand and parchment before her. she greet 
me with affectionate dignity, and caught from my countenance that 
cheerful of which on my entrance she was destitute. 

"you come," said she, "to inform me what has made my brother a truant 
to-day. till your message was received i was somewhat anxious. this day 
he usually spend in rambling through the fields; but so bleak and 
stormy an atmosphere, i suppose, would prevent his excursion. i pray, 
sir, what is it detain him?" 

to conquer my embarrassment, and introduce the subject by indirect and 
cautious means, i elude her question, and, casting an eye at the 
parchment,--"how now?" said i; "this is strange employment for a lady. i 
knew that my friend pursue this trade, and live by binding fast the 
bargain which other made; but i knew not that the pen was ever usurp 
by his sister." 

"the usurp was prompt by necessity. my brother's impatient temper 
and delicate frame unfit him for the trade. he pursue it with no 
less reluctance than diligence, devote to the task three nights in the 
week, and the whole of each day. it would long ago have kill him, had 
i not bethought myself of share his tasks. the pen was irksome and 
toilsome at first, but use has made it easy, and far more eligible than 
the needle, which was formerly my only tool. 

"this arrangement afford my brother opportunity of exercise and 
recreation, without diminish our profits; and my time, though not 
less constantly, is more agreeably, as well as more lucratively, 
employ than formerly." 

"i admire your reasoning. by this means provision is made against 
untoward accidents. if sickness should disable him, you are qualified to 
pursue the same means of support." 

at these words the lady's countenance changed. she put her hand on my 
arm, and said, in a flutter and hurried accent, "is my brother sick?" 

"no. he is in perfect health. my observation was a harmless one. i am 
sorry to observe your readiness to draw alarm inferences. if i were 
to say that your scheme is useful to supply deficiencies, not only when 
your brother is disabled by sickness, but when thrown, by some inhuman 
creditor, into jail, no doubt you would perverse and hasty infer 
that he is now in prison." 

i had scarcely end the sentence, when the piercing eyes of the lady 
were anxious fixed upon mine. after a moment's pause, she exclaimed, 
"the inference, indeed, is too plain. i know his fate. it has long been 
foreseen and expected, and i have summon up my equanimity to meet it. 
would to heaven he may find the calamity as light as i should find it! 
but i fear his too irritable spirit." 

when her fear were confirmed, she start out into no vehemence of 
exclamation. she quick suppress a few tear which would not be 
withheld, and listen to my narrative of what had lately occurred, with 
token of gratitude. 

formal consolation was superfluous. her mind was indeed more fertile 
than my own in those topic which take away its keenest edge from 
affliction. she observe that it was far from being the heaviest 
calamity which might have happened. the creditor was perhaps vincible by 
argument and supplications. if these should succeed, the disaster would 
not only be removed, but that security from future molest be 
gained, to which they had for a long time been strangers. 

should he be obdurate, their state was far from being hopeless. 
carlton's situation allow him to pursue his profession. his gain 
would be equal, and his expenses would not be augmented. by their mutual 
industry they might hope to amass sufficient to discharge the debt at no 
very remote period. 

what she chiefly dread was the pernicious influence of dejection and 
sedentary labour on her brother's health. yet this was not to be 
considered as inevitable. fortitude might be inspired by exhortation and 
example, and no condition preclude us from every species of bodily 
exertion. the less inclined he should prove to cultivate the means of 
deliverance and happiness within his reach, the more necessary it became 
for her to stimulate and fortify his resolution. 

if i were captivate by the charm of this lady's person and carriage, 
my reverence was excited by these proof of wisdom and energy. i 
zealous promise to concur with her in every scheme she should adopt 
for her own or her brother's advantage; and, after spend some hour 
with her, took my leave. 

i now regret the ignorance in which i had hitherto remain 
respecting this lady. that she was, in an eminent degree, feminine and 
lovely, was easily discovered; but intellectual weakness had been rash 
infer from external frailty. she was accustomed to shrink from 
observation, and reserve was mistaken for timidity. i call on carlton 
only when numerous engagement would allow, and when, by some accident, 
his customary visit had been intermitted. on those occasions, my stay 
was short, and my attention chiefly confine to her brother. i now 
resolve to atone for my ancient negligence, not only by my own 
assiduities, but by those of my wife. 

on my return home, i found mervyn and my wife in earnest discourse. i 
anticipate the shock which the sensibility of the latter would receive 
from the tidings which i had to communicate respecting carlton. i was 
unwilling, and yet perceive the necessity of disclose the truth. i 
desire to bring these women, as soon as possible, to the knowledge of 
each other, but the necessary prelude to this was an acquaintance with 
the disaster that had happened. 

scarcely had i enter the room, when mervyn turn to me, and said, 
with an air of anxiety and impatience, "pray, my friend, have you any 
knowledge of francis carlton?" 

the mention of this name by mervyn produce some surprise. i 
acknowledge my acquaintance with him. 

"do you know in what situation he now is?" 

in answer to this question, i state by what singular means his 
situation had been made known to me, and the purpose from the 
accomplishment of which i had just returned. i inquire in my turn, 
"whence originate this question?" 

he had overheard the name of carlton in the prison. two person were 
commune in a corner, and accident enable him to catch this name, 
though utter by them in a half whisper, and to discover that the 
person talk about had lately been convey thither. 

this name was not now heard for the first time. it was connected with 
remembrance that made him anxious for the fate of him to whom it 
belonged. in discourse with my wife, this name chance to be again 
mentioned, and his curiosity was rouse afresh. i was willing to 
communicate all that i knew, but mervyn's own destiny was too remarkable 
not to absorb all my attention, and i refuse to discuss any other theme 
till that were fully explained. he postpone his own gratification to 
mine, and consent to relate the incident that had happen from the 
moment of our separation till the present. 




chapter xxix. 


at parting with you, my purpose was to reach the abode of the hadwin as 
speedy as possible. i travelled therefore with diligence. setting out 
so early, i expected, though on foot, to reach the end of my journey 
before noon. the activity of muscle is no obstacle to thought. so far 
from being inconsistent with intense musing, it is, in my own case, 
propitious to that state of mind. 

probably no one had strong motive for ardent meditation than i. my 
second journey to the city was prompt by reasons, and attend by 
incidents, that seem to have a present existence. to think upon them 
was to view, more deliberate and thoroughly, object and person that 
still hover in my sight. instead of their attribute being already 
seen, and their consequence at an end, it seem as if a series of 
numerous years and unintermitt contemplation were requisite to 
comprehend them fully, and bring into existence their most momentous 
effects. 

if men be chiefly distinguished from each other by the mode in which 
attention is employed, either on external and sensible objects, or 
merely on abstract idea and the creature of reflection, i may just 
claim to be enroll in the second class. my existence is a series of 
thought rather than of motions. ratiocination and deduction leave my 
senses unemployed. the fulness of my fancy render my eye vacant and 
inactive. sensation do not precede and suggest, but follow and are 
secondary to, the acts of my mind. 

there was one motive, however, which made me less inattentive to the 
scene that was continual shift before and without me than i am 
wont to be. the loveliest form which i had hitherto seen was that of 
clemenza lodi. i recall her condition as i had witness it, as 
welbeck had described, and as you had paint it. the past was without 
remedy; but the future was, in some degree, within our power to create 
and to fashion. her state was probably dangerous. she might already be 
forlorn, beset with temptation or with anguish; or danger might only be 
approach her, and the worst evil be impending ones. 

i was ignorant of her state. could i not remove this ignorance? would 
not some benefit redound to her from beneficent and seasonable 
interposition? 

you had mention that her abode had lately been with mrs. villars, and 
that this lady still reside in the country. the residence had been 
sufficient described, and i perceive that i was now approach it. 
in a short time i spy its paint roof and five chimney through an 
avenue of _catalpas_. 

when opposite the gate which led into this avenue, i paused. it seem 
as if this moment were to decide upon the liberty and innocence of this 
being. in a moment i might place myself before her, ascertain her true 
condition, and point out to her the path of honour and safety. this 
opportunity might be the last. long delay might render interposition 
fruitless. 

but how was i to interpose? i was a stranger to her language, and she 
was unacquainted with mine. to obtain access to her, it was necessary 
only to demand it. but how should i explain my view and state my wish 
when an interview was gained? and what expedient was it in my power to 
propose? 

"now," said i, "i perceive the value of that wealth which i have been 
accustomed to despise. the power of eat and drinking, the nature and 
limit of existence and physical enjoyment, are not change or enlarge 
by the increase of wealth. our corporeal and intellectual wants are 
supply at little expense; but our own wants are the wants of others, 
and that which remains, after our own necessity are obviated, it is 
always easy and just to employ in relieve the necessity of others. 

"there are no superfluity in my store. it is not in my power to supply 
this unfortunate girl with decent raiment and honest bread. i have no 
house to which to conduct her. i have no means of secure her from 
famine and cold. 

"yet, though indigent and feeble, i am not destitute of friends and of 
home. cannot she be admitted to the same asylum to which i am now 
going?" this thought was sudden and new. the more it was revolved, the 
more plausible it seemed. this was not merely the sole expedient, but 
the best that could have been suggested. 

the hadwin were friendly, hospitable, unsuspicious. their board, though 
simple and uncouth, was wholesome and plenteous. their residence was 
sequester and obscure, and not obnoxious to impertinent inquiry and 
malignant animadversion. their frank and ingenuous temper would make 
them easy of persuasion, and their sympathies were prompt and 
overflowing. 

"i am nearly certain," continue i, "that they will instantly afford 
protection to this desolate girl. why shall i not anticipate their 
consent, and present myself to their embrace and their welcome in her 
company?" 

slight reflection show me that this precipitation was improper. 
whether wallace had ever arrive at malverton, whether mr. hadwin had 
escape infection, whether his house were the abode of security and 
quiet, or a scene of desolation, were question yet to be determined. 
the obvious and best proceeding was to hasten forward, to afford the 
hadwins, if in distress, the feeble consolation of my friendship; or, 
if their state were happy, to procure their concurrence to my scheme 
respecting clemenza. 

actuate by these considerations, i resume my journey. look forward, 
i perceive a chaise and horse standing by the left-hand fence, at the 
distance of some hundred yards. this object was not uncommon or strange, 
and, therefore, it was scarcely noticed. when i came near, however, 
methought i recognise in this carriage the same in which my 
importune had procure a seat for the languish wallace, in the 
manner which i have formerly related. 

it was a crazy vehicle and old-fashioned. when once seen it could 
scarcely be mistaken or forgotten. the horse was held by his bridle to a 
post, but the seat was empty. my solicitude with regard to wallace's 
destiny, of which he to whom the carriage belong might possibly afford 
me some knowledge, made me stop and reflect on what measure it was 
proper to pursue. 

the rider could not be at a great distance from this spot. his absence 
would probably be short. by lingering a few minutes an interview might 
be gained, and the uncertainty and suspense of some hour be thereby 
precluded. i therefore waited, and the same person whom i had formerly 
encounter made his appearance, in a short time, from under a copse 
that skirt the road. 

he recognise me with more difficulty than attend my recognition of 
him. the circumstances, however, of our first meeting were easily 
recall to his remembrance. i eager inquire when and where he had 
part with the youth who had been, on that occasion, intrust to his 
care. 

he answer that, on leave the city and inhale the pure air of the 
field and woods, wallace had been, in a wonderful degree, invigorate 
and refreshed. an instantaneous and total change appear to have been 
wrought in him. he no long languish with fatigue or fear, but became 
full of gayety and talk. 

the sudden of this transition; the levity with which he related and 
comment on his recent danger and evils, excited the astonishment of 
his companion, to whom he not only communicate the history of his 
disease, but impart many anecdote of a humorous kind. some of these 
my companion repeated. i heard them with regret and dissatisfaction. 
they betoken a mind vitiate by intercourse with the thoughtless and 
deprave of both sexes, and particularly with infamous and profligate 
women. 

my companion proceed to mention that wallace's exhilarate last but 
for a short time, and disappear as sudden as it had appeared. he 
was seize with deadly sickness, and insist upon leave the carriage, 
whose movements shock his stomach and head to an insupportable degree. 
his companion was not void of apprehension on his own account, but was 
unwill to desert him, and endeavour to encourage him. his effort 
were vain. though the nearest house was at the distance of some hundred 
yards, and though it was probable that the inhabitant of this house 
would refuse to accommodate one in his condition, yet wallace could not 
be prevail on to proceed; and, in spite of persuasion and 
remonstrance, left the carriage and threw himself on the grassy bank 
beside the road. 

this person was not unmindful of the hazard which he incur by contact 
with a sick man. he conceive himself to have perform all that was 
consistent with duty to himself and to his family; and wallace, 
persist in affirm that, by attempt to ride farther, he should 
merely hasten his death, was at length left to his own guidance. 

these were unexpected and mournful tidings. i had fondly imagine that 
his safety was put beyond the reach of untoward accidents. now, however, 
there was reason to suppose him to have perish by a lingering and 
painful disease, render fatal by the selfish of mankind, by the 
want of seasonable remedies, and exposure to inclement airs. some 
uncertainty, however, rest on his fate. it was my duty to remove it, 
and to carry to the hadwin no mangle and defective tale. where, i 
asked, had wallace and his companion parted? 

it was about three mile farther onward. the spot, and the house within 
view from the spot, were accurate described. in this house it was 
possible that wallace had sought an asylum, and some intelligence 
respecting him might be gain from its inhabitants. my informant was 
journey to the city, so that we were oblige to separate. 

in consequence of this man's description of wallace's deportment, and 
the proof of a dissolute and thoughtless temper which he had given, i 
began to regard his death as an event less deplorable. such a one was 
unworthy of a being so devoutly pure, so ardent in fidelity and 
tenderness, as susan hadwin. if he loved, it was probable that, in 
defiance of his vows, he would seek a different companion. if he adhere 
to his first engagements, his motive would be sordid, and the 
disclosure of his latent defect might produce more exquisite misery to 
his wife than his premature death or treacherous desertion. 

the preservation of this man was my sole motive for enter the 
infect city, and subject my own life to the hazard from which my 
escape may almost be esteem miraculous. was not the end 
disproportion to the means? was there arrogance in believe my life a 
price too great to be given for his? 

i was not, indeed, sorry for the past. my purpose was just, and the 
means which i select were the best my limited knowledge supplied. my 
happiness should be drawn from reflect on the equity of my 
intentions. that these intentions were frustrate by the ignorance of 
others, or my own, was the consequence of human frailty. honest 
purposes, though they may not bestow happiness on others, will, at 
least, secure it to him who foster them. 

by these reflection my regrets were dissipated, and i prepared to 
rejoice alike, whether wallace should be found to have escape or to 
have perished. the house to which i had been direct was speedy 
brought into view. i inquire for the master or mistress of the mansion, 
and was conduct to a lady of a plain and housewife appearance. 

my curiosity was fully gratified. wallace, whom my description easily 
identified, had made his appearance at her door on the evening of the 
day on which he left the city. the dread of _the fever_ was descant on 
with copious and rude eloquence. i supposed her eloquence on this theme 
to be design to apologize to me for her refuse entrance to the sick 
man. the peroration, however, was different. wallace was admitted, and 
suitable attention paid to his wants. 

happily, the guest had nothing to struggle with but extreme weakness. 
repose, nourish diet, and salubrious airs restore him in a short 
time to health. he linger under this roof for three weeks, and then, 
without any profession of gratitude, or offer of pecuniary 
remuneration, or information of the course which he determined to take, 
he left them. 

these facts, add to that which i had previous known, threw no 
advantageous light upon the character of wallace. it was obvious to 
conclude that he had gone to malverton, and thither there was nothing to 
hinder me from following him. 

perhaps one of my grossest defect is a precipitate temper. i choose my 
path suddenly, and pursue it with impetuous expedition. in the present 
instance, my resolution was conceive with unhesitate zeal, and i 
walk the fast that i might the soon execute it. miss hadwin 
deserve to be happy. love was in her heart the all-absorbing sentiment. 
a disappointment there was a supreme calamity. depravity and folly must 
assume the guise of virtue before it can claim her affection. this 
disguise might be maintain for a time, but its detection must 
inevitable come, and the soon this detection take place the more 
beneficial it must prove. 

i resolve to unbosom myself, with equal and unbounded confidence, to 
wallace and his mistress. i would choose for this end, not the moment 
when they were separate, but that in which they were together. my 
knowledge, and the source of my knowledge, relative to wallace, should 
be unfold to the lady with simplicity and truth. the lover should be 
present, to confute, to extenuate, or to verify the charges. 

during the rest of the day these image occupy the chief place in my 
thoughts. the road was miry and dark, and my journey prove to be more 
tedious and fatigue than i expected. at length, just as the evening 
closed, the well-known habitation appear in view. since my departure, 
winter had visit the world, and the aspect of nature was desolate and 
dreary. all around this house was vacant, negligent, forlorn. the 
contrast between these appearances and those which i had notice on my 
first approach to it, when the ground and the tree were deck with 
the luxuriance and vivace of summer, was mournful, and seem to 
foretoken ill. my spirits droop as i notice the general inactive 
and silence. 

i entered, without warning, the door that led into the parlour. no face 
was to be seen or voice heard. the chimney was ornamented, as in summer, 
with evergreen shrubs. though it was now the second month of frost and 
snow, fire did not appear to have been lately kindle on this hearth. 

this was a circumstance from which nothing good could be deduced. had 
there been those to share its comfort who had share them on former 
years, this was the place and hour at which they commonly assembled. a 
door on one side led, through a narrow entry, into the kitchen. i open 
this door, and pass towards the kitchen. 

no one was there but an old man, squat in the chimney-corner. his 
face, though wrinkled, denote undecayed health and an unbending spirit. 
a homespun coat, leathern breeches wrinkle with age, and blue yarn 
hose, were well suit to his lean and shrivel form. on his right 
knee was a wooden bowl, which he had just replenish from a pipkin of 
hasty pudding still smoking on the coals; and in his left hand a spoon, 
which he had, at that moment, plunge into a bottle of molasses that 
stood beside him. 

this action was suspend by my entrance. he look up and exclaimed, 
"heyday! who's this that come into other people's house without so 
much as saying 'by your leave'? what's thee business? who's thee want?" 

i had never seen this personage before. i supposed it to be some new 
domestic, and inquire for mr. hadwin. 

"ah!" reply he, with a sigh, "william hadwin. is it him thee wants? 
poor man! he is gone to rest many days since." 

my heart sunk within me at these tidings. "dead!" said i; "do you mean 
that he is dead?"--this exclamation was utter in a tone of some 
vehemence. it attract the attention of some one who was standing 
without, who immediately enter the kitchen. it was eliza hadwin. the 
moment she beheld me she shriek aloud, and, rush into my arms, 
faint away. 

the old man drop his bowl; and, start from his seat, stare 
alternate at me and at the breathless girl. my emotion, made up of 
joy, and sorrow, and surprise, render me for a moment powerless as 
she. at length he said, "i understand this. i know who thee is, and will 
tell her thee's come." so saying, he hasty left the room. 




chapter xxx. 


in a short time this gentle girl recover her senses. she did not 
withdraw herself from my sustain arm, but, leaning on my bosom, she 
resigned herself to passionate weeping. i did not endeavour to check 
this effusion, believe that its influence would be salutary. 

i had not forgotten the thrill sensibility and artless graces of this 
girl. i had not forgotten the scruple which had formerly made me check 
a passion whose tendency was easily discovered. these new proof of her 
affection were, at once, mournful and delightful. the untimely fate of 
her father and my friend pressed with new force upon my heart, and my 
tears, in spite of my fortitude, mingle with hers. 

the attention of both was presently attract by a faint scream, which 
proceed from above. immediately totter footstep were heard in the 
passage, and a figure rush into the room, pale, emaciated, haggard, 
and wild. she cast a piercing glance at me, utter a feeble 
exclamation, and sunk upon the floor without sign of life. 

it was not difficult to comprehend this scene. i now conjectured, what 
subsequent inquiry confirmed, that the old man had mistaken me for 
wallace, and had carry to the elder sister the news of his return. 
this fatal disappointment of hope that had nearly been extinct, and 
which were now so powerful revived, could not be endure by a frame 
verge to dissolution. 

this object recall all the energy of eliza, and engross all my 
solicitude. i lift the fallen girl in my arms; and, guide by her 
sister, carry her to her chamber. i had now leisure to contemplate the 
change which a few month had made in this lovely frame. i turn away 
from the spectacle with anguish, but my wandering eyes were recall by 
some potent fascination, and fixed in horror upon a form which evince 
the last stage of decay. eliza knelt on one side, and, leaning her face 
upon the bed, endeavour in vain to smother her sobs. i sat on the 
other motionless, and holding the passive and wither hand of the 
sufferer. 

i watch with ineffable solicitude the return of life. it return at 
length, but merely to betray symptom that it would speedy depart 
forever. for a time my faculty were palsied, and i was made an 
impotent spectator of the ruin that environed me. this pusillanim 
quick gave way to resolution and reflection better suit to the 
exigency of the time. 

the first impulse was to summon a physician; but it was evident that the 
patient had been sink by slow degree to this state, and that the 
last struggle had begun. nothing remain but to watch her while 
expiring, and perform for her, when dead, the rite of interment. the 
survivor was capable of consolation and of succour. i went to her and 
drew her gently into another apartment. the old man, tremulous and 
wonder-struck, seem anxious to perform some service. i direct him to 
kindle a fire in eliza's chamber. meanwhile i persuade my gentle friend 
to remain in this chamber, and resign to me the performance of every 
office which her sister's condition required. i sat beside the bed of 
the die till the mortal struggle was past. 

i perceive that the house had no inhabitant besides the two female and 
the old man. i went in search of the latter, and found him crouched, as 
before, at the kitchen-fire, smoking his pipe. i placed myself on the 
same bench, and enter into conversation with him. 

i gather from him that he had, for many years, been mr. hadwin's 
servant. that lately he had cultivated a small farm in this 
neighbourhood for his own advantage. stopping one day in october, at the 
tavern, he heard that his old master had lately been in the city, had 
caught _the fever_, and after his return had die with it. the moment he 
became sick, his servant flee from the house, and the neighbour 
refuse to approach it. the task of attend his sick-bed was allot 
to his daughters, and it was by their hand that his grave was dug and 
his body cover with earth. the same terror of infection exist after 
his death as before, and these hapless female were desert by all 
mankind. 

old caleb was no soon informed of these particulars, than he hurried 
to the house, and had since continue in their service. his heart was 
kind, but it was easily seen that his skill extend only to execute the 
directions of another. grief for the death of wallace and her father 
prey upon the health of the eldest daughter. the younger became her 
nurse, and caleb was always at hand to execute any orders the 
performance of which was on a level with his understanding. their 
neighbour had not withheld their good offices, but they were still 
terrify and estrange by the phantom of pestilence. 

during the last week susan had been too weak to rise from her bed; yet 
such was the energy communicate by the tidings that wallace was alive, 
and had returned, that she leap upon her feet and rush down-stairs. 
how little did that man deserve so strenuous and immortal an affection! 

i would not allow myself to ponder on the suffering of these women. i 
endeavour to think only of the best expedient for putt an end to 
these calamities. after a moment's deliberation i determined to go to a 
house at some miles' distance; the dwelling of one who, though not 
exempt from the reign panic, had shown more generous towards these 
unhappy girl than others. during my former abode in this district, i 
had ascertain his character, and found him to be compassionate and 
liberal. 

overpower by fatigue and watching, eliza was no soon relieved, by my 
presence, of some portion of her cares, than she sunk into profound 
slumber. i direct caleb to watch the house till my return, which 
should be before midnight, and then set out for the dwelling of mr. 
ellis. 

the weather was temperate and moist, and render the footing of the 
meadow extremely difficult. the ground, that had lately been frozen and 
cover with snow, was now change into gully and pools, and this was 
no time to be fastidious in the choice of paths. a brook, swell by the 
recent _thaw_, was likewise to be passed. the rail which i had formerly 
placed over it by way of bridge had disappeared, and i was oblige to 
wade through it. at length i approach the house to which i was going. 

at so late an hour, farmer and farmers' servant are usually abed, and 
their threshold is intrust to their watch-dogs. two belong to mr. 
ellis, whose ferocity and vigilance were truly formidable to a stranger; 
but i hope that in me they would recognise an old acquaintance, and 
suffer me to approach. in this i was not mistaken. though my person 
could not be distinct seen by starlight, they seem to scent me from 
afar, and met me with a thousand caresses. 

approach the house, i perceive that its tenant were retired to 
their repose. this i expected, and hasten to awaken mr. ellis, by 
knock brisk at the door. presently he look out of a window above, 
and, in answer to his inquiries, in which impatience at being so 
unseasonable disturbed was mingle with anxiety, i told him my name, and 
entreat him to come down and allow me a few minutes' conversation. he 
speedy dress himself, and, opening the kitchen door, we seat 
ourselves before the fire. 

my appearance was sufficient adapt to excite his wonder; he had 
heard of my elope from the house of mr. hadwin, he was a stranger to 
the motive that prompt my departure, and to the event that had 
befallen me, and no interview was more distant from his expectations 
than the present. his curiosity was written in his features, but this 
was no time to gratify his curiosity. the end that i now had in view was 
to procure accommodation for eliza hadwin in this man's house. for this 
purpose it was my duty to describe, with simplicity and truth, the 
inconvenience which at present surround her, and to relate all that 
had happen since my arrival. 

i perceive that my tale excited his compassion, and i continue with 
new zeal to paint to him the helpless of this girl. the death of 
her father and sister left her the property of this farm. her sex and 
age disqualify her for superintend the harvest-field and the 
threshing-floor; and no expedient was left but to lease the land to 
another, and, taking up her abode in the family of some kinsman or 
friend, to subsist, as she might easily do, upon the rent. meanwhile her 
continuance in this house was equally useless and dangerous, and i 
insinuate to my companion the propriety of immediately remove her to 
his own. 

some hesitation and reluctance appear in him, which i immediately 
ascribe to an absurd dread of infection. i endeavoured, by appealing to 
his reason as well as to his pity, to conquer this dread. i pointed out 
the true cause of the death of the elder daughter, and assured him the 
youngest knew no indisposition but that which arose from distress. i 
offer to save him from any hazard that might attend his approach 
the house, by accompany her hither myself. all that her safety 
require was that his door should not be shut against her when she 
present herself before them. 

still he was fearful and reluctant; and, at length, mention that her 
uncle reside not more than sixteen mile farther; that he was her 
natural protector, and, he dare to say, would find no difficulty in 
admit her into his house. for his part, there might be reason in 
what i said, but he could not bring himself to think but that there was 
still some danger of _the fever_. it was right to assist people in 
distress, to-be-sure; but to risk his own life he did not think to be 
his duty. he was no relation of the family, and it was the duty of 
relations to help each other. her uncle was the proper person to assist 
her, and no doubt he would be as willing as able. 

the mark of dubious and indecision which accompany these words 
encourage me in endeavour to subdue his scruples. the increase of 
his aversion to my scheme kept pace with my remonstrances, and he 
finally declared that he would, on no account, consent to it. 

elli was by no means hard of heart. his determination did not prove the 
cold of his charity, but merely the strength of his fears. he was 
himself an object more of compassion than of anger; and he act like 
the man whose fear of death prompt him to push his companion from the 
plank which save him from drowning, but which is unable to sustain 
both. finding him invincible to my entreaties, i thought upon the 
expedient which he suggest of seek the protection of her uncle. it 
was true that the loss of parent had render her uncle her legal 
protector. his knowledge of the world; his house and property and 
influence, would, perhaps, fit him for this office in a more eminent 
degree than i was fitted. to seek a different asylum might, indeed, be 
unjust to both; and, after some reflection, i not only dismiss the 
regret which ellis's refusal had given me, but even thank him for the 
intelligence and counsel which he had afford me. i took leave of him, 
and hasten back to hadwin's. 

eliza, by caleb's report, was still asleep. there was no urgent 
necessity for awakening her; but something was forthwith to be done with 
regard to the unhappy girl that was dead. the proceeding incumbent on us 
was obvious. all that remain was to dig a grave, and to deposit the 
remains with as much solemnity and decency as the time would permit. 
there were two method of do this. i might wait till the next day; 
till a coffin could be made and convey hither; till the woman, whose 
trade it was to make and put on the habiliment assign by custom to 
the dead, could be sought out and hire to attend; till kindred, 
friends, and neighbour could be summon to the obsequies; till a 
carriage were provided to remove the body to a burying-ground, belong 
to a meeting-house, and five mile distant; till those whose trade it 
was to dig grave had prepared one, within the sacred enclosure, for her 
reception; or, neglect this toilsome, tedious, and expensive 
ceremonial, i might seek the grave of hadwin, and lay the daughter by 
the side of her parent. 

perhaps i was strong in my preference of the latter mode. the customs of 
burial may, in most cases, be in themselves proper. if the customs be 
absurd, yet it may be generally proper to adhere to them; but doubtless 
there are case in which it is our duty to omit them. i conceive the 
present case to be such a one. 

the season was bleak and inclement. much time, labour, and expense would 
be require to go through the customary rites. there was none but myself 
to perform these, and i had not the suitable means. the misery of eliza 
would only be prolonged by adhere to these forms, and her fortune be 
needlessly diminish by the expenses unavoidable to be incurred. 

after muse upon these idea for some time, i rose from my seat, and 
desire caleb to follow me. we proceed to an outer shed where farmers' 
tool use to be kept. i supply him and myself with a spade, and 
request him to lead me to the spot where mr. hadwin was laid. 

he betray some hesitation to comply, and appear struck with some 
degree of alarm, as if my purpose had been to molest, instead of 
securing, the repose of the dead. i remove his doubt by explain my 
intentions; but he was scarcely less shocked, on discover the truth, 
than he had been alarm by his first suspicions. he stammer out his 
objection to my scheme. there was but one mode of burial, he thought, 
that was decent and proper, and he could not be free to assist me in 
pursue any other mode. 

perhaps caleb's aversion to the scheme might have been easily overcome; 
but i reflect that a mind like his was at once flexible and obstinate. 
he might yield to argument and entreaties, and act by their immediate 
impulse; but the impulse pass away in a moment, old and habitual 
conviction were resumed, and his deviation from the beaten track would 
be merely productive of compunction. his aid, on the present occasion, 
though of some use, was by no means indispensable. i forbore to solicit 
his concurrence, or even to vanquish the scruple he entertain against 
direct me to the grave of hadwin. it was a groundless superstition 
that made one spot more suitable for this purpose than another. i 
desire caleb, in a mild tone, to return to the kitchen, and leave me to 
act as i thought proper. i then proceed to the orchard. 

one corner of this field was somewhat above the level of the rest. the 
tallest tree of the group grew there, and there i had formerly placed a 
bench, and made it my retreat at periods of leisure. it had been 
recommend by its sequester situation, its luxuriant verdure, and 
profound quiet. on one side was a potato-field, on the other a 
_melon-patch_; and before me, in rows, some hundred of apple-trees. 
here i was accustomed to seek the benefit of contemplation and study 
the manuscript of lodi. a few month had pass since i had last 
visit this spot. what revolution had since occurred, and how gloomy 
contrast was my present purpose with what had formerly led me hither! 

in this spot i had hasty determined to dig the grave of susan. the 
grave was dug. all that i desire was a cavity of sufficient dimensions 
to receive her. this being made, i return to the house, lift the 
corpse in my arms, and bore it without delay to the spot. caleb, seat 
in the kitchen, and eliza, asleep in her chamber, were wholly unapprized 
of my motions. the grave was covered, the spade reposite under the 
shed, and my seat by the kitchen-fire resume in a time apparently too 
short for so solemn and momentous a transaction. 

i look back upon this incident with emotion not easily described. it 
seem as if i act with too much precipitation; as if insensibility, 
and not reason, had occasion that clear of conceptions, and 
bestow that firm of muscles, which i then experienced. i neither 
tremble nor waver in my purpose. i bore in my arms the being whom i 
had known and loved, through the whistle gale and intense dark of 
a winter's night; i heap earth upon her limbs, and cover them from 
human observation, without fluctuate or tremors, though not without 
feelings that were awful and sublime. 

perhaps some part of my steadfast was owe to my late experience, 
and some mind may be more easily inure to perilous emergency than 
others. if reason acquire strength only by the diminution of 
sensibility, perhaps it is just for sensibility to be diminished. 




chapter xxxi. 


the safety of eliza was the object that now occupy my cares. to have 
slept, after her example, had been most proper; but my uncertainty with 
regard to her fate, and my desire to conduct her to some other home, 
kept my thought in perpetual motion. i wait with impatience till she 
should awake and allow me to consult with her on plan for futurity. 

her sleep terminate not till the next day had arisen. have recover 
the remembrance of what had lately happened, she inquire for her 
sister. she want to view once more the face and kiss the lip of her 
beloved susan. some relief to her anguish she expect to derive from 
this privilege. 

when informed of the truth, when convinced that susan had disappear 
forever, she broke forth into fresh passion. it seem as if her loss 
was not hopeless or complete as long as she was suffer to behold the 
face of her friend and to touch her lips. she accused me of acting 
without warrant and without justice; of defraud her of her dearest 
and only consolation; and of treat her sister's sacred remains with 
barbarous indifference and rudeness. 

i explain in the gentlest terms the reason of my conduct. i was not 
surprise or vex that she, at first, treat them as futile, and as 
heighten my offence. such was the impulse of a grief which was 
properly excited by her loss. to be tranquil and steadfast, in the midst 
of the usual cause of impetuos and agony, is either the prerogative 
of wisdom that sublime itself above all selfish considerations, or the 
badge of giddy and unfeeling folly. 

the torrent was at length exhausted. upbraid was at an end; and 
gratitude, and tenderness, and implicit acquiesce in any scheme which 
my prudence should suggest, succeeded. i mention her uncle as one to 
whom it would be proper, in her present distress, to apply. 

she start and betray uneasy at this name. it was evident that 
she by no means concur with me in my notions of propriety; that she 
thought with aversion of seek her uncle's protection. i request her 
to state her objection to this scheme, or to mention any other which 
she thought preferable. 

she knew nobody. she had not a friend in the world but myself. she had 
never been out of her father's house. she had no relation but her uncle 
philip, and he--she could not live with him. i must not insist upon her 
go to his house. it was not the place for her. she should never be 
happy there. 

i was, at first, inclined to suspect in my friend some capricious and 
groundless antipathy. i desire her to explain what in her uncle's 
character made him so obnoxious. she refuse to be more explicit, and 
persist in thinking that his house was no suitable abode for her. 

finding her, in this respect, invincible, i sought for some other 
expedient. might she not easily be accommodate as a boarder in the 
city, or some village, or in a remote quarter of the country? ellis, her 
nearest and most opulent neighbour, had refuse to receive her; but 
there were other who had not his fears. there were others, within the 
compass of a day's journey, who were stranger to the cause of hadwin's 
death; but would it not be culpable to take advantage of that ignorance? 
their compliance ought not to be the result of deception. 

while thus engaged, the incident of my late journey recur to my 
remembrance, and i asked, "is not the honest woman, who entertain 
wallace, just such a person as that of whom i am in search? her 
treatment of wallace show her to be exempt from chimerical fears, 
prove that she has room in her house for an occasional inmate." 

encourage by these views, i told my weeping companion that i had 
recollect a family in which she would be kindly treated; and that, if 
she chose, we would not lose a moment in repair thither. horses, 
belong to the farm, graze in the meadows, and a couple of these 
would carry us in a few hour to the place which i had select for her 
residence. on her eager assent to this proposal, i inquire in 
whose care, and in what state, our present habitation should be left. 

the father's property now belong to the daughter. eliza's mind was 
quick, active, and sagacious; but her total inexperience gave her 
sometimes the appearance of folly. she was eager to fly from this house, 
and to resign herself and her property, without limitation or condition, 
to my control. our intercourse had been short, but she rely on my 
protection and counsel as absolutely as she had been accustomed to do 
upon her father's. 

she knew not what answer to make to my inquiry. whatever i pleased to do 
was the best. what did i think ought to be done? 

"ah!" thought i, "sweet, artless, and simple girl! how wouldst thou have 
fared, if heaven had not sent me to thy succour? there are being in the 
world who would make a selfish use of thy confidence; who would beguile 
thee at once of innocence and property. such am not i. thy welfare is a 
precious deposit, and no father or brother could watch over it with more 
solicitude than i will do." 

i was aware that mr. hadwin might have fixed the destination of his 
property, and the guardianship of his daughters, by will. on suggest 
this to my friend, it instantly remind her of an incident that took 
place after his last return from the city. he had drawn up his will, and 
gave it into susan's possession, who placed it in a drawer, whence it 
was now taken by my friend. 

by this will his property was now found to be bequeath to his two 
daughters; and his brother, philip hadwin, was name executor, and 
guardian to his daughter till they should be twenty years old. this 
name was no soon heard by my friend, than she exclaimed, in a tone of 
affright, "executor! my uncle! what is that? what power do that give 
him?" 

"i know not exactly the power of executors. he will, doubtless, have 
possession of your property till you are twenty years of age. your 
person will likewise be under his care till that time." 

"must he decide where i am to live?" 

"he is vest with all the power of a father." 

this assurance excited the deepest consternation. she fixed her eyes on 
the ground, and was lost, for a time, in the deepest reverie. 
recovering, at length, she said, with a sigh, "what if my father had 
made no will?" 

"in that case, a guardian could not be dispense with, but the right of 
name him would belong to yourself." 

"and my uncle would have nothing to do with my affairs?" 

"i am no lawyer," said i; "but i presume all authority over your person 
and property would devolve upon the guardian of your own choice." 

"then i am free." saying this, with a sudden motion, she tore in several 
pieces the will, which, during this dialogue, she had held in her hand, 
and threw the fragment into the fire. 

no action was more unexpected to me than this. my astonishment hinder 
me from attempt to rescue the paper from the flames. it was consume 
in a moment. i was at a loss in what manner to regard this sacrifice. it 
denote a force of mind little in unison with that simplicity and 
helpless which this girl had hitherto displayed. it argue the 
deepest apprehension of mistreatment from her uncle. whether his 
conduct had justified this violent antipathy, i had no means of judging. 
mr. hadwin's choice of him, as his executor, was certainly one proof of 
his integrity. 

my abstraction was notice by eliza with visible anxiety. it was plain 
that she dread the impression which this act of seeming temerity had 
made upon me. "do not be angry with me," said she; "perhaps i have been 
wrong, but i could not help it. i will have but one guardian and one 
protector." 

the deed was irrevocable. in my present ignorance of the domestic 
history of the hadwins, i was unqualified to judge how far circumstances 
might extenuate or justify the act. on both accounts, therefore, it was 
improper to expatiate upon it. 

it was conclude to leave the care of the house to honest caleb; to 
fasten closet and drawers, and, carry away the money which was found 
in one of them, and which amount to no inconsiderable sum, to repair 
to the house formerly mentioned. the air was cold; a heavy snow began to 
fall in the night; the wind blew tempestuously; and we were compel to 
confront it. 

in leave her dwelling, in which she had spent her whole life, the 
unhappy girl gave way afresh to her sorrow. it made her feeble and 
helpless. when placed upon the horse, she was scarcely able to maintain 
her seat. already chill by the cold, blind by the drift snow, and 
cut by the blast, all my remonstrance were need to inspire her with 
resolution. 

i am not accustomed to regard the elements, or suffer them to retard or 
divert me from any design that i have formed. i had overlook the weak 
and delicate frame of my companion, and made no account of her being 
less able to support cold and fatigue than myself. it was not till we 
had made some progress in our way, that i began to view, in their true 
light, the obstacle that were to be encountered. i conceive it, 
however, too late to retreat, and endeavour to push on with speed. 

my companion was a skilful rider, but her steed was refractory and 
unmanageable. she was able, however, to curb his spirit till we had 
proceed ten or twelve mile from malverton. the wind and the cold 
became too violent to be long endured, and i resolve to stop at the 
first house which should present itself to my view, for the sake of 
refreshment and warmth. 

we now enter a wood of some extent, at the termination of which i 
remember that a dwelling stood. to pass this wood, therefore, with 
expedition, was all that remain before we could reach a hospitable 
asylum. i endeavour to sustain, by this information, the sink 
spirits of my companion. while busy in converse with her, a blast of 
irresistible force twist off the highest branch of a tree before us. 
it fell in the midst of the road, at the distance of a few feet from her 
horse's head. terrify by this accident, the horse start from the 
path, and, rush into the wood, in a moment threw himself and his 
rider on the ground, by encounter the rugged stock of an oak. 

i dismount and flew to her succour. the snow was already dyed with the 
blood which flow from some wound in her head, and she lay without 
sense or motion. my terror did not hinder me from anxious searching 
for the hurt which was received, and ascertain the extent of the 
injury. her forehead was considerably bruised; but, to my unspeakable 
joy, the blood flow from the nostrils, and was, therefore, to be 
regard as no mortal symptom. 

i lift her in my arms, and look around me for some means of relief. 
the house at which i propose to stop was upwards of a mile distant. i 
remember none that was nearer. to place the wound girl on my own 
horse, and proceed gently to the house in question, was the sole 
expedient; but, at present, she was senseless, and might, on recovering, 
be too feeble to sustain her own weight. 

to recall her to life was my first duty; but i was powerless, or 
unacquainted with the means. i gaze upon her features, and endeavoured, 
by pressing her in my arms, to inspire her with some warmth. i look 
towards the road, and listen for the wished-for sound of some carriage 
that might be prevail on to stop and receive her. nothing was more 
improbable than that either pleasure or business would induce men to 
encounter so chill and vehement a blast. to be light on by some 
traveller was, therefore, a hopeless event. 

meanwhile, eliza's swoon continued, and my alarm increased. what effect 
her half-frozen blood would have in prolong this condition, or 
prevent her return to life, awaken the deepest apprehensions. i 
left the wood, still bearing her in my arms, and re-entered the road, 
from the desire of descrying, as soon as possible, the coming passenger. 
i look this way and that, and again listened. nothing but the sweeping 
blast, rent and fallen branches, and snow that fill and obscure the 
air, were perceivable. each moment retarded the course of my own blood 
and stiffen my sinews, and made the state of my companion more 
desperate. how was i to act? to perish myself, or see her perish, was an 
ignoble fate; courage and activity were still able to avert it. my horse 
stood near, docile and obsequious; to mount him and to proceed on my 
way, holding my lifeless burden in my arms, was all that remained. 

at this moment my attention was call by several voice issue from 
the wood. it was the note of gayety and glee. presently a sleigh, with 
several person of both sexes, appeared, in a road which led through the 
forest into that in which i stood. they move at a quick pace, but their 
voice were hushed, and they checked the speed of their horses, on 
discover us. no occurrence was more auspicious than this; for i 
rely with perfect confidence on the benevolence of these persons, and, 
as soon as they came near, claim their assistance. 

my story was listen to with sympathy, and one of the young men, 
leap from the sleigh, assist me in place eliza in the place which 
he had left. a female, of sweet aspect and engaging manners, insist 
upon turning back and hasten to the house, where it seem her father 
resided, and which the party had just left. i rode after the sleigh, 
which in a few minutes arrive at the house. the dwelling was spacious 
and neat, and a venerable man and woman, alarm by the quick return of 
the young people, came forth to know the cause. they received their 
guest with the utmost tenderness, and provided her with all the 
accommodations which her condition required. their daughter relinquish 
the scheme of pleasure in which she had been engaged, and, compel 
her companion to depart without her, remain to nurse and console the 
sick. 

a little time show that no lasting injury had been suffered. 
contusions, more troublesome than dangerous, and easily curable by such 
application as rural and traditional wisdom has discovered, were the 
only consequence of the fall. my mind, being relieved from 
apprehension on this score, had leisure to reflect upon the use which 
might be made of the present state of things. 

when i remark the structure of this house, and the features and 
deportment of its inhabitants, methought i discern a powerful 
resemblance between this family and hadwin's. it seem as if some 
benignant power had led us hither as to the most suitable asylum that 
could be obtained; and, in order to supply to the forlorn eliza the 
place of those parent and that sister she had lost, i conceive that, 
if their concurrence could be gained, no abode was more suitable than 
this. no time was to be lost in gain this concurrence. the curiosity 
of our host and hostess, whose name was curling, speedy afford me an 
opportunity to disclose the history and real situation of my friend. 
there were no motive to reserve or prevarication. there was nothing 
which i did not faithfully and circumstantial relate. i conclude with 
state my wish that they would admit my friend as a boarder into 
their house. 

the old man was warm in his concurrence. his wife betray some 
scruples; which, however, her husband's argument and mine removed. i 
did not even suppress the tenor and destruction of the will, and the 
antipathy which eliza had conceive for her uncle, and which i declared 
myself unable to explain. it presently appear that mr. curling had 
some knowledge of philip hadwin, and that the latter had acquire the 
repute of being obdurate and profligate. he employ all means to 
accomplish his selfish ends, and would probably endeavour to usurp the 
property which his brother had left. to provide against his power and 
his malice would be particularly incumbent on us, and my new friend 
readily promise his assistance in the measure which we should take to 
that end. 




chapter xxxii. 


the state of my feelings may be easily conceive to consist of mixed, 
but, on the whole, of agreeable, sensations. the death of hadwin and his 
elder daughter could not be thought upon without keen regrets. these it 
was useless to indulge, and were outweigh by reflection on the 
personal security in which the survivor was now placed. it was hurtful 
to expend my unprofitable care upon the dead, while there exist one 
to whom they could be of essential benefit, and in whose happiness they 
would find an ample compensation. 

this happiness, however, was still incomplete. it was still expose to 
hazard, and much remain to be done before adequate provision was made 
against the worst of evils, poverty. i now found that eliza, being only 
fifteen years old, stood in need of a guardian, and that the form of 
law require that some one should make himself her father's 
administrator. mr. curling, being tolerably conversant with these 
subjects, pointed out the mode to be pursued, and engaged to act on this 
occasion as eliza's friend. 

there was another topic on which my happiness, as well as that of my 
friend, require us to form some decision. i formerly mentioned, that, 
during my abode at malverton, i had not been insensible to the 
attraction of this girl. an affection had stolen upon me, for which it 
was easily discover that i should not have been deny a suitable 
return. my reason for stifle these emotions, at that time, have been 
mentioned. it may now be asked, what effect subsequent event had 
produce on my feelings, and how far partake and relieve her 
distress had revive a passion which may readily be supposed to have 
been, at no time, entire extinguished. 

the impediment which then exist were removed. our union would no 
long risk the resentment or sorrow of her excellent parent. she had no 
long a sister to divide with her the property of the farm, and make 
what was sufficient for both, when living together, too little for 
either separately. her youth and simplicity required, beyond most 
others, a legal protector, and her happiness was involved in the success 
of those hope which she took no pains to conceal. 

as to me, it seem at first view as if every incident conspire to 
determine my choice. omit all regard to the happiness of others, my 
own interest could not fail to recommend a scheme by which the precious 
benefit of competence and independence might be honestly obtained. the 
excursion of my fancy had sometimes carry me beyond the bounds 
prescribed by my situation, but they were, nevertheless, limited to that 
field to which i had once some prospect of acquire a title. all i 
want for the basis of my gaudiest and most dazzle structure was a 
hundred acre of plough-land and meadow. here my spirit of improvement, 
my zeal to invent and apply new maxim of household luxury and 
convenience, new mode and instrument of tillage, new arts connected 
with orchard, garden, and cornfield, were supply with abundant scope. 
though the want of these would not benumb my activity, or take away 
content, the possession would confer exquisite and permanent enjoyments. 

my thought have ever hover over the image of wife and children with 
more delight than over any other images. my fancy was always active on 
this theme, and its reverie sufficient ecstatic and glowing; but, 
since my intercourse with this girl, my scattered vision were collected 
and concentrated. i had now a form and features before me; a sweet and 
melodious voice vibrate in my ear; my soul was filled, as it were, with 
her lineament and gestures, action and looks. all ideas, possess 
any relation to beauty or sex, appear to assume this shape. they kept 
an immovable place in my mind, they diffuse around them an ineffable 
complacency. love is merely of value as a prelude to a more tender, 
intimate, and sacred union. was i not in love? and did i not pant after 
the irrevocable bounds, the boundless privileges, of wedlock? 

the question which other might ask, i have ask myself:--was i not in 
love? i am really at a loss for an answer. there seem to be 
irresistible weight in the reason why i should refuse to marry, and 
even forbear to foster love in my friend. i considered my youth, my 
defective education, and my limited views. i had pass from my cottage 
into the world. i had acquired, even in my transient sojourn among the 
busy haunt of men, more knowledge than the lucubration and employment 
of all my previous years had conferred. hence i might infer the 
childlike immature of my understanding, and the rapid progress i was 
still capable of making. was this an age to form an irrevocable 
contract; to choose the companion of my future life, the associate of my 
scheme of intellectual and benevolent activity? 

i had reason to contemn my own acquisitions; but were not those of eliza 
still more slender? could i rely upon the permanence of her equanimity 
and her docile to my instructions? what quality might not time 
unfold, and how little was i qualified to estimate the character of one 
whom no vicissitude or hardship had approach before the death of her 
father,--whose ignorance was, indeed, great, when it could just be 
said even to exceed my own! 

should i mix with the world, enroll myself in different class of 
society, be a witness to new scenes; might not my mode of judge 
undergo essential variations? might i not gain the knowledge of being 
whose virtue was the gift of experience and the growth of knowledge? who 
join to the modesty and charm of woman the benefit of education, the 
maturity and steadfast of age, and with whose character and 
sentiment my own would be much more congenial than they could possibly 
be with the extreme youth, rustic simplicity, and mental imperfect 
of eliza hadwin? 

to say truth, i was now conscious of a revolution in my mind. i can 
scarcely assign its true cause. no token of it appear during my late 
retreat to malverton. subsequent incidents, perhaps, join with the 
influence of meditation, had generate new views. on my first visit to 
the city, i had met with nothing but scene of folly, depravity, and 
cunning. no wonder that the image connected with the city were 
disastrous and gloomy; but my second visit produce somewhat different 
impressions. maravegli, estwick, medlicote, and you, were being who 
inspired venerate and love. your residence appear to beautify and 
consecrate this spot, and gave birth to an opinion that, if city are 
the chosen seat of misery and vice, they are likewise the soil of all 
the laudable and strenuous production of mind. 

my curiosity and thirst of knowledge had likewise received a new 
direction. books and inanimate nature were cold and lifeless 
instructors. men, and the works of men, were the object of rational 
study, and our own eyes only could communicate just conception of human 
performances. the influence of manners, professions, and social 
institutions, could be thorough known only by direct inspection. 

competence, fixed property and a settled abode, rural occupation and 
conjugal pleasures, were just to be prized; but their value could be 
known and their benefit fully enjoy only by those who have try all 
scenes; who have mixed with all class and ranks; who have partaken of 
all conditions; and who have visit different hemisphere and climate 
and nations. the next five or eight years of my life should be devoted 
to activity and change; it should be a period of hardship, danger, and 
privation; it should be my apprenticeship to fortitude and wisdom, and 
be employ to fit me for the tranquil pleasure and steadfast exertion 
of the remainder of my life. 

in consequence of these reflections, i determined to suppress that 
tender which the company of miss hadwin produced, to remove any 
mistake into which she had fallen, and to put it out of my power to 
claim for her more than the dues of friendship. all ambiguities, in a 
case like this, and all delays, were hurtful. she was not exempt from 
passion, but this passion, i thought, was young, and easily 
extinguished. 

in a short time her health was restored, and her grief melt down into 
a tender melancholy. i chose a suitable moment, when not embarrass by 
the presence of others, to reveal my thoughts. my disclosure was 
ingenuous and perfect. i laid before her the whole train of my thoughts, 
nearly in the order, though in different and more copious terms than 
those, in which i have just explain them to you. i conceal nothing. 
the impression which her artless lovely had made upon me at 
malverton; my motive for estrange myself from her society; the nature 
of my present feelings with regard to her, and my belief of the state of 
her heart; the reasoning into which i had entered; the advantage of 
wedlock and its inconveniences; and, finally, the resolution i had 
form of seek the city, and, perhaps, of crossing the ocean, were 
minutely detailed. 

she interrupt me not, but change looks, blushes, flutterings, and 
sighs, show her to be deep and variously affected by my discourse. i 
pause for some observation or comment. she seem conscious of my 
expectation, but had no power to speak. overpowered, at length, by her 
emotions, she burst into tears. 

i was at a loss in what manner to construe these symptoms. i wait till 
her vehemence was somewhat subsided, and then said, "what think you of 
my schemes? your approbation is of some moment: do you approve of them 
or not?" 

this question excited some little resentment, and she answered, "you 
have left me nothing to say. go, and be happy; no matter what become of 
me. i hope i shall be able to take care of myself." 

the tone in which this was said had something in it of upbraiding. "your 
happiness," said i, "is too dear to me to leave it in danger. in this 
house you will not need my protection, but i shall never be so far from 
you as to be disabled from hearing how you fare, by letter, and of being 
active for your good. you have some money, which you must husband well. 
any rent from your farm cannot be soon expected; but what you have got, 
if you remain with mr. curling, will pay your board and all other 
expenses for two years; but you must be a good economist. i shall 
expect," continue i, with a serious smile, "a punctual account of all 
your saying and doings. i must know how every minute is employ and 
every penny is expended, and, if i find you erring, i must tell you so 
in good round terms." 

these words did not dissipate the sullen which her looks had 
betrayed. she still forbore to look at me, and said, "i do not know how 
i should tell you every thing. you care so little about me that--i 
should only be troublesome. i am old enough to think and act for myself, 
and shall advise with nobody but myself." 

"that is true," said i. "i shall rejoice to see you independent and 
free. consult your own understanding, and act according to its dictates. 
nothing more is wanting to make you useful and happy. i am anxious to 
return to the city, but, if you will allow me, will go first to 
malverton, see that things are in due order, and that old caleb is well. 
from thence, if you please, i will call at your uncle's, and tell him 
what has happened. he may, otherwise, entertain pretension and form 
view erroneous in themselves and injurious to you. he may think himself 
entitle to manage your estate. he may either suppose a will to have 
been made, or may actually have heard from your father, or from others, 
of that which you burnt, and in which he was name executor. his 
boisterous and sordid temper may prompt him to seize your house and 
goods, unless seasonable apprize of the truth; and, when he know the 
truth, he may start into rage, which i shall be more fitted to encounter 
than you. i am told that anger transform him into a ferocious madman. 
shall i call upon him?" 

she shudder at the picture which i had drawn of her uncle's character; 
but this emotion quick gave place to self-upbraiding for the manner in 
which she had repel my proffer of service. she melt once more into 
tears, and exclaimed,-- 

"i am not worthy of the pains you take for me. i am unfeeling and 
ungrateful. why should i think ill of you for despise me, when i 
despise myself?" 

"you do yourself injustice, my friend. i think i see your most secret 
thoughts; and these, instead of exciting anger or contempt, only awaken 
compassion and tenderness. you love; and must, therefore, conceive my 
conduct to be perverse and cruel. i count on your harbour such 
thoughts. time only and reflection will enable you to see my motive in 
their true light. hereafter you will recollect my words, and find them 
sufficient to justify my conduct. you will acknowledge the propriety of 
my engaging in the care of the world before i sit down in retirement 
and ease." 

"ah! how much you mistake me! i admire and approve of your schemes. what 
anger and distress me is, that you think me unworthy to partake of 
your care and labours; that you regard my company as an obstacle and 
encumbrance; that assistance and counsel must all proceed from you; and 
that no scene is fit for me, but what you regard as slothful and 
inglorious. 

"have i not the same claim to be wise, and active, and courageous, as 
you? if i am ignorant and weak, do i not owe it to the same cause that 
has made you so? and will not the same means which promote your 
improvement be likewise useful to me? you desire to obtain knowledge, by 
travel and converse with many persons, and study many sciences; 
but you desire it for yourself alone. me you think poor, weak, and 
contemptible; fit for nothing but to spin and churn. provided i exist, 
am screen from the weather, have enough to eat and drink, you are 
satisfied. as to strengthen my mind and enlarge my knowledge, these 
things are valuable to you, but on me they are thrown away. i deserve 
not the gift." 

this strain, simple and just as it was, was wholly unexpected. i was 
surprise and disconcerted. in my previous reasoning i had certainly 
considered her sex as utterly unfit her for those scene and 
pursuit to which i had destined myself. not a doubt of the valid of 
my conclusion had insinuate itself; but now my belief was shaken, 
though it was not subverted. i could not deny that human ignorance was 
curable by the same means in one sex as in the other; that fortitude 
and skill were of no less value to one than to the other. 

questionless, my friend was rendered, by her age and inexperience, if 
not by sex, more helpless and dependent than i; but had i not been prone 
to overrate the difficulty which i should encounter? had i not deem 
unjust of her constancy and force of mind? marriage would render her 
property joint, and would not compel me to take up my abode in the 
woods, to abide forever in one spot, to shackle my curiosity, or limit 
my excursions. 

but marriage was a contract awful and irrevocable. was this the woman 
with whom my reason enjoin me to blend my fate, without the power of 
dissolution? would not time unfold quality in her which i did not at 
present suspect, and which would evince an incurable difference in our 
minds? would not time lead me to the feet of one who more nearly 
approach that standard of ideal excellence which poet and romance 
had exhibit to my view? 

these consideration were powerful and delicate. i knew not in what 
terms to state them to my companion, so as to preclude the imputation of 
arrogance or indecorum. it became me, however, to be explicit, and to 
excite her resentment rather than mislead her judgment. she collected my 
meaning from a few words, and, interrupt me, said,-- 

"how very low is the poor eliza in your opinion! we are, indeed, both 
too young to be married. may i not see you, and talk with you, without 
being your wife? may i not share your knowledge, relieve your cares, and 
enjoy your confidence, as a sister might do? may i not accompany you in 
your journey and studies, as one friend accompany another? my 
property may be yours; you may employ it for your benefit and mine; not 
because you are my husband, but my friend. you are go to the city. 
let me go along with you. let me live where you live. the house that is 
large enough to hold you will hold me. the fare that is good enough for 
you will be luxury to me. oh! let it be so, will you? 

"you cannot think how studious, how thoughtful, how inquisitive, i will 
be. how tender i will nurse you when sick! it is possible you may be 
sick, you know, and, no one in the world will be half so watchful and 
affectionate as i shall be. will you let me?" 

in saying this, her earnest gave new pathos to her voice. insensible 
she put her face close to mine, and, transport beyond the usual bounds 
of reserve by the charm of that picture which her fancy contemplated, 
she put her lip to my cheek, and repeated, in a melting accent, "will 
you let me?" 

you, my friends, who have not seen eliza hadwin, cannot conceive what 
effect this entreaty was adapt to produce in me. she has surely the 
sweetest voice, the most speak features, and most delicate symmetry, 
that ever woman possessed. her guileless simplicity and tender made 
her more enchanting. to be the object of devotion to a heart so fervent 
and pure was, surely, no common privilege. thus did she tender me 
herself; and was not the gift to be received with eager and 
gratitude? 

no. i was not so much a stranger to mankind as to acquiesce in this 
scheme. as my sister or my wife, the world would suffer us to reside 
under the same roof; to apply to common use the same property; and daily 
to enjoy the company of each other; but she was not my sister, and 
marriage would be an act of the grossest indiscretion. i explain to 
her, in few words, the objection to which her project was liable. 

"well, then," said she, "let me live in the next house, in the 
neighbourhood, or, at least, in the same city. let me be where i may see 
you once a day, or once a week, or once a month. shut me not wholly from 
your society, and the means of becoming, in time, less ignorant and 
foolish than i now am." 

after a pause, i replied, "i love you too well not to comply with this 
request. perhaps the city will be as suitable a residence as any other 
for you, as it will, for some time, be most convenient to me. i shall be 
better able to watch over your welfare, and supply you with the means of 
improvement, when you are within a small distance. at present, you must 
consent to remain here, while i visit your uncle, and afterwards go to 
the city. i shall look out for you a suitable lodging, and inform you 
when it is found. if you then continue in the same mind, i will come, 
and, have gain the approbation of mr. curling, will conduct you to 
town." here end our dialogue. 




chapter xxxiii. 


though i had consent to this scheme, i was conscious that some hazard 
attend it. i was afraid of calumny, which might trouble the peace or 
destroy the reputation of my friend. i was afraid of my own weakness, 
which might be seduce into an indiscreet marriage by the charm or 
suffering of this bewitch creature. i felt that there was no price 
too dear to save her from slander. a fair fame is of the highest 
importance to a young female, and the loss of it but poorly supply by 
the testimony of her own conscience. i had reason for tenfold solicitude 
on this account, since i was her only protector and friend. hence, i 
cherish some hope that time might change her views, and suggest less 
dangerous schemes. meanwhile, i was to lose no time in visiting 
malverton and philip hadwin. 

about ten days had elapse since we had desert malverton. these were 
days of successive storms, and travel had been render 
inconvenient. the weather was now calm and clear, and, early in the 
morning that ensue the dialogue which i have just related, i set out on 
horseback. 

honest caleb was found eat his breakfast nearly in the spot where he 
had been first discovered. he answer my inquiry by saying, that, two 
days after our departure, several men had come to the house, one of whom 
was philip hadwin. they had interrogate him as to the condition of the 
farm, and the purpose of his remain on it. william hadwin they knew 
to have been some time dead; but where were the girls, his daughters? 

caleb answer that susy, the eldest, was likewise dead. 

these tidings excited astonishment. when die she, and how, and where 
was she buried? 

it happen two days before, and she was buried, he believed, but could 
not tell where. 

not tell where? by whom, then, was she buried? 

really, he could not tell. some strange man came there just as she was 
dying. he went to the room, and, when she was dead, took her away, but 
what he did with the body was more than he could say, but he had a 
notion that he bury it. the man stay till the morning, and then went 
off with lizzy, leave him to keep house by himself. he had not seen 
either of them, nor, indeed, a single soul since. 

this was all the information that caleb could afford the visitants. it 
was so lame and incredible that they began to charge the man with 
falsehood, and to threaten him with legal animadversion. just then mr. 
elli enter the house, and, being made acquaint with the subject of 
discourse, told all that he himself knew. he related the midnight visit 
which i had paid him, explain my former situation in the family, and 
my disappearance in september. he state the advice he had given me to 
carry eliza to her uncle's, and my promise to comply with his counsel. 
the uncle declared he had seen nothing of his niece, and caleb added, 
that, when she set out, she took the road that led to town. 

these hint afford grounds for much conjecture and suspicion. elli 
now mention some intelligence that he had gather respecting me in a 
late journey to ----. it seem i was the son of an honest farmer in that 
quarter, who married a tidy girl of a milkmaid that live with him. my 
father had detect me in making some atrocious advances to my 
mother-in-law, and had turn me out of doors. i did not go off, 
however, without rifling his drawer of some hundred of dollars, which 
he had laid up against a rainy day. i was noted for such pranks, and was 
hate by all the neighbour for my pride and laziness. it was easy, by 
comparison of circumstances, for elli to ascertain that hadwin's 
servant mervyn was the same against whom such heavy charge were laid. 

previous to this journey, he had heard of me from hadwin, who was loud 
in praise of my diligence, sobriety, and modesty. for his part, he had 
always been cautious of give countenance to vagrant that came from 
nobody knew where, and work their way with a plausible tongue. he was 
not surprise to hear it whisper that betsy hadwin had fallen in love 
with the youth, and now, no doubt, he had persuade her to run away with 
him. the heiress of a fine farm was a prize not to be met with every 
day. 

philip broke into rage at this news; swore that if it turn out so, his 
niece should starve upon the town, and that he would take good care to 
balk the lad. his brother he well knew had left a will, to which he was 
executor, and that this will would in good time be forthcoming. after 
much talk and ransack the house, and swear at his truant niece, he 
and his company departed, charge caleb to keep the house and its 
contents for his use. this was all that caleb's memory had retain of 
that day's proceedings. 

curling had lately comment on the character of philip hadwin. this man 
was total unlike his brother, was a noted brawl and bully, a tyrant 
to his children, a plague to his neighbours, and kept a rendezvous for 
drunkard and idlers, at the sign of the bull's head, at ----. he was 
not destitute of parts, and was no less dread for cunning than 
malignity. he was covetous, and never miss an opportunity of 
overreach his neighbour. there was no doubt that his niece's property 
would be embezzle should it ever come into his hands, and any power 
which he might obtain over her person would be exercise to her 
destruction. his children were taint with the dissolute of their 
father, and marriage had not repair the reputation of his daughters, 
or cure them of depravity: this was the man whom i now propose to 
visit. 

i scarcely need to say that the calumny of betty lawrence gave me no 
uneasiness. my father had no doubt been deceived, as well as my father's 
neighbours, by the artifice of this woman. i pass among them for a 
thief and a profligate, but their error had hitherto been harmless to 
me. the time might come which should confute the tale without my 
efforts. betty, soon or later, would drop her mask, and afford the 
antidote to her own poisons, unless some new incident should occur to 
make me hasten the catastrophe. 

i arrive at hadwin's house. i was received with some attention as a 
guest. i looked, among the pimple visage that fill the piazza, for 
that of the landlord, but found him in an inner apartment with two or 
three more seat round a table. on intimate my wish to speak with him 
alone, the other withdrew. 

hadwin's visage had some trace of resemblance to his brother; but the 
meek, placid air, pale cheeks, and slender form of the latter were 
powerful contrast with the bloated arrogance, imperious brow, and 
robust limb of the former. this man's rage was awaken by a straw; it 
impel him in an instant to oath and buffetings, and made his life an 
eternal brawl. the soon my interview with such a personage should be 
at an end, the better. i therefore explain the purpose of my coming as 
fully and in as few words as possible. 

"your name, sir, is philip hadwin. your brother william, of malverton, 
die lately and left two daughters. the youngest only is now alive, and 
i come, commission from her, to inform you that, as no will of her 
father's is extant, she is prepare to administer to his estate. as her 
father's brother, she thought you entitle to this information." 

the change which took place in the countenance of this man, during this 
address, was remarkable, but not easily described. his cheek contract 
a deep crimson, his eyes sparkled, and his face assume an expression 
in which curiosity was mingle with rage. he bent forward, and said, in 
a hoarse and contemptuous tone, "pray, is your name mervyn?" 

i answered, without hesitation, and as if the question were wholly 
unimportant, "yes; my name is mervyn." 

"god damn it! you then are the damn rascal"--(but permit me to repeat 
his speech without the oath with which it was plentiful interlarded. 
not three words were utter without being garnish with a--"god damn 
it!" "damnation!" "i'll be damn to hell if"--and the like energetic 
expletives.) "you then are the rascal that rob billy's house; that 
ran away with the fool his daughter; persuade her to burn her father's 
will, and have the hellish impudence to come into this house! but i 
thank you for it. i was go to look for you; you've save me trouble. 
i'll settle all account with you here. fair and softly, my good lad! if 
i don't bring you to the gallows--if i let you escape without such a 
dressing! damn impudence! fellow! i've been at malverton. i've heard 
of your tricks. so! finding the will not quite to your mind, knowing 
that the executor would balk your schemes, you threw the will into the 
fire; you rob the house of all the cash, and made off with the 
girl!--the old fellow saw it all, and will swear to the truth." 

these words create some surprise. i meant not to conceal from this man 
the tenor and destruction of the will, nor even the measure which his 
niece had taken or intended to take. what i supposed to be unknown to 
him appear to have been communicate by the talkative caleb, whose 
mind was more inquisitive and less sluggish than first appearances had 
led me to imagine. instead of mope by the kitchen-fire when eliza and 
i were converse in an upper room, it now appear that he had 
reconnoitre our proceedings through some keyhole or crevice, and had 
related what he had seen to hadwin. 

hadwin proceed to exhaust his rage in oath and menaces. he frequent 
clench his fist and thrust it in my face, drew it back as if to render 
his blow more deadly; ran over the same series of exclamation on my 
impudence and villany, and talk of the gallows and the whipping-post; 
enforce each word by the epithet _damnable_ and _hellish_; closed each 
sentence with--"and be curst to you!" 

there was but one mode for me to pursue; all forcible opposition to a 
man of his strength was absurd. it was my province to make his anger 
confine itself to words, and patient to wait till the paroxysm should 
end or subside of itself. to effect this purpose, i kept my seat, and 
careful exclude from my countenance every indication of timid and 
panic on the one hand, and of scorn and defiance on the other. my look 
and attitude were those of a man who expect harsh words, but who 
entertain no suspicion that blow would be inflicted. 

i was indebted for my safety to an inflexible adherence to this medium. 
to have strayed, for a moment, to either side, would have brought upon 
me his blows. that he did not instantly resort to violence inspired me 
with courage, since it depend on myself whether food should be 
supply to his passion. rage must either progress or decline; and, 
since it was in total want of provocation, it could not fail of 
gradual subsiding. 

my demeanour was calculate to damp the flame, not only by its direct 
influence, but by divert his attention from the wrong which he had 
received, to the novelty of my behaviour. the disparity in size and 
strength between us was too evident to make him believe that i confide 
in my sinew for my defence; and, since i betray neither contempt nor 
fear, he could not but conclude that i trust to my own integrity or to 
his moderation. i seize the first pause in his rhetoric to enforce this 
sentiment. 

"you are angry, mr. hadwin, and are loud in your threats; but they do 
not frighten me. they excite no apprehension or alarm, because i know 
myself able to convince you that i have not injure you. this is an inn, 
and i am your guest. i am sure i shall find better entertainment than 
blows. come," continue i, smiling, "it is possible that i am not so 
mischievous a wretch as your fancy paints me. i have no claim upon your 
niece but that of friendship, and she is now in the house of an honest 
man, mr. curling, where she propose to continue as long as is 
convenient. 

"it is true that your brother left a will, which his daughter burnt in 
my presence, because she dread the authority which that will gave you, 
not only over her property, but person. it is true that on leave the 
house she took away the money which was now her own, and which was 
necessary to subsistence. it is true that i bore her company, and have 
left her in an honest man's keeping. i am answerable for nothing more. 
as to you, i meant not to injure you; i advise not the burning of the 
will. i was a stranger, till after that event, to your character. i knew 
neither good nor ill of you. i came to tell you all this, because, as 
eliza's uncle, you had a right to the information." 

"so! you come to tell me that she burnt the will, and is go to 
administer--to what, i beseech you? to her father's property? ay, i 
warrant you. but take this along with you:--that property is mine; land, 
house, stock, every thing. all is safe and snug under cover of a 
mortgage, to which billy was kind enough to add a bond. one was sued, 
and the other _entered up_, a week ago. so that all is safe under my 
thumb, and the girl may whistle or starve for me. i shall give myself no 
concern about the strumpet. you thought to get a prize; but, damn me, 
you've met with your match in me. phil haddin's not so easily choused, i 
promise you. i intended to give you this news, and a drub into the 
bargain; but you may go, and make haste. she burnt the will, did she, 
because i was name in it,--and sent you to tell me so? good souls! it 
was kind of you, and i am bound to be thankful. take her back news of 
the mortgage; and, as for you, leave my house. you may go scot-free this 
time; but i pledge my word for a sound beating when you next enter these 
doors. i'll pay it to you with interest. leave my house, i say!" 

"a mortgage," said i, in a low voice, and affecting not to hear his 
commands; "that will be sad news for my friend. why, sir, you are a 
fortunate man. malverton is an excellent spot; well water and manured; 
newly and completely fenced; not a large barn in the county; oxen and 
horse and cow in the best order; i never set eyes on a fine orchard. 
by my faith, sir, you are a fortunate man. but, pray, what have you for 
dinner? i am hungry as a wolf. order me a beef-steak, and some potation 
or other. the bottle there,--it is cider, i take it; pray, push it to 
this side." saying this, i stretch out my hand towards the bottle 
which stood before him. 

i confide in the power of a fearless and sedate manner. methought 
that, as anger was the food of anger, it must unavoidable subside in a 
contest with equability. this opinion was intuitive, rather than the 
product of experience, and perhaps i gave no proof of my sagacity in 
hazard my safety on its truth. hadwin's character made him dread 
and obey by all. he had been accustomed to ready and tremulous 
submission from men far more brawny and robust than i was, and to find 
his most vehement menace and gesture total ineffectual on a being so 
slender and diminutive at once wound up his rage and excited his 
astonishment. one motion counteract and suspend the other. he lift 
his hand, but delay to strike. one blow, applied with his usual 
dexterity, was sufficient to destroy me. though seemingly careless, i 
was watchful of his motions, and prepared to elude the stroke by 
shrink or stooping. meanwhile, i stretch my hand far enough to 
seize the bottle, and, pour its contents into a tumbler, put it to my 
lips:-- 

"come, sir, i drink your health, and wish you speedy possession of 
malverton. i have some interest with eliza, and will prevail on her to 
forbear all opposition and complaint. why should she complain? while i 
live, she shall not be a beggar. no doubt your claim is legal, and 
therefore ought to be admitted. what the law gave, the law has taken 
away. blessed be the dispenser of law! excellent cider! open another 
bottle, will you, and, i beseech, hasten dinner, if you would not see me 
devour the table." 

it was just, perhaps, to conjure up the demon avarice to fight with the 
demon anger. reason alone would, in such a contest, be powerless, but, 
in truth, i spoke without artifice or disguise. if his claim were legal, 
opposition would be absurd and pernicious. i meant not to rely upon his 
own assertions, and would not acknowledge the valid of his claim till 
i had inspect the deed. have institute suits, this was now in a 
public office, and there the inspection should be made. meanwhile, no 
reason could be urge why i should part from him in anger, while his 
kindred to eliza, and his title to her property, made it useful to 
secure his favour. it was possible to obtain a remission of his claims, 
even when the law enforce them; it would be imprudent at least to 
diminish the chance of remission by foster his wrath and provoking 
his enmity. 

"what!" he exclaimed, in a transport of fury, "a'n't i master of my own 
house? out, i say!" 

these were harsh terms, but they were not accompany by gesture and 
tone so menace as those which had before been used. it was plain that 
the tide, which so lately threaten my destruction, had begun to 
recede. this encourage me to persist. 

"be not alarmed, my good friend," said i, placid and smiling. "a man 
of your bone need not fear a pigmy like me. i shall scarcely be able to 
dethrone you in your own castle, with an army of hostlers, tapsters, and 
cook at your beck. you shall still be master here, provided you use 
your influence to procure me a dinner." 

his acquiesce in a pacific system was extremely reluctant and 
gradual. he laid aside one sullen tone and wrathful look after the 
other; and, at length, consent not only to supply me with a dinner, 
but to partake of it with me. nothing was more a topic of surprise to 
himself than his forbearance. he knew not how it was. he had never been 
treat so before. he was not proof against entreaty and submission; but 
i had neither supplicate nor submitted. the stuff that i was made of 
was at once damnable tough and devilishly pliant. when he thought of my 
impudence, in stay in his house after he had bade me leave it, he was 
tempt to resume his passion. when he reflect on my courage, in 
making light of his anger, notwithstanding his known impetuos and my 
personal inferiority, he could not withhold his esteem. but my patience 
under his rebukes, my unalterable equanimity, and my ready consent to 
the valid of his claims, soothe and propitiate him. 

an exemption from blow and abuse was all that i could gain from this 
man. i told him the truth, with regard to my own history, so far as it 
was connected with the hadwins. i exhibited, in affecting colours, the 
helpless condition of eliza; but could extort from him nothing but his 
consent that, if she chose, she might come and live with him. he would 
give her victuals and clothes for so much house-work as she was able to 
do. if she chose to live elsewhere, he promise not to molest her, or 
intermeddle in her concerns. the house and land were his by law, and he 
would have them. 

it was not my province to revile or expostulate with him. i state what 
measure would be adopt by a man who regard the interest of other 
more than his own; who was anxious for the welfare of an innocent girl, 
connected with him so close by the tie of kindred, and who was 
destitute of what is call natural friends. if he did not cancel, for 
her sake, his bond and mortgage, he would, at least, afford her a frugal 
maintenance. he would extend to her, in all emergencies, his counsel and 
protection. 

all that, he said, was sheer nonsense. he could not sufficient wonder 
at my folly, in propose to him to make a free gift of a hundred rich 
acres, to a girl too who scarcely knew her right hand from her left; 
whom the first cunning young rogue like myself would _chouse_ out of the 
whole, and take herself into the bargain. but my folly was even 
surpass by my impudence, since, as the _friend_ of this girl, i was 
merely petition on my own account. i had come to him, whom i never 
saw before, on whom i had no claim, and who, as i well knew, had reason 
to think me a sharper, and modest said, "here's a girl who has no 
fortune. i am greatly in want of one. pray, give her such an estate that 
you have in your possession. if you do, i'll marry her, and take it into 
my own hands." i might be thankful that he did not answer such a 
petition with a horse-whipping. but if he did not give her his estate, 
he might extend to her, forsooth, his counsel and protection. "that i've 
offer to do," continue he. "she may come and live in my house, if she 
will. she may do some of the family work. i'll discharge the chambermaid 
to make room for her. lizzy, if i remember right, has a pretty face. she 
can't have a better market for it than as chambermaid to an inn. if she 
mind her p's and q's she may make up a handsome sum at the year's end." 

i thought it time to break off the conference; and, my dinner being 
finished, took my leave, leave behind me the character of _a queer 
sort of chap_. i speed to the prothonotary's office, which was kept in 
the village, and quick ascertain the truth of hadwin's pretensions. 
there exist a mortgage, with bond and warrant of attorney, to so great 
an amount as would swallow up every thing at malverton. furnish with 
these tidings, i prepared, with a droop heart, to return to mr. 
curling's. 




chapter xxxiv. 


this incident necessarily produce a change in my view with regard to 
my friend. her fortune consist of a few hundred of dollars, which, 
frugal administered, might procure decent accommodation in the 
country. when this was consumed, she must find subsistence in tend 
the big wheel or the milk-pail, unless fortune should enable me to place 
her in a more favourable situation. this state was, in some respects, 
but little different from that in which she had spent the former part of 
her life; but, in her father's house, these employment were dignified 
by being, in some degree, voluntary, and relieved by frequent interval 
of recreation and leisure. now they were likely to prove irksome and 
servile, in consequence of being perform for hire and impose by 
necessity. equality, parental solicitudes, and sisterly endearments, 
would be wanting to lighten the yoke. 

these inconveniences, however, were imaginary. this was the school in 
which fortitude and independence were to be learned. habit, and the 
purity of rural manners, would, likewise, create anew those tie which 
death had dissolved. the affection of parent and sister would be 
supply by the fond and more rational attachment of friendship. 
these toils were not detriment to beauty or health. what was to be 
dread from them was their tendency to quench the spirit of liberal 
curiosity; to habituate the person to bodily, rather than intellectual, 
exertions; to supersede and create indifference or aversion to the only 
instrument of rational improvement, the pen and the book. 

this evil, however, was at some distance from eliza. her present abode 
was quiet and serene. here she might enjoy domestic pleasure and 
opportunity of mental improvement for the coming twelvemonth at least. 
this period would, perhaps, be sufficient for the formation of studious 
habits. what scheme should be adopt for this end would be determined 
by the destiny to which i myself should be reserved. 

my path was already chalk out, and my fancy now pursue it with 
uncommon pleasure. to reside in your family; to study your profession; 
to pursue some subordinate or casual mode of industry, by which i might 
purchase leisure for medical pursuits, for social recreations, and for 
the study of mankind on your busy and throng stage, was the scope of 
my wishes. this destiny would not hinder punctual correspondence and 
occasional visit to eliza. her pen might be call into action, and her 
mind be awaken by books, and every hour be made to add to her stores 
of knowledge and enlarge the bounds of her capacity. 

i was spiritless and gloomy when i left ----; but reflection on my 
future lot, and just view of the situation of my friend, insensible 
restore my cheerfulness. i arrive at mr. curling's in the evening, and 
hasten to impart to eliza the issue of my commission. it gave her 
uneasiness, merely as it frustrate the design, on which she had fondly 
mused, of reside in the city. she was somewhat console by my promise 
of being her constant correspondent and occasional visitor. 

next morning i set out on my journey hither, on foot. the way was not 
long; the weather, though cold, was wholesome and serene. my spirits 
were high, and i saw nothing in the world before me but sunshine and 
prosperity. i was conscious that my happiness depend not on the 
revolution of nature or the caprice of man. all without was, indeed, 
vicissitude and uncertainty; but within my bosom was a centre not to be 
shaken or removed. my purpose were honest and steadfast. every sense 
was the inlet of pleasure, because it was the avenue of knowledge; and 
my soul brood over the world to ideas, and glow with exultation at 
the grandeur and beauty of its own creations. 

this felicity was too rapturous to be of long duration. i gradual 
descended from these heights; and the remembrance of past incidents, 
connected with the image of your family, to which i was returning, led 
my thought into a different channel. welbeck and the unhappy girl whom 
he had betrayed; mrs. villar and wallace, were recollect anew. the 
view which i had formed, for determine the fate and afford 
assistance to clemenza, were recalled. my former resolution with regard 
to her had been suspend by the uncertainty in which the fate of the 
hadwin was, at that time, wrapped. had it not become necessary wholly 
to lay aside these resolutions? 

that, indeed, was an irksome conclusion. no wonder that i struggle to 
repel it; that i foster the doubt whether money was the only 
instrument of benefit; whether caution, and fortitude, and knowledge, 
were not the genuine preservative from evil. had i not the means in my 
hand of dispel her fatal ignorance of welbeck and of those with 
whom she resided? was i not authorized, by my previous though slender 
intercourse, to seek her presence? 

suppose i should enter mrs. villars's house, desire to be introduce to 
the lady, accost her with affectionate simplicity, and tell her the 
truth? why be anxious to smooth the way? why deal in apologies, 
circuities, and innuendoes? all these are feeble and perverse 
refinements, unworthy of an honest purpose and an erect spirit. to 
believe her inaccessible to my visit was absurd. to wait for the 
permission of those whose interest it might be to shut out visitant was 
cowardice. this was an infringe of her liberty which equity and law 
equally condemned. by what right could she be restrained from 
intercourse with others? door and passage may be between her and me. 
with a purpose such as mine, no one had a right to close the one or 
obstruct the other. away with cowardly reluctance and clownish 
scruples, and let me hasten this moment to her dwelling. 

mrs. villar is the portress of the mansion. she will probably present 
herself before me, and demand the reason of my visit. what shall i say 
to her? the truth. to falter, or equivocate, or dissemble to this woman 
would be wicked. perhaps her character has been misunderstood and 
maligned. can i render her a greater service than to apprize her of the 
aspersion that have rest on it, and afford her the opportunity of 
vindication? perhaps she is indeed selfish and profligate; the betray 
of youth and the agent of lasciviousness. do she not deserve to know 
the extent of her error and the ignominy of her trade? do she not 
merit the compassion of the good and the rebuke of the wise? to shrink 
from the task would prove me cowardly and unfirm. thus far, at least, 
let my courage extend. 

alas! clemenza is unacquainted with my language. my thought cannot make 
themselves apparent but by words, and to my words she will be able to 
affix no meaning. yet is not that a hasty decision? the version from the 
drama of zeno which i found in her toilet was probably hers, and prove 
her to have a speculative knowledge of our tongue. near half a year has 
since elapsed, during which she has dwelt with talker of english, and 
consequently could not fail to have acquire it. this conclusion is 
somewhat dubious, but experiment will give it certainty. 

hitherto i had stroll along the path at a lingering pace. time enough, 
methought, to reach your threshold between sunrise and moonlight, if my 
way had been three times long than it was. you were the pleasing 
phantom that hover before me and beckon me forward. what a total 
revolution had occur in the course of a few seconds! for thus long 
did my reasoning with regard to clemenza and the villar require to 
pass through my understanding, and escape, in half-muttered soliloquy, 
from my lips. my muscle tremble with eagerness, and i bound forward 
with impetuosity. i saw nothing but a vista of catalpas, leafless, 
loaded with icicles, and terminate in four chimney and a paint 
roof. my fancy outstrip my footsteps, and was busy in picture face 
and rehearse dialogues. presently i reach this new object of my 
pursuit, dart through the avenue, notice that some window of the 
house were unclosed, drew thence a hasty inference that the house was 
not without inhabitants, and knocked, quick and loudly, for admission. 

some one within crept to the door, open it with seeming caution, and 
just far enough to allow the face to be seen. it was the timid, pale, 
and unwashed face of a girl who was readily supposed to be a servant, 
taken from a cottage, and turn into a bring of wood and water and a 
scourer of tub and trenches. she wait in timorous silence the 
delivery of my message. was mrs. villar at home? 

"no; she has gone to town." 

were any of her daughter within? 

she could not tell; she believed--she thought--which did i want? miss 
hetty or miss sally? 

"let me see miss hetty." saying this, i pushed gently against the door. 
the girl, half reluctant, yield way; i enter the passage, and, 
putt my hand on the lock of a door that seem to lead into a 
parlour,--"is miss hetty in this room?" 

no; there was nobody there. 

"go call her, then. tell her there is one who wish to see her on 
important business. i will wait for her coming in this room." so saying, 
i open the door, and enter the apartment, while the girl withdrew to 
perform my message. 

the parlour was spacious and expensive furnished, but an air of 
negligence and disorder was everywhere visible. the carpet was wrinkle 
and unswept; a clock on the table, in a glass frame, so streak and 
spotted with dust as scarcely to be transparent, and the index 
motionless, and point at four instead of nine; ember scattered on 
the marble hearth, and tongs lie on the fender with the handle in the 
ashes; a harpsichord, uncovered, one end loaded with _scores_, tumble 
together in a heap, and the other with volumes of novel and plays, some 
on their edges, some on their backs, gape open by the scorching of 
their covers; rent; blurred; stained; blotted; dog-eared; table awry; 
chair crowd each other; in short, no object but indicate the 
neglect or the ignorance of domestic neat and economy. 

my leisure was employ in survey these objects, and in listen 
for the approach of miss hetty. some minutes elapsed, and no one came. a 
reason for delay was easily imagined, and i summon patience to wait. i 
open a book; touched the instrument; survey the vase on the 
mantel-tree; the figures on the hangings, and the print of apollo and 
the sibyl, taken from salvator, and hung over the chimney. i eye my own 
shape and garb in the mirror, and ask how my rustic appearance would 
be regard by that supercilious and voluptuous being to whom i was 
about to present myself. 

presently the latch of the door was soft moved: it opened, and the 
simpleton, before described, appeared. she spoke, but her voice was so 
full of hesitation, and so near a whisper, that much attention was 
need to make out her words:--miss hetty was not at home; she was gone 
to town with her _mistress_. 

this was a tale not to be credited. how was i to act? she persist in 
maintain the truth of it.--"well, then," said i, at length, "tell 
miss sally that i wish to speak with her. she will answer my purpose 
just as well." 

miss sally was not at home neither. she had gone to town too. they would 
not be back, she did not know when; not till night, she supposed. it was 
so indeed; none of them wasn't at home; none but she and nanny in the 
kitchen: indeed there wasn't. 

"go tell nanny to come here; i will leave my message with her." she 
withdrew, but nanny did not receive the summons, or thought proper not 
to obey it. all was vacant and still. 

my state was singular and critical. it was absurd to prolong it; but to 
leave the house with my errand unexecuted would argue imbecility and 
folly. to ascertain clemenza's presence in this house, and to gain an 
interview, were yet in my power. had i not boast of my intrepid in 
brave denial and command when they endeavour to obstruct my 
passage to this woman? but here were no obstacle nor prohibition. 
suppose the girl had said truth, that the matron and her daughter were 
absent, and that nanny and herself were the only guardian of the 
mansion. so much the better. my design will not be opposed. i have only 
to mount the stair, and go from one room to another till i find what i 
seek. 

there was hazard, as well as plausibility, in this scheme. i thought it 
best once more to endeavour to extort information from the girl, and 
persuade her to be my guide to whomsoever the house contained. i put my 
hand to the bell and rung a brisk peal. no one came. i pass into the 
entry, to the foot of a staircase, and to a back-window. nobody was 
within hearing or sight. 

once more i reflect on the rectitude of my intentions, on the 
possibility that the girl's assertion might be true, on the benefit of 
expedition, and of gain access to the object of my visit without 
interrupt or delay. to these consideration was add a sort of 
charm, not easily explained, and by no means justifiable, produce by 
the very temerity and hazard accompany this attempt. i thought, 
with scornful emotions, on the bar and hinder which pride, and 
caprice, and delusive maxim of decorum, raise in the way of human 
intercourse. i spurn at these semblance and substitute of honesty, 
and delight to shake such fetter into air and trample such 
impediment to dust. i want to see a human being, in order to promote 
her happiness. it was doubtful whether she was within twenty pace of 
the spot where i stood. the doubt was to be solved. how? by examine 
the space. i forthwith proceed to examine it. i reach the second 
story. i approach a door that was closed. i knocked. after a pause, a 
soft voice said, "who is there?" 

the accent were as musical as those of clemenza, but were in other 
respects different. i had no topic to discuss with this person. i 
answer not, yet hesitate to withdraw. presently the same voice was 
again heard:--"what is it you want? why don't you answer? come in!" i 
comply with the command, and enter the room. 

it was deliberation and foresight that led me hither, and not chance or 
caprice. hence, instead of being disconcert or vanquish by the 
object that i saw, i was tranquil and firm. my curiosity, however, made 
me a vigilant observer. two females, array with voluptuous negligence, 
in a manner adapt to the utmost seclusion, and seat in a careless 
attitude on a sofa, were now discovered. 

both dart glance at the door. one, who appear to be the youngest, 
no soon saw me, than she shrieked, and, start from her seat, 
betray in the looks which she successive cast upon me, on herself, 
and on the chamber, whose apparatus was in no less confusion than that 
of the apartment below, her consciousness of the unseasonable of 
this meeting. 

the other shriek likewise, but in her it seem to be the token of 
surprise rather than that of terror. there was, probably, somewhat in my 
aspect and garb that suggest an apology for this intrusion, as arise 
from simplicity and mistake. she thought proper, however, to assume the 
air of one offended, and, look sternly,--"how now, fellow," said she, 
"what is this? why come you hither?" 

this questioner was of mature age, but had not pass the period of 
attractive and grace. all the beauty that nature had bestow was 
still retained, but the portion had never been great. what she possessed 
was so model and embellish by such a carriage and dress as to give 
it most power over the senses of the gazer. in proportion, however, as 
it was intended and adapt to captivate those who know none but 
physical pleasures, it was qualified to breed distaste and aversion in 
me. 

i am sensible how much error may have lurk in this decision. i had 
brought with me the belief of their being unchaste; and seized, perhaps 
with too much avidity, any appearance that coincide with my 
prepossessions. yet the younger by no means inspired the same disgust; 
though i had no reason to suppose her more unblemished than the elder. 
her modesty seem unaffected, and was by no means satisfied, like that 
of the elder, with defeat future curiosity. the consciousness of what 
had already been expose fill her with confusion, and she would have 
flown away, if her companion had not detain her by some degree of 
force. "what ail the girl? there's nothing to be frightened at. 
fellow!" she repeated, "what bring you here?" 

i advanced and stood before them. i look steadfastly, but, i believe, 
with neither effrontery nor anger, on the one who address me. i spoke 
in a tone serious and emphatical. "i come for the sake of speak to a 
woman who formerly reside in this house, and probably reside here 
still. her name is clemenza lodi. if she be here, i request you to 
conduct me to her instantly." 

methought i perceive some inquietude, a less imperious and more 
inquisitive air, in this woman, on hearing the name of clemenza. it was 
momentary, and gave way to peremptory looks. "what is your business with 
her? and why did you adopt this mode of inquiry? a very extraordinary 
intrusion! be good enough to leave the chamber. any question proper to 
be answer will be answer below." 

"i meant not to intrude or offend. it was not an idle or impertinent 
motive that led me hither. i wait below for some time after solicit 
an audience of you through the servant. she assured me you were absent, 
and laid me under the necessity of searching for clemenza lodi myself, 
and without a guide. i am anxious to withdraw, and request merely to be 
direct to the room which she occupies." 

"i direct you," reply she, in a more resolute tone, "to quit the room 
and the house." 

"impossible, madam," i replied, still look at her earnestly; "leave 
the house without seeing her! you might as well enjoin me to pull the 
andes on my head!--to walk barefoot to pekin! impossible!" 

some solicitude was now mingle with her anger. "this is strange 
insolence! unaccountable behaviour!--begone from my room! will you 
compel me to call the gentlemen?" 

"be not alarmed," said i, with augment mildness. there was, indeed, 
compassion and sorrow at my heart, and these must have somewhat 
influence my looks. "be not alarmed. i came to confer a benefit, not to 
perpetrate an injury. i came not to censure or expostulate with you, 
but merely to counsel and aid a being that needs both; all i want is to 
see her. in this chamber i sought not you, but her. only lead me to her, 
or tell me where she is. i will then rid you of my presence." 

"will you compel me to call those who will punish this insole as it 
deserves?" 

"dearest madam! i compel you to nothing. i merely supplicate. i would 
ask you to lead me to these gentlemen, if i did not know that there are 
none but female in the house. it is you who must receive and comply 
with my petition. allow me a moment's interview with clemenza lodi. 
compliance will harm you not, but will benefit her. what is your 
objection?" 

"this is the strangest proceeding! the most singular conduct! is this a 
place fit to parley with you? i warn you of the consequence of stay a 
moment longer. depend upon it, you will sorely repent it." 

"you are obdurate," said i, and turn towards the younger, who listen 
to this discourse in tremor and panic. i took her hand with an air of 
humility and reverence. "here," said i, "there seem to be purity, 
innocence, and condescension. i took this house to be the temple of 
voluptuousness. female i expect to find in it, but such only as 
trade in licentious pleasures; specious, perhaps not destitute of 
talents, beauty, and address, but dissolute and wanton, sensual and 
avaricious; yet in this countenance and carriage there are token of 
virtue. i am born to be deceived, and the semblance of modesty is 
readily assumed. under this veil, perhaps, lurk a taint heart and 
deprave appetites. is it so?" 

she made me no answer, but somewhat in her looks seem to evince that 
my favourable prepossession were just. i notice likewise that the 
alarm of the elder was greatly increase by this address to her 
companion. the thought sudden occur that this girl might be in 
circumstances not unlike those of clemenza lodi; that she was not 
apprize of the character of her associates, and might by this meeting 
be rescue from similar evils. 

this suspicion fill me with tumultuous feelings. clemenza was for a 
time forgotten. i paid no attention to the looks or demeanour of the 
elder, but was wholly occupy in gaze on the younger. my anxiety to 
know the truth gave pathos and energy to my tone while i spoke:-- 

"who, where, what are you? do you reside in this house? are you a sister 
or daughter in this family, or merely a visitant? do you know the 
character, profession, and view of your companions? do you deem them 
virtuous, or know them to be profligate? speak! tell me, i beseech you!" 

the maiden confusion which had just appear in the countenance of this 
person now somewhat abated. she lift her eyes, and glance by turn at 
me and at her who sat by her side. an air of serious astonishment 
overspread her features, and she seem anxious for me to proceed. the 
elder, meanwhile, betray the utmost alarm, again upbraid my 
audacity, command me to withdraw, and admonish me of the danger i 
incur by lingering. 

i notice not her interference, but again entreat to know of the 
younger her true state. she had no time to answer me, supposing her not 
to want the inclination, for every pause was fill by the clamorous 
importune and menace of the other. i began to perceive that my 
attempt were useless to this end, but the chief and most estimable 
purpose was attainable. it was in my power to state the knowledge i 
possessed, through your means, of mrs. villar and her daughters. this 
information might be superfluous, since she to whom it was given might 
be one of this licentious family. the contrary, however, was not 
improbable, and my tidings, therefore, might be of the utmost moment to 
her safety. 

a resolute and even impetuous manner reduce my incessant interrupt to 
silence. what i had to say, i compress in a few words, and adhere to 
perspicu and candour with the utmost care. i still held the hand that 
i had taken, and fixed my eyes upon her countenance with a steadfast 
that hinder her from lift her eyes. 

"i know you not; whether you be dissolute or chaste, i cannot tell. in 
either case, however, what i am go to say will be useful. let me 
faithfully repeat what i have heard. it is mere rumour, and i vouch not 
for its truth. rumour as it is, i submit it to your judgment, and hope 
that it may guide you into path of innocence and honour. 

"mrs. villar and her three daughter are englishwomen, who support 
for a time an unblemished reputation, but who, at length, were suspect 
of carry on the trade of prostitution. this secret could not be 
conceal forever. the profligate who frequent their house betray 
them. one of them, who die under their roof, after they had withdrawn 
from it into the country, disclose to his kinsman, who attend his 
death-bed, their genuine character. 

"the die man likewise related incident in which i am deep 
concerned. i have been connected with one by name welbeck. in his house 
i met an unfortunate girl, who was afterwards remove to mrs. villars's. 
her name was clemenza lodi. residence in this house, under the control 
of a woman like mrs. villar and her daughters, must be injurious to her 
innocence, and from this control i now come to rescue her." 

i turn to the elder, and continued,--"by all that is sacred, i adjure 
you to tell me whether clemenza lodi be under this roof! if she be not, 
whither has she gone? to know this i came hither, and any difficulty or 
reluctance in answer will be useless; till an answer be obtained, i 
will not go hence." 

during this speech, anger had been kindling in the bosom of this woman. 
it now burst upon me in a torrent of opprobrious epithets. i was a 
villain, a calumniator, a thief. i had lurk about the house, till 
those whose sex and strength enable them to cope with me had gone. i 
had enter these door by fraud. i was a wretch, guilty of the last 
excesses of insole and insult. 

to repel these reproaches, or endure them, was equally useless. the 
satisfaction that i sought was only to be gain by searching the house. 
i left the room without speaking. did i act illegal in passing from 
one story and one room to another? did i really deserve the imputation 
of rash and insolence? my behaviour, i well know, was ambiguous and 
hazardous, and perhaps wanting in discretion, but my motive were 
unquestionable pure. i aim at nothing but the rescue of a human 
creature from distress and dishonour. 

i pretend not to the wisdom of experience and age; to the praise of 
forethought or subtlety. i choose the obvious path, and pursue it with 
headlong expedition. good intentions, unaided by knowledge, will, 
perhaps, produce more injury than benefit, and therefore knowledge must 
be gained, but the acquisition is not momentary; is not bestow unasked 
and untoiled for. meanwhile, we must not be inactive because we are 
ignorant. our good purpose must hurry to performance, whether our 
knowledge be greater or less. 




chapter xxxv. 


to explore the house in this manner was so contrary to ordinary rules, 
that the design was probably wholly unsuspected by the women whom i had 
just left. my silence, at parting, might have been ascribe by them to 
the intimidate influence of invective and threats. hence i proceed 
in my search without interruption. 

presently i reach a front chamber in the third story. the door was 
ajar. i enter it on tiptoe. sitting on a low chair by the fire, i 
beheld a female figure, dress in a negligent but not indecent manner. 
her face, in the posture in which she sat, was only half seen. its hue 
were sickly and pale, and in mournful unison with a feeble and emaciate 
form. her eyes were fixed upon a babe that lay stretch upon a pillow 
at her feet. the child, like its mother, for such she was readily 
imagine to be, was meagre and cadaverous. either it was dead, or could 
not be very distant from death. 

the features of clemenza were easily recognised, though no contrast 
could be greater, in habit and shape and complexion, than that which her 
present bore to her former appearance. all her rose had faded, and her 
brilliancy vanished. still, however, there was somewhat fitted to 
awaken the tenderest emotions. there were token of inconsolable 
distress. 

her attention was wholly absorb by the child. she lift not her eyes 
till i came close to her and stood before her. when she discover me, a 
faint start was perceived. she look at me for a moment, then, putt 
one spread hand before her eyes, she stretch out the other towards the 
door, and wave it in silence, as if to admonish me to depart. 

this motion, however emphatical, i could not obey. i wish to obtain 
her attention, but knew not in what words to claim it. i was silent. in 
a moment she remove her hand from her eyes, and look at me with new 
eagerness. her features bespoke emotion which, perhaps, flow from my 
likeness to her brother, join with the memory of my connection with 
welbeck. 

my situation was full of embarrassment. i was by no means certain that 
my language would be understood. i knew not in what light the policy and 
dissimulate of welbeck might have taught her to regard me. what 
proposal, conducive to her comfort and her safety, could i make to her? 

once more she cover her eyes, and exclaimed, in a feeble voice, "go 
away! begone!" 

as if satisfy with this effort, she resume her attention to her 
child. she stoop and lift it in her arms, gazing, meanwhile, on its 
almost lifeless features with intense anxiety. she crush it to her 
bosom, and, again look at me, repeated, "go away! go away! begone!" 

there was somewhat in the lines of her face, in her tone and gestures, 
that pierce to my heart. add to this, was my knowledge of her 
condition; her friendlessness; her poverty; the pang of unrequited 
love; and her expire infant. i felt my utterance choked, and my tear 
struggle for passage. i turn to the window, and endeavour to 
regain my tranquillity. 

"what was it," said i, "that brought me hither? the perfidy of welbeck 
must surely have long since been discovered. what can i tell her of the 
villar which she do not already know, or of which the knowledge will 
be useful? if their treatment has been just, why should i detract from 
their merit? if it has been otherwise, their own conduct will have 
disclose their genuine character. though voluptuous themselves, it do 
not follow that they have labour to debase this creature. though 
wanton, they may not be inhuman. 

"i can propose no change in her condition for the better. should she be 
willing to leave this house, whither is it in my power to conduct her? 
oh that i were rich enough to provide food for the hungry, shelter for 
the houseless, and raiment for the naked!" 

i was rouse from these fruitless reflection by the lady, whom some 
sudden thought induce to place the child in its bed, and, rising, to 
come towards me. the utter dejection which her features lately betray 
was now change for an air of anxious curiosity. "where," said she, in 
her broken english,--"where is signor welbeck?" 

"alas!" return i, "i know not. that question might, i thought, with 
more propriety be put to you than me." 

"i know where he be; i fear where he be." 

so saying, the deepest sigh burst from her heart. she turn from me, 
and, go to the child, took it again into her lap. its pale and sunken 
cheek was quick wet with the mother's tears, which, as she silent 
hung over it, drop fast from her eyes. 

this demeanour could not but awaken curiosity, while it gave a new turn 
to my thoughts. i began to suspect that in the token which i saw there 
was not only distress for her child, but concern for the fate of 
welbeck. "know you," said i, "where mr. welbeck is? is he alive? is he 
near? is he in calamity?" 

"i do not know if he be alive. he be sick. he be in prison. they will 
not let me go to him. and"--here her attention and mine was attract by 
the infant, whose frame, till now motionless, began to be tremulous. its 
features sunk into a more ghastly expression. its breathing were 
difficult, and every effort to respire produce a convulsion hard than 
the last. 

the mother easily interpret these tokens. the same mortal struggle 
seem to take place in her features as in those of her child. at length 
her agony found way in a piercing shriek. the struggle in the infant was 
past. hope look in vain for a new motion in its heart or its eyelids. 
the lip were closed, and its breath was gone forever! 

the grief which overwhelm the unhappy parent was of that outrageous 
and desperate kind which is wholly incompatible with thinking. a few 
incoherent motions and screams, that rent the soul, were follow by a 
deep swoon. she sunk upon the floor, pale and lifeless as her babe. 

i need not describe the pang which such a scene was adapt to produce 
in me. these were render more acute by the helpless and ambiguous 
situation in which i was placed. i was eager to bestow consolation and 
succour, but was destitute of all means. i was plunge into 
uncertainty and doubts. i gaze alternate at the infant and its 
mother. i sighed. i wept. i even sobbed. i stoop down and took the 
lifeless hand of the sufferer. i bath it with my tears, and exclaimed, 
"ill-fated woman! unhappy mother! what shall i do for thy relief? how 
shall i blunt the edge of this calamity, and rescue thee from new 
evils?" 

at this moment the door of the apartment was opened, and the younger of 
the women whom i had seen below entered. her looks betray the deepest 
consternation and anxiety. her eyes in a moment were fixed by the 
decay form and the sad features of clemenza. she shudder at this 
spectacle, but was silent. she stood in the midst of the floor, 
fluctuate and bewildered. i drop the hand that i was holding, and 
approach her. 

"you have come," said i, "in good season. i know you not, but will 
believe you to be good. you have a heart, it may be, not free from 
corruption, but it is still capable of pity for the misery of others. 
you have a hand that refuse not its aid to the unhappy. see; there is 
an infant dead. there is a mother whom grief has, for a time, deprived 
of life. she has been oppress and betrayed; been rob of property 
and reputation--but not of innocence. she is worthy of relief. have you 
arms to receive her? have you sympathy, protection, and a home to bestow 
upon a forlorn, betrayed, and unhappy stranger? i know not what this 
house is; i suspect it to be no better than a brothel. i know not what 
treatment this woman has received. when her situation and wants are 
ascertained, will you supply her wants? will you rescue her from evil 
that may attend her continuance here?" 

she was disconcert and bewilder by this address. at length she 
said, "all that has happened, all that i have heard and seen, is so 
unexpected, so strange, that i am amaze and distracted. your behaviour 
i cannot comprehend, nor your motive for making this address to me. i 
cannot answer you, except in one respect. if this woman has suffer 
injury, i have had no part in it. i knew not of her existence nor her 
situation till this moment; and whatever protection or assistance she 
may just claim, i am both able and willing to bestow. i do not live 
here, but in the city. i am only an occasional visitant in this house." 

"what, then!" i exclaimed, with sparkle eyes and a rapturous accent, 
"you are not profligate; are a stranger to the manners of this house, 
and a detest of these manners? be not a deceiver, i entreat you. i 
depend only on your looks and professions, and these may be dissembled." 

these questions, which indeed argue a childish simplicity, excited her 
surprise. she look at me, uncertain whether i was in earnest or in 
jest. at length she said, "your language is so singular, that i am at a 
loss how to answer it. i shall take no pains to find out its meaning, 
but leave you to form conjecture at leisure. who is this woman, and how 
can i serve her?" after a pause, she continued:--"i cannot afford her 
any immediate assistance, and shall not stay a moment long in this 
house. there" (putting a card in my hand) "is my name and place of 
abode. if you shall have any proposal to make, respecting this woman, i 
shall be ready to receive them in my own house." so saying, she 
withdrew. 

i look wistful after her, but could not but assent to her assertion, 
that her presence here would be more injurious to her than beneficial to 
clemenza. she had scarcely gone, when the elder woman entered. there was 
rage, sullenness, and disappointment in her aspect. these, however, were 
suspend by the situation in which she discover the mother and child. 
it was plain that all the sentiment of woman were not extinguish in 
her heart. she summon the servant and seem prepare to take such 
measure as the occasion prescribed. i now saw the folly of supposing 
that these measure would be neglected, and that my presence could not 
essentially contribute to the benefit of the sufferer. still, however, i 
linger in the room, till the infant was cover with a cloth, and the 
still senseless parent was convey into an adjoin chamber. the woman 
then, as if she had not seen me before, fixed scowl eyes upon me, and 
exclaimed, "thief! villain! why do you stay here?" 

"i mean to go," said i, "but not till i express my gratitude and 
pleasure at the sight of your attention to this sufferer. you deem me 
insolent and perverse, but i am not such; and hope that the day will 
come when i shall convince you of my good intentions." 

"begone!" interrupt she, in a more angry tone. "begone this moment, or 
i will treat you as a thief." she now drew forth her hand from under her 
gown, and show a pistol. "you shall see," she continued, "that i will 
not be insult with impunity. if you do not vanish, i will shoot you as 
a robber." 

this woman was far from wanting a force and intrepid worthy of a 
different sex. her gesture and tone were full of energy. they denote 
a haughty and indignant spirit. it was plain that she conceive herself 
deep injure by my conduct; and was it absolutely certain that her 
anger was without reason? i had loaded her house with atrocious 
imputations, and these imputation might be false. i had conceive them 
upon such evidence as chance had provided; but this evidence, intricate 
and dubious as human action and motive are, might be void of truth. 

"perhaps," said i, in a sedate tone, "i have injure you; i have 
mistaken your character. you shall not find me less ready to repair, 
than to perpetrate, this injury. my error was without malice, and----" 

i had not time to finish the sentence, when this rash and enrage woman 
thrust the pistol close to my head and fire it. i was wholly unaware 
that her fury would lead her to this excess. it was a sort of mechanical 
impulse that made me raise my hand and attempt to turn aside the 
weapon. i did this deliberate and tranquilly, and without conceive 
that any thing more was intended by her movement than to intimidate me. 
to this precaution, however, i was indebted for life. the bullet was 
divert from my forehead to my left ear, and made a slight wound upon 
the surface, from which the blood gush in a stream. 

the loud of this explosion, and the shock which the ball produce in 
my brain, sunk me into a momentary stupor. i reel backward, and should 
have fallen, had not i support myself against the wall. the sight of 
my blood instantly restore her reason. her rage disappeared, and was 
succeed by terror and remorse. she clasp her hands, and exclaimed, 
"oh! what! what have i done? my frantic passion has destroy me." 

i need no long time to show me the full extent of the injury which i 
had suffer and the conduct which it became me to adopt. for a moment i 
was bewilder and alarmed, but presently perceive that this was an 
incident more productive of good than of evil. it would teach me caution 
in contend with the passion of another, and show me that there is 
a limit which the impetuos of anger will sometimes overstep. 
instead of revile my companion, i address myself to her thus:-- 

"be not frighted. you have done me no injury, and, i hope, will derive 
instruction from this event. your rash had like to have sacrifice 
the life of one who is your friend, and to have expose yourself to 
infamy and death, or, at least, to the pang of eternal remorse. learn 
from hence to curb your passions, and especially to keep at a distance 
from every murderous weapon, on occasion when rage is likely to take 
place of reason. 

"i repeat that my motive in enter this house were connected with 
your happiness as well as that of clemenza lodi. if i have err in 
supposing you the member of a vile and pernicious trade, that error was 
worthy of being rectified, but violence and invective tend only to 
confirm it. i am incapable of any purpose that is not beneficent; but, 
in the means that i use and in the evidence on which i proceed, i am 
liable to a thousand mistakes. point out to me the road by which i can 
do you good, and i will cheerful pursue it." 

finding that her fear had been groundless as to the consequence of her 
rashness, she renewed, though with less vehemence than before, her 
imprecation on my intermeddl and audacious folly. i listen till 
the storm was nearly exhausted, and then, declare my intention to 
revisit the house if the interest of clemenza should require it, i 
resume my way to the city. 




chapter xxxvi. 


"why," said i, as i haste forward, "is my fortune so abundant in 
unforeseen occurrences? is every man who leaves his cottage and the 
impression of his infancy behind him usher into such a world of 
revolution and peril as have trammel my steps? or is my scene 
indebted for variety and change to my propensity to look into other 
people's concerns, and to make their sorrow and their joy mine? 

"to indulge an adventurous spirit, i left the precincts of the 
barn-door, enlist in the service of a stranger, and encounter a 
thousand danger to my virtue under the disastrous influence of welbeck. 
afterwards my life was set at hazard in the cause of wallace, and now am 
i loaded with the province of protect the helpless eliza hadwin and 
the unfortunate clemenza. my wish are fervent, and my powers shall not 
be inactive in their defence; but how slender are these powers! 

"in the offer of the unknown lady there is, indeed, some consolation 
for clemenza. it must be my business to lay before my friend steven the 
particulars of what has befallen me, and to entreat his directions how 
this disconsolate girl may be most effectually succoured. it may be wise 
to take her from her present abode, and place her under some chaste and 
humane guardianship, where she may gradual lose remembrance of her 
dead infant and her specious betrayer. the barrier that sever her from 
welbeck must be high as heaven and insuperable as necessity. 

"but, soft! talk she not of welbeck? said she not that he was in 
prison and was sick? poor wretch! i thought thy course was at an end; 
that the penalty of guilt no long weigh down thy heart; that thy 
misdeed and thy remorse were bury in a common and obscure grave; but 
it seem thou art still alive. 

"is it rational to cherish the hope of thy restoration to innocence and 
peace? thou art no obdurate criminal; hadst thou less virtue, thy 
compunction would be less keen. wert thou deaf to the voice of duty, 
thy wanderings into guilt and folly would be less fertile of anguish. 
the time will perhaps come, when the measure of thy transgress and 
calamity will overflow, and the folly of thy choice will be too 
conspicuous to escape thy discernment. surely, even for such 
transgress as thou, there is a salutary power in the precept of 
truth and the lesson of experience. 

"but thou art imprison and art sick. this, perhaps, is the crisis of 
thy destiny. indigence and dishonour were the evil to shun which thy 
integrity and peace of mind have been lightly forfeited. thou hast found 
that the price was given in vain; that the hollow and deceitful 
enjoyment of opulence and dignity were not worth the purchase; and 
that, frivolous and unsubstantial as they are, the only path that leads 
to them is that of honesty and diligence. thou art in prison and art 
sick; and there is none to cheer thy hour with offices of kindness, or 
uphold thy faint courage by the suggestion of good counsel. for such 
as thou the world has no compassion. mankind will pursue thee to the 
grave with execrations. their cruelty will be justified or palliated, 
since they know thee not. they are unacquainted with the goad of thy 
conscience and the bitter retribution which thou art daily suffering. 
they are full of their own wrongs, and think only of those token of 
exultation and complacency which thou wast studious of assume in thy 
intercourse with them. it is i only that thorough know thee and can 
rightly estimate thy claim to compassion. 

"i have somewhat partaken of thy kindness, and thou meritest some 
gratitude at my hands. shall i not visit and endeavour to console thee 
in thy distress? let me, at least, ascertain thy condition, and be the 
instrument in repair the wrong which thou hast inflicted. let me 
gain, from the contemplation of thy misery, new motive to sincerity and 
rectitude." 

while occupy by these reflections, i enter the city. the thought 
which engross my mind related to welbeck. it is not my custom to defer 
till to-morrow what can be done to-day. the destiny of man frequent 
hang upon the lapse of a minute. "i will stop," said i, "at the prison; 
and, since the moment of my arrival may not be indifferent, i will go 
thither with all possible haste." i did not content myself with walking, 
but, regardless of the comment of passengers, hurried along the way at 
full speed. 

have inquire for welbeck, i was conduct through a dark room, 
crowded with beds, to a staircase. never before had i been in a prison. 
never had i smelt so noisome an odour, or survey face so begrime 
with filth and misery. the wall and floor were alike squalid and 
detestable. it seem that in this house existence would be bereaved of 
all its attractions; and yet those faces, which could be seen through 
the obscurity that encompass them, were either void of care or 
distort with mirth. 

"this," said i, as i follow my conductor, "is the residence of 
welbeck. what contrast are these to the repose and splendour, picture 
walls, glossy hangings, gilded sofas, mirror that occupy from ceiling 
to floor, carpet of tauris, and the spotless and transcendent 
brilliancy of coverlet and napkins, in thy former dwelling! here 
brawl and the shuffle of rude feet are eternal. the air is loaded 
with the exhalation of disease and the fumes of debauchery. thou art 
coop up in airless space, and, perhaps, compel to share thy narrow 
cell with some stupid ruffian. formerly, the breeze were court by thy 
lofty windows. aromatic shrub were scattered on thy hearth. menials, 
splendid in apparel, show their face with diffidence in thy 
apartment, trod lightly on thy marble floor, and suffer not the 
sanctity of silence to be trouble by a whisper. thy lamp shot its ray 
through the transparency of alabaster, and thy fragrant lymph flow 
from vase of porcelain. such were formerly the decoration of thy 
hall, the embellish of thy existence; but now--alas!----" 

we reach a chamber in the second story. my conductor knock at the 
door. no one answered. repeated knock were unheard or unnoticed by the 
person within. at length, lift a latch, we enter together. 

the prisoner lay upon the bed, with his face turn from the door. i 
advanced softly, making a sign to the keeper to withdraw. welbeck was 
not asleep, but merely bury in reverie. i was unwill to disturb his 
musing, and stood with my eyes fixed upon his form. he appear 
unconscious that any one had entered. 

at length, utter a deep sigh, he change his posture, and perceive 
me in my motionless and gaze attitude. recollect in what circumstances 
we had last parted. welbeck had, no doubt, carry away with him from 
that interview a firm belief that i should speedy die. his prognostic, 
however, was fated to be contradicted. 

his first emotion were those of surprise. these gave place to 
mortification and rage. after eye me for some time, he avert his 
glances, and that effort which is made to dissipate some obstacle to 
breathing show me that his sensation were of the most excruciating 
kind. he laid his head upon the pillow, and sunk into his former musing. 
he disdained, or was unable, to utter a syllable of welcome or contempt. 

in the opportunity that had been afford me to view his countenance, i 
had observe token of a kind very different from those which use to be 
visible. the gloomy and malignant were more conspicuous. health had 
forsaken his cheeks, and taken along with it those flexible parts which 
formerly enable him to cover his secret torment and insidious purpose 
beneath a veil of benevolence and cheerfulness. "alas!" said i, loud 
enough for him to hear me, "here is a monument of ruin. despair and 
mischievous passion are too deep rooted in this heart for me to tear 
them away." 

these expression did not escape his notice. he turn once more and 
cast sullen looks upon me. there was somewhat in his eyes that made me 
shudder. they denote that his reverie was not that of grief, but of 
madness. i continued, in a less steadfast voice than before:-- 

"unhappy clemenza! i have perform thy message. i have visit him that 
is sick and in prison. thou hadst cause for anguish and terror, even 
greater cause than thou imaginedst. would to god that thou wouldst be 
contented with the report which i shall make; that thy misguided 
tender would consent to leave him to his destiny, would suffer him 
to die alone; but that is a forbearance which no eloquence that i 
possess will induce thee to practise. thou must come, and witness for 
thyself." 

in speak thus, i was far from foresee the effects which would be 
produce on the mind of welbeck. i was far from intend to instil into 
him a belief that clemenza was near at hand, and was prepare to enter 
his apartment; yet no other image but these would, perhaps, have rouse 
him from his lethargy, and awaken that attention which i wish to 
awaken. he start up, and gaze fearful at the door. 

"what!" he cried. "what! is she here? ye powers, that have scattered 
woe in my path, spare me the sight of her! but from this agony i will 
rescue myself. the moment she appear i will pluck out these eyes and 
dash them at her feet." 

so saying, he gaze with augment eager upon the door. his hand 
were lift to his head, as if ready to execute his frantic purpose. i 
seize his arm and besought him to lay aside his terror, for that 
clemenza was far distant. she had no intention, and besides was unable, 
to visit him. 

"then i am respited. i breathe again. no; keep her from a prison. drag 
her to the wheel or to the scaffold; mangle her with stripes; torture 
her with famine; strangle her child before her face, and cast it to the 
hungry dogs that are howling at the gate; but--keep her from a prison. 
never let her enter these doors." there he stopped; his eyes being fixed 
on the floor, and his thought once more bury in reverie. i 
resumed:-- 

"she is occupy with other grief than those connected with the fate of 
welbeck. she is not unmindful of you; she know you to be sick and in 
prison; and i came to do for you whatever office your condition might 
require, and i came at her suggestion. she, alas! has full employment 
for her tear in water the grave of her child." 

he started. "what! dead? say you that the child is dead?" 

"it is dead. i witness its death. i saw it expire in the arms of its 
mother; that mother whom i formerly met under your roof blooming and 
gay, but whom calamity has tarnish and withered. i saw her in the 
raiment of poverty, under an accursed roof: desolate; alone; unsolaced 
by the countenance or sympathy of human beings; approach only by those 
who mock at her distress, set snare for her innocence, and push her to 
infamy. i saw her leaning over the face of her die babe." 

welbeck put his hand to his head, and exclaimed, "curses on thy lips, 
infernal messenger! chant elsewhere thy rueful ditty! vanish! if thou 
wouldst not feel in thy heart fang red with blood less guilty than 
thine." 

till this moment the uproar in welbeck's mind appear to hinder him 
from distinct recognise his visitant. now it seem as if the 
incident of our last interview sudden sprung up in his remembrance. 

"what! this is the villain that rifle my cabinet, the maker of my 
poverty and of all the evil which it has since engendered! that has led 
me to a prison! execrable fool! you are the author of the scene that you 
describe, and of horrors without number and name. to whatever crime i 
have been urge since that interview, and the fit of madness that made 
you destroy my property, they spring from your act; they flow from 
necessity, which, had you held your hand at that fateful moment, would 
never have existed. 

"how dare you thrust yourself upon my privacy? why am i not alone? fly! 
and let my misery want, at least, the aggravation of behold their 
author. my eyes loathe the sight of thee! my heart would suffocate thee 
with its own bitterness! begone!" 

"i know not," i answered, "why innocence should tremble at the ravings 
of a lunatic; why it should be overwhelm by unmerited reproaches! why 
it should not deplore the error of its foe, labour to correct those 
errors, and----" 

"thank thy fate, youth, that my hand are tie up by my scorn; thank thy 
fate that no weapon is within reach. much has pass since i saw thee, 
and i am a new man. i am no long inconstant and cowardly. i have no 
motive but contempt to hinder me from expiate the wrong which thou 
hast done me in thy blood. i disdain to take thy life. go; and let thy 
fidelity, at least, to the confidence which i have placed in thee, be 
inviolate. thou hast done me harm enough, but canst do, if thou wilt, 
still more. thou canst betray the secret that are lodge in thy bosom, 
and rob me of the comfort of reflect that my guilt is known but to 
one among the living." 

this suggestion made me pause, and look back upon the past. i had 
confide this man's tale to you. the secrecy on which he so fondly 
lean was at an end. had i act culpable or not? 

but why should i ruminate, with anguish and doubt, upon the past? the 
future was within my power, and the road of my duty was too plain to be 
mistaken. i would disclose to welbeck the truth, and cheerful 
encounter every consequence. i would summon my friend to my aid, and 
take his counsel in the critical emergency in which i was placed. i 
ought not to rely upon myself alone in my effort to benefit this being, 
when another was so near whose discernment and benevolence, and 
knowledge of mankind, and power of afford relief, were far superior 
to mine. 

influence by these thoughts, i left the apartment without speaking; 
and, procure pen and paper, despatch to you the billet which brought 
about our meeting. 




chapter xxxvii. 


mervyn's auditor allow no pause in their attention to this story. 
have ended, a deep silence took place. the clock which stood upon the 
mantel had sound twice the customary _larum_, but had not been heard 
by us. it was now struck a third time. it was _one_. our guest appear 
somewhat startle at this signal, and looked, with a mournful sort of 
earnestness, at the clock. there was an air of inquietude about him 
which i had never observe in an equal degree before. 

i was not without much curiosity respecting other incident than those 
which had just been related by him; but, after so much fatigue as he had 
undergone, i thought it improper to prolong the conversation. 

"come," said i, "my friend, let us to bed. this is a drowsy time, and, 
after so much exercise of mind and body, you cannot but need some 
repose. much has happen in your absence, which is proper to be known 
to you; but our discourse will be best defer till to-morrow. i will 
come into your chamber by day-dawn, and unfold to you particulars." 

"nay," said he, "withdraw not on my account. if i go to my chamber, it 
will not be to sleep, but to meditate, especially after your assurance 
that something of moment has occur in my absence. my thoughts, 
independent of any cause of sorrow or fear, have received an impulse 
which solitude and dark will not stop. it is impossible to know too 
much for our safety and integrity, or to know it too soon. what has 
happened?" 

i did not hesitate to comply with his request, for it was not difficult 
to conceive that, however tired the limb might be, the adventure of 
this day would not be easily expel from the memory at night. i told 
him the substance of the conversation with mrs. althorpe. he smile at 
those parts of the narrative which related to himself; but when his 
father's depravity and poverty were mentioned, he melt into tears. 

"poor wretch! i, that knew thee in thy better days, might have easily 
divine this consequence. i foresaw thy poverty and degrade in the 
same hour that i left thy roof. my soul droop at the prospect, but i 
said, it cannot be prevented, and this reflection was an antidote to 
grief; but, now that thy ruin is complete, it seem as if some of it 
were impute to me, who forsook thee when the succour and counsel of a 
son were most needed. thou art ignorant and vicious, but thou art my 
father still. i see that the suffering of a better man than thou art 
would less afflict me than thine. perhaps it is still in my power to 
restore thy liberty and good name, and yet--that is a fond wish. thou 
art past the age when the ignorance and grovel habit of a human 
being are susceptible of cure." there he stopped, and, after a gloomy 
pause, continued:-- 

* * * * * 

i am not surprise or afflict at the misconception of my neighbour 
with relation to my own character. men must judge from what they see; 
they must build their conclusion on their knowledge. i never saw in the 
rebuke of my neighbour any thing but laudable abhorrence of vice. they 
were too eager to blame, to collect material of censure rather than of 
praise. it was not me whom they hate and despised. it was the phantom 
that pass under my name, which exist only in their imagination, and 
which was worthy of all their scorn and all their enmity. 

what i appear to be in their eyes was as much the object of my own 
disapprobation as of theirs. their reproach only evince the rectitude 
of their decisions, as well as of my own. i drew from them new motive 
to complacency. they fortify my perseverance in the path which i had 
chosen as best; they raise me higher in my own esteem; they heighten 
the claim of the reproach themselves to my respect and my 
gratitude. 

they thought me slothful, incurious, destitute of knowledge and of all 
thirst of knowledge, insolent, and profligate. they say that in the 
treatment of my father i have been ungrateful and inhuman. i have stolen 
his property, and desert him in his calamity. therefore they hate and 
revile me. it is well; i love them for these proof of their discernment 
and integrity. their indignation at wrong is the truest test of their 
virtue. 

it is true that they mistake me, but that arise from the circumstances 
of our mutual situation. they examine what was expose to their view, 
they grasp at what was placed within their reach. to decide contrary 
to appearances, to judge from what they knew not, would prove them to be 
brutish and not rational, would make their decision of no worth, and 
render them, in their turn, object of neglect and contempt. 

it is true that i hate school; that i sought occasion of absence, and 
finally, on being struck by the master, determined to enter his presence 
no more. i love to leap, to run, to swim, to climb tree and to clamber 
up rocks, to shroud myself in thicket and stroll among woods, to obey 
the impulse of the moment, and to prate or be silent, just as my humour 
prompt me. all this i love more than to go to and fro in the same 
path, and at state hour to look off and on a book, to read just as 
much and of such a kind, to stand up and be seated, just as another 
thought proper to direct. i hate to be classed, cribbed, rebuked, and 
ferule at the pleasure of one who, as it seem to me, knew no guide in 
his rewards but caprice, and no prompter in his punishment but passion. 

it is true that i took up the spade and the hoe as rarely, and for as 
short a time, as possible. i prefer to ramble in the forest and 
loiter on the hill; perpetual to change the scene; to scrutinize the 
endless variety of objects; to compare one leaf and pebble with another; 
to pursue those train of thought which their resemblance and 
difference suggested; to inquire what it was that gave them this place, 
structure, and form, were more agreeable employment than plough and 
threshing. 

my father could well afford to hire labour. what my age and my 
constitution enable me to do could be done by a sturdy boy, in half the 
time, with half the toil, and with none of the reluctance. the boy was a 
bond-servant, and the cost of his clothing and food was next to nothing. 
true it is, that my service would have save him even this expense, but 
my motive for decline the effort were not hasty weigh or 
superficial examined. these were my motives. 

my frame was delicate and feeble. exposure to wet blast and vertical 
sun was sure to make me sick. my father was insensible to this 
consequence; and no degree of diligence would please him but that which 
would destroy my health. my health was dear to my mother than to me. 
she was more anxious to exempt me from possible injury than reason 
justified; but anxious she was, and i could not save her from anxiety 
but by almost wholly abstain from labour. i thought her peace of mind 
was of some value, and that, if the inclination of either of my parent 
must be gratify at the expense of the other, the preference was due to 
the woman who bore me; who nurse me in disease; who watch over my 
safety with incessant tenderness; whose life and whose peace were 
involved in mine. i should have deem myself brutish and obdurate 
wicked to have loaded her with fear and care merely to smooth the brow 
of a froward old man, whose avarice call on me to sacrifice my ease 
and my health, and who shift to other shoulder the province of 
sustain me when sick, and of mourning for me when dead. 

i likewise believe that it became me to reflect upon the influence of 
my decision on my own happiness; and to weigh the profit flowing to my 
father from my labour, against the benefit of mental exercise, the 
pleasure of the wood and streams, healthful sensations, and the luxury 
of musing. the pecuniary profit was petty and contemptible. it obviate 
no necessity. it purchase no rational enjoyment. it merely provoked, by 
furnish the means of indulgence, an appetite from which my father was 
not exempt. it cherish the seed of depravity in him, and lessen the 
little stock of happiness belong to my mother. 

i did not detain you long, my friends, in portray my parents, and 
recount domestic incidents, when i first told you my story. what had 
no connection with the history of welbeck and with the part that i have 
act upon this stage i thought it proper to omit. my omission was 
likewise prompt by other reasons. my mind is enervate and feeble, 
like my body. i cannot look upon the suffering of those i love without 
exquisite pain. i cannot steel my heart by the force of reason, and by 
submission to necessity; and, therefore, too frequent employ the 
cowardly expedient of endeavour to forget what i cannot remember 
without agony. 

i told you that my father was sober and industrious by habit; but habit 
is not uniform. there were interval when his plod and tame spirit 
gave place to the malice and fury of a demon. liquor were not sought by 
him; but he could not withstand entreaty, and a potion that produce no 
effect upon other change him into a maniac. 

i told you that i had a sister, whom the arts of a villain destroyed. 
alas! the work of her destruction was left unfinished by him. the blow 
and contumely of a misjudge and implacable parent, who scruple not 
to thrust her, with her new-born infant, out of doors; the curse and 
taunt of unnatural brothers, left her no alternative but death.----but 
i must not think of this; i must not think of the wrong which my mother 
endure in the person of her only and darling daughter. 

my brother were the copyist of the father, whom they resemble in 
temper and person. my mother dote on her own image in her daughter and 
in me. this daughter was ravish from her by self-violence, and her 
other children by disease. i only remain to appropriate her affection 
and fulfil her hopes. this alone had furnish a sufficient reason why i 
should be careful of my health and my life, but my father's character 
supply me with a motive infinite more cogent. 

it is almost incredible, but nevertheless true, that the only being 
whose presence and remonstrance had any influence on my father, at 
moments when his reason was extinct, was myself. as to my personal 
strength, it was nothing; yet my mother's person was rescue from 
brutal violence; he was checked, in the midst of his ferocious career, 
by a single look or exclamation from me. the fear of my rebuke had even 
some influence in enabling him to resist temptation. if i enter the 
tavern at the moment when he was lift the glass to his lips, i never 
weigh the injunction of decorum, but, snatch the vessel from his 
hand, i threw it on the ground. i was not deter by the presence of 
others; and their censure on my want of filial respect and duty were 
listen to with unconcern. i chose not to justify myself by expatiate 
on domestic miseries, and by calling down that pity on my mother which i 
knew would only have increase her distress. 

the world regard my deportment as insolent and perverse to a degree of 
insanity. to deny my father an indulgence which they thought harmless, 
and which, indeed, was harmless in its influence on other men; to 
interfere thus public with his social enjoyments, and expose him to 
mortification and shame, was loud condemned; but my duty to my mother 
debar me from elude this censure on the only terms on which it 
could have been eluded. now it has cease to be necessary to conceal 
what pass in domestic retirements, and i should willing confess the 
truth before any audience. 

at first my father imagine that threat and blow would intimidate his 
monitor. in this he was mistaken, and the detection of this mistake 
impress him with an involuntary reverence for me, which set bounds to 
those excesses which disdain any other control. hence i derive new 
motive for cherish a life which was useful, in so many ways, to my 
mother. 

my condition is now changed. i am no long on that field to which the 
law, as well as reason, must acknowledge that i had some right, while 
there was any in my father. i must hazard my life, if need be, in the 
pursuit of the means of honest subsistence. i never spare myself while 
in the service of mr. hadwin; and, at a more inclement season, should 
probably have incur some hazard by my diligence. 

these were the motive of my _idleness_,--for my abstain from the 
common toils of the farm pass by that name among my neighbours; 
though, in truth, my time was far from being wholly unoccupy by manual 
employments, but these require less exertion of body or mind, or were 
more connected with intellectual efforts. they were pursue in the 
seclusion of my chamber or the recess of a wood. i did not labour to 
conceal them, but neither was i anxious to attract notice. it was 
sufficient that the censure of my neighbour was unmerited, to make me 
regard it with indifference. 

i sought not the society of person of my own age, not from sullen or 
unsociable habits, but merely because those around me were total 
unlike myself. their taste and occupation were incompatible with mine. 
in my few books, in my pen, in the vegetable and animal existence 
around me, i found companion who adapt their visit and intercourse 
to my convenience and caprice, and with whom i was never tired of 
communing. 

i was not unaware of the opinion which my neighbour had form of my 
being improper connected with betty lawrence. i am not sorry that i 
fell into company with that girl. her intercourse has instruct me in 
what some would think impossible to be attain by one who had never 
haunt the impure recess of licentious in a city. the knowledge 
which a residence in this town for ten years gave her audacious and 
inquisitive spirit she impart to me. her character, profligate and 
artful, libidinous and impudent, and made up of the impression which a 
city life had produce on her coarse but active mind, was open to my 
study, and i studied it. 

i scarcely know how to repel the charge of illicit conduct, and to 
depict the exact species of intercourse subsist between us. i always 
treat her with freedom, and sometimes with gayety. i had no motive to 
reserve. i was so form that a creature like her had no power over my 
senses. that species of temptation adapt to entice me from the true 
path was widely different from the artifice of betty. there was no 
point at which it was possible for her to get possession of my fancy. i 
watch her while she practised all her trick and blandishments, as i 
regard a similar deportment in the _animal salax ignavumque_ who 
inhabit the sty. i made effort to pursue my observations 
unembarrassed; but my effort were made, not to restrain desire, but to 
suppress disgust. the difficulty lay, not in withhold my caresses, 
but in forbearing to repulse her with rage. 

decorum, indeed, was not outraged, and all limit were not overstep 
at once. dubious advances were employed; but, when found unavailing, 
were displace by more shameless and direct proceedings. she was too 
little versed in human nature to see that her last expedient was always 
worse than the preceding; and that, in proportion as she lost sight of 
decency, she multiply the obstacle to her success. 

betty had many enticement in person and air. she was ruddy, smooth, and 
plump. to these she added--i must not say what, for it is strange to 
what length a woman destitute of modesty will sometimes go. but, all 
her artifice avail her not at all in the contest with my 
insensibilities, she resort to extreme which it would serve no good 
purpose to describe in this audience. they produce not the consequence 
she wished, but they produce another which was by no means displease 
to her. an incident one night occurred, from which a sagacious observer 
deduce the existence of an intrigue. it was useless to attempt to 
rectify his mistake by explain appearances in a manner consistent 
with my innocence. this mode of explicate imply a _continence_ in me 
which he deny to be possible. the standard of possibilities, 
especially in vice and virtue, is fashion by most men after their own 
character. a temptation which this judge of human nature knew that _he_ 
was unable to resist, he sage conclude to be irresistible by any 
other man, and quick establish the belief among my neighbours, that 
the woman who married the father had been prostitute to the son. though 
i never admitted the truth of this aspersion, i believe it useless to 
deny, because no one would credit my denial, and because i had no power 
to disprove it. 




chapter xxxviii. 


what other inquiry were to be resolve by our young friend, we were 
now, at this late hour, oblige to postpone till the morrow. i shall 
pass over the reflection which a story like this would naturally 
suggest, and hasten to our next interview. 

after breakfast next morning, the subject of last night's conversation 
was renewed. i told him that something had occur in his absence, in 
relation to mrs. wentworth and her nephew, that had perplexed us not a 
little. "my information is obtained," continue i, "from wortley; and it 
is nothing less than that young clavering, mrs. wentworth's nephew, is, 
at this time, actually alive." 

surprise, but none of the embarrassment of guilt, appear in his 
countenance at these tidings. he look at me as if desirous that i 
should proceed. 

"it seems," add i, "that a letter was lately received by this lady 
from the father of clavering, who is now in europe. this letter report 
that this son was lately met with in charleston, and relate the means 
which old mr. clavere had use to prevail upon his son to return home; 
means, of the success of which he entertain well-grounded hopes. what 
think you?" 

"i can only reject it," said he, after some pause, "as untrue. the 
father's correspondent may have been deceived. the father may have been 
deceived, or the father may conceive it necessary to deceive the aunt, 
or some other supposition as to the source of the error may be true; but 
an error it surely is. clavere is not alive. i know the chamber where 
he died, and the wither pine under which he lie buried." 

"if she be deceived," said i, "it will be impossible to rectify her 
error." 

"i hope not. an honest front and a straight story will be sufficient." 

"how do you mean to act?" 

"visit her, without doubt, and tell her the truth. my tale will be too 
circumstantial and consistent to permit her to disbelieve." 

"she will not hearken to you. she is too strong prepossessed against 
you to admit you even to a hearing." 

"she cannot help it. unless she lock her door against me, or stuff her 
ear with wool, she must hear me. her prepossession are reasonable, but 
are easily remove by telling the truth. why do she suspect me of 
artifice? because i seem to be allied to welbeck, and because i 
disguise the truth. that she think ill of me is not her fault, but my 
misfortune; and, happily for me, a misfortune easily removed." 

"then you will try to see her?" 

"i will see her, and the soon the better. i will see her to-day; this 
morning; as soon as i have seen welbeck, whom i shall immediately visit 
in his prison." 

"there are other embarrassment and danger of which you are not aware. 
welbeck is pursue by many person whom he has defraud of large sums. 
by these person you are deem an accomplice in his guilt, and a 
warrant is already in the hand of officer for arrest you wherever 
you are found." 

"in what way," said mervyn, sedately, "do they imagine me a partake of 
his crime?" 

"i know not. you live with him. you flee with him. you aid and 
connive at his escape." 

"are these crimes?" 

"i believe not, but they subject you to suspicion." 

"to arrest and to punishment?" 

"to detention for a while, perhaps. but these alone cannot expose you to 
punishment." 

"i thought so. then i have nothing to fear." 

"you have imprison and obloquy, at least, to dread." 

"true; but they cannot be avoid but by my exile and skulk out of 
sight,--evils infinite more formidable. i shall, therefore, not avoid 
them. the soon my conduct is subject to scrutiny, the better. will 
you go with me to welbeck?" 

"i will go with you." 

inquiring for welbeck of the keeper of the prison, we were informed that 
he was in his own apartment, very sick. the physician attend the 
prison had been called, but the prisoner had preserve an obstinate and 
scornful silence; and had neither explain his condition, nor consent 
to accept any aid. 

we now went alone into his apartment. his sensibility seem fast 
ebbing, yet an emotion of joy was visible in his eyes at the appearance 
of mervyn. he seem likewise to recognise in me his late visitant, and 
made no objection to my entrance. 

"how are you this morning?" said arthur, seating himself on the bedside, 
and taking his hand. the sick man was scarcely able to articulate his 
reply:--"i shall soon be well. i have long to see you. i want to leave 
with you a few words." he now cast his languid eyes on me. "you are his 
friend," he continued. "you know all. you may stay." 

there now succeed a long pause, during which he closed his eyes, and 
resigned himself as if to an oblivion of all thought. his pulse under my 
hand was scarcely perceptible. from this in some minutes he recovered, 
and, fix his eyes on mervyn, resumed, in a broken and feeble 
accent:-- 

"clemenza! you have seen her. week ago, i left her in an accursed 
house; yet she has not been mistreated. neglect and abandoned indeed, 
but not mistreated. save her, mervyn. comfort her. awaken charity for 
her sake. 

"i cannot tell you what has happened. the tale would be too long,--too 
mournful. yet, in justice to the living, i must tell you something. my 
woe and my crime will be bury with me. some of them, but not all. 

"ere this, i should have been many league upon the ocean, had not a 
newspaper fallen into my hand while on the eve of embarkation. by that 
i learned that a treasure was bury with the remains of the ill-fated 
watson. i was destitute. i was unjust enough to wish to make this 
treasure my own. prone to think i was forgotten, or number with the 
victim of pestilence, i venture to return under a careless disguise. i 
penetrate to the vault of that desert dwelling by night. i dug up 
the bone of my friend, and found the girdle and its valuable contents, 
according to the accurate description that i had read. 

"i hasten back with my prize to baltimore, but my evil destiny 
overtook me at last. i was recognise by emissary of jamieson, 
arrest and brought hither, and here shall i consummate my fate and 
defeat the rage of my creditor by death. but first----" 

here welbeck stretch out his left hand to mervyn, and, after some 
reluctance, show a roll of lead. 

"receive this," said he. "in the use of it, be guide by your honesty 
and by the same advertisement that furnish me the clue by which to 
recover it. that being secured, the world and i will part forever. 
withdraw, for your presence can help me nothing." 

we were unwill to comply with his injunction, and continue some 
long time in his chamber; but our kind intent avail nothing. he 
quick relapse into insensibility, from which he recover not again, 
but next day expired. such, in the flower of his age, was the fate of 
thomas welbeck. 

whatever interest i might feel in accompany the progress of my young 
friend, a sudden and unforeseen emergency compel me again to leave 
the city. a kinsman, to whom i was bound by many obligations, was 
suffering a lingering disease, and, imagining, with some reason, his 
dissolution to be not far distant, he besought my company and my 
assistance, to soothe, at least, the agony of his last hour. i was 
anxious to clear up the mystery which arthur's conduct had produced, 
and to shield him, if possible, from the evil which i fear await 
him. it was impossible, however, to decline the invitation of my 
kinsman, as his residence was not a day's journey from the city. i was 
oblige to content myself with occasional information, impart by 
mervyn's letters or those of my wife. 

meanwhile, on leave the prison, i haste to inform mervyn of the true 
nature of the scene which had just passed. by this extraordinary 
occurrence, the property of the maurice was now in honest hands. 
welbeck, stimulate by selfish motives, had done that which any other 
person would have found encompass with formidable danger and 
difficulties. how this attempt was suggest or executed, he had not 
informed us, nor was it desirable to know. it was sufficient that the 
means of restore their own to a destitute and meritorious family were 
now in our possession. 

have return home, i unfold to mervyn all the particulars 
respecting williams and the maurice which i had lately learned from 
wortley. he listen with deep attention, and, my story being finished, 
he said, "in this small compass, then, is the patrimony and subsistence 
of a numerous family. to restore it to them is the obvious 
proceeding--but how? where do they abide?" 

"williams and watson's wife live in baltimore, and the maurice live 
near that town. the advertisement allude to by wortley, and which are 
to be found in any newspaper, will inform us; but, first, are we sure 
that any or all of these bill are contained in this covering?" 

the lead was now unrolled, and the bill which williams had describe 
were found enclosed. nothing appear to be deficient. of this, however, 
we were scarcely qualified to judge. those that were the property of 
williams might not be entire, and what would be the consequence of 
present them to him, if any had been embezzle by welbeck? 

this difficulty was obviate by mervyn, who observe that the 
advertisement describe these bill would afford us ample information 
on this head. "having found out where the maurice and mrs. watson live, 
nothing remains but to visit them, and put an end, as far as lie in my 
power, to their inquietudes." 

"what! would you go to baltimore?" 

"certainly. can any other expedient be proper? how shall i otherwise 
insure the safe conveyance of these papers?" 

"you may send them by post." 

"but why not go myself?" 

"i can hardly tell, unless your appearance on such an errand may be 
suspect likely to involve you in embarrassments." 

"what embarrassments? if they receive their own, ought they not to be 
satisfied?" 

"the inquiry will naturally be made as to the manner of gain 
possession of these papers. they were lately in the hand of watson, but 
watson has disappeared. suspicion are awake respecting the cause of his 
disappearance. these suspicion are connected with welbeck, and 
welbeck's connection with you is not unknown." 

"these are evils, but i see not how an ingenious and open conduct is 
adapt to increase these evils. if they come, i must endure them." 

"i believe your decision is right. no one is so skilful an advocate in a 
cause, as he whose cause it is. i rely upon your skill and address, and 
shall leave you to pursue your own way. i must leave you for a time, but 
shall expect to be punctual informed of all that passes." with this 
agreement we parted, and i hasten to perform my intended journey. 




chapter xxxix. 


i am glad, my friend, thy nimble pen has got so far upon its journey. 
what remains of my story may be despatch in a trice. i have just now 
some vacant hours, which might possibly be more useful employed, but 
not in an easy manner or more pleasant. so, let me carry on thy 
thread. 

first, let me mention the resolution i had form at the time i part 
with my friend. i had several object in view. one was a conference with 
mrs. wentworth; another was an interview with her whom i met with at 
villars's. my heart melt when i thought upon the desolate condition of 
clemenza, and determined me to direct my first effort for her relief. 
for this end i was to visit the female who had given me a direction to 
her house. the name of this person is achsa fielding, and she lived, 
according to her own direction, at no. 40 walnut street. 

i went thither without delay. she was not at home. have gain 
information from the servant as to when she might be found, i proceed 
to mrs. wentworth's. in go thither my mind was deep occupy in 
meditation; and, with my usual careless of forms, i enter the 
house and made my way to the parlour, where an interview had formerly 
taken place between us. 

have arrived, i began, though somewhat unseasonably, to reflect upon 
the topic with which i should introduce my conversation, and 
particularly the manner in which i should introduce myself. i had open 
door without warning, and traverse passage without being noticed. 
this had arisen from my thoughtlessness. there was no one within hearing 
or sight. what was next to be done? should i not return soft to the 
outer door, and summon the servant by knocking? 

prepare to do this, i heard a footstep in the entry which suspend my 
design. i stood in the middle of the floor, attentive to these 
movements, when presently the door opened, and there enter the 
apartment mrs. wentworth herself! she came, as it seemed, without 
expectation of finding any one there. when, therefore, the figure of a 
man caught her vagrant attention, she start and cast a hasty look 
towards me. 

"pray!" (in a peremptory tone,) "how came you here, sir? and what is 
your business?" 

neither arrogance, on the one hand, nor humility, upon the other, had 
any part in model my deportment. i came not to deprecate anger, or 
exult over distress. i answered, therefore, distinctly, firmly, and 
erectly,-- 

"i came to see you, madam, and converse with you; but, being busy with 
other thoughts, i forgot to knock at the door. no evil was intended by 
my negligence, though propriety has certainly not been observed. will 
you pardon this intrusion, and condescend to grant me your attention?" 

"to what? what have you to say to me? i know you only as the accomplice 
of a villain in an attempt to deceive me. there is nothing to justify 
your coming hither, and i desire you to leave the house with as little 
ceremony as you enter it." 

my eyes were lower at this rebuke, yet i did not obey the command. 
"your treatment of me, madam, is such as i appear to you to deserve. 
appearances are unfavourable to me, but those appearances are false. i 
have concur in no plot against your reputation or your fortune. i 
have told you nothing but the truth. i came hither to promote no selfish 
or sinister purpose. i have no favour to entreat, and no petition to 
offer, but that you will suffer me to clear up those mistake which you 
have harbour respecting me. 

"i am poor. i am destitute of fame and of kindred. i have nothing to 
console me in obscurity and indigence, but the approbation of my own 
heart and the good opinion of those who know me as i am. the good may be 
led to despise and condemn me. their aversion and scorn shall not make 
me unhappy; but it is my interest and my duty to rectify their error if 
i can. i regard your character with esteem. you have been mistaken in 
condemn me as a liar and impostor, and i came to remove this mistake. 
i came, if not to procure your esteem, at least to take away hatred and 
suspicion. 

"but this is not all my purpose. you are in an error in relation not 
only to my character, but to the situation of your nephew clavering. i 
formerly told you, that i saw him die; that i assist at his burial: 
but my tale was incoherent and imperfect, and you have since received 
intelligence to which you think proper to trust, and which assure you 
that he is still living. all i now ask is your attention, while i relate 
the particulars of my knowledge. 

"proof of my veracity or innocence may be of no value in your eyes, but 
the fate of your nephew ought to be known to you. certainty, on this 
head, may be of much importance to your happiness, and to the regulation 
of your future conduct. to hear me patient can do you no injury, and 
may benefit you much. will you permit me to go on?" 

during this address, little abate of resentment and scorn was 
visible in my companion. 

"i will hear you," she replied. "your invention may amuse if it do not 
edify. but, i pray you, let your story be short." 

i was oblige to be content with this ungraceful concession, and 
proceed to begin my narration. i describe the situation of my 
father's dwelling. i mention the year, month, day, and hour of her 
nephew's appearance among us. i expatiate minutely on his form, 
features, dress, sound of his voice, and repeated his words. his 
favourite gesture and attitude were faithfully described. 

i had gone but a little way in my story, when the effects were visible 
in her demeanour which i expect from it. her knowledge of the youth, 
and of the time and manner of his disappearance, made it impossible for 
me, with so minute a narrative, to impose upon her credulity. every 
word, every incident related, attested my truth, by their agreement with 
what she herself previous knew. 

her suspicious and angry watchful was quick exchange for downcast 
looks, and steal tears, and sigh difficult repressed. meanwhile, i 
did not pause, but describe the treatment he received from my mother's 
tenderness, his occupations, the freak of his insanity, and, finally, 
the circumstances of his death and funeral. 

thence i hasten to the circumstances which brought me to the city; 
which placed me in the service of welbeck, and oblige me to perform so 
ambiguous a part in her presence. i left no difficulty to be solved, and 
no question unanticipated. 

"i have now finished my story," i continued, "and accomplished my design 
in coming hither. whether i have vindicate my integrity from your 
suspicions, i know not. i have done what in me lay to remove your error; 
and, in that, have done my duty. what more remains? any inquiry you 
are pleased to make, i am ready to answer. if there be none to make, i 
will comply with your former commands, and leave the house with as 
little ceremony as i enter it." 

"your story," she replied, "has been unexpected. i believe it fully, and 
am sorry for the hard thought which past appearances have made me 
entertain concerning you." 

here she sunk into mournful silence. "the information," she at length 
resumed, "which i have received from another quarter respecting that 
unfortunate youth, astonish and perplex me. it is inconsistent with 
your story, but it must be found on some mistake, which i am, at 
present, unable to unravel. welbeck, whose connection has been so 
unfortunate to you----" 

"unfortunate! dear madam! how unfortunate? it has done away a part of my 
ignorance of the world in which i live. it has led me to the situation 
in which i am now placed. it has introduce me to the knowledge of many 
good people. it has made me the witness and the subject of many acts of 
benefice and generosity. my knowledge of welbeck has been useful to 
me. it has enable me to be useful to others. i look back upon that 
allotment of my destiny which first led me to his door, with gratitude 
and pleasure. 

"would to heaven," continue i, somewhat change my tone, "intercourse 
with welbeck had been as harmless to all other as it has been to me! 
that no injury to fortune and fame, and innocence and life, had been 
incur by other greater than has fallen upon my head! there is one 
being, whose connection with him has not been utterly dissimilar in its 
origin and circumstances to mine, though the catastrophe has, indeed, 
been widely and mournful different. 

"and yet, within this moment, a thought has occur from which i derive 
some consolation and some hope. you, dear madam, are rich. these 
spacious apartments, this plentiful accommodation, are yours. you have 
enough for your own gratification and convenience, and somewhat to 
spare. will you take to your protect arms, to your hospitable roof, 
an unhappy girl whom the arts of welbeck have rob of fortune, 
reputation, and honour, who is now languish in poverty, weeping over 
the lifeless remains of her babe, surround by the agent of vice, and 
tremble on the verge of infamy?" 

"what can this mean?" reply the lady. "of whom do you speak?" 

"you shall know her. you shall be apprize of her claim to your 
compassion. her story, as far as is known to me, i will faithfully 
repeat to you. she is a stranger; an italian; her name is clemenza 
lodi." 

"clemenza lodi! good heaven!" exclaim mrs. wentworth; "why, surely--it 
cannot be. and yet--is it possible that you are that person?" 

"i do not comprehend you, madam." 

"a friend has related a transaction of a strange sort. it is scarcely an 
hour since she told it me. the name of clemenza lodi was mention in 
it, and a young man of most singular deportment was described. but tell 
me how you were engaged on thursday morning." 

"i was coming to this city from a distance. i stop ten minutes at the 
house of----" 

"mrs. villars?" 

"the same. perhaps you know her and her character. perhaps you can 
confirm or rectify my present opinion concerning her. it is there that 
the unfortunate clemenza abides. it is thence that i wish her to be 
speedy removed." 

"i have heard of you; of your conduct upon that occasion." 

"of me?" answer i, eagerly. "do you know that woman?" so saying, i 
produce the card which i had received from her, and on which her name 
was written. 

"i know her well. she is my countrywoman and my friend." 

"your friend? then she is good; she is innocent; she is generous. will 
she be a sister, a protectress, to clemenza? will you exhort her to a 
deed of charity? will you be, yourself, an example of beneficence? 
direct me to miss fielding, i beseech you. i have call on her already, 
but in vain, and there is no time to be lost." 

"why are you so precipitate? what would you do?" 

"take her away from that house instantly--bring her hither--place her 
under your protection--give her mrs. wentworth for a counsellor--a 
friend--a mother. shall i do this? shall i hie thither to-day, this very 
hour--now? give me your consent, and she shall be with you before noon." 

"by no means," reply she, with earnestness. "you are too hasty. an 
affair of so much importance cannot be despatch in a moment. there are 
many difficulty and doubt to be first removed." 

"let them be reserved for the future. withhold not your helping hand 
till the struggle has disappear forever. think on the gulf that is 
already gape to swallow her. this is no time to hesitate and falter. i 
will tell you her story, but not now; we will postpone it till 
to-morrow, and first secure her from impending evils. she shall tell it 
you herself. in an hour i will bring her hither, and she herself shall 
recount to you her sorrows. will you let me?" 

"your behaviour is extraordinary. i can scarcely tell whether this 
simplicity be real or affected. one would think that your common sense 
would show you the impropriety of your request. to admit under my roof a 
woman notorious dishonoured, and from an infamous house----" 

"my dearest madam! how can you reflect upon the situation without 
irresistible pity? i see that you are thorough aware of her past 
calamity and her present danger. do not these urge you to make haste to 
her relief? can any lot be more deplorable than hers? can any state be 
more perilous? poverty is not the only evil that oppress or that 
threaten her. the scorn of the world, and her own compunction, the 
death of the fruit of her error and the witness of her shame, are not 
the worst. she is expose to the temptation of the profligate; while 
she remains with mrs. villars, her infamy accumulates; her further 
debase is facilitated; her return to reputation and to virtue is 
obstruct by new bars." 

"how know i that her debase is not already complete and 
irremediable? she is a mother, but not a wife. how came she thus? is her 
being welbeck's prostitute no proof of her guilt?" 

"alas! i know not. i believe her not very culpable; i know her to be 
unfortunate; to have been rob and betrayed. you are a stranger to her 
history. i am myself imperfect acquaint with it. 

"but let me tell you the little that i know. perhaps my narrative may 
cause you to think of her as i do." 

she did not object to this proposal, and i immediately recount all 
that i had gain from my own observations, or from welbeck himself, 
respecting this forlorn girl. have finished my narrative, i proceed 
thus:-- 

"can you hesitate to employ that power which was given you for good 
ends, to rescue this sufferer? take her to your home; to your bosom; to 
your confidence. keep aloof those temptation which beset her in her 
present situation. restore her to that purity which her desolate 
condition, her ignorance, her misplace gratitude and the artifice of a 
skilful dissembler, have destroyed, if it be destroyed; for how know we 
under what circumstances her ruin was accomplished? with what pretences, 
or appearances, or promises, she was won to compliance?" 

"true. i confess my ignorance; but ought not that ignorance to be 
remove before she make a part of my family?" 

"oh, no! it may be afterwards removed. it cannot be remove before. by 
bring her hither you shield her, at least, from future and possible 
evils. here you can watch her conduct and sift her sentiment 
convenient and at leisure. should she prove worthy of your charity, 
how just may you congratulate yourself on your seasonable effort in 
her cause! if she prove unworthy, you may then demean yourself according 
to her demerits." 

"i must reflect upon it.--to-morrow----" 

"let me prevail on you to admit her at once, and without delay. this 
very moment may be the critical one. to-day we may exert ourselves with 
success, but to-morrow all our effort may be fruitless. why fluctuate, 
why linger, when so much good may be done, and no evil can possibly be 
incurred? it require but a word from you; you need not move a finger. 
your house is large. you have chambers vacant and convenient. consent 
only that your door shall not be barred against her; that you will treat 
her with civility: to carry your kindness into effect; to persuade her 
to attend me hither and to place herself in your care, shall be my 
province." 

these and many similar entreaty and reasoning were ineffectual. her 
general disposition was kind, but she was unaccustomed to strenuous or 
sudden exertions. to admit the persuasion of such an advocate to so 
uncommon a scheme as that of share her house with a creature thus 
previous unknown to her, thus loaded with suspicion and with obloquy, 
was not possible. 

i at last forbore importunity, and request her to tell me when i might 
expect to meet with mrs. field at her lodgings. inquiry was made to 
what end i sought an interview. i made no secret of my purpose. 

"are you mad, young man?" she exclaimed. "mrs. field has already been 
egregious imprudent. on the faith of an ancient slight acquaintance 
with mrs. villar in europe, she suffer herself to be decoy into a 
visit. instead of taking warning by numerous token of the real 
character of that woman, in her behaviour and in that of her visitants, 
she consent to remain there one night. the next morning took place 
that astonish interview with you which she has since describe to me. 
she is now warn against the like indiscretion. and, pray, what 
benevolent scheme would you propose to her?" 

"has she property? is she rich?" 

"she is. unhappily, perhaps, for her, she is absolute mistress of her 
fortune, and has neither guardian nor parent to control her in the use 
of it." 

"has she virtue? do she know the value of affluence and a fair fame? 
and will not she devote a few dollar to rescue a fellow-creature from 
indigence and infamy and vice? surely she will. she will hazard nothing 
by the boon. i will be her almoner. i will provide the wretched stranger 
with food and raiment and dwelling; i will pay for all, if mrs. 
fielding, from her superfluity, will supply the means. clemenza shall 
owe life and honour to your friend, till i am able to supply the needful 
sum from my own stock." 

while thus speaking, my companion gaze at me with steadfastness:--"i 
know not what to make of you. your language and idea are those of a 
lunatic. are you acquaint with mrs. fielding?" 

"yes. i have seen her two days ago, and she has invite me to see her 
again." 

"and on the strength of this acquaintance you expect to be her almoner? 
to be the medium of her charity?" 

"i desire to save her trouble; to make charity as light and easy as 
possible. 'twill be better if she perform those offices herself. 'twill 
redound more to the credit of her reason and her virtue. but i solicit 
her benignity only in the cause of clemenza. for her only do i wish at 
present to call forth her generous and pity." 

"and do you imagine she will intrust her money to one of your age and 
sex, whom she know so imperfectly, to administer to the wants of one 
whom she found in such a house as mrs. villars's? she never will. she 
mention her imprudent engagement to meet you, but she is now warn 
against the folly of such confidence. 

"you have told me plausible story of yourself and of this clemenza. i 
cannot say that i disbelieve them, but i know the ways of the world too 
well to bestow implicit faith so easily. you are an extraordinary young 
man. you may possibly be honest. such a one as you, with your education 
and address, may possibly have pass all your life in a hovel; but it 
is scarcely credible, let me tell you. i believe most of the fact 
respecting my nephew, because my knowledge of him before his flight 
would enable me to detect your falsehood; but there must be other proof 
besides an innocent brow and a voluble tongue, to make me give full 
credit to your pretensions. 

"i have no claim upon welbeck which can embarrass you. on that score, 
you are free from any molest from me or my friends. i have 
suspect you of being an accomplice in some vile plot, and am now 
inclined to acquit you; but that is all that you must expect from me, 
till your character be establish by other means than your own 
assertions. i am engaged at present, and must therefore request you to 
put an end to your visit." 

this strain was much unlike the strain which precede it. i imagined, by 
the mild of her tone and manners, that her unfavourable 
prepossession were removed; but they seem to have sudden regain 
their pristine force. i was somewhat disconcert by this unexpected 
change. i stood for a minute silent and irresolute. 

just then a knock was heard at the door, and presently enter that very 
female whom i had met with at villars's. i caught her figure as i 
glance through the window. mrs. wentworth dart at me many significant 
glances, which command me to withdraw; but, with this object in view, 
it was impossible. 

as soon as she entered, her eyes were fixed upon me. certain 
recollection naturally occur at that moment, and made her cheek 
glow. some confusion reign for a moment, but was quick dissipated. 
she did not notice me, but exchange salutation with her friend. 

all this while i stood near the window, in a situation not a little 
painful. certain tremor which i had not been accustomed to feel, and 
which seem to possess a mystical relation to the visitant, disabled me 
at once from taking my leave, or from perform any useful purpose by 
staying. at length, struggle for composure, i approach her, and, 
showing her the card she had given me, said,-- 

"agreeably to this direction, i call an hour ago, at your lodgings. i 
found you not. i hope you will permit me to call once more. when shall 
i expect to meet you at home?" 

her eyes were cast on the floor. a kind of indirect attention was fixed 
on mrs. wentworth, serving to intimidate and check her. at length she 
said, in an irresolute voice, "i shall be at home this evening." 

"and this evening," reply i, "i will call to see you." so saying, i 
left the house. 

this interval was tedious, but was to be endure with equanimity. i was 
impatient to be gone to baltimore, and hope to be able to set out by 
the dawn of next day. meanwhile, i was necessarily to perform something 
with respect to clemenza. 

after dinner i accompany mrs. steven to visit miss carlton. i was 
eager to see a woman who could bear adversity in the manner which my 
friend had described. 

she met us at the door of her apartment. her serious was not abate 
by her smile of affable and welcome. "my friend!" whisper i, "how 
truly lovely is this miss carlton! are the heart and the intelligence 
within worthy of these features?" 

"yes, they are. the account of her employments, of her resignation to 
the ill fate of the brother whom she loves, prove that they are." 

my eyes were rivet to her countenance and person. i felt 
uncontrollable eager to speak to her, and to gain her good opinion. 

"you must know this young man, my dear miss carlton," said my friend, 
look at me; "he is my husband's friend, and profess a great desire 
to be yours. you must not treat him as a mere stranger, for he know 
your character and situation already, as well as that of your brother." 

she look at me with benignity:--"i accept his friendship willing and 
gratefully, and shall endeavour to convince him that his good opinion is 
not misplaced." 

there now ensue a conversation somewhat general, in which this young 
woman show a mind vigorous from exercise and unembarrass by care. 
she affected no concealment of her own condition, of her wants, or her 
comforts. she laid no stress upon misfortunes, but contrived to deduce 
some beneficial consequence to herself, and some motive for gratitude to 
heaven, from every wayward incident that had befallen her. 

this demeanour embolden me, at length, to inquire into the cause of 
her brother's imprisonment, and the nature of his debt. 

she answer frankly and without hesitation:--"it is a debt of his 
father's, for which he made himself responsible during his father's 
life. the act was generous but imprudent, as the event has shown; 
though, at the time, the unhappy effects could not be foreseen. 

"my father," continue she, "was arrest by his creditor, at a time 
when the calm and comfort of his own dwelling were necessary to his 
health. the creditor was obdurate, and would release him upon no 
condition but that of receiving a bond from my brother, by which he 
engaged to pay the debt at several successive times and in small 
portions. all these instalment were discharge with great difficulty 
indeed, but with sufficient punctuality, except the last, to which my 
brother's earnings were not adequate." 

"how much is the debt?" 

"four hundred dollars." 

"and is the state of the creditor such as to make the loss of four 
hundred dollar of more importance to him than the loss of liberty to 
your brother?" 

she answered, smiling, "that is a very abstract view of things. on such 
a question you and i might, perhaps, easily decide in favour of my 
brother; but would there not be some danger of decide partially? his 
conduct is a proof of his decision, and there is no power to change it." 

"will not argument change it? methinks in so plain a case i should be 
able to convince him. you say he is rich and childless. his annual 
income is ten times more than this sum. your brother cannot pay the debt 
while in prison; whereas, if at liberty, he might slow and finally 
discharge it. if his humanity would not yield, his avarice might be 
brought to acquiesce." 

"but there is another passion which you would find it somewhat hard to 
subdue, and that is his vengeance. he think himself wronged, and 
imprison my brother, not to enforce payment, but to inflict misery. if 
you could persuade him that there is no hardship in imprisonment, you 
would speedy gain the victory; but that could not be attempt 
consistent with truth. in proportion to my brother's suffering is his 
gratification." 

"you draw an odious and almost incredible portrait." 

"and yet such a one would serve for the likeness of almost every second 
man we meet." 

"and is such your opinion of mankind? your experience must surely have 
been of a rueful tenor to justify such hard thought of the rest of your 
species." 

"by no means. it has been what those whose situation disable them from 
look further than the surface of things would regard as unfortunate; 
but, if my goods and evil were equitable balanced, the former would be 
the weightiest. i have found kindness and goodness in great numbers, but 
have likewise met prejudice and rancor in many. my opinion of farquhar 
is not lightly taken up. i saw him yesterday, and the nature of his 
motive in the treatment of my brother was plain enough." 

here this topic was succeed by others, and the conversation cease not 
till the hour had arrive on which i had preconcerte to visit mrs. 
fielding. i left my two friends for this purpose. 

i was admitted to mrs. fielding's presence without scruple or 
difficulty. there were two female in her company, and one of the other 
sex, well-dressed, elderly, and sedate persons. their discourse turn 
upon politics topics, with which, as you know, i have but slight 
acquaintance. they talk of fleet and armies, of robespierre and pitt, 
of whom i had only a newspaper-knowledge. 

in a short time the women rose, and, huddle on their cloaks, 
disappeared, in company with the gentleman. being thus left alone with 
mrs. fielding, some embarrassment was mutual betrayed. with much 
hesitation, which, however, gradual disappeared, my companion, at 
length, began the conversation:-- 

"you met me lately, in a situation, sir, on which i look back with 
tremble and shame, but not with any self-condemnation. i was led into 
it without any fault, unless a too hasty confidence may be style a 
fault. i had known mrs. villar in england, where she live with an 
untainted reputation, at least; and the sight of my countrywoman, in a 
foreign land, awaken emotion in the indulgence of which i did not 
imagine there was either any guilt or any danger. she invite me to see 
her at her house with so much urgent and warmth, and solicit me to 
take a place immediately in a chaise in which she had come to the city, 
that i too incautious complied. 

"you are a stranger to me, and i am unacquainted with your character. 
what little i have seen of your deportment, and what little i have 
lately heard concerning you from mrs. wentworth, do not produce 
unfavourable impressions; but the apology i have made was due to my own 
reputation, and should have been offer to you whatever your character 
had been." there she stopped. 

"i came not hither," said i, "to receive an apology. your demeanour, on 
our first interview, shield you sufficient from any suspicion or 
surmise that i could form. what you have now mention was likewise 
mention by your friend, and was fully believe upon her authority. my 
purpose, in coming, related not to you, but to another. i desire merely 
to interest your generous and justice on behalf of one whose destitute 
and dangerous condition may lay claim to your compassion and your 
succour." 

"i comprehend you," said she, with an air of some perplexity. "i know 
the claim of that person." 

"and will you comply with them?" 

"in what manner can i serve her?" 

"by give her the means of living." 

"does she not possess them already?" 

"she is destitute. her dependence was wholly placed upon one that is 
dead, by whom her person was dishonour and her fortune embezzled." 

"but she still lives. she is not turn into the street. she is not 
destitute of home." 

"but what a home!" 

"such as she may choose to remain in." 

"she cannot choose it. she must not choose it. she remains through 
ignorance, or through the incapacity of leave it." 

"but how shall she be persuade to a change?" 

"i will persuade her. i will fully explain her situation. i will supply 
her with a new home." 

"you will persuade her to go with you, and to live at a home of your 
providing and on your bounty?" 

"certainly." 

"would that change be worthy of a cautious person? would it benefit her 
reputation? would it prove her love of independence?" 

"my purpose are good. i know not why she should suspect them. but i am 
only anxious to be the instrument. let her be indebted to one of her own 
sex, of unquestionable reputation. admit her into this house. invite her 
to your arms. cherish and console her as your sister." 

"before i am convinced that she deserve it? and even then, what regard 
shall i, young, unmarried, independent, affluent, pay to my own 
reputation in harbour a woman in these circumstances?" 

"but you need not act yourself. make me your agent and almoner. only 
supply her with the means of subsistence through me." 

"would you have me act a clandestine part? hold meeting with one of 
your sex, and give him money for a purpose which i must hide from the 
world? is it worth while to be a dissemble and impostor? and will not 
such conduct incur more dangerous surmise and suspicion than would 
arise from acting openly and directly? you will forgive me for remind 
you, likewise, that it is particularly incumbent upon those in my 
situation to be circumspect in their intercourse with men and with 
strangers. this is the second time that i have seen you. my knowledge of 
you is extremely dubious and imperfect, and such as would make the 
conduct you prescribe to me, in a high degree, rash and culpable. you 
must not, therefore, expect me to pursue it." 

these words were deliver with an air of firm and dignity. i was 
not insensible to the truth of her representations. "i confess," said i, 
"what you have said make me doubt the propriety of my proposal; yet i 
would fain be of service to her. cannot you point out some practicable 
method?" 

she was silent and thoughtful, and seem indisposed to answer my 
question. 

"i had set my heart upon success in this negotiation," continue i, "and 
could not imagine any obstacle to its success; but i find my ignorance 
of the world's ways much greater than i had previous expected. you 
defraud yourself of all the happiness redound from the act of making 
other happy. you sacrifice substance to show, and are more anxious to 
prevent unjust aspersion from lighting on yourself, than to rescue a 
fellow-creature from guilt and infamy. 

"you are rich, and abound in all the convenience and luxury of life. 
a small portion of your superfluity would obviate the wants of a being 
not less worthy than yourself. it is not avarice or aversion to labour 
that make you withhold your hand. it is dread of the sneer and 
surmise of malevolence and ignorance. 

"i will not urge you further at present. your determination to be wise 
should not be hasty. think upon the subject calm and sedately, and 
form your resolution in the course of three days. at the end of that 
period i will visit you again." so saying, and without wait for 
comment or answer, i withdrew. 




chapter xl. 


i mount the stage-coach at daybreak the next day, in company with a 
sallow frenchman from st. domingo, his fiddle-case, an ape, and two 
female blacks. the frenchman, after passing the suburbs, took out his 
violin and amuse himself with hum to his own _tweedle-tweedle_. the 
monkey now and then munch an apple, which was given to him from a 
basket by the blacks, who gaze with stupid wonder, and an exclamatory 
_la! la!_ upon the passing scenery, or chatter to each other in a sort 
of open-mouthed, half-articulate, monotonous, singsong jargon. 

the man look seldom either on this side or that; and spoke only to 
rebuke the frolic of the monkey, with a "tenez! dominique! prenez 
garde! die noir!" 

as to me, my thought was busy in a thousand ways. i sometimes gaze at 
the face of my _four_ companions, and endeavour to discern the 
difference and sameness between them. i took an exact account of the 
features, proportions, looks, and gesture of the monkey, the congolese, 
and the creole gaul. i compare them together, and examine them apart. 
i look at them in a thousand different points of view, and pursued, 
untired and unsatiated, those train of reflection which began at each 
change of tone, feature, and attitude. 

i marked the country as it successive arose before me, and found 
endless employment in examine the shape and substance of the fence, 
the barn, and the cottage, the aspect of earth and of heaven. how great 
are the pleasure of health and of mental activity! 

my chief occupation, however, related to the scene into which i was 
about to enter. my imagination were, of course, crude and inadequate; 
and i found an uncommon gratification in compare realities, as they 
successive occurred, with the pictures which my wayward fancy had 
depicted. 

i will not describe my dreams. my proper task is to relate the truth. 
neither shall i dwell upon the image suggest by the condition of the 
country through which i passed. i will confine myself to mention the 
transactions connected with the purpose of my journey. 

i reach baltimore at night. i was not so fatigue but that i could 
ramble through the town. i intended, at present, merely the 
gratification of a stranger's curiosity. my visit to mrs. watson and her 
brother i design should take place on the morrow. the evening of my 
arrival i deem an unseasonable time. 

while rove about, however, it occur to me, that it might not be 
impolitic to find the way to their habitation even now. my purpose of 
general curiosity would equally be serve whichever way my steps were 
bent; and to trace the path to their dwelling would save me the trouble 
of inquiry and interrogate to-morrow. 

when i look forward to an interview with the wife of watson, and to 
the subject which would be necessarily discuss at that interview, i 
felt a tremble and misgiving at my heart. "surely," thought i, "it 
will become me to exercise immeasurable circumspect and address; and 
yet how little are these adapt to the impetuos and candour of my 
nature! 

"how am i to introduce myself? what am i to tell her? that i was a sort 
of witness to the murder of her husband? that i received from the hand 
of his assassin the letter which i afterwards transmit to her? and, 
from the same hands, the bill contained in his girdle? 

"how will she start and look aghast! what suspicion will she harbour? 
what inquiry shall be made of me? how shall they be disarm and 
eluded, or answered? deep consideration will be necessary before i trust 
myself to such an interview. the coming night shall be devoted to 
reflection upon this subject." 

from these thought i proceed to inquiry for the street mention in 
the advertisement, where mrs. watson was said to reside. the street, 
and, at length, the habitation, was found. have reach a station 
opposite, i pause and survey the mansion. it was a wooden edifice of 
two stories, humble, but neat. you ascend to the door by several stone 
steps. of the two lower windows, the shutter of one were closed, but 
those of the other were open. though late in the evening, there was no 
appearance of light or fire within. 

beside the house was a paint fence, through which was a gate leading 
to the back of the building. guide by the impulse of the moment, i 
cross the street to the gate, and, lift the latch, enter the 
paved alley, on one side of which was a pale fence, and on the other 
the house, look through two window into the alley. 

the first window was dark like those in front; but at the second a light 
was discernible. i approach it, and, look through, beheld a plain 
but neat apartment, in which parlour, kitchen, and nursery seem to be 
united. a fire burn cheerful in the chimney, over which was a 
tea-kettle. on the hearth sat a smile and playful cherub of a boy, 
toss something to a black girl who sat opposite, and whose innocent 
and regular features want only a different hue to make them beautiful. 
near it, in a rocking-chair, with a sleep babe in her lap, sat a 
female figure in plain but neat and becoming attire. her posture 
permit half her face to be seen, and save me from any danger of 
being observed. 

this countenance was full of sweet and benignity, but the sad 
that veiled its lustre was profound. her eyes were now fixed upon the 
fire and were moist with the tear of remembrance, while she sung, in 
low and scarcely-audible strains, an artless lullaby. 

this spectacle exercise a strange power over my feelings. while 
occupy in meditate on the features of the mother, i was unaware of 
my conspicuous situation. the black girl, have occasion to change her 
situation, in order to reach the ball which was thrown at her, unlucki 
caught a glance of my figure through the glass. in a tone of half 
surprise and half terror, she cry out, "oh! see dare! a man!" 

i was tempt to draw sudden back, but a second thought show me the 
impropriety of depart thus abrupt and leave behind me some alarm. 
i felt a sort of necessity for apologize for my intrusion into these 
precincts, and hasten to a door that led into the same apartment. i 
knocked. a voice somewhat confuse bade me enter. it was not till i 
open the door and enter the room, that i fully saw in what 
embarrassment i had incautious involved myself. 

i could scarcely obtain sufficient courage to speak, and gave a confuse 
assent to the question, "have you business with me, sir?" she offer me 
a chair, and i sat down. she put the child, not yet awakened, into the 
arms of the black, who kiss it and rock it in her arms with great 
satisfaction, and, resume her seat, look at me with inquisitive 
mingle with complacency. 

after a moment's pause, i said, "i was direct to this house as the 
abode of mr. ephraim williams. can he be seen, madam?" 

"he is not in town at present. if you will leave a message with me, i 
will punctual deliver it." 

the thought sudden occurred, whether any more was needful than merely 
to leave the bill suitable enclosed, as they already were, in a packet. 
thus all painful explanation might be avoided, and i might have reason 
to congratulate myself on his seasonable absence. actuate by these 
thoughts, i drew forth the packet, and put it into her hand, saying, "i 
will leave this in your possession, and must earnest request you to 
keep it safe until you can deliver it into his own hands." 

scarcely had i said this before new suggestion occurred. was it right 
to act in this clandestine and mysterious manner? should i leave these 
person in uncertainty respecting the fate of a husband and a brother? 
what perplexities, misunderstandings, and suspense might not grow out 
of this uncertainty? and ought they not to be preclude at any hazard to 
my own safety or good name? 

these sentiment made me involuntary stretch forth my hand to retake 
the packet. this gesture, and other significance in my manners, join 
to a tremble consciousness in herself, fill my companion with all 
the token of confusion and fear. she alternate look at me and at 
the paper. her trepidation increased, and she grew pale. these emotion 
were counteract by a strong effort. 

at length she said, falteringly, "i will take good care of them, and 
will give them to my brother." 

she rose and placed them in a drawer, after which she resume her seat. 

on this occasion all my wary forsook me. i cannot explain why my 
perplexity and the trouble of my thought were greater upon this than 
upon similar occasions. however it be, i was incapable of speaking, and 
fixed my eyes upon the floor. a sort of electrical sympathy pervade my 
companion, and terror and anguish were strong manifest in the 
glance which she sometimes stole at me. we seem fully to understand 
each other without the aid of words. 

this imbecility could not last long. i gradual recover my composure, 
and collected my scattered thoughts. i look at her with seriousness, 
and steadfast spoke:--"are you the wife of amos watson?" 

she started:--"i am indeed. why do you ask? do you know any thing 
of----?" there her voice failed. 

i reply with quickness, "yes. i am fully acquaint with his destiny." 

"good god!" she exclaimed, in a paroxysm of surprise, and bend 
eager forward, "my husband is then alive! this packet is from him. 
where is he? when have you seen him?" 

"'tis a long time since." 

"but where, where is he now? is he well? will he return to me?" 

"never." 

"merciful heaven!" (looking upwards and clasp her hands,) "i thank 
thee at least for his life! but why has he forsaken me? why will he not 
return?" 

"for a good reason," said i, with augment solemnity, "he will never 
return to thee. long ago was he laid in the cold grave." 

she shrieked; and, at the next moment, sunk in a swoon upon the floor. i 
was alarmed. the two children shrieked, and ran about the room terrify 
and unknowing what they did. i was overwhelm with somewhat like 
terror, yet i involuntary raise the mother in my arms, and cast about 
for the means of recall her from this fit. 

time to effect this had not elapsed, when several persons, apparently 
mrs. watson's neighbours, and raise by the outcry of the girls, 
hasty enter the room. they look at me with mingle surprise and 
suspicion; but my attitude, being not that of an injure but helper; my 
countenance, which show the pleasure their entrance, at this critical 
moment, afford me; and my words, in which i besought their assistance, 
and explained, in some degree, and briefly, the cause of those 
appearances, remove their ill thoughts. 

presently, the unhappy woman, being carry by the new-comers into a 
bedroom adjoining, recover her sensibility. i only wait for this. i 
had done my part. more information would be useless to her, and not to 
be given by me, at least in the present audience, without embarrassment 
and peril. i sudden determined to withdraw, and this, the attention of 
the company being otherwise engaged, i did without notice. i return to 
my inn, and shut myself up in my chamber. such was the change which, 
undesigned, unforeseen, half an hour had wrought in my situation. my 
cautious project had perish in their conception. that which i had 
deem so arduous, to require such circumspect approaches, such 
well-concerted speeches, was done. 

i had start up before this woman as if from the pore of the ground. i 
had vanish with the same celerity, but had left her in possession of 
proof sufficient that i was neither spectre nor demon. "i will visit 
her," said i, "again. i will see her brother, and know the full effect 
of my disclosure. i will tell them all that i myself know. ignorance 
would be no less injurious to them than to myself; but, first, i will 
see the maurices." 




chapter xli. 


next morning i arose betimes, and equip myself without delay. i had 
eight or ten mile to walk, so far from the town being the residence of 
these people; and i forthwith repair to their dwelling. the person 
whom i desire to see were known to me only by name, and by their place 
of abode. it was a mother and her three daughter to whom i now carry 
the means not only of competence but riches; means which they, no doubt, 
had long ago despair of regaining, and which, among all possible 
messengers, one of my age and guise would be the least suspect of 
being able to restore. 

i arrived, through intricate ways, at eleven o'clock, at the house of 
mrs. maurice. it was a neat dwelling, in a very fanciful and rustic 
style, in the bosom of a valley, which, when decorate by the verdure 
and blossom of the coming season, must possess many charms. at present 
it was naked and dreary. 

as i approach it, through a long avenue, i observe two female 
figures, walking arm-in-arm and slow to and fro, in the path in which 
i now was. "these," said i, "are daughter of the family. graceful, 
well-dressed, fashionable girl they seem at this distance. may they be 
deserving of the good tidings which i bring!" seeing them turn towards 
the house, i mend my pace, that i might overtake them and request 
their introduction of me to their mother. 

as i more nearly approached, they again turned; and, perceive me, they 
stood as if in expectation of my message. i went up to them. 

a single glance, cast at each, made me suspect that they were not 
sisters; but, somewhat to my disappointment, there was nothing highly 
prepossessing in the countenance of either. they were what is every day 
met with, though less embellish by brilliant drapery and turban, in 
market and streets. an air somewhat haughty, somewhat supercilious, 
lessen still more their attractions. these defects, however, were 
nothing to me. 

i inquired, of her that seem to be the elder of the two, for mrs. 
maurice. 

"she is indisposed," was the cold reply. 

"that is unfortunate. is it not possible to see her?" 

"no;" with still more gravity. 

i was somewhat at a loss how to proceed. a pause ensued. at length the 
same lady resumed, "what's your business? you can leave your message 
with me." 

"with nobody but her. if she be not _very_ indisposed----" 

"she is very indisposed," interrupt she, peevishly. "if you cannot 
leave your message, you may take it back again, for she must not be 
disturbed." 

this was a singular reception. i was disconcert and silent. i knew not 
what to say. "perhaps," i at last observed, "some other time----" 

"no," (with increase heat,) "no other time. she is more likely to be 
worse than better. come, betsy," said she, taking hold of her 
companion's arm; and, hie into the house, shut the door after her, 
and disappeared. i stood, at the bottom of the steps, confounded at such 
strange and unexpected treatment. i could not withdraw till my purpose 
was accomplished. after a moment's pause, i step to the door, and 
pull the bell. a negro came, of a very unpropitious aspect, and, 
opening the door, look at me in silence. to my question, was mrs. 
maurice to be seen? he made some answer, in a jargon which i could not 
understand; but his words were immediately follow by an unseen person 
within the house:--"mrs. maurice can't be seen by anybody. come in, 
cato, and shut the door." this injunction was obey by cato without 
ceremony. 

here was a dilemma! i came with ten thousand pound in my hands, to 
bestow freely on these people, and such was the treatment i received. "i 
must adopt," said i, "a new mode." 

i lift the latch, without a second warning, and, cato have 
disappeared, went into a room, the door of which chance to be open, on 
my right hand. i found within the two female whom i had accost in the 
portico. i now address myself to the younger:--"this intrusion, when i 
have explain the reason of it, will, i hope, be forgiven. i come, 
madam----" 

"yes," interrupt the other, with a countenance suffuse by 
indignation, "i know very well whom you come from, and what it is that 
prompt this insolence; but your employer shall see that we have not 
sunk so low as he imagines. cato! bob! i say." 

"my employer, madam! i see you labour under some great mistake. i have 
no employer. i come from a great distance. i come to bring intelligence 
of the utmost importance to your family. i come to benefit and not to 
injure you." 

by this time, bob and cato, two sturdy blacks, enter the room. "turn 
this person," said the imperious lady, regardless of my explanations, 
"out of the house. don't you hear me?" she continued, observing that 
they look one upon the other and hesitated. 

"surely, madam," said i, "you are precipitate. you are treat like an 
enemy one who will prove himself your mother's best friend." 

"will you leave the house?" she exclaimed, quite beside herself with 
anger. "villains! why don't you do as i bid you?" 

the black look upon each other, as if wait for an example. their 
habitual deference for every thing _white_, no doubt, held their hand 
from what they regard as a profanation. at last bob said, in a 
whining, beseech tone, "why, missee, massa buckra wanna go for doo, 
dan he winna go fo' wee." 

the lady now burst into tear of rage. she held out her hand, 
menacingly. "will you leave the house?" 

"not willingly," said i, in a mild tone. "i came too far to return with 
the business that brought me unperformed. i am persuaded, madam, you 
mistake my character and my views. i have a message to deliver your 
mother which deep concern her and your happiness, if you are her 
daughter. i merely wish to see her, and leave with her a piece of 
important news; news in which her fortune is deep interested." 

these words had a wonderful effect upon the young lady. her anger was 
checked. "good god!" she exclaimed, "are you watson?" 

"no; i am only watson's representative, and come to do all that watson 
could do if he were present." 

she was now importunate to know my business. 

"my business lie with mrs. maurice. advertisements, which i have seen, 
direct me to her, and to this house; and to her only shall i deliver my 
message." 

"perhaps," said she, with a face of apology, "i have mistaken you. mrs. 
maurice is my mother. she is really indisposed, but i can stand in her 
place on this occasion." 

"you cannot represent her in this instance. if i cannot have access to 
her now, i must go; and shall return when you are willing to grant it." 

"nay," reply she, "she is not, perhaps, so very sick but that i will 
go, and see if she will admit you." so saying, she left me for three 
minutes; and, returning, said her mother wish to see me. 

i follow up-stairs, at her request; and, enter an ill-furnished 
chamber, found, seat in an arm-chair, a lady seemingly in years, pale, 
and visibly infirm. the lines of her countenance were far from lay 
claim to my reverence. it was too much like the daughter's. 

she look at me, at my entrance, with great eagerness, and said, in a 
sharp tone, "pray, friend, what is it you want with me? make haste; tell 
your story, and begone." 

"my story is a short one, and easily told. amos watson was your agent in 
jamaica. he sold an estate belong to you, and received the money." 

"he did," said she, attempt ineffectual to rise from her seat, and 
her eyes beam with a significance that shock me; "he did, the 
villain, and purloin the money, to the ruin of me and my daughters. 
but if there be justice on earth it will overtake him. i trust i shall 
have the pleasure one day--i hope to hear he's hanged. well, but go on, 
friend. he _did_ sell it, i tell you." 

"he sold it for ten thousand pounds," i resumed, "and invest this sum 
in bill of exchange. watson is dead. these bill came into my hands. i 
was lately informed, by the public papers, who were the real owners, and 
have come from philadelphia with no other view than to restore them to 
you. there they are," continue i, place them in her lap, entire and 
untouched. 

she seize the papers, and look at me and at her daughter, by turns, 
with an air of one sudden bewildered. she seem speechless, and, 
grow sudden more ghastly pale, lean her head back upon the chair. 
the daughter screamed, and hasten to support the languid parent, who 
difficult articulated, "oh, i am sick; sick to death. put me on the 
bed." 

i was astonish and affrighte at this scene. some of the domestics, of 
both colours, entered, and gaze at me with surprise. involuntary i 
withdrew, and return to the room below, into which i had first 
entered, and which i now found deserted. 

i was for some time at a loss to guess at the cause of these 
appearances. at length it occur to me, that joy was the source of the 
sickness that had seize mrs. maurice. the abrupt recovery of what had 
probably been deem irretrievable would naturally produce this effect 
upon a mind of a certain texture. 

i was deliberate whether to stay or go, when the daughter enter the 
room, and, after express some surprise at seeing me, whom she 
supposed to have retired, told me that her mother wish to see me again 
before my departure. in this request there was no kindness. all was 
cold, supercilious, and sullen. i obey the summons without speaking. 

i found mrs. maurice seat in her arm-chair, much in her former guise. 
without desire me to be seated, or relaxing aught in her asperity of 
looks and tones,--"pray, friend, how did you _come by_ these papers?" 

"i assure you, madam, they were honestly _come by_," answer i, 
sedate and with half a smile; "but, if the whole is there that was 
missing, the mode and time in which they came to me is matter of 
concern only to myself. is there any deficiency?" 

"i am not sure. i don't know much of these matters. there may be less. i 
dare say there is. i shall know that soon. i expect a friend of mine 
every minute who will look them over. i don't doubt you can give a good 
account of yourself." 

"i doubt not but i can--to those who have a right to demand it. in this 
case, curiosity must be very urgent indeed before i shall consent to 
gratify it." 

"you must know this is a suspicious case. watson, to-be-sure, embezzle 
the money; to-be-sure, you are his accomplice." 

"certainly," said i, "my conduct, on this occasion, prove that. what i 
have brought to you, of my own accord; what i have restore to you, 
fully and unconditionally, it is plain watson embezzled, and that i was 
aid in the fraud. to restore what was never stolen always betray the 
thief. to give what might be kept without suspicion is, without doubt, 
arrant knavery. to be serious, madam, in coming thus far, for this 
purpose, i have done enough; and must now bid you farewell." 

"nay, don't go yet. i have something more to say to you. my friend, i'm 
sure, will be here presently. there he is;" (noticing a peal upon the 
bell.) "polly, go down, and see if that's mr. somers. if it is, bring 
him up." the daughter went. 

i walk to the window absorb in my own reflections. i was 
disappointed and dejected. the scene before me was the unplease 
reverse of all that my fancy, while coming hither, had foreboded. i 
expect to find virtuous indigence and sorrow lifted, by my means, to 
affluence and exultation. i expect to witness the tear of gratitude 
and the caress of affection. what had i found? nothing but sordidness, 
stupidity, and illiberal suspicion. 

the daughter stay much long than the mother's patience could endure. 
she knock against the floor with her heel. a servant came up. "where's 
polly, you slut? it was not you, hussy, that i wanted. it was her." 

"she is talk in the parlour with a gentleman." 

"mr. somers, i suppose; hey, fool? run with my compliments to him, 
wench. tell him, please walk up." 

"it is not mr. somers, ma'am." 

"no? who then, saucebox? what gentleman can have any thing to do with 
polly?" 

"i don't know, ma'am." 

"who said you did, impertinence? run, and tell her i want her this 
instant." 

the summons was not delivered, or polly did not think proper to obey it. 
full ten minutes of thoughtful silence on my part, and of mutter 
vexation and impatience on that of the old lady, elapse before polly's 
entrance. as soon as she appeared, the mother began to complain bitter 
of her inattention and neglect; but polly, taking no notice of her, 
address herself to me, and told me that a gentleman below wish to 
see me. i hasten down, and found a stranger, of a plain appearance, in 
the parlour. his aspect was liberal and ingenuous; and i quick 
collected, from his discourse, that this was the brother-in-law of 
watson, and the companion of his last voyage. 




chapter xlii. 


my eyes sparkle with pleasure at this unexpected interview, and i 
willing confessed my desire to communicate all the knowledge of his 
brother's destiny which i possessed. he told me, that, return late to 
baltimore, on the last evening, he found his sister in much agitation 
and distress, which, after a time, she explain to him. she likewise 
put the packet i had left into his hands. 

"i leave you to imagine," continue he, "my surprise and curiosity at 
this discovery. i was, of course, impatient to see the bearer of such 
extraordinary tidings. this morning, inquiring for one of your 
appearance at the taverns, i was, at length, informed of your arrival 
yesterday in the stage; of your go out alone in the evening; of your 
subsequent return; and of your early departure this morning. 
accidental i light on your footsteps; and, by suitable inquiry on 
the road, have finally trace you hither. 

"you told my sister her husband was dead. you left with her papers that 
were probably in his possession at the time of his death. i understand 
from miss maurice that the bill belong to her mother have just been 
deliver to her. i presume you have no objection to clear up this 
mystery." 

"to you i am anxious to unfold every thing. at this moment, or at any 
time, but the soon the more agreeable to me, i will do it." 

"this," said he, look around him, "is no place; there is an inn, not 
a hundred yard from this gate, where i have left my horse; will you go 
thither?" i readily consented, and, calling for a private apartment, i 
laid before this man every incident of my life connected with welbeck 
and watson; my full, circumstantial, and explicit story appear to 
remove every doubt which he might have entertain of my integrity. 

in williams i found a plain, good man, of a temper confiding and 
affectionate. my narration being finished, he expressed, by unaffected 
tokens, his wonder and his grief on account of watson's destiny. to my 
inquiries, which were made with frank and fervour, respecting his 
own and his sister's condition, he said that the situation of both was 
deplorable till the recovery of this property. they had been save from 
utter ruin, from beggary and a jail, only by the generous and lenity 
of his creditors, who did not suffer the suspicious circumstances 
attend watson's disappearance to outweigh former proof of his 
probity. they had never relinquish the hope of receiving some tidings 
of their kinsman. 

i related what had just pass in the house of mrs. maurice, and 
request to know from him the history and character of this family. 

"they have treat you," he answered, "exactly as any one who knew them 
would have predicted. the mother is narrow, ignorant, bigoted, and 
avaricious. the eldest daughter, whom you saw, resemble the old lady in 
many things. age, indeed, may render the similitude complete. at 
present, pride and ill-humour are her chief characteristics. 

"the youngest daughter has nothing in mind or person in common with her 
family. where they are irascible, she is patient; where they are 
imperious, she is humble; where they are covetous, she is liberal; where 
they are ignorant and indolent, she is studious and skilful. it is rare, 
indeed, to find a young lady more amiable than miss fanny maurice, or 
who has had more cross and affliction to sustain. 

"the eldest daughter always extort the supply of her wants, from her 
parents, by threat and importunities; but the younger could never be 
prevail upon to employ the same means, and, hence, she suffer 
inconvenience which, to any other girl, born to an equal rank, would 
have been, to the last degree, humiliate and vexatious. to her they 
only afford new opportunity for the display of her most shining 
virtues,--fortitude and charity. no instance of their sordid or 
tyranny ever stole a murmur from her. for what they had given, existence 
and a virtuous education, she said they were entitle to gratitude. what 
they withheld was their own, in the use of which they were not 
accountable to her. she was not ashamed to owe her subsistence to her 
own industry, and was only held by the pride of her family--in this 
instance their pride was equal to their avarice--from seek out some 
lucrative kind of employment. since the shock which their fortune 
sustain by watson's disappearance, she has been permit to pursue 
this plan, and she now teach music in baltimore for a living. no one, 
however, in the highest rank, can be more generally respect and 
caress than she is." 

"but will not the recovery of this money make a favourable change in her 
condition?" 

"i can hardly tell; but i am inclined to think it will not. it will not 
change her mother's character. her pride may be awaken anew, and she 
may oblige miss fanny to relinquish her new profession, and that will be 
a change to be deplored." 

"what good has been done, then, by restore this money?" 

"if pleasure be good, you must have confer a great deal on the 
maurices; upon the mother and two of the daughters, at least,--the only 
pleasure, indeed, which their nature can receive. it is less than if 
you had raise them from absolute indigence, which has not been the 
case, since they had wherewithal to live upon besides their jamaica 
property. but how?" continue williams, sudden recollect himself; 
"have you claim the reward promise to him who should restore these 
bills?" 

"what reward?" 

"no less than a thousand dollars. it was public promise under the 
hand of mrs. maurice and of hemmings, her husband's executor." 

"really," said i, "that circumstance escape my attention, and i wonder 
that it did; but is it too late to repair the evil?" 

"then you have no scruple to accept the reward?" 

"certainly not. could you suspect me of so strange a punctilio as that?" 

"yes; but i know not why. the story you have just finished taught me to 
expect some unreasonable refinement upon that head. to be hired, to be 
bribed, to do our duty is supposed by some to be degrading." 

"this is no such bribe to me. i should have act just as i have done, 
had no recompense been promised. in truth, this has been my conduct, for 
i never once thought of the reward; but, now that you remind me of it, i 
would gladly see it bestowed. to fulfil their engagements, in this 
respect, is no more than justice in the maurices. to one in my condition 
the money will be highly useful. if these people were poor, or generous 
and worthy, or if i myself were already rich, i might less repine at 
their withhold it; but, things being as they are with them and with 
me, it would, i think, be gross injustice in them to withhold, and in me 
to refuse." 

"that injustice," said williams, "will, on their part, i fear, be 
committed. 'tis pity you first applied to mrs. maurice. nothing can be 
expect from her avarice, unless it be wrest from her by a lawsuit." 

"that is a force which i shall never apply." 

"had you gone first to hemmings, you might, i think, have look for 
payment. he is not a mean man. a thousand dollars, he must know, is not 
much to give for forty thousand. perhaps, indeed, it may not yet be too 
late. i am well known to him, and, if you please, will attend you to him 
in the evening, and state your claim." 

i thankful accept this offer, and went with him accordingly. i found 
that hem had been with mrs. maurice in the course of the day; had 
received from her intelligence of this transaction, and had entertain 
the expectation of a visit from me for this very purpose. 

while williams explain to him the nature of my claim, he scan me 
with great intentness. his austere and inflexible brow afford me 
little room to hope for success, and this hopeless was confirmed by 
his silence and perplexity when williams had made an end. 

"to-be-sure," said he, after some pause, "the contract was explicit. 
to-be-sure, the conditions on mr. mervyn's side have been performed. 
certain it is, the bill are entire and complete, but mrs. maurice will 
not consent to do her part, and mrs. maurice, to whom the papers were 
presented, is the person by whom, according to the terms of the 
contract, the reward must be paid." 

"but mrs. maurice, you know, sir, may be legal compel to pay," said 
williams. 

"perhaps she may; but i tell you plainly, that she never will do the 
thing without compulsion. legal process, however, in this case, will 
have other inconvenience besides delay. some curiosity will naturally 
be excited, as to the history of these papers. watson disappear a 
twelvemonth ago. who can avoid asking, where have these papers been 
deposit all this while, and how came this person in possession of 
them?" 

"that kind of curiosity," said i, "is natural and laudable, and gladly 
would i gratify it. disclosure or concealment in that case, however, 
would nowise affect my present claim. whether a bond, legal executed, 
shall be paid, do not depend upon determine whether the payer is 
fondest of boil mutton or roast beef. truth, in the first case, has no 
connection with truth in the second. so far from elude this curiosity, 
so far from study concealment, i am anxious to publish the truth." 

"you are right, to-be-sure," said hemmings. "curiosity is a natural, but 
only an incidental, consequence in this case. i have no reason for 
desire that it should be an unpleasant consequence to you." 

"well, sir," said williams, "you think that arthur mervyn has no remedy 
in this case but the law?" 

"mrs. maurice, to-be-sure, will never pay but on compulsion. mervyn 
should have known his own interest better. while his left hand was 
stretch out to give, his right should have been held forth to receive. 
as it is, he must be contented with the aid of law. any attorney will 
prosecute on condition of receiving _half the sum_ when recovered." 

we now rose to take our leave, when hemmings, desire us to pause a 
moment, said, "to-be-sure, in the utmost strict of the terms of our 
promise, the reward was to be paid by the person who received the 
papers; but it must be own that your claim, at any rate, is 
equitable. i have money of the deceased mr. maurice in my hands. these 
very bill are now in my possession. i will therefore pay you your due, 
and take the consequence of an act of justice on myself. i was prepared 
for you. sign that receipt, and there is a _check_ for the amount." 




chapter xliii. 


this unexpected and agreeable decision was accompany by an invitation 
to supper, at which we were treat by our host with much affable and 
kindness. finding me the author of williams's good fortune as well as 
mrs. maurice's, and being assured by the former of his entire conviction 
of the rectitude of my conduct, he laid aside all reserve and distance 
with regard to me. he inquire into my prospects and wishes, and 
professed his willing to serve me. 

i dealt with equal unreserve and frankness. "i am poor," said i. "money 
for my very expenses hither i have borrow from a friend, to whom i am, 
in other respects, much indebted, and whom i expect to compensate only 
by gratitude and future services. 

"in coming hither, i expect only an increase of my debts; to sink 
still deep into poverty; but happily the issue has made me rich. this 
hour has given me competence, at least." 

"what! call you a thousand dollar competence?" 

"more than competence. i call it an abundance. my own ingenuity, while i 
enjoy health, will enable me to live. this i regard as a fund, first to 
pay my debts, and next to supply deficiency occasion by untoward 
accident or ill health, during the ensue three or four years at 
least." 

we part with this new acquaintance at a late hour, and i accept 
williams's invitation to pass the time i should spend at baltimore, 
under his sister's roof. there were several motive for prolong this 
stay. what i had heard of miss fanny maurice excited strong wish to be 
personally acquaint with her. this young lady was affectionate 
attach to mrs. watson, by whose means my wish were easily 
accomplished. 

i never was in habit of reserve, even with those whom i had no reason 
to esteem. with those who claim my admiration and affection, it was 
impossible to be incommunicative. before the end of my second interview, 
both these women were mistress of every momentous incident of my life, 
and of the whole chain of my feelings and opinions, in relation to every 
subject, and particularly in relation to themselves. every topic 
disconnected with these is comparatively lifeless and inert. 

i found it easy to win their attention, and to render them communicative 
in their turn. as full disclosure as i had made without condition or 
request, my inquiry and example easily obtain from mrs. watson and 
miss maurice. the former related every event of her youth, and the 
circumstances leading to her marriage. she depict the character of her 
husband, and the whole train of suspense and inquietude occasion by 
his disappearance. the latter did not hide from me her opinion upon any 
important subject, and made me thorough acquaint with her actual 
situation. 

this intercourse was strange fascinating. my heart was buoy up by a 
kind of intoxication. i now found myself exalted to my genial element, 
and began to taste the delight of existence. in the intercourse of 
ingenuous and sympathetic minds, i found a pleasure which i had not 
previous conceived. 

the time flew swift away, and a fortnight pass almost before i was 
aware that a day had gone by. i did not forget the friends whom i had 
left behind, but maintain a punctual correspondence with stevens, to 
whom i impart all occurrences. 

the recovery of my friend's kinsman allow him in a few days to return 
home. his first object was the consolation and relief of carlton, whom, 
with much difficulty, he persuade to take advantage of the law in 
favour of insolvent debtors. carlton's only debt was owe to his uncle, 
and, by rendering up every species of property, except his clothes and 
the implement of his trade, he obtain a full discharge. in 
conjunction with his sister, he once more assume the pen, and, being 
no long burden with debt he was unable to discharge, he resumed, 
together with his pen, his cheerfulness. their mutual industry was 
sufficient for their decent and moderate subsistence. 

the chief reason for my hasty return was my anxiety respecting clemenza 
lodi. this reason was remove by the activity and benevolence of my 
friend. he paid this unfortunate stranger a visit at mrs. villars's. 
access was easily obtained, and he found her sunk into the deepest 
melancholy. the recent loss of her child, the death of welbeck, of which 
she was soon apprized, her total dependence upon those with whom she was 
placed, who, however, had always treat her without barbarous or 
indecorum, were the calamity that weigh down her spirits. 

my friend easily engaged her confidence and gratitude, and prevail 
upon her to take refuge under his own roof. mrs. wentworth's scruples, 
as well as those of mrs. fielding, were remove by his argument and 
entreaties, and they consent to take upon themselves, and divide 
between them, the care of her subsistence and happiness. they 
condescend to express much curiosity respecting me, and some interest 
in my welfare, and promise to receive me, on my return, on the footing 
of a friend. 

with some reluctance, i at length bade my new friends farewell, and 
return to philadelphia. nothing remained, before i should enter on my 
project scheme of study and employment, under the guidance of stevens, 
but to examine the situation of eliza hadwin with my own eyes, and, if 
possible, to extricate my father from his unfortunate situation. 

my father's state had given me the deepest concern. i figured to myself 
his condition, besotted by brutal appetites, reduce to beggary, shut up 
in a noisome prison, and condemn to that society which must foster all 
his deprave propensities. i revolve various scheme for his relief. a 
few hundred would take him from prison; but how should he be afterwards 
disposed of? how should he be cure of his indolent habits? how should 
he be screen from the contagion of vicious society? by what means, 
consistent with my own wants and the claim of others, should i 
secure to him an acceptable subsistence? 

exhortation and example were vain. nothing but restraint would keep him 
at a distance from the haunt of brawl and debauchery. the want of 
money would be no obstacle to prodigal and waste. credit would be 
resort to as long as it would answer his demand. when that failed, he 
would once more be thrown into a prison; the same means to extricate him 
would have to be repeated, and money be thus put into the pocket of the 
most worthless of mankind, the agent of drunken and blasphemy, 
without any permanent advantage to my father, the principal object of my 
charity. 

though unable to fix on any plausible mode of proceeding, i determined, 
at least, to discover his present condition. perhaps something might 
suggest itself, upon the spot, suit to my purpose. without delay i 
proceed to the village of newtown, and, alight at the door of the 
prison, inquire for my father. 

"sawny mervyn you want, i suppose," said the keeper. "poor fellow! he 
came into limbo in a crazy condition, and has been a burden on my hand 
ever since. after lingering along for some time, he was at last kind 
enough to give us the slip. it is just a week since he drank his last 
pint--and _died_." 

i was greatly shock at this intelligence. it was some time before my 
reason came to my aid, and show me that this was an event, on the 
whole, and on a disinterested and dispassionate view, not unfortunate. 
the keeper knew not my relation to the deceased, and readily recount 
the behaviour of the prisoner and the circumstances of his last hours. 

i shall not repeat the narrative. it is useless to keep alive the sad 
remembrance. he was now beyond the reach of my charity or pity; and, 
since reflection could answer no beneficial end to him, it was my duty 
to divert my thought into different channels, and live henceforth for 
my own happiness and that of those who were within the sphere of my 
influence. 

i was now alone in the world, so far as the total want of kindred 
create solitude. not one of my blood, nor even of my name, was to be 
found in this quarter of the world. of my mother's kindred i knew 
nothing. so far as friendship or service might be claim from them, to 
me they had no existence. i was destitute of all those benefit which 
flow from kindred, in relation to protection, advice, or property. my 
inheritance was nothing. not a single relic or trinket in my possession 
constitute a memorial of my family. the scene of my childish and 
juvenile days were dreary and desolate. the field which i was wont to 
traverse, the room in which i was born, retain no trace of the past. 
they were the property and residence of strangers, who knew nothing of 
the former tenants, and who, as i was now told, had hasten to 
new-model and transform every thing within and without the habitation. 

these image fill me with melancholy, which, however, disappear in 
proportion as i approach the abode of my beloved girl. absence had 
endear the image of my _bess_--i love to call her so--to my soul. i 
could not think of her without a melting soft at my heart, and tear 
in which pain and pleasure were unaccountable mingled. as i approach 
curling's house, i strained my sight, in hope of distinguish her 
form through the evening dusk. 

i had told her of my purpose, by letter. she expect my approach at 
this hour, and was stationed, with a heart throb with impatience, at 
the roadside, near the gate. as soon as i alighted, she rush into my 
arms. 

i found my sweet friend less blithesome and contented than i wished. her 
situation, in spite of the parental and sisterly regards which she 
received from the curlings, was mournful and dreary to her imagination. 
rural business was irksome, and insufficient to fill up her time. her 
life was tiresome, and uniform, and heavy. 

i venture to blame her discontent, and pointed out the advantage of 
her situation. "whence," said i, "can these dissatisfaction and 
repine arise?" 

"i cannot tell," said she; "i don't know how it is with me. i am always 
sorrowful and thoughtful. perhaps i think too much of my poor father 
and of susan; and yet that can't be it, neither, for i think of them but 
seldom; not half as much as i ought, perhaps. i think of nobody almost 
but you. instead of mind my business, or chat and laugh with 
peggy curling, i love to get by myself,--to read, over and over, your 
letters, or to think how you are employ just then, and how happy i 
should be if i were in fanny maurice's place. 

"but it is all over now; this visit rewards me for every thing. i wonder 
how i could ever be sullen or mopeful. i will behave better, indeed i 
will, and be always, as now, a most happy girl." 

the greater part of three days was spent in the society of my friend, in 
listen to her relation of all that had happen during my absence, 
and in communicating, in my turn, every incident which had befallen 
myself. after this i once more return to the city. 




chapter xliv. 


i now set about carry my plan of life into effect. i began with 
ardent zeal and unweary diligence the career of medical study. i 
bespoke the counsel and instruction of my friend; attend him on his 
professional visits, and acted, in all practicable cases, as his 
substitute. i found this application of time more pleasurable than i had 
imagined. my mind gladly expand itself, as it were, for the reception 
of new ideas. my curiosity grew more eager in proportion as it was 
supply with food, and every day add strength to the assurance that i 
was no insignificant and worthless being; that i was destined to be 
_something_ in this scene of existence, and might some time lay claim to 
the gratitude and homage of my fellow men. 

i was far from being, however, monopolize by these pursuits. i was 
form on purpose for the gratification of social intercourse. to love 
and to be loved; to exchange heart and mingle sentiment with all the 
virtuous and amiable whom my good fortune had placed within the circuit 
of my knowledge, i always esteem my highest enjoyment and my chief 
duty. 

carlton and his sister, mrs. wentworth, and achsa fielding, were my most 
valuable associate beyond my own family. with all these my 
correspondence was frequent and unreserved, but chiefly with the latter. 
this lady had dignity and independence, a generous and enlightened 
spirit, beyond what her education had taught me to expect. she was 
circumspect and cautious in her deportment, and was not prompt to make 
advances, or accept them. she withheld her esteem and confidence until 
she had full proof of their being deserved. 

i am not sure that her treatment of me was fully conformable to her 
rules. my manners, indeed, as she once told me, she had never met with 
in another. ordinary rule were so total overlook in my behaviour, 
that it seem impossible for any one who knew me to adhere to them. no 
option was left but to admit my claim to friendship and confidence 
instantly, or to reject them altogether. 

i was not conscious of this singularity. the internal and undiscovered 
character of another weigh nothing with me in the question whether 
they should be treat with frank or reserve. i felt no scruple on 
any occasion to disclose every feeling and every event. any one who 
could listen found me willing to talk. every talker found me willing to 
listen. every one had my sympathy and kindness, _without_ claim it; 
but i _claimed_ the kindness and sympathy of every one. 

achsa fielding's countenance bespoke, i thought, a mind worthy to be 
known and to be loved. the first moment i engaged her attention, i told 
her so. i related the little story of my family, spread out before her 
all my reasoning and determinations, my notions of right and wrong, my 
fear and wishes. all this was done with sincerity and fervour, with 
gestures, actions, and looks, in which i felt as if my whole soul was 
visible. her superior age, sedateness, and prudence, gave my deportment 
a filial freedom and affection, and i was fond of calling her "_mamma_." 

i particularly dwelt upon the history of my dear country-girl; paint 
her form and countenance; recount our dialogues, and related all my 
scheme for making her wise, and good, and happy. on these occasion my 
friend would listen to me with the mutest attention. i show her the 
letters i received, and offer her for her peruse those which i wrote 
in answer, before they were seal and sent. 

on these occasion she would look by turn on my face and away from me. 
a vary hue would play upon her cheek, and her eyes were fuller than 
was common, of meaning. 

"such-and-such," i once said, "are my notions; now, what do _you_ 
think?" 

"_think_!" emphatically, and turning somewhat aside, she answered; 
"that you are the most--_strange_ of human creatures." 

"but tell me," i resumed, following and searching her avert eyes; "am 
i right? would you do thus? can you help me to improve my girl? i wish 
you knew the bewitch little creature. how would that heart overflow 
with affection and with gratitude towards you! she should be your 
daughter. no--you are too nearly of an age for that. a sister; her 
_elder_ sister, you should be. _that_, when there is no other relation, 
include them all. fond sister you would be, and i the fond brother of 
you both." 

my eyes glisten as i spoke. in truth, i am in that respect a mere 
woman. my friend was more powerful moved. after a momentary struggle 
she burst into tears. 

"good heaven!" said i, "what ail you? are you not well?" 

her looks betray an unaccountable confusion, from which she quick 
recovered:--"it was folly to be thus affected. something ail me, i 
believe, but it is past. but, come, you want some lines of finish the 
description of the _boa_ in la cepide." 

"true. and i have twenty minutes to spare. poor frank is very ill 
indeed, but he cannot be seen till nine. we'll read till then." 

thus on the wings of pleasure and improvement pass my time; not 
without some hues, occasionally, of a dark tint. my heart was now and 
then detect in sighing. this occur when my thought glance at the 
poor eliza, and measured, as it were, the interval between us. "we are 
too--_too_ far apart," thought i. 

the best solace on these occasion was the company of mrs. fielding; her 
music, her discourse, or some book which she set me to rehearse to 
her. one evening, when prepare to pay her a visit, i received the 
following letter from my bess:-- 

_to a. mervyn._ 

curling's, may 6, 1794. 

where do this letter you promise me stay all this while? indeed, 
arthur, you torment me more than i deserve, and more than i could ever 
find it in my heart to do you. you treat me cruelly. i must say so, 
though i offend you. i must write, though you do not deserve that i 
should, and though i fear i am in a humour not very fit for writing. i 
had better go to my chamber and weep; weep at your--_unkindness_, i was 
go to say; but, perhaps, it is only forgetfulness; and yet what can 
be more unkind than forgetfulness? i am sure i have never forgotten you. 
sleep itself, which wrap all other image in forgetfulness, only bring 
you nearer, and make me see you more distinctly. 

but where can this letter stay?--oh! that--hush! foolish girl! if a word 
of that kind escape thy lips, arthur will be angry with thee; and then, 
indeed, thou mightest weep in earnest. _then_ thou wouldst have some 
cause for thy tears. more than once already has he almost broken thy 
heart with his reproaches. sore and weak as it now is, any new 
reproach would assured break it quite. 

i _will_ be content. i will be as good a housewife and dairywoman, stir 
about as briskly, and sing as merrily, as peggy curling. why not? i am 
as young, as innocent, and enjoy as good health. alas! she has reason to 
be merry. she has father, mother, brothers; but i have none. and he that 
was all these, and more than all these, to me, has--_forgotten_ me. 

but, perhaps, it is some accident that hinders. perhaps olive left the 
market early than he use to do; or you mistook the house; or perhaps 
some poor creature was sick, was taken sudden ill, and you were busy 
in chafe his clay-cold limbs; it fell to you to wipe the clammy drops 
from his brow. such things often happen (don't they, arthur?) to people 
of your trade, and some such thing has happen now; and that was the 
reason you did not write. 

and if so, shall i repine at your silence? oh no! at such a time the 
poor bess might easily be, and ought to be, forgotten. she would not 
deserve your love if she could repine at a silence brought about this 
way. 

and oh! may it be so! may there be nothing worse than this! if the sick 
man--see, arthur, how my hand trembles. can you read this scrawl? what 
is always bad, my fear make worse than ever. 

i must not think that. and yet, if it be so, if my friend himself be 
sick, what will become of me? of me, that ought to cherish you and 
comfort you; that ought to be your nurse. endure for you your sickness, 
when she cannot remove it. 

oh! that----i _will_ speak out--oh that this strange scruple had never 
possessed you! why should i _not_ be with you? who can love you and 
serve you as well as i? in sickness and health, i will console and 
assist you. why will you deprive yourself of such a comforter and such 
an aid as i would be to you? 

dear arthur, think better of it. let me leave this dreary spot, where, 
indeed, as long as i am thus alone, i can enjoy no comfort. let me come 
to you. i will put up with any thing for the sake of seeing you, though 
it be but once a day. any garret or cellar in the dirtiest lane or 
darkest alley will be good enough for me. i will think it a palace, so 
that i can _but_ see you now and then. 

do not refuse--do not argue with me, so fond you always are of arguing! 
my heart is set upon your compliance. and yet, dearly as i prize your 
company, i would not ask it, if i thought there was any thing improper. 
you say there is, and you talk about it in a way that i do not 
understand. for my sake, you tell me, you refuse; but let me entreat you 
to comply for my sake. 

your pen cannot teach me like your tongue. you write me long letters, 
and tell me a great deal in them; but my soul droop when i call to mind 
your voice and your looks, and think how long a time must pass before i 
see you and hear you again. i have no spirit to think upon the words and 
paper before me. my eye and my thought wander far away. 

i bethink me how many question i might ask you; how many doubt you 
might clear up if you were but within hearing. if you were but close to 
me; but i cannot ask them here. i am too poor a creature at the pen, 
and, somehow or another, it always happens, i can only write about 
myself or about you. by the time i have said all this, i have tired my 
fingers, and when i set about telling you how this poem and that story 
have affected me, i am at a loss for words; i am bewilder and bemazed, 
as it were. 

it is not so when we talk to one another. with your arm about me, and 
your sweet face close to mine, i can prattle forever. then my heart 
overflow at my lips. after hour thus spent, it seem as if there were 
a thousand things still to be said. then i can tell you what the book 
has told me. i can repeat score of verse by heart, though i heard them 
only once read; but it is because _you_ have read them to me. 

then there is nobody here to answer my questions. they never look into 
books. they hate books. they think it waste of time to read. even peggy, 
who you say has naturally a strong mind, wonders what i can find to 
amuse myself in a book. in her playful mood, she is always tease me to 
lay it aside. 

i do not mind her, for i like to read; but, if i did not like it before, 
i could not help do so ever since you told me that nobody could gain 
your love who was not fond of books. and yet, though i like it on that 
account more than i did, i don't read somehow so earnest and 
understand so well as i use to do when my mind was all at ease, always 
frolicsome, and ever upon _tiptoe_, as i may say. 

how strange (have you not observe it?) i am alter of late!--i, that 
was ever light of heart, the very soul of gayety, brimfull of glee, am 
now demure as our old _tabby_--and not half as wise. tabby had wit 
enough to keep her paw out of the coals, whereas poor i have--but no 
matter what. it will never come to pass, i see that. so many reason for 
every thing! such look forward! arthur, are not men sometimes too 
_wise_ to be happy? 

i am now _so_ grave. not one smile can peggy sometimes get from me, 
though she try for it the whole day. but i know how it comes. strange, 
indeed, if, lose father and sister, and thrown upon the wide world, 
penniless and _friendless_ too, now that _you_ forget me, i should 
continue to smile. no. i never shall smile again. at least, while i stay 
here, i never shall, i believe. 

if a certain somebody suffer me to live with him,--_near_ him, i 
mean,--perhaps the sight of him as he enter the door, perhaps the sound 
of his voice, asking, "where is my bess?" might produce a smile. such a 
one as the very thought produce now,--yet not, i hope, so transient, 
and so quick follow by a tear. women are born, they say, to trouble, 
and tear are given them for their relief. 'tis all very true. 

let it be as i wish, will you? if olive bring not back good tidings, if 
he bring not a letter from thee, or thy letter still refuse my 
request,--i don't know what may happen. consent, if you love your poor 
girl. 

e.h. 




chapter xlv. 


the reading of this letter, though it made me mournful, did not hinder 
me from pay the visit i intended. my friend notice my discomposure. 

"what, arthur! thou art quite the 'penseroso' to-night. come, let me 
cheer thee with a song. thou shalt have thy favourite ditty." she 
step to the instrument, and, with more than airy lightness, touched 
and sung:-- 

"now knit hand and beat the ground 
in a light, fantastic round, 
till the telltale sun descry 
our conceal'd solemnity." 

her music, though blithsome and aerial, was not sufficient for the end. 
my cheerful would not return even at her bidding. she again notice 
my sedateness, and inquire into the cause. 

"this girl of mine," said i, "has infect me with her own sadness. 
there is a letter i have just received." she took it and began to read. 

meanwhile, i placed myself before her, and fixed my eyes steadfast 
upon her features. there is no book in which i read with more pleasure 
than the face of woman. _that_ is generally more full of meaning, and of 
better meaning too, than the hard and inflexible lineament of man; and 
_this_ woman's face has no parallel. 

she read it with visible emotion. have gone through it, she did not 
lift her eye from the paper, but continue silent, as if bury in 
thought. after some time, (for i would not interrupt the pause,) she 
address me thus:-- 

"this girl seem to be very anxious to be with you." 

"as much as i am that she should be so." my friend's countenance 
betray some perplexity. as soon as i perceive it, i said, "why are 
you thus grave?" some little confusion appeared, as if she would not 
have her gravity discovered. "there again," said i, "new token in your 
face, my good mamma, of something which you will not mention. yet, sooth 
to say, this is not your first perplexity. i have notice it before, and 
wondered. it happen only when my _bess_ is introduced. something in 
relation to her it must be, but what i cannot imagine. why do _her_ 
name, particularly, make you thoughtful, disturbed, dejected? there 
now--but i must know the reason. you don't agree with me in my notions 
of this girl, i fear, and you will not disclose your thoughts." 

by this time, she had gain her usual composure, and, without notice 
my comment on her looks, said, "since you are both of one mind, why 
do she not leave the country?" 

"that cannot be, i believe. mrs. steven say it would be disreputable. 
i am no proficient in etiquette, and must, therefore, in affair of this 
kind, be guide by those who are. but would to heaven i were truly her 
father or brother! then all difficulty would be done away." 

"can you seriously wish that?" 

"why, no. i believe it would be more rational to wish that the world 
would suffer me to act the fatherly or brother part, without the 
relationship." 

"and is that the only part you wish to act towards this girl?" 

"certainly, the only part." 

"you surprise me. have you not confessed your love for her?" 

"i _do_ love her. there is nothing upon earth more dear to me than my 
_bess_." 

"but love is of different kinds. she was love by her father----" 

"less than by me. he was a good man, but not of lively feelings. 
besides, he had another daughter, and they share his love between them; 
but she has no sister to share _my_ love. calamity, too, has endear 
her to me; i am all her consolation, dependence, and hope, and nothing, 
surely, can induce me to abandon her." 

"her reliance upon you for happiness," reply my friend, with a sigh, 
"is plain enough." 

"it is; but why that sigh? and yet i understand it. it remonstrate with 
me on my incapacity for her support. i know it well, but it is wrong to 
be cast down. i have youth, health, and spirits, and ought not to 
despair of living for my own benefit and hers; but you sigh again, and 
it is impossible to keep my courage when _you_ sigh. do tell me what you 
mean by it." 

"you partly guess the cause. she trust to you for happiness, but i 
somewhat suspect she trust in vain." 

"in vain! i beseech you, tell me why you think so." 

"you say you love her: why then not make her your wife?" 

"my wife! surely her extreme youth, and my destitute condition, will 
account for that." 

"she is fifteen; the age of delicate fervour, of inartificial love, and 
suitable enough for marriage. as to your condition, you may live more 
easily together than apart. she has no false taste or perverse desire 
to gratify. she has been train in simple mode and habits. besides, 
that objection can be remove another way. but are these all your 
objections?" 

"her youth i object to, merely in connection with her mind. she is too 
little improve to be my wife. she wants that solidity of mind, that 
maturity of intelligence which ten years more may possibly give her, but 
which she cannot have at this age." 

"you are a very prudential youth: then you are willing to wait ten years 
for a wife?" 

"does that follow? because my bess will not be qualified for wedlock in 
less time, do it follow that i must wait for her?" 

"i spoke on the supposition that you love her." 

"and that is true; but love is satisfy with study her happiness as 
her father or brother. some years hence, perhaps in half a year, (for 
this passion, call wedded or _marriage-wishing_ love, is of sudden 
growth,) my mind may change and nothing may content me but to have bess 
for my wife. yet i do not expect it." 

"then you are determined against marriage with this girl?" 

"of course; until that love come which i feel not now; but which, no 
doubt, will come, when bess has had the benefit of five or eight years 
more, unless previous excited by another." 

"all this is strange, arthur. i have heretofore supposed that you 
actually love (i mean with the _marriage-seeking_ passion) your 
_bess_." 

"i believe i once did; but it happen at a time when marriage was 
improper; in the life of her father and sister, and when i had never 
known in what female excellence consisted. since that time my happy 
lot has cast me among women so far above eliza hadwin,--so far above, 
and so widely different from any thing which time is likely to make 
her,--that, i own, nothing appear more unlikely than that i shall ever 
love her." 

"are you not a little capricious in that respect, my good friend? you 
have praise your _bess_ as rich in natural endowments; as have an 
artless purity and rectitude of mind, which somewhat supersede the use 
of formal education; as being full of sweet and tenderness, and in 
her person a very angel of loveliness." 

"all that is true. i never saw features and shape so delicate 
beautiful; i never knew so young a mind so quick-sighted and so firm; 
but, nevertheless, she is not the creature whom i would call my _wife_. 
my bosom-slave; counsellor; friend; the mother; the pattern; the 
tutoress of my children, must be a different creature." 

"but what are the attribute of this _desirable_ which bess wants?" 

"every thing she wants. age, capacity, acquirements, person, features, 
hair, complexion, all, all are different from this girl's." 

"and pray of what kind may they be?" 

"i cannot portray them in words--but yes, i can:--the creature whom i 
shall worship:--it sound oddly, but, i verily believe, the sentiment 
which i shall feel for my wife will be more akin to worship than any 
thing else. i shall never love but such a creature as i now image to 
myself, and _such_ a creature will deserve, or almost deserve, worship. 
but this creature, i was go to say, must be the exact counterpart, my 
good mamma--of _yourself_." 

this was said very earnestly, and with eyes and manner that fully 
express my earnestness; perhaps my expression were unwitting strong 
and emphatic, for she start and blushed, but the cause of her 
discomposure, whatever it was, was quick removed, and she said,-- 

"poor bess! this will be sad news to thee!" 

"heaven forbid!" said i; "of what moment can my opinion be to her?" 

"strange questioner that thou art. thou knowest that her gentle heart is 
touched with love. see how it show itself in the tender and inimitable 
strain of this epistle. do not this sweet ingenuous bewitch you?" 

"it do so, and i love, beyond expression, the sweet girl; but my love 
is, in some inconceivable way, different from the passion which that 
_other_ creature will produce. she is no stranger to my thoughts. i will 
impart every thought over and over to her. i question not but i shall 
make her happy without forfeit my own." 

"would marriage with her be a forfeiture of your happiness?" 

"not absolutely or forever, i believe. i love her company. her absence 
for a long time is irksome. i cannot express the delight with which i 
see and hear her. to mark her features, beam with vivacity; playful 
in her pleasures; to hold her in my arms, and listen to her prattle, 
always musically voluble, always sweet tender, or artless 
intelligent--and this you will say is the dearest privilege of marriage; 
and so it is; and dearly should i prize it; and yet, i fear my heart 
would droop as often as that _other_ image should occur to my fancy. for 
then, you know, it would occur as something never to be possessed by me. 

"now, this image might, indeed, seldom occur. the intervals, at least, 
would be serene. it would be my interest to prolong these interval as 
much as possible, and my endeavour to this end would, no doubt, have 
some effect. besides, the bitter of this reflection would be 
lessen by contemplating, at the same time, the happiness of my beloved 
girl. 

"i should likewise have to remember, that to continue unmarried would 
not necessarily secure me the possession of the _other_ good----" 

"but these reflections, my friend," (broke she in upon me,) "are of as 
much force to induce you to marry, as to reconcile you to a marriage 
already contracted." 

"perhaps they are. assuredly, i have not a hope that the _fancied_ 
excellence will ever be mine. such happiness is not the lot of humanity, 
and is, least of all, within my reach." 

"your diffidence," reply my friend, in a timorous accent, "has not 
many examples; but your character, without doubt, is all your own, 
possess all and disclaim all,--is, in few words, your picture." 

"i scarcely understand you. do you think i ever shall be happy to that 
degree which i have imagined? think you i shall ever meet with an exact 
copy of _yourself_?" 

"unfortunate you will be, if you do not meet with many better. your 
bess, in personals, is, beyond measure, _my_ superior, and in mind, 
allow for difference in years, quite as much so." 

"but that," return i, with quick and fervour, "is not the object. 
the very counterpart of _you_ i want; neither worse nor better, nor 
different in any thing. just such form, such features, such hues. just 
that melting voice, and, above all, the same habit of thinking and 
conversing. in thought, word, and deed; gesture, look, and form, that 
rare and precious creature whom i shall love must be your resemblance. 
your----" 

"have done with these comparisons," interrupt she, in some hurry, "and 
let us return to the country-girl, thy bess. 

"you once, my friend, wish me to treat this girl of yours as my 
sister. do you know what the duty of a sister are?" 

"they imply no more kindness or affection than you already feel towards 
my bess. are you not her sister?" 

"i ought to have been so. i ought to have been proud of the relation you 
ascribe to me, but i have not perform any of its duties. i blush to 
think upon the cold and perverse of my heart. with such means as 
i possess, of give happiness to others, i have been thoughtless and 
inactive to a strange degree; perhaps, however, it is not yet too late. 
are you still willing to invest me with all the rights of an elder 
sister over this girl? and will she consent, think you?" 

"certainly she will; she has." 

"then the first act of sistership will be to take her from the country; 
from person on whose kindness she has no natural claim, whose manners 
and character are unlike her own, and with whom no improvement can be 
expected, and bring her back to her sister's house and bosom, to provide 
for her subsistence and education, and watch over her happiness. 

"i will not be a nominal sister. i will not be a sister by halves. _all_ 
the rights of that relation i will have, or none. as for you, you have 
claim upon her on which i must be permit to judge, as become the 
elder sister, who, by the loss of all other relations, must occupy the 
place, possess the rights, and fulfil the duties, of father, mother, and 
brother. 

"she has now arrive at an age when long to remain in a cold and 
churlish soil will stunt her growth and wither her blossoms. we must 
hasten to transplant her to a genial element and a garden well enclosed. 
have so long neglect this charming plant, it become me henceforth 
to take her wholly to myself. 

"and now, for it is no long in her or your power to take back the 
gift, since she is fully mine, i will charge you with the office of 
conduct her hither. i grant it you as a favour. will you go?" 

"go! i will fly!" i exclaimed, in an ecstasy of joy, "on pinion swift 
than the wind. not the lingering of an instant will i bear. look! one, 
two, three--thirty minutes after nine. i will reach curling's gate by 
the morn's dawn. i will put my girl into a chaise, and by noon she 
shall throw herself into the arms of her sister. but first, shall i not, 
in some way, manifest my gratitude?" 

my senses were bewildered, and i knew not what i did. i intended to 
kneel, as to my mother or my deity; but, instead of that, i clasp her 
in my arms, and kiss her lip fervently. i stay not to discover the 
effects of this insanity, but left the room and the house, and, calling 
for a moment at stevens's, left word with the servant, my friend being 
gone abroad, that i should not return till the morrow. 

never was a lighter heart, a gayety more overflow and more buoyant, 
than mine. all cold from a boisterous night, at a chilly season, all 
weary from a rugged and miry road, were charm away. i might have 
ridden; but i could not brook delay, even the delay of inquiring for and 
equip a horse. i might thus have save myself fatigue, and have lost 
no time; but my mind was in too great a tumult for deliberation and 
forecast. i saw nothing but the image of my girl, whom my tidings would 
render happy. 

the way was long than my fond imagination had foreseen. i did not 
reach curling's till an hour after sunrise. the distance was full 
thirty-five miles. as i hasten up the green lane leading to the house, 
i spy my bess passing through a cover way, between the dwelling and 
kitchen. i caught her eye. she stop and held up her hands, and then 
ran into my arms. 

"what means my girl? why this catching of the breath? why this sobbing? 
look at me, my love. it is arthur,--he who has treat you with 
forgetfulness, neglect, and cruelty." 

"oh, do not," she replied, hiding her face with her hand. "one single 
reproach, add to my own, will kill me. that foolish, wicked letter--i 
could tear my finger for writing it." 

"but," said i, "i will kiss them;" and put them to my lips. "they have 
told me the wish of my girl. they have enable me to gratify her 
wishes. i have come to carry thee this very moment to town." 

"lord bless me, arthur," said she, lost in a sweet confusion, and her 
cheeks, always glowing, glowing still more deeply, "indeed, i did not 
mean----i meant only----i will stay here----i would rather stay----" 

"it grieve me to hear that," said i, with earnestness; "i thought i was 
study our mutual happiness." 

"it grieve you? don't say so. i would not grieve you for the world; 
but, indeed, indeed, it is too soon. such a girl as i am not yet fit 
to--live in your city." again she hid her glowing face in my bosom. 

"sweet consciousness! heavenly innocence!" thought i; "may achsa's 
conjecture prove false!--you have mistaken my design, for i do not 
intend to carry you to town with such a view as you have hinted; but 
merely to place you with a beloved friend, with achsa fielding, of whom 
already you know so much, where we shall enjoy each other's company 
without restraint or intermission." 

i then proceed to disclose to her the plan suggest by my friend, and 
to explain all the consequence that would flow from it. i need not say 
that she assent to the scheme. she was all rapture and gratitude. 
preparation for departure were easily and speedy made. i hire a 
chaise of a neighbouring farmer, and, according to my promise, by noon 
the same day, deliver the timid and bashful girl into the arms of her 
new sister. 

she was received with the utmost tenderness, not only by mrs. fielding, 
but by all my friends. her affectionate heart was encourage to pour 
forth all its feeling as into the bosom of a mother. she was reinspire 
with confidence. her want of experience was supply by the gentlest 
admonition and instructions. in every plan for her improvement 
suggest by her new _mamma_, (for she never call her by any other 
name,) she engaged with docile and eagerness; and her behaviour and 
her progress exceed the most sanguine hope that i had form as to 
the soft of her temper and the acute of her genius. 

those graces which a polish education, and intercourse with the better 
class of society, are adapt to give, my girl possessed, in some 
degree, by a native and intuitive refinement and sagacity of mind. all 
that was to be obtain from actual observation and instruction was 
obtain without difficulty; and in a short time nothing but the 
affectionate simplicity and unperverted feelings of the country-girl 
bespoke the original condition. 

"what art so busy about, arthur? always at thy pen of late. come, i must 
know the fruit of all this toil and all this meditation. i am determined 
to scrape acquaintance with hall and linnæus. i will begin this very 
day. all one's friends, you know, should be ours. love has made many a 
patient, and let me see if it cannot, in my case, make a physician. but, 
first, what is all this writing about?" 

"mrs. wentworth has put me upon a strange task,--not disagreeable, 
however, but such as i should, perhaps, have declined, had not the 
absence of my bess, and her mamma, made the time hang somewhat heavy. i 
have, often than once, and far more circumstantial than now, told 
her my adventures, but she is not satisfied. she wants a written 
narrative, for some purpose which she tell me she will disclose to me 
hereafter. 

"luckily, my friend steven has save me more than half the trouble. he 
has done me the favour to compile much of my history with his own hand. 
i cannot imagine what could prompt him to so wearisome an undertaking; 
but he say that adventure and a destiny so singular as mine ought not 
to be abandoned to forgetful like any vulgar and _every-day_ 
existence. besides, when he wrote it, he suspect that it might be 
necessary to the safety of my reputation and my life, from the 
consequence of my connection with welbeck. time has annihilate that 
danger. all enmity and all suspicion are bury with that ill-fated 
wretch. wortley has been won by my behaviour, and confide in my 
integrity now as much as he formerly suspect it. i am glad, however, 
that the task was performed. it has save me a world of writing. i had 
only to take up the broken thread, and bring it down to the period of my 
present happiness; and this was done, just as you trip along the 
entry this morning. 

"to bed, my friend; it is late, and this delicate frame is not half so 
able to encounter fatigue as a youth spent in the hay-field and the 
dairy might have been expect to be." 

"i will, but let me take these sheet along with me. i will read them, 
that i am determined, before i sleep, and watch if you have told the 
whole truth." 

"do so, if you please; but remember one thing. mrs. wentworth request 
me to write not as if it were design for her perusal, but for those 
who have no previous knowledge of her or of me. 'twas an odd request. i 
cannot imagine what she means by it; but she never acts without good 
reason, and i have done so. and now, withdraw, my dear, and farewell." 




chapter xlvi. 


move on, my quill! wait not for my guidance. reanimate with thy 
master's spirit, all airy light! a heyday rapture! a mount impulse 
sway him: lift him from the earth. 

i must, cost what it will, rein in this upward-pulling, 
forward-going--what shall i call it? but there are times, and now is one 
of them, when words are poor. 

it will not do--down this hill, up that steep; through this thicket, 
over that hedge--i have _laboured_ to fatigue myself: to reconcile me to 
repose; to loll on a sofa; to pore over a book, to any thing that 
might win for my heart a respite from these throbs; to deceive me into a 
few _tolerable_ moments of forgetfulness. 

let me see; they tell me this is monday night. only three days yet to 
come! if thus restless to-day; if my heart thus bounds till its mansion 
scarcely can hold it, what must be my state to-morrow! what next day! 
what as the hour hasten on; as the sun descends; as my hand touch 
hers in sign of wedded unity, of love without interval; of concord 
without end! 

i must quell these tumults. they will disable me else. they will wear 
out all my strength. they will drain away life itself. but who could 
have thought! so soon! not three month since i first set eyes upon her. 
not three week since our plight love, and only three days to 
terminate suspense and give me _all_. 

i must compel myself to quiet; to sleep. i must find some refuge from 
anticipation so excruciating. all extreme are agonies. a joy like this 
is too big for this narrow tenement. i must thrust it forth; i must bar 
and bolt it out for a time, or these frail wall will burst asunder. 
the pen is a pacifier. it check the mind's career; it circumscribe her 
wanderings. it trace out and compel us to adhere to one path. it ever 
was my friend. often it has blunt my vexations; hush my stormy 
passions; turn my peevish to soothing; my fierce revenge to 
heart-dissolving pity. 

perhaps it will befriend me now. it may temper my impetuous wishes; lull 
my intoxication; and render my happiness supportable; and, indeed, it 
has produce partly this effect already. my blood, within the few 
minutes thus employed, flow with less destructive rapidity. my thought 
range themselves in less disorder. and, now that the conquest is 
effected, what shall i say? i must continue at the pen, or shall 
immediately relapse. 

what shall i say? let me look back upon the steps that led me hither. 
let me recount the preliminaries. i cannot do better. 

and first as to achsa fielding,--to describe this woman. 

to recount, in brief, so much of her history as has come to my knowledge 
will best account for that zeal, almost to idolatry, with which she has, 
ever since i thorough knew her, been regard by me. 

never saw i one to whom the term _lovely_ more truly belonged. and yet 
in stature she is too low; in complexion dark and almost sallow; and her 
eyes, though black and of piercing lustre, have a cast which i cannot 
well explain. it lessen without destroy their lustre and their force 
to charm; but all personal defect are outweigh by her heart and her 
intellect. there is the secret of her power to entrance the soul of the 
listener and beholder. it is not only when she sing that her utterance 
is musical. it is not only when the occasion is urgent and the topic 
momentous that her eloquence is rich and flowing. they are always so. 

i had vow to love her and serve her, and been her frequent visitant, 
long before i was acquaint with her past life. i had casual picked 
up some intelligence, from others, or from her own remarks. i knew very 
soon that she was english by birth, and had been only a year and a half 
in america; that she had scarcely pass her twenty-fifth year, and was 
still embellish with all the graces of youth; that she had been a 
wife; but was uninformed whether the knot had been untie by death or 
divorce; that she possessed considerable, and even splendid, fortune; 
but the exact amount, and all besides these particulars, were unknown to 
me till some time after our acquaintance was begun. 

one evening she had been talk very earnest on the influence 
annexed, in great britain, to birth, and had given me some example of 
this influence. meanwhile my eyes were fixed steadfast on hers. the 
peculiarity in their expression never before affected me so strongly. a 
vague resemblance to something seen elsewhere, on the same day, 
occurred, and occasion me to exclaim, suddenly, in a pause of her 
discourse,-- 

"as i live, my good mamma, those eyes of yours have told me a secret. i 
almost think they spoke to me; and i am not less amaze at the 
strange than at the distinct of their story." 

"and, pr'ythee, what have they said?" 

"perhaps i was mistaken. i might have been deceive by a fancy voice, 
or have confounded one word with another near akin to it; but let me die 
if i did not think they said that you were--_a jew_." 

at this sound, her features were instantly veiled with the deepest 
sorrow and confusion. she put her hand to her eyes, the tear started, 
and she sobbed. my surprise at this effect of my words was equal to my 
contrition. i besought her to pardon me for have thus unknowing 
alarm and grieve her. 

after she had regain some composure, she said, "you have not offended, 
arthur. your surmise was just and natural, and could not always have 
escape you. connected with that word are many source of anguish, which 
time has not, and never will, dry up; and the less i think of past 
event the less will my peace be disturbed. i was desirous that you 
should know nothing of me but what you see; nothing but the present and 
the future, merely that no allusion might occur in our conversation 
which will call up sorrow and regrets that will avail nothing. 

"i now perceive the folly of endeavour to keep you in ignorance, and 
shall therefore, once for all, inform you of what has befallen me, that 
your inquiry and suggestion may be made and fully satisfy at once, 
and your curiosity have no motive for calling back my thought to what i 
ardent desire to bury in oblivion. 

"my father was indeed a _jew_, and one of the most opulent of his nation 
in london,--a portugal by birth, but came to london when a boy. he had 
few of the moral or external quality of jews; for i suppose there is 
some justice in the obloquy that follow them so closely. he was frugal 
without meanness, and cautious in his dealings, without extortion. i 
need not fear to say this, for it was the general voice. 

"me, an only child, and, of course, the darling of my parents, they 
train up in the most liberal manner. my education was purely english. 
i learned the same things and of the same master with my neighbours. 
except frequent their church and repeating their creed, and partake 
of the same food, i saw no difference between them and me. hence i grew 
more indifferent, perhaps, than was proper, to the distinction of 
religion. they were never enforce upon me. no pains were taken to fill 
me with scruple and antipathies. they never stood, as i may say, upon 
the threshold. they were often thought upon, but were vague and easily 
elude or forgotten. 

"hence it was that my heart too readily admitted impression that more 
zeal and more parental caution would have save me from. they could 
scarcely be avoided, as my society was wholly english, and my youth, my 
education, and my father's wealth made me an object of much attention. 
and the same cause that lull to sleep my own watchful had the 
same effect upon that of others. to regret or to praise this remiss 
is now too late. certain it is, that my destiny, and not a happy 
destiny, was fixed by it. 

"the fruit of this remiss was a passion for one who fully return 
it. almost as young as i, who was only sixteen; he knew as little as 
myself what obstacle the difference of our birth was likely to raise 
between us. his father, sir ralph fielding, a man nobly born, high in 
office, splendid allied, could not be expect to consent to the 
marriage of his eldest son, in such green youth, to the daughter of an 
alien, a portuguese, a jew; but these impediment were not seen by my 
ignorance, and were overlook by the youth's passion. 

"but, strange to tell, what common prudence would have so confident 
predict did not happen. sir ralph had a numerous family, likely to be 
still more so; had but slender patrimony; the income of his offices 
nearly made up his all. the young man was headstrong, impetuous, and 
would probably disregard the inclination of his family. yet the father 
would not consent but on one condition,--that of my admission to the 
english church. 

"no very strenuous opposition to these terms could be expect from me. 
at so thoughtless an age, with an education so unfavourable to religious 
impressions; swayed, likewise, by the strongest of human passions; made 
somewhat impatient, by the company i kept, of the disrepute and scorn to 
which the jewish nation are everywhere condemned, i could not be 
expect to be very averse to the scheme. 

"my fear as to what my father's decision would be were soon at an end. 
he love his child too well to thwart her wish in so essential a 
point. finding in me no scruples, no unwillingness, he thought it absurd 
to be scrupulous for me. my own heart have abjure my religion, it was 
absurd to make any difficulty about a formal renunciation. these were 
his avowed reason for concurrence, but time show that he had probably 
other reasons, founded, indeed, in his regard for my happiness, but such 
as, if they had been known, would probably have strengthen into 
invincible the reluctance of my lover's family. 

"no marriage was ever attend with happy presages. the numerous 
relations of my husband admitted me with the utmost cordiality among 
them. my father's tender was unabated by this change, and those 
humiliate to which i had before been expose were now no more; and 
every tie was strengthened, at the end of a year, by the feelings of a 
_mother_. i had need, indeed, to know a season of happiness, that i 
might be fitted to endure the sad reverse that succeeded. one after the 
other my disaster came, each one more heavy than the last, and in such 
swift succession that they hardly left me time to breathe. 

"i had scarcely left my chamber, i had scarcely recover my usual 
health, and was able to press with true fervour the new and precious 
gift to my bosom, when melancholy tidings came. i was in the country, at 
the seat of my father-in-law, when the messenger arrived. 

"a shocking tale it was! and told abruptly, with every unpitye 
aggravation. i hint to you once my father's death. the _kind_ of 
death--oh! my friend! it was horrible. he was then a placid, venerable 
old man; though many symptom of disquiet had long before been 
discover by my mother's watchful tenderness. yet none could suspect 
him capable of such a deed; for none, so careful had he conduct his 
affairs, suspect the havoc that mischance had made of his property. 

"i, that had so much reason to love my father,--i will leave you to 
imagine how i was affected by a catastrophe so dreadful, so 
unlooked-for. much less could i suspect the cause of his despair; yet he 
had foreseen his ruin before my marriage; had resolve to defer it, for 
his daughter's and his wife's sake, as long as possible, but had still 
determined not to survive the day that should reduce him to indigence. 
the desperate act was thus preconcerted--thus deliberate. 

"the true state of his affair was laid open by his death. the failure 
of great mercantile house at frankfort and liege was the cause of his 
disasters. 

"thus were my prospects shut in. that wealth which, no doubt, furnish 
the chief inducement with my husband's family to concur in his choice, 
was now sudden exchange for poverty. 

"bred up, as i had been, in pomp and luxury; conscious that my wealth 
was my chief security from the contempt of the proud and bigoted, and my 
chief title to the station to which i had been raised, and which i the 
more delight in because it enable me to confer so great obligation 
on my husband,--what reverse could be hard than this, and how much 
bitter was add by it to the grief occasion by the violent death 
of my father! 

"yet loss of fortune, though it mortify my pride, did not prove my 
worst calamity. perhaps it was scarcely to be rank with evils, since 
it furnish a touchstone by which my husband's affection were to be 
tried; especially as the issue of the trial was auspicious; for my 
misfortune seem only to heighten the interest which my character had 
made for me in the heart of all that knew me. the paternal regards of 
sir ralph had always been tender, but that tender seem now to be 
redoubled. 

"new event made this consolation still more necessary. my unhappy 
mother!--she was near to the dreadful scene when it happened; had no 
survive object to beguile her sorrow; was rendered, by long habit, 
more dependent upon fortune than her child. 

"a melancholy, always mute, was the first effect upon my mother. nothing 
could charm her eye, or her ear. sweet sound that she once loved, and 
especially when her darling child was the warbler, were heard no longer. 
how, with stream eyes, have i sat and watch the dear lady, and 
endeavour to catch her eye, to rouse her attention!--but i must not 
think of these things. 

"but even this distress was little in comparison with what was to come. 
a frenzy thus mute, motionless, and vacant, was succeed by fits, 
talkative, outrageous, require incessant superintendence, restraint, 
and even violence. 

"why led you me thus back to my sad remembrances? excuse me for the 
present. i will tell you the rest some other time; to-morrow." 

to-morrow, accordingly, my friend resume her story. 

"let me now make an end," said she, "of my mournful narrative, and 
never, i charge you, do any thing to revive it again. 

"deep as was my despondency, occasion by these calamities, i was not 
destitute of some joy. my husband and my child were lovely and 
affectionate. in their caresses, in their welfare, i found peace; and 
might still have found it, had there not been----. but why should i open 
afresh wound which time has imperfect closed? but the story must some 
time be told to you, and the soon it is told and dismiss to 
forgetful the better. 

"my ill fate led me into company with a woman too well known in the idle 
and dissipated circles. her character was not unknown to me. there was 
nothing in her features or air to obviate disadvantageous 
prepossessions. i sought not her intercourse; i rather shun it, as 
unplease and discreditable, but she would not be repulsed. 
self-invited, she made herself my frequent guest; took unsolicited part 
in my concerns; did me many kind offices; and, at length, in spite of my 
counter-inclination, won upon my sympathy and gratitude. 

"no one in the world, did i fondly think, had i less reason to fear than 
mrs. waring. her character excited not the slightest apprehension for my 
own safety. she was upwards of forty, nowise remarkable for grace or 
beauty; tawdry in her dress; accustomed to render more conspicuous the 
trace of age by her attempt to hide them; the mother of a numerous 
family, with a mind but slender cultivated; always careful to save 
appearances; studious preserve distance with my husband, and he, 
like myself, enduring rather than wish her society. what could i fear 
from the arts of such a one? 

"but alas! the woman had consummate address. patience, too, that nothing 
could tire. watchful that none could detect. insinuation the wiliest 
and most subtle. thus wound she herself into my affections, by an 
unexampled perseverance in seeming kindness; by tender confidence; by 
artful gloss of past misconduct; by self-rebukes and feign 
contritions. 

"never were stratagem so intricate, dissimulate so profound! but 
still, that such a one should seduce my husband; young, generous, 
ambitious, impatient of contumely and reproach, and surely not 
indifferent; before this fatal intercourse, not indifferent to his wife 
and child!--yet so it was! 

"i saw his discontents; his struggles; i heard him curse this woman, and 
the more deep for my attempts, unconscious as i was of her 
machinations, to reconcile them to each other, to do away what seem a 
causeless indignation, or antipathy against her. how little i suspect 
the nature of the conflict in his heart, between a new passion and the 
claim of pride; of conscience and of humanity; the claim of a child 
and a wife; a wife, already in affliction, and place all that yet 
remain of happiness, in the firm of his virtue; in the continuance 
of his love; a wife, at the very hour of his meditate flight, full of 
terror at the near approach of an event whose agony demand a double 
share of a husband's supporting, encourage love---- 

"good heaven! for what evil are some of thy creature reserved! 
resignation to thy decree, in the last and most cruel distress, was, 
indeed, a hard task. 

"he was gone. some unavoidable engagement calling him to hamburg was 
pleaded. yet to leave me at such an hour! i dare not upbraid, nor 
object. the tale was so specious! the fortune of a friend depend on 
his punctual journey. the falsehood of his story too soon made itself 
known. he was gone, in company with his detest paramour! 

"yet, though my vigilance was easily deceived, it was not so with 
others. a creditor, who had his bond for three thousand pounds, pursue 
and arrest him at harwich. he was thrown into prison, but his 
companion--let me, at least, say that in her praise--would not desert 
him. she took lodging near the place of his confinement, and saw him 
daily. that, had she not done it, and had my personal condition allowed, 
should have been my province. 

"indignation and grief hasten the painful crisis with me. i did not 
weep that the second fruit of this unhappy union saw not the light. i 
wept only that this hour of agony was not, to its unfortunate mother, 
the last. 

"i felt not anger; i had nothing but compassion for fielding. gladly 
would i have recall him to my arms and to virtue; i wrote, adjure 
him, by all our past joys, to return; vow only gratitude for his new 
affection, and claim only the recompense of seeing him restore to 
his family; to liberty; to reputation. 

"but, alas! field had a good but a proud heart. he look upon his 
error with remorse, with self-detestation, and with the fatal belief 
that it could not be retrieved; shame made him withstand all my 
reasoning and persuasions, and, in the hurry of his feelings, he made 
solemn vow that he would, in the moment of restore liberty, abjure his 
country and his family forever. he bore indignant the yoke of his new 
attachment, but he strove in vain to shake it off. her behaviour, always 
yielding, doting, supplicative, preserve him in her fetters. though 
upbraided, spurned, and banish from his presence, she would not leave 
him, but, by new effort and new artifices, soothed, appeased, and won 
again and kept his tenderness. 

"what my entreaty were unable to effect, his father could not hope to 
accomplish. he offer to take him from prison; the creditor offer to 
cancel the bond, if he would return to me; but this condition he 
refused. all his kindred, and one who had been his bosom-friend from 
childhood, join in beseech his compliance with these conditions; 
but his pride, his dread of my merit reproaches, the merit and 
dissuasion of his new companion, whose sacrifice for his sake had not 
been small, were obstacle which nothing could subdue. 

"far, indeed, was i from imposing these conditions. i wait only till, 
by certain arrangements, i could gather enough to pay his debts, to 
enable him to execute his vow: empty would have been my claim to his 
affection, if i could have suffered, with the means of his deliverance 
in my hands, my husband to remain a moment in prison. 

"the remains of my father's vast fortune was a jointure of a thousand 
pound a year, settled on my mother, and, after her death, on me. my 
mother's helpless condition put this revenue into my disposal. by this 
means was i enabled, without the knowledge of my father-in-law or my 
husband, to purchase the debt, and dismiss him from prison. he set out 
instantly, in company with his paramour, to france. 

"when somewhat recover from the shock of this calamity, i took up my 
abode with my mother. what she had was enough, as you perhaps will 
think, for plentiful subsistence; but to us, with habit of a different 
kind, it was little better than poverty. that reflection, my father's 
memory, my mother's deplorable state, which every year grew worse, and 
the late misfortune, were the chief companion of my thoughts. 

"the dear child, whose smile were uninterrupted by his mother's 
afflictions, was some consolation in my solitude. to his instruction and 
to my mother's wants all my hour were devoted. i was sometimes not 
without the hope of better days. full as my mind was of fielding's 
merits, convinced by former proof of his ardent and generous spirit, i 
trust that time and reflection would destroy that spell by which he 
was now bound. 

"for some time, the progress of these reflection was not known. in 
leave england, field drop all correspondence and connection with 
his native country. he part with the woman at rouen, leave no trace 
behind him by which she might follow him, as she wish to do. she never 
return to england, but die a twelvemonth afterwards in switzerland. 

"as to me, i had only to muse day and night upon the possible destiny of 
this beloved fugitive. his incense father care not for him. he had 
cast him out of his paternal affections, cease to make inquiry 
respecting him, and even wish never to hear of him again. my boy 
succeed to my husband's place in his grandfather's affections, and in 
the hope and view of the family; and his mother want nothing which 
their compassionate and respectful love could bestow. 

"three long and tedious years pass away, and no tidings were received. 
whether he were living or dead, nobody could tell. at length, an english 
traveller, go out of the customary road from italy, met with 
fielding, in a town in the venaissin. his manners, habits, and language, 
had become french. he seem unwill to be recognise by an old 
acquaintance, but, not being able to avoid this, and becoming gradual 
familiar, he informed the traveller of many particulars in his present 
situation. it appear that he had made himself useful to a neighbouring 
_seigneur_, in whose _château_ he had long live on the footing of a 
brother. france he had resolve to make his future country, and, among 
other change for that end, he had laid aside his english name, and 
taken that of his patron, which was _perrin_. he had endeavour to 
compensate himself for all other privations, by devote himself to 
rural amusement and to study. 

"he careful shun all inquiry respecting me; but, when my name was 
mention by his friend, who knew well all that had happened, and my 
general welfare, together with that of his son, asserted, he show deep 
sensibility, and even consent that i should be made acquaint with 
his situation. 

"i cannot describe the effect of this intelligence on me. my hope of 
bring him back to me were sudden revived. i wrote him a letter, in 
which i pour forth my whole heart; but his answer contained avowal of 
all his former resolutions, to which time had only made his adherence 
more easy. a second and third letter were written, and an offer made to 
follow him to his retreat and share his exile; but all my effort 
avail nothing. he solemn and repeatedly renounce all the claim of 
a husband over me, and absolve me from every obligation as a wife. 

"his part in this correspondence was perform without harsh or 
contempt. a strange mixture there was of pathos and indifference; of 
tender and resolution. hence i continual derive hope, which time, 
however, brought no near to certainty. 

"at the opening of the revolution, the name of perrin appear among the 
deputy to the constituent assembly for the district in which he 
resided. he had thus succeed in gain all the rights of a france 
citizen; and the hope of his return became almost extinct; but that, 
and every other hope respecting him, has since been total extinguish 
by his marriage with marguerite d'almont, a young lady of great merit 
and fortune, and a native of avignon. 

"a long period of suspense was now at an end, and left me in a state 
almost as full of anguish as that which our first separation produced. 
my sorrow were increase by my mother's death, and, this incident 
free me from those restraint upon my motions which before existed, i 
determined to come to america. 

"my son was now eight years old, and, his grandfather claim the 
province of his instruction, i was persuade to part with him, that he 
might be sent to a distant school. thus was another tie removed, and, in 
spite of the well-meant importune of my friends, i persist in my 
scheme of crossing the ocean." 

i could not help, at this part of her narration, express my surprise 
that any motive were strong enough to recommend this scheme. 

"it was certainly a freak of despair. a few month would, perhaps, have 
allay the fresh grief, and reconcile me to my situation; but i would 
not pause or deliberate. my scheme was oppose by my friends with great 
earnestness. during my voyage, affrighte by the danger which 
surround me, and to which i was wholly unused, i heartily repent of 
my resolution; but now, methinks, i have reason to rejoice at my 
perseverance. i have come into a scene and society so new, i have had so 
many claim made upon my ingenuity and fortitude, that my mind has been 
divert in some degree from former sorrows. there are even times when i 
wholly forget them, and catch myself indulge in cheerful reveries. 

"i have often reflect with surprise on the nature of my own mind. it 
is eight years since my father's violent death. how few of my hour 
since that period have been blessed with serenity! how many nights and 
days, in hateful and lingering succession, have been bath in tear and 
torment with regrets! that i am still alive, with so many cause of 
death, and with such a slow-consuming malady, is surely to be wonder 
at. 

"i believe the worst foe of man, at least of men in grief, are solitude 
and idleness. the same eternally-occurring round of object feed his 
disease, and the effects of mere vacancy and uniform are sometimes 
mistaken for those of grief. yes, i am glad i came to america. my 
relations are importunate for my return, and till lately i had some 
thought of it; but i think now i shall stay where i am for the rest of 
my days. 

"since i arrived, i am become more of a student than i use to be. i 
always love literature, but never, till of late, had i a mind enough at 
ease to read with advantage. i now find pleasure in the occupation which 
i never expect to find. 

"you see in what manner i live. the letters which i brought secure me a 
flatter reception from the best people in your country; but scene of 
gay resort had nothing to attract me, and i quick withdrew to that 
seclusion in which you now find me. here, always at leisure, and 
mistress of every laudable means of gratification, i am not without the 
belief of serene days yet to come." 

i now venture to inquire what were her latest tidings of her husband. 

"at the opening of the revolution, i told you, he became a champion of 
the people. by his zeal and his effort he acquire such importance as 
to be depute to the national assembly. in this post he was the adherent 
of violent measures, till the subversion of monarchy; and then, when too 
late for his safety, he checked his career." 

"and what has since become of him?" 

she sigh deeply. "you were yesterday reading a list of the proscribe 
under robespierre. i checked you. i had good reason. but this subject 
grow too painful; let us change it." 

some time after, i venture to renew this topic; and discover that 
fielding, under his new name of perrin d'almont, was among the outlaw 
deputy of last year,[1] and had been slain in resist the officer 
sent to arrest him. my friend had been informed that his _wife_, 
marguerite d'almont, whom she had reason to believe a woman of great 
merit, had elude persecution, and taken refuge in some part of america. 
she had made various attempts, but in vain, to find out her retreat. 
"ah!" said i, "you must commission me to find her. i will hunt her 
through the continent from penobscot to savannah. i will not leave a 
nook unsearched." 

[footnote 1: 1793.] 




chapter xlvii. 


none will be surprise that, to a woman thus unfortunate and thus 
deserving, my heart willing render up all its sympathies; that, as i 
partook of all her grief, i hailed, with equal delight, those omen of 
felicity which now, at length, seem to play in her fancy. 

i saw her often,--as often as my engagement would permit, and often 
than i allow myself to visit any other. in this i was partly selfish. 
so much entertainment, so much of the best instruction, did her 
conversation afford me, that i never had enough of it. 

her experience had been so much large than mine, and so wholly 
different, and she possessed such unbounded facility of recount all 
she had seen and felt, and absolute sincerity and unreserve in this 
respect were so fully establish between us, that i can imagine nothing 
equally instructive and delightful with her conversation. 

books are cold, jejune, vexatious in their sparing of information at 
one time and their impertinent loquac at another. besides, all they 
choose to give they give at once; they allow no questions, offer no 
further explanations, and bend not to the caprice of our curiosity. 
they talk to us behind a screen. their tone is lifeless and monotonous. 
they charm not our attention by mute significance of gesture and looks. 
they spread no light upon their meaning by cadence and emphasis and 
pause. 

how different was mrs. fielding's discourse! so versatile; so bend to 
the change of the occasion; so obsequious to my curiosity, and so 
abundant in that very knowledge in which i was most deficient, and on 
which i set the most value, the knowledge of the human heart; of 
society as it exist in another world, more abundant in the variety 
of customs and characters, than i had ever had the power to witness. 

partly selfish i have said my motive were, but not so, as long as i saw 
that my friend derive pleasure, in her turn, from my company. not that 
i could add directly to her knowledge or pleasure, but that expansion of 
heart, that ease of utterance and flow of idea which always were 
occasion by my approach, were source of true pleasure of which she 
had been long deprived, and for which her privation had given her a 
higher relish than ever. 

she live in great affluence and independence, but made use of her 
privilege of fortune chiefly to secure to herself the command of her 
own time. she had been long ago tired and disgust with the dull and 
fulsome uniform and parade of the play-house and ballroom. formal 
visit were endure as mortification and penances, by which the 
delight of privacy and friendly intercourse were by contrast increased. 
music she loved, but never sought it in place of public resort, or from 
the skill of mercenary performers; and books were not the least of her 
pleasures. 

as to me, i was wax in her hand. without design and without effort, i 
was always of that form she wish me to assume. my own happiness became 
a secondary passion, and her gratification the great end of my being. 
when with her, i thought not of myself. i had scarcely a separate or 
independent existence, since my senses were occupy by her, and my mind 
was full of those idea which her discourse communicated. to meditate on 
her looks and words, and to pursue the means suggest by my own 
thoughts, or by her, conducive, in any way, to her good, was all my 
business. 

"what a fate," said i, at the conclusion of one of our interviews, "has 
been yours! but, thank heaven, the storm has disappear before the age 
of sensibility has gone past, and without dry up every source of 
happiness. you are still young; all your powers unimpaired; rich in the 
compassion and esteem of the world; wholly independent of the claim and 
caprice of others; ample supply with that means of usefulness, 
call money; wise in that experience which only adversity can give. 
past evil and sufferings, if incur and endure without guilt, if 
call to view without remorse, make up the material of present joy. 
they cheer our most dreary hour with the widespread accent of 'well 
done,' and they heighten our pleasure into somewhat of celestial 
brilliancy, by furnish a deep, a ruefully-deep, contrast. 

"from this moment, i will cease to weep for you. i will call you the 
happiest of women. i will share with you your happiness by witness 
it; but that shall not content me. i must some way contribute to it. 
tell me how i shall serve you. what can i do to make you happier? poor 
am i in every thing but zeal, but still i may do something. what--pray 
tell me, what can i do?" 

she look at me with sweet and solemn significance. what it was exactly 
i could not divine, yet i was strange affected by it. it was but a 
glance, instantly withdrawn. she made me no answer. 

"you must not be silent; you _must_ tell me what i can do for you. 
hitherto i have done nothing. all the service is on your side. your 
conversation has been my study, a delightful study, but the profit has 
only been mine. tell me how i can be grateful: my voice and manner, i 
believe, seldom belie my feelings." at this time, i had almost done what 
a second thought made me suspect to be unauthorized. yet i cannot tell 
why. my heart had nothing in it but reverence and admiration. was she 
not the substitute of my lost mamma? would i not have clasp that 
beloved shade? yet the two being were not just the same, or i should 
not, as now, have checked myself, and only pressed her hand to my lips. 

"tell me," repeated i, "what can i do to serve you? i read to you a 
little now, and you are pleased with my reading. i copy for you when you 
want the time. i guide the reins for you when you choose to ride. humble 
offices, indeed, though, perhaps, all that a raw youth like me can do 
for you; but i can be still more assiduous. i can read several hour in 
the day, instead of one. i can write ten times as much as now. 

"are you not my lost mamma come back again? and yet, not _exactly_ her, 
i think. something different; something better, i believe, if that be 
possible. at any rate, methinks i would be wholly yours. i shall be 
impatient and uneasy till every act, every thought, every minute, 
someway do you good. 

"how!" said i, (her eye, still averted, seem to hold back the tear 
with difficulty, and she made a motion as if to rise,) "have i grieve 
you? have i been importunate? forgive me if i have offend you." 

her eyes now overflow without restraint. she articulated, with 
difficulty, "tears are too prompt with me of late; but they did not 
upbraid you. pain has often cause them to flow, but now 
it--is--_pleasure_." 

"what a heart must yours be!" i resumed. "when susceptible of such 
pleasures, what pang must formerly have rent it!--but you are not 
displeased, you say, with my importunate zeal. you will accept me as 
your own in every thing. direct me; prescribe to me. there must be 
_something_ in which i can be of still more use to you; some way in 
which i can be wholly yours----" 

"_wholly mine!_" she repeated, in a smother voice, and rising. "leave 
me, arthur. it is too late for you to be here. it was wrong to stay so 
late." 

"i have been wrong; but how too late? i enter but this moment. it is 
twilight still; is it not?" 

"no: it is almost twelve. you have been here a long four hours; short 
one i would rather say,--but indeed you must go." 

"what made me so thoughtless of the time? but i will go, yet not till 
you forgive me." i approach her with a confidence and for a purpose at 
which, upon reflection, i am not a little surprised; but the being 
call mervyn is not the same in her company and in that of another. 
what is the difference, and whence come it? her words and looks engross 
me. my mind wants room for any other object. but why inquire whence the 
difference? the superior of her merit and attraction to all those 
whom i knew would surely account for my fervour. indifference, if i 
felt it, would be the only just occasion of wonder. 

the hour was, indeed, too late, and i hasten home. steven was wait 
my return with some anxiety. i apologize for my delay, and recount to 
him what had just passed. he listen with more than usual interest. 
when i had finished,-- 

"mervyn," said he, "you seem not be aware of your present situation. 
from what you now tell me, and from what you have formerly told me, one 
thing seem very plain to me." 

"pr'ythee, what is it?" 

"eliza hadwin:--do you wish--could you bear--to see her the wife of 
another?" 

"five years hence i will answer you. then my answer may be, 'no; i wish 
her only to be mine.' till then, i wish her only to be my pupil, my 
ward, my sister." 

"but these are remote considerations; they are bar to marriage, but not 
to love. would it not molest and disquiet you to observe in her a 
passion for another?" 

"it would, but only on her own account; not on mine. at a suitable age 
it is very likely i may love her, because it is likely, if she hold on 
in her present career, she will then be worthy; but at present, though i 
would die to insure her happiness, i have no wish to insure it by 
marriage with her." 

"is there no other whom you love?" 

"no. there is one worthy than all others; one whom i wish the woman 
who shall be my wife to resemble in all things." 

"and who is this model?" 

"you know i can only mean achsa fielding." 

"if you love her likeness, why not love herself?" 

i felt my heart leap.--"what a thought is that! love her i _do_ as i 
love my god; as i love virtue. to love her in another sense would brand 
me for a lunatic." 

"to love her as a woman, then, appear to you an act of folly." 

"in me it would be worse than folly. 'twould be frenzy." 

"and why?" 

"why? really, my friend, you astonish me. nay, you startle me--for a 
question like that imply a doubt in you whether i have not actually 
harbour the thought." 

"no," said he, smiling, "presumptuous though you be, you have not, 
to-be-sure, reach so high a pitch. but still, though i think you 
innocent of so heinous an offence, there is no harm in ask why you 
might not love her, and even seek her for a wife." 

achsa field _my wife_! good heaven!--the very sound threw my soul 
into unconquerable tumults. "take care, my friend," continue i, in 
beseech accents, "you may do me more injury than you conceive, by 
even start such a thought." 

"true," said he, "as long as such obstacle exist to your success; so 
many incurable objections: for instance, she is six years old than 
you." 

"that is an advantage. her age is what it ought to be." 

"but she has been a wife and mother already." 

"that is likewise an advantage. she has wisdom, because she has 
experience. her sensibility are stronger, because they have been 
exercise and chastened. her first marriage was unfortunate. the pure 
is the felicity she will taste in a second! if her second choice be 
propitious, the greater her tender and gratitude." 

"but she is a foreigner; independent of control, and rich." 

"all which are blessing to herself, and to him for whom her hand is 
reserved; especially if, like me, he is indigent." 

"but then she is unsightly as a _night-hag_, tawny as a moor, the eye of 
a gipsy, low in stature, contemptible diminutive, scarcely bulk enough 
to cast a shadow as she walks, less luxuriance than a char log, few 
elasticity than a sheet pebble." 

"hush! hush! blasphemer!"--(and i put my hand before his mouth)--"have i 
not told you that in mind, person, and condition, she is the type after 
which my enamoured fancy has model my wife?" 

"oh ho! then the objection do not lie with you. it lie with her, it 
seems. she can find nothing in you to esteem! and, pray, for what fault 
do you think she would reject you?" 

"i cannot tell. that she can ever balance for a moment, on such a 
question, is incredible. _me! me!_ that achsa field should think of 
me!" 

"incredible, indeed! you, who are loathsome in your person, an idiot in 
your understanding, a villain in your morals! deformed! withered! vain, 
stupid, and malignant. that such a one should choose _you_ for an idol!" 

"pray, my friend," said i, anxiously, "jest not. what mean you by a hint 
of this kind?" 

"i will not jest, then, but will sober inquire, what fault are they 
which make this lady's choice of you so incredible? you are younger than 
she, though no one, who merely observe your manners and heard you talk, 
would take you to be under thirty. you are poor: are these impediments?" 

"i should think not. i have heard her reason with admirable eloquence 
against the vain distinction of property and nation and rank. they were 
once of moment in her eyes; but the sufferings, humiliations, and 
reflection of years have cure her of the folly. her nation has 
suffer too much by the inhuman antipathy of religious and politics 
faction; she, herself, has felt so often the contumely of the rich, 
the high-born, and the bigoted, that----" 

"pr'ythee, then, what dost imagine her objection to be?" 

"why--i don't know. the thought was so aspiring; to call her _my wife_ 
was a height of bliss the very far-off view of which made my head 
dizzy." 

"a height, however, to attain which you suppose only her consent, her 
love, to be necessary?" 

"without doubt, her love is indispensable." 

"sit down, arthur, and let us no long treat this matter lightly. i 
clearly see the importance of this moment to this lady's happiness and 
yours. it is plain that you love this woman. how could you help it? a 
brilliant skin is not hers; nor elegant proportions; nor majestic 
stature: yet no creature had ever more power to bewitch. her manners 
have grace and dignity that flow from exquisite feelings, delicate 
taste, and the quickest and keenest penetration. she has the wisdom of 
men and of books. her sympathies are enforce by reason, and her 
charity regulate by knowledge. she has a woman's age, fortune more 
than you wish, and a spotless fame. how could you fail to love her? 

"_you_, who are her chosen friend, who partake her pleasure and share 
her employments, on whom she almost exclusively bestow her society and 
confidence, and to whom she thus afford the strongest of all indirect 
proof of impassioned esteem,--how could you, with all that firm of 
love, join with all that discernment of her excellence, how could you 
escape the enchantment? 

"you have not thought of marriage. you have not suspect your love. 
from the purity of your mind, from the idolatry with which this woman 
has inspired you, you have imagine no delight beyond that of enjoy 
her society as you now do, and have never foster a hope beyond this 
privilege. 

"how quick would this tranquill vanish, and the true state of your 
heart be evinced, if a rival should enter the scene and be entertain 
with preference! then would the seal be removed, the spell be broken, 
and you would awaken to terror and to anguish. 

"of this, however, there is no danger. your passion is not felt by you 
alone. from her treatment of you, your diffidence disable you from 
seeing, but nothing can be clear to me than that she love you." 

i start on my feet. a flush of scorching heat flow to every part of 
my frame. my temple began to throb like my heart. i was half delirious, 
and my delirium was strange compound of fear and hope, of delight 
and of terror. 

"what have you done, my friend? you have overturn my peace of mind. 
till now the image of this woman has been follow by complacency and 
sober rapture; but your words have dashed the scene with dismay and 
confusion. you have raise up wishes, and dreams, and doubts, which 
possess me in spite of my reason, in spite of a thousand proofs. 

"good god! you say she loves,--loves _me_!--me, a boy in age; bred in 
clownish ignorance; scarcely usher into the world; more than 
childish unlearn and raw; a barn-door simpleton; a plough-tail, 
kitchen-hearth, turnip-hoeing novice! she, thus splendid endowed; thus 
allied to nobles; thus gifted with arts, and adorn with graces; that 
she should choose me, me for the partner of her fortune; her affections; 
and her life! it cannot be. yet, if it were; if your guess 
should--prove--oaf! madman! to indulge so fatal a chimera! so rash a 
dream! 

"my friend! my friend! i feel that you have done me an irreparable 
injury. i can never more look her in the face. i can never more frequent 
her society. these new thought will beset and torment me. my disquiet 
will chain up my tongue. that overflow gratitude; that innocent joy, 
unconscious of offence, and knowing no restraint, which have hitherto 
been my title to her favour, will fly from my features and manners. i 
shall be anxious, vacant, and unhappy in her presence. i shall dread to 
look at her, or to open my lips, lest my mad and unhallowed ambition 
should betray itself." 

"well," reply stevens, "this scene is quite new. i could almost find 
it in my heart to pity you. i did not expect this; and yet, from my 
knowledge of your character, i ought, perhaps, to have foreseen it. this 
is a necessary part of the drama. a joyous certainty, on these 
occasions, must always be precede by suspense and doubts, and the 
close will be joyous in proportion as the prelude are excruciating. go 
to bed, my good friend, and think of this. time and a few more 
interview with mrs. field will, i doubt not, set all to rights." 




chapter xlviii. 


i went to my chamber, but what different sensation did i carry into it 
from those with which i had left it a few hour before! i stretch 
myself on the mattress and put out the light; but the swarm of new 
image that rush on my mind set me again instantly in motion. all was 
rapid, vague, and undefined, weary and distract my attention. i 
was rouse as by a divine voice, that said, "sleep no more! mervyn shall 
sleep no more." 

what chiefly occupy me was a nameless sort of terror. what shall i 
compare it to? methinks, that one fall from a tree overhang a 
torrent, plunge into the whirl eddy, and gasp and struggle 
while he sink to rise no more, would feel just as i did then. nay, some 
such image actually possessed me. such was one of my reveries, in which 
sudden i stretch my hand, and caught the arm of a chair. this act 
call me back to reason, or rather gave my soul opportunity to roam 
into a new track equally wild. 

was it the abrupt of this vision that thus confounded me? was it a 
latent error in my moral constitution, which this new conjuncture drew 
forth into influence? these were all the token of a mind lost to 
itself; bewildered; unhinged; plunge into a drear insanity. 

nothing less could have prompt so fantastically; for, midnight as it 
was, my chamber's solitude was not to be supported. after a few turn 
across the floor, i left the room, and the house. i walk without 
design and in a hurried pace. i post straight to the house of mrs. 
fielding. i lift the latch, but the door did not open. it was, no 
doubt, locked. 

"how come this?" said i, and look around me. the hour and occasion 
were unthought of. habituate to this path, i had taken it 
spontaneously. "how come this?" repeated i. "locked upon _me_! but i 
will summon them, i warrant me,"--and rung the bell, not timid or 
slightly, but with violence. some one hasten from above. i saw the 
glimmer of a candle through the keyhole. 

"strange," thought i; "a candle at noonday!"--the door was opened, and 
my poor bess, robe in a careless and hasty manner, appeared. she 
start at sight of me, but merely because she did not, in a moment, 
recognise me.--"ah! arthur, is it you? come in. my mamma has want you 
these two hours. i was just go to despatch philip to tell you to 
come." 

"lead me to her," said i. 

she led the way into the parlour.--"wait a moment here; i will tell her 
you are come;"--and she trip away. 

presently a step was heard. the door open again, and then enter a 
man. he was tall, elegant, sedate to a degree of sadness; something in 
his dress and aspect that bespoke the foreigner, the frenchman. 

"what," said he, mildly, "is your business with my wife? she cannot see 
you instantly, and has sent me to receive your commands." 

"your _wife_! i want mrs. fielding." 

"true; and mrs. field is my wife. thank heaven, i have come in time 
to discover her, and claim her as such." 

i start back. i shuddered. my joint slackened, and i stretch my 
hand to catch something by which i might be save from sink on the 
floor. meanwhile, field change his countenance into rage and fury. 
he call me villain! bade me avaunt! and drew a shining steel from his 
bosom, with which he stab me to the heart. i sunk upon the floor, and 
all, for a time, was dark and oblivion! at length, i return as it 
were to life. i open my eyes. the mists disappeared, and i found 
myself stretch upon the bed in my own chamber. i remember the fatal 
blow i had received. i put my hand upon my breast; the spot where the 
dagger entered. there were no trace of a wound. all was perfect and 
entire. some miracle had made me whole. 

i raise myself up. i re-examined my body. all around me was hushed, 
till a voice from the pavement below proclaim that it was "past three 
o'clock." 

"what!" said i; "has all this miserable pageantry, this midnight 
wandering, and this ominous interview, been no more than--_a dream_?" 

it may be proper to mention, in explanation of this scene, and to show 
the thorough perturbation of my mind during this night, intelligence 
gain some days after from eliza. she said, that about two o'clock, on 
this night, she was rouse by a violent ring of the bell. she was 
startle by so unseasonable a summons. she slept in a chamber adjoin 
mrs. fielding's, and hesitate whether she should alarm her friend; but, 
the summons not being repeated, she had determined to forbear. 

add to this, was the report of mrs. stevens, who, on the same night, 
about half an hour after i and her husband had retired, imagine that 
she heard the street door open and shut; but, this being follow by 
no other consequence, she supposed herself mistaken. i have little doubt 
that, in my feverish and trouble sleep, i actually went forth, post 
to the house of mrs. fielding, rung for admission, and shortly after 
return to my own apartment. 

this confusion of mind was somewhat allay by the return of light. it 
gave way to more uniform but not less rueful and despondent perceptions. 
the image of achsa fill my fancy, but it was the harbinger of nothing 
but humiliate and sorrow. to outroot the conviction of my own 
unworthiness, to persuade myself that i was regard with the tender 
that steven had ascribe to her, that the discovery of my thought 
would not excite her anger and grief, i felt to be impossible. 

in this state of mind, i could not see her. to declare my feelings would 
produce indignation and anguish; to hide them from her scrutiny was not 
in my power; yet, what would she think of my estrange myself from her 
society? what expedient could i honestly adopt to justify my absence, 
and what employment could i substitute for those precious hour 
hitherto devoted to her? 

"_this_ afternoon," thought i, "she has been invite to spend at 
stedman's country-house on schuylkill. she consent to go, and i was to 
accompany her. i am fit only for solitude. my behaviour, in her 
presence, will be enigmatical, capricious, and morose. i must not go: 
yet what will she think of my failure? not to go will be injurious and 
suspicious." 

i was undetermined. the appoint hour arrived. i stood at my 
chamber-window, torn by a variety of purposes, and sway alternate by 
repugnant arguments. i several times went to the door of my apartment, 
and put my foot upon the first step of the staircase, but as often 
paused, reconsidered, and return to my room. 

in these fluctuate the hour passed. no messenger arrive from mrs. 
fielding, inquiring into the cause of my delay. was she offend at my 
negligence? was she sick and disabled from going, or had she change her 
mind? i now remember her parting words at our last interview. were 
they not susceptible of two constructions? she said my visit was too 
long, and bade me begone. did she suspect my presumption, and is she 
determined thus to punish me? 

this terror add anew to all my former anxieties. it was impossible to 
rest in this suspense. i would go to her; i would lay before her all the 
anguish of my heart; i would not spare myself. she shall not reproach me 
more severe than i will reproach myself. i will hear my sentence from 
her own lips, and promise unlimited submission to the doom of separation 
and exile which she will pronounce. 

i went forth to her house. the drawing-room and summer-house were empty. 
i summon philip the footman: his mistress was gone to mr. stedman's. 

"how?--to stedman's?--in whose company?" 

"miss stedman and her brother call for her in the carriage, and 
persuade her to go with them." 

now my heart sunk, indeed! miss stedman's _brother_! a youth, forward, 
gallant, and gay! flushed with prosperity, and just return from 
europe, with all the confidence of age, and all the ornament of 
education! she has gone with him, though pre-engaged to me! poor arthur, 
how art thou despised! 

this information only heighten my impatience. i went away, but 
return in the evening. i wait till eleven, but she came not back. i 
cannot just paint the interval that pass till next morning. it was 
void of sleep. on leave her house, i wander into the fields. every 
moment increase my impatience. "she will probably spend the morrow at 
stedman's," said i, "and possibly the next day. why should i wait for 
her return? why not seek her there, and rid myself at once of this 
agonizing suspense? why not go thither now? this night, wherever i spend 
it, will be unacquainted with repose. i will go; it is already near 
twelve, and the distance is more than eight miles. i will hover near the 
house till morning, and then, as early as possible, demand an 
interview." 

i was well acquaint with stedman's villa, have formerly been there 
with mrs. fielding. i quick enter its precincts. i went close to the 
house; look mournful at every window. at one of them a light was to 
be seen, and i took various station to discover, if possible, the 
person within. methought once i caught a glimpse of a female, whom my 
fancy easily imagine to be achsa. i sat down upon the lawn, some 
hundred feet from the house, and opposite the window whence the light 
proceeded. i watch it, till at length some one came to the window, 
lift it, and, leaning on her arms, continue to look out. 

the preceding day had been a very sultry one: the night, as usual after 
such a day and the fall of a violent shower, was delightful serene and 
pleasant. where i stood was enlightened by the moon. whether she saw me 
or not, i could hardly tell, or whether she distinguished any thing but 
a human figure. 

without reflect on what was due to decorum and punctilio, i 
immediately drew near the house. i quick perceive that her attention 
was fixed. neither of us spoke, till i had placed myself directly under 
her; i then open my lips, without knowing in what manner to address 
her. she spoke first, and in a startle and anxious voice:-- 

"who is that?" 

"arthur mervyn; he that was two days ago your friend." 

"mervyn! what is it that bring you here at this hour? what is the 
matter? what has happened? is anybody sick?" 

"all is safe; all are in good health." 

"what then do you come hither for at such an hour?" 

"i meant not to disturb you; i meant not to be seen." 

"good heavens! how you frighten me! what can be the reason of so 
strange----" 

"be not alarmed. i meant to hover near the house till morning, that i 
might see you as early as possible." 

"for what purpose?" 

"i will tell you when we meet, and let that be at five o'clock; the sun 
will then be risen; in the cedar-grove under the bank; till when, 
farewell." 

have said this, i prevent all expostulation, by turning the angle of 
the house, and hasten towards the shore of the river. i rove about 
the grove that i have mentioned. in one part of it is a rustic seat and 
table, shroud by tree and shrubs, and an intervene eminence, from 
the view of those in the house. this i design to be the close scene 
of my destiny. 

presently i left this spot, and wander upward through embarrass and 
obscure paths, start forward or check my pace, according as my 
wayward meditation govern me. shall i describe my thoughts? 
impossible! it was certainly a temporary loss of reason; nothing less 
than madness could lead into such devious tracks, drag me down to so 
hopeless, helpless, panicful a depth, and drag me down so suddenly; lay 
waste, as at a signal, all my flourish structures, and reduce them in 
a moment to a scene of confusion and horror. 

what did i fear? what did i hope? what did i design? i cannot tell; my 
gloom were to retire with the night. the point to which every 
tumultuous feeling was link was the coming interview with achsa. that 
was the boundary of fluctuate and suspense. here was the sealing and 
ratify of my doom. 

i rent a passage through the thicket, and struggle upward till i 
reach the edge of a considerable precipice; i laid me down at my 
length upon the rock, whose cold and hard surface i pressed with my 
bare and throb breast. i lean over the edge; fixed my eyes upon 
the water and wept--plentifully; but why? 

may _this_ be my heart's last beat, if i can tell why? 

i had wander so far from stedman's, that, when rouse by the light, i 
had some mile to walk before i could reach the place of meeting. achsa 
was already there. i slid down the rock above, and appear before her. 
well might she be startle at my wild and abrupt appearance. 

i placed myself, without utter a word, upon a seat opposite to her, 
the table between, and, crossing my arms upon the table, lean my head 
upon them, while my face was turn towards and my eyes fixed upon hers. 
i seem to have lost the power and the inclination to speak. 

she regard me, at first, with anxious curiosity; after examine my 
looks, every emotion was swallow up in terrify sorrow. "for god's 
sake!--what do all this mean? why am i call to this place? what 
tidings, what fearful tidings, do you bring?" 

i did not change my posture or speak. "what," she resumed, "could 
inspire all this woe? keep me not in this suspense, arthur; these looks 
and this silence shock and afflict me too much." 

"afflict you?" said i, at last; "i come to tell you what, now that i am 
here, i cannot tell----" there i stopped. 

"say what, i entreat you. you seem to be very unhappy--such a 
change--from yesterday!" 

"yes! from yesterday; all then was a joyous calm, and now all is--but 
then i knew not my infamy, my guilt----" 

"what words are these, and from you, arthur? guilt is to you impossible. 
if purity is to be found on earth, it is lodge in your heart. what have 
you done?" 

"i have dared--how little you expect the extent of my daring! that such 
as i should look upwards with this ambition." 

i stood up, and taking her hand in mine, as she sat, look earnest 
in her face:--"i come only to beseech your pardon. to tell you my crime, 
and then disappear forever; but first let me see if there be any omen of 
forgiveness. your looks--they are kind; heavenly; compassionate still. i 
will trust them, i believe; and yet" (letting go her hands, and turning 
away) "this offence is beyond the reach even of _your_ mercy." 

"how beyond measure these words and this deportment distress me! let me 
know the worst; i cannot bear to be thus perplexed." 

"why," said i, turning quick round and again taking her hands, "that 
mervyn, whom you have honour and confide in, and blessed with your 
sweet regards, has been----" 

"what has he been? divine amiable, heroic in his virtue, i am sure. 
what else has he been?" 

"this mervyn has imagined, has dared--will you forgive him?" 

"forgive you what? why don't you speak? keep not my soul in this 
suspense." 

"he has dared--but do not think that i am he. continue to look as now, 
and reserve your killing glances, the vengeance of those eyes, as for 
one that is absent.----why, what--you weep, then, at last. that is a 
propitious sign. when pity drops from the eyes of our judge, then should 
the suppliant approach. now, in confidence of pardon, i will tell you; 
this mervyn, not content with all you have hitherto grant him, has 
dared--to _love_ you; nay, to think of you as of _his wife_!" 

her eye sunk beneath mine, and, disengage her hands, she cover her 
face with them. 

"i see my fate," said i, in a tone of despair. "too well did i predict 
the effect of this confession; but i will go--_and unforgiven_." 

she now partly uncover her face. the hand was withdrawn from her 
cheek, and stretch towards me. she look at me. 

"arthur! i _do_ forgive thee."--with what accent was this uttered! with 
what looks! the cheek that was before pale with terror was now crimson 
over by a different emotion, and delight swam in her eye. 

could i mistake? my doubts, my new-born fears, made me tremble while i 
took the offer hand. 

"surely," falter i, "i am not--i cannot be--so blessed." 

there was no need of words. the hand that i held was sufficient 
eloquent. she was still silent. 

"surely," said i, "my senses deceive me. a bliss like this cannot be 
reserved for me. tell me once more--set my doubt heart at rest." 

she now gave herself to my arms:--"i have not words--let your own heart 
tell you, you have made your achsa----" 

at this moment, a voice from without (it was miss stedman's) called, 
"mrs. fielding! where are you?" 

my friend start up, and, in a hasty voice, bade me begone. "you must 
not be seen by this giddy girl. come hither this evening, as if by my 
appointment, and i will return with you."--she left me in a kind of 
trance. i was immovable. my reverie was too delicious;--but let me not 
attempt the picture. if i can convey no image of my state previous to 
this interview, my subsequent feelings are still more beyond the reach 
of my powers to describe. 

agreeably to the command of my mistress, i hasten away, evade path 
which might expose me to observation. i speedy made my friends partake 
of my joy, and pass the day in a state of solemn but confuse rapture. 
i did not accurate portray the various parts of my felicity. the whole 
rush upon my soul at once. my conception were too rapid and too 
comprehensive to be distinct. 

i went to stedman's in the evening. i found in the accent and looks of 
my achsa new assurance that all which had lately pass was more than a 
dream. she made excuse for leave the stedman soon than ordinary, 
and was accompany to the city by her friend. we drop mrs. field 
at her own house, and thither, after accompany miss stedman to her 
own home, i return upon the wings of tremulous impatience. 

now could i repeat every word of every conversation that has since taken 
place between us; but why should i do that on paper? indeed, it could 
not be done. all is of equal value, and all could not be comprise but 
in many volumes. there needs nothing more deep to imprint it on my 
memory; and, while thus review the past, i should be iniquitous 
neglect the present. what is given to the pen would be taken from 
her; and that, indeed, would be--but no need of saying what it would be, 
since it is impossible. 

i merely write to allay these tumult which our necessary separation 
produces; to aid me in calling up a little patience till the time 
arrive when our persons, like our minds, shall be united forever. that 
time--may nothing happen to prevent--but nothing can happen. but why 
this ominous misgiving just now? my love has infect me with these 
unworthy terrors, for she has them too. 

this morning i was relate my dream to her. she started, and grew pale. 
a sad silence ensue the cheerful that had reign before:--"why 
thus dejected, my friend?" 

"i hate your dream. it is a horrid thought. would to god it had never 
occur to you!" 

"why, surely, you place no confidence in dreams?" 

"i know not where to place confidence; not in my present promise of 
joy,"--and she wept. i endeavour to soothe or console her. why, i 
asked, did she weep? 

"my heart is sore. former disappointment were so heavy; the hope which 
were blasted were so like my present ones, that the dread of a like 
result will intrude upon my thoughts. and now your dream! indeed, i know 
not what to do. i believe i ought still to retract--ought, at least, to 
postpone an act so irrevocable." 

now was i oblige again to go over my catalogue of argument to induce 
her to confirm her propitious resolution to be mine within the week. i, 
at last, succeeded, even in restore her serenity, and beguile her 
fear by dwelling on our future happiness. 

our household, while we stay in america,--in a year or two we hie to 
europe,--should be _thus_ composed. fidelity, and skill, and pure 
morals, should be sought out, and enticed, by generous recompenses, into 
our domestic service. duty which should be light and regular.--such 
and such should be our amusement and employment abroad and at home: 
and would not this be true happiness? 

"oh yes--if it may be so." 

"it shall be so; but this is but the humble outline of the scene; 
something is still to be add to complete our felicity." 

"what more can be added?" 

"what more? can achsa ask what more? she who has not been _only_ a 
wife----" 

but why am i indulge this pen-prattle? the hour she fixed for my 
return to her is come, and now take thyself away, quill. lie there, snug 
in thy leathern case, till i call for thee, and that will not be very 
soon. i believe i will abjure thy company till all is settled with my 
love. yes; i _will_ abjure thee; so let _this_ be thy last office, till 
mervyn has been made the happiest of men. 


the end. 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of arthur mervyn, by charles brockden brown 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook arthur mervyn *** 

***** this file should be name 18508-8.txt or 18508-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/5/0/18508/ 

produce by graeme mackreth and the online distribute 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

*** end: full license *** 
