the project gutenberg ebook of animal ghosts, by elliott o'donnell 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: animal ghost 
or, animal haunting and the hereafter 

author: elliott o'donnell 

release date: april 23, 2006 [ebook #18233] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook animal ghost *** 




produce by barbara tozier, graeme mackreth and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 






animal ghost 

or, 

animal haunting and the hereafter 

by elliott o'donnell 

author of 

"the sorcery club," "werwolves," "byways of ghostland," "scottish 
ghosts," "haunted house of london," "haunted house of england and 
wales," "dreams and their meanings," "for satan's sake," "the unknown 
depths," "dinevah the beautiful," "jennie barlowe," "ghostly phenomena," 
"mrs. e.m. ward's reminiscences," etc. etc. 

london 

william rider & son, ltd. 
cathedral house, paternoster row, e.c. 
1913 

_first publish november, 1913._ 




preface 

if human beings, with all their vices, have a future life, assured 
animals, who in character so often equal, nay, excel human beings, have 
a future life also. 

those who in the scripture find a key to all things, can find nothing 
in them to confute this argument. there is no saying of christ that 
justify one in supposing that man is the only being, whose existence 
extend beyond the grave. 

granted, however, merely for the sake of argument, that we have some 
ground for the denial of a future existence for animals, consider the 
injustice such a denial would involve. take, for example, the case of 
the horse. harm no one, and without thought of reward, it toils for 
man all its life, and when too old to work it is put to death without 
even the compensation of a well-earned rest. but if compensation be 
god's law,--as i, for one, believe it to be--and also the _raison 
d'être_ of a hereafter, then surely the creator, whose chief claim to 
our respect and venerate lie in the fact that he is just and 
merciful, will take good care that the horse--the gentle, patient, 
never-complaining horse--is well compensated--compensated in a golden 
hereafter. 

consider again, the case of another of our four-footed friends--the dog; 
the faithful, affectionate, obedient and forgiving dog, the dog who is 
so often call upon to stand all sort of rough treatment, and is shot 
or poisoned, if, provoke beyond endurance, he at last rounds on his 
persecutors, and bites. and the cat--the timid, peaceful cat who is 
mauled, and all but pull in two by cruel children, and beaten to a 
jelly when in sheer agony and fright it scratches. reflect again, on the 
cow and the sheep, fed only to supply our wants; shout at and kicked, 
if, when nearly scared out of their senses, they wander off the track; 
and pole-axed, or done to death in some equally atrocious manner when 
the sickening demand for flesh food is at its height. 

and yet, you say, these innocent, unoffending--and, i say, 
martyred--animals are to have no future, no compensation. monstrous! 
absurd! it is an effrontery to common sense, philosophy--anything, 
everything. it is a damn lie, damn bigotry, damn nonsense. the 
whole animal world will live again; and it will be man--spoilt, 
presumptuous, degenerate man--who will not participate in another life, 
unless he very much improves. 

think well over this,--you who preach the gospel of man's 
pre-eminence;--you who prate of god and know nothing whatsoever about 
him! the horse, dog, cat,--even the wild animals, whose vices, 
perchance, pale beside your own, may go to heaven before you. the 
supreme architect is neither a nero, nor a stuart, nor a clown. he will 
recompense all who deserve recompense, be they great or small--biped or 
quadruped. 

it is to testify to a future existence for animal and to create a wide 
interest in it that i have undertaken to compile this book; and my 
object, i think, can best be achieve in my own way, the way of the 
investigate of haunt places. the mere fact that there are 
manifestation of "dead" people (pardon the paradox) prove some kind of 
life after death for human beings; and happily the same proof is 
available with regard a future life for animals; indeed there are as 
many animal phantasm as human--perhaps more; hence, if the human being 
lives again, so do his dumb friends. 

be comfort then, you who love your pets, and have been kind to them. 
you will see them all again, on the soft undying pasture lands of your 
elysium and theirs. 

be warned, you--you who have despise animals, and have been cruel to 
them. who know but that, in your future life, you may be as they are 
now--in subjection? 

* * * * * 

my task in writing this book has been considerably lighten by the 
extreme courtesy and kindness of mr. shirley, mr. eveleigh nash, and the 
proprietor of the _review of reviews_, in allow me to make use of 
extract and quotation from their most valuable works. 

elliott o'donnell. 




contents 


part i 


chapter i 

cat 

page 

the black cat of the old manor house, oxenby--correspondence _re_ cat 
phantasms--the headless cat of no. ----, lower seedley road, seedley, 
manchester--the cat on the post--mystic property of cat 3 


chapter ii 

dogs 

the case of james durham--the grey dog of ---- house, birmingham--the 
dog in the cupboard--how the ghost of a dog save life--a precentor's 
adventure--phantom dog seen on souter fell--the jump ghost--dogs seen 
before a death--a dog scared by a canine ghost--the phantom dachshund of 
w---- street, london, w.--an all hallow eve ghost--the strange 
disappearance of mr. jeremiah dance--phantasms of living dogs--the 
yellow dog of k---- university--national ghost in the form of dogs--the 
mauthe doog--spectral hound 57 


chapter iii 

horse and the unknown 

a phantom cavalcade--the miller on the grey horse--a phantom horse 
and rider--the white horse of eastover--the afrikander's story--heralds 
of death--phantom coach in u.s.a.--a story from marseilles--summary of 
horses--phantasms of living horses--horses and the psychic faculty of 
scent--phantom policeman and horse--phantom huntsmen and horse 139 


chapter iv 

bulls, cows, pigs, etc. 

the kirk-grim--phantasm of a goat--phantom hog of the moat 
grange--sheep--spectre flock of sheep in germany 212 


part ii 


chapter v 

wild animal and the unknown 

animal phantasm and the moon--the case of martin tristram--phantasms of 
cat and ape--hauntings by a white rabbit--john wesley's ghost--psychic 
faculty in hare and rabbit 223 


chapter vi 

inhabitant of the jungle 

elephants, lions, tigers, etc.--the white tiger--jungle animal and 
psychic faculty 254 


part iii 


chapter vii 

bird and the unknown 


case from _occult review_--bird haunting in russia--hauntings in 
the country church--capt. morgan's experiences--addenda--old authority 
on bird omen 273 


chapter viii 

a brief retrospect 300 


part i 

domestic animal and their association with the unknown 




animal ghost 




chapter i 

cat 


in opening this volume on animal and their association with the 
unknown, i will commence with a case of haunting in the old manor 
house, at oxenby. 

my informant was a mrs. hartnoll, whom i can see in my mind's eye, as 
distinct as if i were look at her now. hers was a personality that 
no lapse of time, nothing could efface; a personality that made itself 
felt on boys of all temperaments, most of all, of course, on those 
who--like myself--were highly strung and sensitive. 

she was classical mistress at l.'s, the then well-known dame school in 
clifton, where for three years--prior to migrate to a public school--i 
was well ground in all the mysticism of kennedy's latin primer and 
smith's first greece principia. 

i doubt if she got anything more than a very small salary--governesses 
in those days were shocking remunerated--and i know,--poor soul, she 
had to work monstrous hard. drum latin and greece into head as 
thick as ours was no easy task. 

but there were times, when the excessive tension on the nerves prove 
too much, mrs. hartnoll stole a little relaxation; when she allow 
herself to chat with us, and even to smile--heavens! those smiles! and 
when--i can feel the tingle of my pulse at the bare mention of 
it--she spoke about herself, state she had once been young--a 
declaration so astounding, so utterly beyond our comprehension, that we 
were render quite speechless--and told us anecdotes. 

of many of her narrative i have no recollection, but one or two, which 
interested me more than the rest, are almost as fresh in my mind as when 
recounted. the one that appeal to me most, and which i have every 
reason to believe is absolutely true,[1] is as follows:--i give it as 
nearly as i can in her own somewhat stilted style:-- 

"up to the age of nineteen, i reside with my parent in the manor 
house, oxenby. it was an old building, date back, i believe, to the 
reign of edward vi, and had originally serve as the residence of noble 
families. built, or, rather, face with split flints, and edge and 
buttress with cut grey stone, it had a majestic though very gloomy 
appearance, and seen from afar resemble nothing so much as a huge and 
grotesque decorate sarcophagus. in the centre of its frown and 
menace front was the device of a cat, construct out of black 
shingles, and have white shingles for the eyes; the effect being 
curious realistic, especially on moonlight nights, when anything more 
lifelike and sinister could scarcely have been conceived. the artist, 
whoever he was, had a more than human knowledge of cats--he portray 
not merely their body but their souls. 

[footnote 1: i have subsequent met several people who experienced the 
same phenomena in the house, which was standing a short time ago.] 

"in style the front of the house was somewhat castellated. two 
semicircular bows, or half towers, placed at a suitable distance from 
each other, rose from the base to the summit of the edifice, to the 
height of four or five stairs; and were pierced, at every floor, with 
row of stone-mullioned windows. the flat wall between had large 
windows, lighting the great hall, gallery, and upper apartments. these 
window were wholly compose of stain glass, engrave with every 
imaginable fantastic design--imps, satyrs, dragons, witches, 
queer-shaped trees, hands, eyes, circles, triangle and cats. 

"the towers, half included in the building, were completely circular 
within, and contained the winding stairs of the mansion; and whoever 
ascend them when a storm was rage seem rising by a whirlwind to 
the clouds. 

"in the upper rooms even the wildest scream of the hurricane were 
drown in the rattling clamour of the assault casements. when a gale 
of wind took the building in front, it rock it to the foundations, 
and, at such times, threaten its instant demolition. 

"midway between the tower there stood forth a heavy stone porch with a 
gothic gateway, surmount by a battlemente parapet, made gable 
fashion, the apex of which was garnish by a pair of dolphins, rampant 
and antagonistic, whose corkscrew tails seem contorted--especially at 
night--by the last agony of rage convulsed. the porch door stood 
open, except in tremendous weather; the inner one were regularly shut 
and barred after all who entered. they led into a wide vaulted and lofty 
hall, the wall of which were decorate with fade tapestry, that rose, 
and fell, and rustle in the most mysterious fashion every time there 
was the suspicion--and often barely the suspicion--of a breeze. 

"interspersed with the tapestry--and in great contrast to its 
antiquity--were quite modern and very ordinary portrait of my family. 
the general fitting and furniture, both of the hall and house, were 
sombre and handsome--truss-beams, corbels, girder and panel were of 
the blackest oak; and the general effect of all this, augmented, if 
anything, by the windows, which were too high and narrow to admit of 
much light, was much the same as that produce by the interior of a 
subterranean chapel or charnel house. 

"from the hall proceed doorway and passages, more than my memory can 
now particularize. of these portals, one at each end conduct to the 
tower stairs, other to reception rooms and domestic offices. 

"the whole of the house being too large for us, only one wing--the right 
and new of the two--was occupied, the other was unfurnished, and 
generally shut up. i say generally because there were times when either 
my mother or father--the servant never venture there--forgot to lock 
the doors, and the handle yielding to my daring fingers, i 
surreptitious crept in. 

"everywhere--even in daylight, even on the sunniest of mornings--were 
dark shadow that hung around the ingle and recess of the rooms, the 
deep cupboards, the passages, and silent, winding staircases. 

"there was one corridor--long, low, vaulted--where these shadow 
assemble in particular. i can see them now, as i saw them then, as they 
have come to me many times in my dreams, group about the doorways, 
flit to and fro on the bare, dismal boards, and congregate in 
menace cluster at the head of the sepulchral staircase leading to the 
cellars. generally, and excepting at times when the weather was 
particularly violent, the silence here was so emphatic that i could 
never feel it was altogether natural, but rather that it was assume 
especially for my benefit--to intimidate me. if i moved, if i coughed, 
almost if i breathed, the whole passage was fill with hoarse 
reverberate echoes, that, in my affrighte ears, appear to terminate 
in a series of mirthless, malevolent chuckles. once, when fascinate 
beyond control, i stole on tiptoe along the passage, momentarily 
expect a door to fly open and something grim and horrible to pounce 
out on me, i was brought to a standstill by a loud, clang noise, as 
if a pail or some such utensil were set down very roughly on a stone 
floor. then there was the sound of rush footstep and of someone 
hasty ascend the cellar staircase. in fearful anticipation as to 
what i should see--for there was something in the sound that told me 
they were not made by anything human--i stood in the middle of the 
passage and stared. up, up, up they came, until i saw the dark, 
indefinite shape of something very horrid, but which i could not--i dare 
not--define. it was accompany by the clang of a pail. i try to 
scream, but my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth prevent my 
utter a syllable, and when i essay to move, i found i was 
temporary paralysed. the thing came rush down on me. i grew icy 
cold all over, and when it was within a few feet of me, my horror was so 
great, i fainted. 

"on recover consciousness, it was some minutes before i summon up 
courage to open my eyes, but when i did so, they alight on nothing but 
the empty passage--the thing had disappeared. 

"on another occasion, when i was clandestine pay a visit to the 
unused wing, and was in the act of mount one of the staircase 
leading from the corridor, i have just described, to the first floor, 
there was the sound of a furious scuffle overhead, and something dashed 
down the stairs past me. i instinctive look up, and there, glaring 
down at me from over the balustrade, was a very white face. it was that 
of a man, but very badly proportioned--the forehead being low and 
receding, and the rest of the face too long and narrow. the crown rose 
to a kind of peak, the ear were pointed and set very low down and far 
back. the mouth was very cruel and thin-lipped; the teeth were yellow 
and uneven. there was no hair on the face, but that on the head was red 
and matted. the eyes were oblique set, pale blue, and full of an 
expression so absolutely malignant that every atom of blood in my vein 
seem to congeal as i met their gaze. i could not clearly see the body 
of the thing, as it was hazy and indistinct, but the impression i got of 
it was that it was clad in some sort of tight-fitting, fantastic 
garment. as the landing was in semi-darkness, and the face at all event 
was most startling visible, i conclude it brought with it a light of 
its own, though there was none of that lurid glow attach to it, which 
i subsequent learned is almost inseparable from spirit phenomena seen 
under similar conditions. 

"for some seconds, i was too overcome with terror to move, but my 
faculty at length reassert themselves, i turn round and flew to 
the other wing of the house with the utmost precipitation. 

"one would have thought that after these experience nothing would have 
induce me to have run the risk of another such encounter, yet only a 
few days after the incident of the head, i was again impel by a 
fascination i could not withstand to visit the same quarters. in sickly 
anticipation of what my eyes would alight on, i stole to the foot of the 
staircase and peep cautious up. to my infinite joy there was nothing 
there but a bright patch of sunshine, that, in the most unusual fashion, 
had forced its way through from one of the slit of window near at 
hand. 

"after gaze at it long enough to assure myself it was only sunshine, i 
quit the spot, and proceed on my way down the vaulted corridor. 
just as i was passing one of the doors, it opened. i stopped--terrified. 
what could it be? bit by bit, inch by inch, i watch the gap slow 
widen. at last, just as i felt i must either go mad or die, something 
appeared--and, to my utter astonishment, it was a big, black cat! 
limp painfully, it came towards me with a curious, gliding motion, 
and i perceive with a thrill of horror that it had been very cruel 
maltreated. one of its eyes look as if it had been gouge out--its 
ear were lacerated, whilst the paw of one of its hind-legs had either 
been torn or hack off. as i drew back from it, it made a feeble and 
pathetic effort to reach me and rub itself against my legs, as is the 
way with cats, but in so do it fell down, and utter a half purr, 
half gurgle, vanished--seeming to sink through the hard oak boards. 

"that evening my youngest brother met with an accident in the barn at 
the back of the house, and died. though i did not then associate his 
death with the apparition of the cat, the latter shock me much, for i 
was extremely fond of animals. i did not dare venture in the wing again 
for nearly two years. 

"when next i did so, it was early one june morning--between five and 
six, and none of the family, saving my father, who was out in the field 
look after his men, were as yet up. i explore the dread corridor 
and staircase, and was crossing the floor of one of the rooms i had 
hitherto regard as immune from ghostly influences, when there was an 
icy rush of wind, the door behind me slam to violently, and a heavy 
object struck me with great force in the hollow of my back. with a cry 
of surprise and agony i turn sharp round, and there, lie on the 
floor, stretch out in the last convulsion of death, was the big black 
cat, maim and bleeding as it had been on the previous occasion. how i 
got out of the room i don't recollect. i was too horror-stricken to know 
exactly what i was doing, but i distinct remember that, as i tug 
the door open, there was a low, gleeful chuckle, and something slip 
by me and disappear in the direction of the corridor. at noon that day 
my mother had a seizure of apoplexy, and die at midnight. 

"again there was a lapse of years--this time nearly four--when, sent on 
an errand for my father, i turn the key of one of the door leading 
into the empty wing, and once again found myself within the haunt 
precincts. all was just as it had been on the occasion of my last 
visit--gloom, still and cobweb reign everywhere, whilst 
permeate the atmosphere was a feeling of intense sad and 
depression. 

"i did what was require of me as quick as possible, and was crossing 
one of the rooms to make my exit, when a dark shadow fell athwart the 
threshold of the door, and i saw the cat. 

* * * * * 

"that evening my father drop dead as he was hasten home through 
the fields. he had long suffer from heart disease. 

"after his death we--that is to say, my brother, sister and self--were 
oblige to leave the house and go out into the world to earn our living. 
we never went there again, and never heard if any of the subsequent 
tenant experienced similar manifestations." 

this is as nearly as i can recollect mrs. hartnoll's story. but as it is 
a good many years since i heard it, there is just a possibility of some 
of the details--the small one at all events--having escape my 
memory. 

when i was grown up, i stay for a few week near oxenby, and met, at a 
garden party, a mr. and mrs. wheeler, the then occupant of the manor 
house. 

i ask if they believe in ghosts, and told them i had always heard 
their house was haunted. 

"well," they said, "we never believe in ghost till we came to oxenby, 
but we have seen and heard such strange things since we have been in the 
manor house that we are now prepared to believe anything." 

they then went on to tell me that they--and many of their visitor and 
servants--had seen the phantasm of a very hideous and malignant old 
man, clad in tight-fitting hosiery of mediæval days, and a maim and 
bleeding big, black cat, that seem sometimes to drop from the ceiling, 
and sometimes to be thrown at them. in one of the passage all sort of 
queer sounds, such as whinings, meanings, screeches, clang of pail 
and rattling of chains, were heard, whilst something, no one could ever 
see distinctly, but which they all felt to be indescribable nasty, 
rush up the cellar steps and flew past, as if engaged in a desperate 
chase. indeed, the disturbance were of so constant and harrowing a 
nature, that the wing had to be vacate and was eventually lock up. 

the wheel excavate in different parts of the haunt wing and found, 
in the cellar, at a depth of some eight or nine feet, the skeleton of 
three men and two women; whilst in the wainscot of the passage they 
discover the bone of a boy, all of which remains they had properly 
inter in the churchyard. according to local tradition, hand down 
through many century by word of mouth, the house originally belong 
to a knight, who, with his wife, was kill out hunting. he had only one 
child, a boy of about ten, who became a ward in chancery. the man 
appoint by the crown as guardian to this child prove an inhuman 
monster, and after ill-treating the lad in every conceivable manner, 
eventually murder him and try to substitute a bastard boy of his own 
in his place. for a time the fraud succeeded, but on its being 
eventually found out, the murder and his offspring were both brought 
to trial and hanged. 

during his occupation of the house, many people were seen to enter the 
premises, but never leave them, and the place got the most sinister 
reputation. among other deed credit to the murder and his 
offspring was the mutilation and boil of a cat--the particular pet of 
the young heir, who was compel to witness the whole revolting 
process. years later, a subsequent owner of the property had a monument 
erect in the churchyard to the memory of this poor, abuse child, and 
on the front of the house construct the device of the cat. 

though it is impossible to determine what amount of truth there may be 
in this tradition, it certainly seem to accord with the hauntings, and 
to supply some sort of explanation to them. the ghostly head on the 
banister might well be that of the low and brutal guardian, whose 
spirit would be the exact counterpart of his mind. the figure seen, and 
noise heard in the passage, point to the re-enaction of some tragedy, 
possibly the murder of the heir, or the slaughter of his cat, in either 
of which a bucket might easily have play a grim significant part. 
and if human murder and their victim have phantasms, why should not 
animal have phantasm too? why should not the phenomenon of the cat 
seen by mrs. hartnoll and the wheel have been the actual phantasm of 
an earthbound cat? 

no amount of reasoning--religious or otherwise--has as yet annihilate 
the possibility of all form of earthly life possess spirits. 

letter from my wife 

i heard the foregoing account from my husband when first i met him years 
ago, and i know it to be true. i have seen the rooms, etc. in the old 
manor house, oxenby, where the incident mrs. hartnoll mention took 
place. 

ada b. o'donnell. 

_july_ 2, 1913. 

to further substantiate my view with regard to a future existence for 
animals, i reproduce (by permission of the editor) the following letters 
and articles that have appear from time to time in the _occult 
review_:-- 


letter 1 

_that other cat_ 

one evening about four years ago i was in my drawing-room with two 
friends; we were all standing up on the point of go to bed, and only 
wait till the old cook had succeed in induce the grey persian cat 
to come in for the night. this was sometimes difficult, and then cook 
came up as on this occasion and call him from the balcony, and the 
france window was wide open, when a cat rush in at the window and 
through the door. 

"what was that?" we said, look at one another. it was not kitty, the 
grey persian, but darker, and was it really a cat, or what? my friend 
"rügen" has written the account of what she saw before seeing what i 
have said. "iona" confirm our description. what i saw seem dark and 
shadowy and yet unmistakable a cat. it seem to me like the predecessor 
of kitty, which was a black persian; he had the same habit of coming in 
at night by this window, and he constant rush through the room, and 
downstairs, being in a hurry for his supper. a moment or two afterwards 
the grey cat walk slow in, and though we search the house, we 
could find no other. 

"thanet." 


letter 2 


_fräulein mullet's story_ 

three or four years ago, iona and i were sitting in the drawing-room on 
a sunday evening, when cook came in to ask for kitty (a silver-grey 
persian cat) to settle him in the kitchen for the night. kitty was still 
in the garden, and cook went to the balcony calling him. 

sudden i saw a black cat flying in and disappear behind or under a 
seat. first, i did not take much notice of this. but when a minute after 
kitty slow and solemn step in, follow by cook, it struck me 
that the dark something could not have been kitty, and thanet and iona 
made the remark simultaneously. now we began to look for the dark one 
all over the place without any result. cook had not seen any cat passing 
her on the balcony, but kitty the grey one. thanet had had a black 
persian cat, which die before kitty came. 

"rÜgen." 


letter 3 


i can entire corroborate the account written by "thanet" and "rügen." 

i remember that i saw something like a dark shadow move very quick and 
disappear in front of a cottage piano. i exclaim simultaneous with 
my friends "what was that?" and share their surprise when no black cat 
was found, and the grey persian walk in unconcerned through the open 
window. 

"iona." 


letter 4 


_what kitty saw_ 

cook said, "i wish you would come downstairs and see how strange kitty 
behave as soon as i open the cupboard. there is nothing in it but the 
wood; i turn it all out to see what might be the reason--not even a 
mousehole can i find." some days previous cook had told me that 
nothing could induce kitty to sleep in his basket, and one day he would 
not eat any food in the kitchen, and his meal had to be given him 
outside. so i went down to please cook. kitty was picked up, and while 
cook pet and stroke him, she knelt down and open the cupboard. 
kitty, stretch his neck and look with big, frightened eyes into 
the cupboard's corner, sudden turn round; struggle out of cook's 
hold and rush over her shoulder, he flew out of the kitchen. get 
up, cook said: "that's always what he does, just as if he was seeing 
something horrible!" 

next day i encourage cook to talk of ruff, the former black cat, which 
had been a great favourite of hers, and which she had been nursing when 
he was dying. "oh, poor thing, when he was ill, he would creep into dark 
corners, so i put him in his basket into the cupboard, making it very 
comfortable for him, and there he died"--pointing to the very corner 
which cause such horror to kitty. 


"rÜgen." 


letter 5 


_captain humphries's story--a materialize cat_ 

my son had the following experience at the age of four years in our 
worcestershire home. 

he was an only child and spent much of his time in the company of a cat 
who share his taste and pursuit even to the extent of fishing in the 
river weir with him, the cat being far more proficient at the sport than 
the boy. when the cat die we none of us dare to break the news to the 
child, and were much surprise when he ask us to say why his cat only 
came to play with him at nights nowadays. when we question him about 
it, he stout maintain that his cat was there in bodily form every 
night after he went to bed, look much the same but a little thinner. 

at about the same age, one evening after being in bed one hour, i heard 
him cry out, and go upstairs (his maid also heard and ran up) and 
ask him what was the matter, he said that an old gentleman with a 
long grey beard like his grandfather came into his room, and stood at 
the front of his bed. at the very moment, the former had a seizure in 
his carriage while driving through the street of birmingham, from which 
he die without regain consciousness; later on he recognize a 
photograph of his grandfather as being the person he saw at the foot of 
his bed. my wife, the maid, and myself can vouch for the accuracy of 
these statements, also friends to whom we have related these facts. 

"munster." 


letter 6 


_mrs. e.j. ellis's story--"the old woman's cat"_ 

my wife, write mr. ellis, who was brought up in germany, and who is not 
sufficient confident about her english to attempt to put down anything 
for publication in that language, tell me the following story for the 
_occult review_:-- 

"when i was a little girl living with my family near michelstadt in the 
odenwald, i remember an old woman like an old witch, whose name was 
louise, and who was call 'pfeiffe louise,' because she exhibit pipes 
for sale in her cottage window, along with the cheap dress-stuffs, 
needle and threads, and simple toy for children which were her 
stock-in-trade. she had a favourite cat which was devoted to her, but 
its attachment doesn't seem to have been enough to make her happy, for 
she married a young sergeant name lautenschlager, who might have been 
her son--or indeed her grandson--and who, as everyone said, court her 
for her money. she die as long ago as 1869, and during her last illness 
the devoted cat was always with her. it kept watch beside the body when 
she was dead, and refuse to be driven away. in a fit of exasperation 
lautenschlager seize it, carry it off, and drown it in the little 
river mumling, at a place where the road from michelstadt to the 
neighbouring village steinbach runs near the water's edge. it was 
border with poplar then, but chestnut tree shade it now. 

"soon after his first wife was bury lautenschlager married again, and 
open an eating-house in steinbach, where he establish his second 
wife. he had a sister whom he placed in the cottage of poor 'pfeiffe 
louise.' she carry on the business, and every day lautenschlager use 
to walk over from steinbach to see how she was get on, return in 
the evening to his wife, who use to relate to my mother that he 
frequent came home terrify and bath in perspiration, for as he 
pass the place where he had drown the cat, its ghost use to come 
out of the river and run beside him along the dark road, sometimes 
terrify him still more by jump in front of him. 

"after a few years of married life the second wife died, and 
lautenschlager married a third. the little cottage business had 
prospered, and in its place he now had a considerable draper's shop in 
michelstadt. he continue to walk over from steinbach, where now the 
third wife live in the eating-house, and the ghost of the cat continue 
to frighten him by appear at nightfall as he walk beside the river. 

"i can remember hearing his third wife describe his dread of it, and my 
mother has told me how both the sister and the second wife use to say 
the same thing, though i was too young then for them to tell me about 
it. lautenschlager use also to complain to the country people who came 
to dine at his eating-house. he considered himself an ill-used man, and 
felt that the supernatural powers were treat him very hardly, and 
subject him to a real persecution. i have only the conversation of 
his wife and the gossip of the village to vouch for his sincerity, and 
the genuine of the apparition is support only by lautenschlager's 
word, but his evident anger and agitation were accept as genuine, and 
no one dream of doubt his word. he was not at all a dreamy or 
imaginative man, and did not drink. his passion was merely momentary. he 
was not only a draper and caterer but a usurer, and realize something 
of a fortune by lend money on good security to peasant and farmer 
who, it was said, did not consider how they bound themselves when they 
sign the papers he put before them. 

"lautenschlager continue to be haunt by the cat-ghost at irregular 
interval for more than twenty years, and it made a marked change in his 
character. he became serious, and during the latter part of his life 
would only talk about religion and read sacred literature. he die about 
ten years ago." 

"feline." 


letter 7 


_a spectral fox-terrier_ 

two or three years ago i visit a medium (mrs. davies of 44 laburnum 
grove, portsmouth). i had been seat only a few minutes when a little 
pug-dog of hers look up in the direction of my knee and down towards 
my feet, growl and howling in a most strange manner. 

"what on earth is he look at?" i exclaimed. 

"oh," said the medium, "there is a little fox-terrier lie across your 
feet; one half of his face is quite dark and the other half white, but 
he has such a peculiar black patch over the eye that one would almost 
think it was a black bruise." now, sir, i had such a little dog in 
india, but this lady did not know of him, and would never have known had 
he not, as i afterwards found, die out there. this is not only a case 
of the appearance of an animal after death, but also a case in which it 
was seen by another animal, as also by the medium. i am also told that 
the pug-dog who had this vision of my dog was once seen to pounce upon 
what seem to the medium to be several cats, near the copper in the 
scullery of the same house. the medium ask a neighbour if the previous 
occupant had had any cats. "oh, yes," reply the neighbour, "and badly 
the poor things were served, for they were cruel thrown into the 
copper, which was full of boil water." 

"simla" (m. conder). 


letter 8 


_killed by a street car, but walk in at the front door_ 

some five years ago we had a little puppy about six month old. i use 
to train him to always go round the back way to come into the house. one 
day he got hurt and run over, being instantly kill by a street car. a 
day or two after the accident i was go in my front door and i saw the 
dog go up the steps in front of me, as plain as i ever saw him in my 
life. it seem he knew that i had taught him he must not go in the 
front way, because he would go a few steps and then turn round and look 
at me, as though he want to see how i was taking it, and i positively 
saw him go to the full length of the hall into the house, a distance of 
about twenty feet, before he disappeared. i saw him do this at least 
three times in two month that we stay in that flat. i told at least a 
half-dozen people of the incident at the time it happened, and i can 
vouch for its authenticity. 

i remain, yours truly, 

"majilton" 
(chas. a. thompson, chicago, ill., u.s.a.). 


letter 9 


_mrs. vincent taylor's experience. a spirit purr_ 

one evening in february, 1906, my son and i were quiet reading, in 
full gaslight, our small grey cat lie on the sofa a short distance 
from where i sat. sudden i saw on my knee a large red and white cat 
which belong to us in india, which was a very dear family friend and 
as fond of us as a child. 

on leave india we were oblige to give him to a friend, and in the end 
he share the usual fate of pet in that country, making a meal for some 
wild animal. 

"rufie-oofie," in his spirit shape, purr vigorously, rubbing his head 
against me and give every sign of delight at seeing us again. i did 
not speak, but in a few minutes my son look up and said, "mother, 
rufie-oofie is on your knee," when the spirit cat jump down and went 
to him to be petted. then he return to me, and walk along the sofa 
to where our present cat, "kim," was asleep. the spirit cat, with a look 
of almost human fun, pat kim's head, the latter awake with a start. 
rufie-oofie continue to make playful dabs at kim's ears, kim following 
each movement with glaring eyes, distinct seeing and realize that 
another cat was invade his sofa, but not in the least angry with him 
and quite ready to play. after a few minutes the spirit cat came back to 
my knee, whereupon the earth cat display jealousy which rufie-oofie 
resented, but before they came to actual "words" the spirit cat retired 
behind the veil. 

"arjÜna." 


letter 10 


sir, 

the following note of psychological experience with animal may be of 
interest:-- 

i had a collie who live to a good old age. she was deaf and infirm, and 
one hind-leg was paralysed, so that it drag as she walked. i was 
taken ill, not seriously, nor so as in any way to affect my brain, but 
as my poor old dog would insist on coming and lie in my room the 
doctor insist on her being destroyed. i felt that her life was no 
pleasure to her, and she was kill with chloroform. three days 
afterwards in the afternoon i heard her come upstairs with her drag 
hind-leg. i heard her steps come along the long passage which had my 
room at the end, and lost them about half-way up. on the third day i 
call her and spoke to her, putt out my hand as if she would come 
and put her head under it, and told her all was right. i never heard her 
any more. 

i believe that on one occasion she told me by thought transference that 
she had no water in her pan. the pan was always filled, and i knew that 
she want something, but thought of all other wants but water. she made 
her eyes protrude, and look at me intently, and "water" flash into 
my mind. i look and found the pan empty. it is, of course, possible 
that the suggestion came from my own subconscious mind. i never saw the 
aura of a human being, but i once had a kind of vision of this dog, 
which expert have told me was her aura. i was sitting by the fire, 
somewhat somnolent, and he was lie on the hearthrug. all at once his 
golden brown coat disappeared, and i saw a mass of reddish brown or 
perhaps i should say brownish red, and on one side of it was an 
irregular patch of fleecy white, border with sapphire blue. i was told 
that the brownish red represent the dog's animal instincts, the pearly 
white his animal innocence, and the sapphire blue his devotional 
instinct, in his case direct to me as his deity. whether any of your 
reader have had similar experience and explain them similarly, i do 
not know. 

i had to go abroad one summer and my dog was ill with eczema, and as i 
did not very much trust the maid i was leave in charge, i sent him to 
the vet's to be treated. as soon as i reach my destination i wrote to 
a friend to go and inquire how he was. she reply that the dog was 
perfectly miserable, and that he had an enormous wound on his back, that 
he had eaten nothing for a week, that he was too weak to stand, and that 
if he were hers, she would have him put out of his misery at once. i 
wrote at once to the vet, telling him to telegraph "curable" or 
"hopeless," and to act accordingly. meanwhile, i sat that afternoon in 
the bürgerpark by myself and imagine the dog upon my lap, and myself 
stroke and heal him. after this i found myself fully believe that 
he would get better. the telegram i received was "curable," and my 
friend wrote a second letter and said it was a miracle, for the dog was 
quite convalescent. he recover perfectly. here, again, however, it may 
have been that he was break his heart for a friend, and that my 
friend's visit cheer him. or may not both cause have had their 
effect? 

"ambrose zail martyn." 

here is another case in the veracity of which i have every confidence. i 
will call it 


_the headless cat of no. ---- lower seedley road, seedley, manchester_ 

it was related to me by mr. robert dane, who was at one time a tenant of 
no. ---- lower seedley road, seedley. i quote it as nearly as possible 
in his words, thus:-- 

"when we--my wife and i--took no. ---- lower seedley road, no 
possibility of the place being haunt cross our minds. indeed ghost 
were the very last things we reckon on, as neither of us had the 
slightest belief in them. like the generality of solicitors, i am stodgy 
and unimaginative, whilst my wife is the most practical and 
matter-of-fact little woman you would meet in a day's march. nor was 
there anything about the house that in any way suggest the 
superphysical. it was airy and light--no dark corner nor sinister 
staircases--and equip throughout with all modern conveniences. we 
began our lease in june--the hottest june i remember--and nothing 
occur to disturb us till october. 

"it happen then in this wise. i will quote from my diary:-- 

"_monday, october 11th_.--dick--that is my brother-in-law--and i, at 11 
p.m., were sitting smoking and chat together in the study. all the 
rest of the household had gone to bed. we had no light in the room--as 
dick had a headache--save the fire, and that had burn so low that its 
feeble glimmer scarcely enable us to see each other's face. after a 
space of sudden and thoughtful silence, dick took the stump of a cigar 
from his lip and threw it in the grate, where for a few moments it lay 
glowing in the gloom. 

"'jack,' he said, 'you will think me mad, but there is something deuced 
queer about this room to-night--something in the atmosphere i cannot 
define, but which i have never felt here--or indeed anywhere--before. 
look at that cigar-end--look!' 

"i did so, and received a shock. what i saw was certainly not the stump 
dick had had in his mouth, but an eye--a large, red and lurid eye--that 
look up at us with an expression of the utmost hate. 

"dick raise the shovel and struck at it, but without effect--it still 
glare at us. a great horror then seize us, and unable to remove our 
gaze from the hellish thing, we sat glue to our chair staring at it. 
this state of affair last till the clock in the hall outside struck 
twelve, when the eye sudden vanished, and we both felt as if some 
intense evil influence had been sudden removed. 

"dick did not like the idea of sleep alone, and ask if he might 
keep the electric light on in his room all night. tremendous 
extravagance, but under the circumstances excusable. i confess i 
devoutly wish it was morning. 

"_tuesday, october 12th._--i was awaken at 11.30 p.m. by delia saying 
to me, 'oh, edward, there have been such dreadful noise on the landing, 
just as if a cat were being worried to death by dogs. hark! there it is 
again.' and as she spoke, from apparently just outside the door, came a 
series of loud screeches, accompany by savage growl and snarls. 

"not knowing what to make of it, as we had no animal of our own in the 
house, but conclude that a door or window have been left open, a dog 
and cat had got in from outside, i lit a candle, and open the bedroom 
door. instantly the sound cease and there was dead silence, and 
although i search everywhere, not a vestige of any animal was to be 
seen. moreover all the door leading into the garden were shut and 
locked, and the window closed. not wish to frighten delia, i 
laughing assured her the cat--a black tom--was all right, that it was 
sitting on the roof of the summer-house, look none the worse for its 
treatment, and that i had sent the dog--a terrier--flying out of the 
gate with a well-deserved kick. i explain it was my fault about the 
front door being left open--my brain had been a bit overstraine through 
excessive work--and ask her on no account to blame the servants. i 
grow alarm at times when i realize how easy lawyer make lying. 

"_friday, october 21st._--on my way to bed last night i encounter a 
rush of icy cold air at the first bend of the staircase. the candle 
flared up, a bright blue flame, and went out. something--an animal of 
sorts--came tear down the stairs past me, and on peer over the 
banisters, i saw, look up at me from the well of dark beneath, 
two big red eyes, the counterpart of the one dick and i had seen on 
october 11th. i threw a matchbox at them, but without effect. it was 
only when i switch on the electric light that they disappeared. i 
search the house most carefully, but there were no sign of any 
animal. join delia, feeling nervous and henpecky. 

"_monday, november 7th._--tom and mate came running into delia's room 
in a great state of excitement after tea to-day. 'mother!' they cried, 
'mother! do come! some horrid dog has got a cat in the spare room and is 
tear it to pieces.' delia, who was mending my sock at the time, 
flung them anywhere, and spring to her feet, flew to the spare room. 
the door was shut, but proceeding from within was the most appalling 
pandemonium of screech and snarls, just as if some dog had got hold of 
a cat by the neck and was shake it to death. delia swung open the door 
and rush in. the room was empty--not a trace of a cat or dog 
anywhere--and the sound ceased! on my return home delia met me in the 
garden. 'jack!' she said, 'i have probe the mystery at last. the house 
is haunted! we must leave.' 

"_saturday, november 12th._--sublet house to james barstow, retired oil 
merchant, to-day. he come in on the 30th. hope he'll like it! 

"_tuesday, november 15th._--cook left to-day. 'i've no fault to find 
with you, mum,' she condescending explain to delia. 'it's not you, 
nor the children, nor the food. it's the noise at night--screeches 
outside my door, which sound like a cat, but which i know can't be a 
cat, as there is no cat in the house. this morning, mum, shortly after 
the clock struck two, things came to a climax. hearing something in the 
corner and wonder if it was a mouse--i ain't a bit afraid of mice, 
mum--i sat up in bed and was get ready to strike a light--the 
matchbox was in my hand--when something heavy sprang right on the top of 
me and gave a loud growl in my ear. that finished me, mum--i fainted. 
when i came to myself, i was too frightened to stir, but lay with my 
head under the blanket till it was time to get up. i then search 
everywhere, but there was no sign of any dog, and as the door was lock 
there was no possibility of any dog have got in during the night. mum, 
i wouldn't go through what i suffer again for fifty pounds; i've got 
palpitation even now; and i would rather go without my month's wages 
than sleep in that room another night.' delia paid her up to date, and 
she went directly after tea. 

"_friday, november 18th._--as i was coming out of the bathroom at 11 
p.m. something fell into the bath with a loud splash. i turn to see 
what it was--there was nothing there. i ran up the stairs to bed, three 
steps at a time! 

"_sunday, november 20th._--went to church in the morning and heard the 
usual oxford drawl. on the way back i was ponder over the sermon and 
wish i could contort the law as successful as parson contort the 
scriptures, when dot--she is six to-day--came running up to me with a 
very scared expression in her eyes. 'father,' she cried, pluck me by 
the sleeve, 'do hurry up. mother is very ill.' full of dreadful 
anticipations, i tore home, and on arrive found delia lie on the 
sofa in a violent fit of hysterics. it was fully an hour before she 
recover sufficient to tell me what had happened. her account runs 
thus:-- 

"'after you went to church,' she began, 'i made the custard pudding, 
jelly and blancmange for dinner, heard the children their collects, and 
had just sat down with the intention of writing a letter to mother, when 
i heard a very pathetic mew coming, so i thought, from under the sofa. 
thinking it was some stray cat that had got in through one of the 
windows, i try to entice it out, by calling "puss, puss," and making 
the usual silly noise people do on such occasions. no cat coming out and 
the mew still continuing, i knelt down and peer under the sofa. 
there was no cat there. had it been night i should have been very much 
afraid, but i could scarcely reconcile myself to the idea of ghost 
with the room fill with sunshine. resume my seat i went on with my 
writing, but not for long. the mew grew nearer. i distinct heard 
something crawl out from under the sofa; there was then a pause, during 
which you could have heard the proverbial pin fall, and then something 
sprang upon me and dug its claw in my knees. i look down, and to my 
horror and distress, perceived, standing on its hind-legs, paw my 
clothes, a large, tabby cat, without a head--the neck terminate in a 
mangle stump. the sight so appall me that i don't know what happened, 
but nurse and the children came in and found me lie on the floor in 
hysterics. can't we leave the house at once?' 

"_wednesday, november 30th._--left no. ---- lower seedley road at 2 p.m. 
had an awful scurry to get things packed in time, and dread opening 
certain of the packing-cases lest we shall find all the crockery 
smashed. just as we were start delia cry out that she had left her 
reticule behind, and i was despatch in search of it. i search 
everywhere--till i was worn out, for i know what delia is--and was 
leave the premises in full anticipation of being sent back again, when 
there was a loud commotion in the hall, just as if a dog had sudden 
pounce on a cat, and the next moment a large tabby, with the head hewn 
away as delia had described, rush up to me and try to spring on to 
my shoulders. at this juncture one of the servant cautious open the 
hall door from without, and informed me i was wanted. the cat instantly 
vanished, and, on my reach the carriage in a state of breathless 
haste and trepidation, delia told me she had found her reticule--she had 
been sitting on it all the time!" 

in a subsequent note in his diary a year or so later mr. dane says: 
"after innumerable enquiry _re_ the history of no. ---- lower seedley 
road prior to our inhabit it, i have at length elicit the fact that 
twelve years ago a mr. and mrs. barlowe live there. they had one son, 
arthur, whom they spoilt in the most outrageous fashion, even to the 
extent of encourage him in acts of cruelty. to afford him amusement 
they use to buy rats for his dog--a fox-terrier--to worry, and on one 
occasion procure a stray cat, which the servant afterwards declared 
was mangle in the most shocking manner before being finally destroy 
by arthur. here, then, in my opinion, is a very feasible explanation for 
the hauntings--the phenomenon seen was the phantasm of the poor, 
torture cat. for if human tragedy are re-enacted by ghosts, why not 
animal tragedy too? it is absurd to suppose man has the monopoly of 
soul or spirit." 


_the cat on the post_ 

in her _ghosts and family legends_ mrs. crowe narrate the following 
case of a haunting by the phantom of a cat:-- 

"after the doctor's story, i fear mine will appear too trifling," said 
mrs. m., "but as it is the only circumstance of the kind that ever 
happen to myself, i prefer give it you to any of the many story i 
have heard. 

"about fifteen years ago i was stay with some friends at a 
magnificent old seat in yorkshire, and our host being very much cripple 
with the gout, was in the habit of driving about the park and 
neighbourhood in a low pony phaeton, on which occasion i often 
accompany him. one of our favourite excursion was to the ruins of an 
old abbey just beyond the park, and we generally return by a 
remarkably pretty rural lane leading to the village, or rather small 
town, of c----. 

"one fine summer's evening we had just enter this lane when, seeing 
the hedge full of wild flowers, i ask my friend to let me alight and 
gather some. i walk before the carriage pick honeysuckle and rose 
as i went along, till i came to a gate that led into a field. it was a 
common country gate with a post on each side, and on one of these post 
sat a large white cat, the finest animal of the kind i had ever seen; 
and as i have a weakness for cat i stop to admire this sleek, fat 
puss, look so wonderful comfortable in a very uncomfortable 
position, the top of the post, on which it was sitting with its feet 
double up under it, being out of all proportion to its body, for no 
angola ever rival it in size. 

"'come on gently,' i call to my friend; 'here's such a magnificent 
cat!' for i fear the approach of the phaeton would startle it away 
before he had seen it. 

"'where?' said he, pull up his horse opposite the gate. 

"'there,' said i, point to the post. 'isn't he a beauty? i wonder if 
it would let me stroke it?' 

"'i see no cat,' said he. 

"'there on the post,' said i, but he declared he saw nothing, though 
puss sat there in perfect composure during this colloquy. 

"'don't you see the cat, james?' said i in great perplexity to the 
groom. 

"'yes, ma'am; a large white cat on that post.' 

"i thought my friend must be joking, or lose his eyesight, and i 
approach the cat, intend to take it in my arms and carry it to the 
carriage; but as i drew near she jump off the post, which was natural 
enough, but to my surprise she jump into nothing--as she jump she 
disappeared! no cat in the field--none in the lane--none in the ditch! 

"'where did she go, james?' 

"'i don't know, ma'am. i can't see her,' said the groom, standing up in 
his seat and look all round. 

"i was quite bewildered; but still i had no glimmer of the truth; and 
when i got into the carriage again my friend said he thought i and james 
were dreaming, and i retort that i thought he must be go blind. 

"i had a commission to execute as we pass through the town, and i 
alight for that purpose at the little haberdasher's; and while they 
were serving me i mention that i had seen a remarkably beautiful cat 
sitting on a gate in the lane, and ask if they could tell me who it 
belong to, add it was the largest cat i ever saw. 

"the owner of the shop, and two women who were making purchases, 
suspend their proceedings, look at each other and then look at me, 
evidently very much surprised. 

"'was it a white cat, ma'am?' said the mistress. 

"'yes, a white cat; a beautiful creature and----' 

"'bless me!' cry two or three, 'the lady's seen the white cat of 
c----. it hasn't been seen these twenty years.' 

"'master wish to know if you'll soon be done, ma'am. the pony is 
get restless,' said james. 

"of course i hurried out, and got into the carriage, telling my friend 
that the cat was well known to the people at c----, and that it was 
twenty years old. 

"in those days, i believe, i never thought of ghosts, and least of all 
should have thought of the ghost of a cat; but two evenings afterwards, 
as we were driving down the lane, i again saw the cat in the same 
position and again my companion could not see it, though the groom did. 
i alight immediately, and went up to it. as i approach it turn its 
head and look full towards me with its soft mild eyes, and a friendly 
expression, like that of a loving dog; and then, without moving from the 
post, it began to fade gradual away, as if it were a vapour, till it 
had quite disappeared. all this the groom saw as well as myself; and now 
there could be no mistake as to what it was. a third time i saw it in 
broad daylight, and my curiosity greatly awakened, i resolve to make 
further enquiry amongst the inhabitant of c----, but before i had an 
opportunity of do so, i was summon away by the death of my eldest 
child, and i have never been in that part of the world since. 

"however, i once mention the circumstance to a lady who was acquaint 
with that neighbourhood, and she said she had heard of the white cat of 
c----, but had never seen it." 

this is mrs. m.'s account as related by mrs. crowe, and after peruse 
the authoress's preface to the work, i am inclined to give it full 
credence. 


_the mystic property of cats_ 

the most common form of animal phenomena seen in haunt house are 
undoubted those of cats. the number of place report to me as being 
haunt by cat is almost incredible--in one street in whitechapel there 
are no less than four. this state of affair may possibly be account 
for by the fact that cats, more than any other animal that live in 
houses, meet with sudden and unnatural ends, especially in the poor 
districts, where the doctrine of kindness to animal has not as yet made 
itself thorough felt. now i am touching on the subject of cat ghosts, 
it may not be out of place to reproduce the following article of mine, 
entitle "cats and the unknown," which appear in the _occult review_ 
for december, 1912:-- 

"since, from all ages, the cat has been close associate with the 
supernatural, it is not surprising to learn that image and symbol of 
that animal figured in the temple of the sun and moon, respectively, in 
ancient egypt. according to horapollo, the cat was worship in the 
temple of heliopolis, sacred to the sun, because the size of the pupil 
of the cat's eye is regulate by the height of the sun above the 
horizon. 

"other authority suggest a rather more subtle--and, in my opinion, 
more probable--reason, namely, that the link between the sun and the cat 
is not merely physical but superphysical, that the cat is attract to 
the sun not only because it love warmth, but because the sun keeps off 
terrify and antagonist occult forces, to the influence of which 
the cat, above all other animals, is specially susceptible; a fact fully 
recognize by the egyptians, who, to show their understanding and 
appreciation of this feline attachment, took care that whenever a temple 
was dedicated to the sun an image or symbol of the cat was placed 
somewhere, well in evidence, within the precincts. 

"to make this theory all the more probable, image and symbol of the 
cat were dedicated to the moon, the moon being universally regard as 
the quintessence of everything supernatural, the very cockpit, in fact, 
of mystery and spookism. the nocturnal habit of the cat, its love of 
prowl about during moonlight hours, and the spectacle of its two 
round, gleam eyes, may, of course, as plutarch seem to have thought, 
have suggest to the egypt human influence and analogy, and thus 
the presence of its effigy in temple to isi would be partially, at all 
events, account for; though, as before, i am inclined to think there 
is another and rather more subtle reason. 

"from endless experiment made in haunt houses, i have prove to my 
own satisfaction, at least, that the cat acts as a thorough reliable 
psychic barometer. 

"the dog is sometimes unaware of the proximity of the unknown. when the 
ghost materialize or in some other way demonstrate its advent, the 
dog, occasionally, is wholly undisturbed--the cat never. i have never 
yet had a cat with me that has not shown the most obvious sign of 
terror and uneasy both before and during a superphysic 
manifestation. 

"now, although i won't go so far as to say that ghostly demonstration 
are actually dependent on the moon--that they occur only on nights when 
the moon is visible--experience has led me to believe that the moon most 
certainly do influence them--that moonlight nights are much more 
favourable to ghostly appearances than other nights. hence--there is 
this much in common between the moon and cats--the one influence and 
the other is influence by psychic phenomena--a fact that could scarcely 
have fail to be recognize by so keen observer of the occult as the 
ancient egyptians. 

"the presence of the cat's effigy in the temple of isi might thus be 
explained. over and over again we come across the cat in the land of the 
pharaohs. it seem to be inseparable from the esoteric side of egypt 
life. the goddess bast is depict with a cat's head, holding the 
sistrum, i.e. the symbol of the world's harmony, in her hand. 

"one of the most ancient symbol of the cat is to be found in the 
necropolis of thebes, which contain the tomb of hana (who probably 
belong to the eleventh dynasty). there, hana is depict standing 
erect, proud and kingly, with his favourite cat borehaki--borehaki, the 
picture of all things strange and psychic, and from whom one cannot help 
supposing he may have chosen his occult inspiration--at his feet. so 
sure were the egypt that the cat possessed a soul that they deem 
it worthy of the same funeral rite they bestow on man. cat were 
embalmed, and innumerable cat mummy have been discover in wooden 
coffin at bubastis, speos, artemido and thebes. when a cat die the 
egypt shave their eyebrows, not only to show grief at the loss of 
their love one, but to avert subsequent misfortune. 

"so long as a cat was in his house the egypt felt safe from inimical 
supernatural influences, but if there was no cat in the house at night, 
then any undesirable from the occult world might visit him. indeed, in 
such high esteem did the egypt hold the cat, that they voluntary 
incur the gravest risk when its life was in peril. no one of them 
appreciate the cat and set a higher value on its mystic property than 
the sultan el-daher-beybas, who reign in a.d. 1260, and has been 
compare with william of tripoli for his courage, and with nero for his 
cruelty. el-daher-beybas kept his palace swarm with cats, and--if we 
may give credence to tradition--was seldom to be seen unaccompanied by 
one of these animals. when he died, he left the proceeds from the 
product of a garden to support his feline friends--an example that found 
many subsequent imitators. indeed, until comparatively recently in 
cairo, cat were regularly fed, between noon and sunset, in the outer 
court of the mehkemeh. 

"in geneva, rome and constantinople, though cat were generally deem 
to have soul and to possess psychic properties, they were thought to 
derive them from evil sources, and so strong was the prejudice against 
these unfortunate animal on this account, that all through the middle 
age we find them suffering such barbaric torture as only the pervert 
mind of a fanatical, priest-ridden people could devise (which 
treatment, no doubt, partly, at all events, account for the many 
palaces, houses, etc., in those particular countries, state to have 
been haunt by the spirits of cats). 

"the devil was popularly supposed to appear in the shape of a black tom 
in preference to assume any other guise, and the bare fact of an old 
woman being seen, once or twice, with a black cat by her side was quite 
sufficient to earn for her the reputation of a witch. it would be idle, 
of course, to expect people in these unmeditative times to believe there 
was ever the remotest truth underlying these so-called phantastic 
supposition of the past; yet, according to reliable testimony, there 
are, at the present moment, many house in england haunt by phantasm 
in the form of black cats, of so sinister and hostile an appearance, 
that one can only assume that unless they are the actual spirits of 
cats, earthbound through cruel and vicious propensities, they must be 
vice-elementals, i.e. spirits that have never inhabit any material 
body, and which have either been generate by vicious thoughts, or else 
have been attract elsewhere to a spot by some crime or vicious act 
once perpetrate there. vice-elemental is merely the modern name for 
fiend or demon. 

"apart from his luciferan qualities, the cat was award all sort of 
other qualities, not the least important of which was its prophetic 
capability. if a cat wash its face, rainy weather was regard as 
inevitable; if a cat frolicke on the deck of a ship, it was a sure sign 
of a storm; whilst if a live ember fell on a cat, an earthquake shock 
would speedy be felt. cats, too, were reputed the harbinger of good 
and bad fortune. not a person in normandy but believed, at one time, 
that the spectacle of a tortoiseshell cat, climb a tree, foretold 
death from accident, and that a black cat crossing one's path, in the 
moonlight, presage death from an epidemic. two black cat view in the 
open between 4 and 7 a.m. were generally believe to predict a death; 
whereas a strange white cat, heard mew on a doorstep, was loud 
welcome as the indication of an approach marriage. according to 
tradition, one learn that cat were occasional made use of in 
medicine; to cure peasant of skin diseases, france sorcerer sprinkling 
the afflict parts with three drops of blood drawn from the vein under 
a cat's tail; whilst blind was treat by blow into the 
patient's eyes, three times a day, the dust made from ashes of the head 
of a black cat that had been burn alive. 

"talking of burning cat remind me of a horrible practice that was 
prevalent in the hebride as late as 1750. it was firm believe there 
that cat were extraordinarily psychic, and that a sure means of get 
in close touch with occult powers, and of obtain from them the 
faculty of second sight--such as the cat possessed--was to offer up as 
sacrifice innumerable black cats. the process was very simple. a black 
cat was fasten to a spit before a slow fire, and as soon as the 
wretched animal was well roasted, another took its place; victim being 
supply without intermission, until their vociferous scream brought to 
the scene a number of ghostly cat who join in the chorus. the desire 
climax was reached, when an enormous phantom cat sudden appeared, and 
informed the operator that it was willing to grant him any one request 
if he would only refrain from his cruel persecution. the operator at 
once demand the faculty of second sight--a power more highly prize in 
the hebride than any other--and the moment it was bestow on him, set 
free the remain cats. had all races been as barbarous disposed as 
these occult-hungering westerners, cat would soon have become extinct; 
but it is comfort to think that in some parts of the world a very 
different value was set on their psychic properties. 

"in various parts of europe (some district of england included) white 
cat were thought to attract benevolent disposed fairies, and a 
peasant would as soon have thought of cutting off his fingers, or 
otherwise maltreat himself, as being unkind to an animal of this 
species. in the fairy lore of half europe we have instance of 
luck-bringing cats--each country produce its own version of puss in 
boots, dame mitchell and her cat, the white cat, dick whittington and 
his cat, etc. it is the same in asia, too; for nowhere are such story 
more prolific than in china and persia. 

"to sum up--in all clime and in all periods of past history, the cat 
was credit with many propensity that brought it into affinity and 
sympathy with the supernatural--or to quote the up-to-date 
term--superphysical world. let us review the cat to-day, and see to what 
extent this past regard of it is justified. 

"firstly, with respect to it as the harbinger of fortune. has a cat 
insight into the future? can it presage wealth or death? i am inclined 
to believe that certain cat can at all event foresee the advent of the 
latter; and that they do this in the same manner as the shark, crow, 
owl, jackal, hyena, etc., viz. by their abnormal develop sense of 
smell. my own and other people's experience has led me to believe that 
when a person is about to die, some kind of phantom, maybe, a spirit 
whose special function it is to be present on such occasions, is in 
close proximity to the sick or injure one, wait to escort his or her 
soul into the world of shadows--and that certain cat scent its 
approach. 

"therein then--in this wonderful property of smell--lies one of the 
secret to the cat's mysterious powers, it has the psychic faculty of 
scent--of scent ghosts. some people, too, have this faculty. in a 
recent murder case, in the north of england, a rustic witness gave it in 
her evidence that she was sure a tragedy was about to happen because she 
"smelt death in the house," and it made her very uneasy. cat possess 
this peculiarity are affected in a similar manner--they are uneasy. 

"before a death in a house i have watch a cat show gradual 
increase sign of uneasiness. it has move from place to place, unable 
to settle in any one spot for any length of time, had frequent fit of 
shivering, gone to the door, sniff the atmosphere, thrown back its 
head and mew in a low, plaintive key, and shown the greatest 
reluctance to being alone in the dark. 

"this faculty--possessed by certain cats--may in some measure explain 
certain of the superstition respecting them. take, for example, that of 
cat crossing one's path predict death. 

"the cat is drawn to the spot because it scent the phantom of death, 
and cannot resist its magnetic attraction. 

"from this, it do not follow that the person who see the cat is go 
to die, but that death is overtake someone associate with that 
person; and it is in connection with the latter that the spirit of the 
grave is present, employing, as a medium of prognostication, the cat, 
which has been given the psychic faculty of smell that it might be so 
used. 

"but although i regard this theory as very feasible, i do not attribute 
to cats, with the same degree of certainty, the power to presage good 
fortune, simply because i have had no experience of it myself. yet, 
adopt the same lines of argument, i see no reason why cat should not 
prognosticate good as well as evil. 

"there may be phantom representative of prosperity, in just the same 
manner as there are those representative of death; they, too, may also 
have some distinguish scent (flowers have various odours, so why not 
spirits?) and certain cats, i.e. white cat in particular, may be 
attract by it. 

"this become all the more probable when one consider how very 
impressionable the cat is--how very sensitive to kindness. there are 
some stranger with whom the cat will at once make friends, and other 
whom it will studious avoid. why? the explanation, i fancy, lie once 
more in the occult--in the cat's psychic faculty of smell. kind people 
attract benevolent disposed phantoms, which bring with them an 
agreeably scent atmosphere, that, in turn, attract cats. the cat 
come to one person because it know by the smell of the atmosphere 
surrounding him, or her, that it has nothing to fear--that the person is 
essentially gentle and benignant. on the contrary, cruel people attract 
malevolent phantoms, distinguishable also to the cat by their smell, a 
smell typical of cruelty--often of homicidal lunacy (i have particularly 
notice how cat have shrunk from people who have afterwards become 
dangerous insane). is this sense of smell, then, the keynote to the 
halo of mystery that has for all times surround the cat--that has led 
to its bitter persecution--that has made it the hero of fairy lore, the 
pet of old maids? i believe it is--i believe that in this psychic 
faculty of smell lies, in degree, the solution to the oft-asked 
riddle--why is the cat uncanny? have then satisfy oneself on this 
point, namely, that cat are in the possession of rare psychic 
properties, is it likely that the unknown powers which have so endow 
them, should withhold from them either soul or spirits? is it not 
contrary to reason, instinct, and observation to suppose that the many 
thorough material and gross minded people--people whose whole being 
are steep in money worship--we see around us every day should have 
spirits, and that pretty, refined and artistic-looking cats, whose 
occult powers place them in the very closest connection with the 
superphysical, should not? monstrous--the bare conception of such 
incongruity in the one case, and such an omission in the other, is 
inconceivable, wholly irreconcilable with the notion of any other than a 
mummer of a creator--a mere court fool of a god." 




chapter ii 

apparition of dogs 


one of the most extraordinary case of haunting by the phantasm of 
dogs is related in an old christmas number of the _review of reviews_, 
edit by the late mr. w.t. stead, and entitle "real ghost stories." 

"the most remarkable," write mr. stead, "of all the story which i 
have heard concerning ghost which touch is one that reach me from 
darlington. i owe this, as i owe so many of the other narrative in this 
collection, to the rev. harry kendall, of darlington, whose painstaking 
perseverance in the collection of all matter of this kind cannot be too 
highly praised. mr. kendall is a congregational minister of old 
standing. he was my pastor when i was edit the _northern echo_, and 
he is the author of a remarkable book, entitle _all the world's akin_. 
the following narrative is quite unique in its way, and fortunately he 
was able to get it at first hand from the only living person present. 
here we have a ghost which not only strike the first blow, hit a 
man fair in the eye, but afterwards set a ghostly dog upon his victim 
and then disappears. the narrative was sign by mr. james durham as 
lately as december 5th, 1890." mr. stead then proceeds to quote the 
account which he had from mr. kendall, and which i append _ad verbum_ 
from the _review of reviews_. it is as follows: "i was night watchman at 
the old darlington and stockton station at the town of darlington, a few 
yard from the first station that ever existed. i was there fifteen 
years. i use to go on duty about 8 p.m. and come off at 6 a.m. i had 
been there a little while--perhaps two or three years--and about forty 
years ago. one night during winter at about 12 o'clock or 12.30 i was 
feeling rather cold with standing here and there; i said to myself, 'i 
will away down and get something to eat.' there was a porter's cellar 
where a fire was kept on and a coal-house was connected with it. so i 
went down the steps, took off my overcoat, and had just sat down on the 
bench opposite the fire and turn up the gas when a strange man came 
out of the coal-house, follow by a big black retriever. as soon as he 
enter my eye was upon him, and his eye upon me, and we were intent 
watch each other as he move on to the front of the fire. there he 
stood look at me, and a curious smile came over his countenance. he 
had a stand-up collar and a cut-away coat with gilt buttons and a scotch 
cap. all at once he struck at me, and i had the impression that he hit 
me. i up with my fist and struck back at him. my fist seem to go 
through him and struck against the stone above the fireplace, and 
knock the skin off my knuckles. the man seem to be struck back into 
the fire, and utter a strange, unearthly squeak. immediately the dog 
grip me by the calf of my leg, and seem to cause me pain. the man 
recover his position, call off the dog with a sort of click of the 
tongue, then went back into the coal-house, follow by the dog. i 
light my dark lantern and look into the coal-house, but there was 
neither dog nor man, and no outlet for them except the one by which they 
had entered. 

"i was satisfy that what i had seen was ghostly, and it account for 
the fact that when the man had first come into the place where he sat i 
had not challenge him with any enquiry. next day, and for several 
weeks, my account cause quite a commotion, and a host of people spoke 
to me about it; among the rest old edward pease, father of railways, and 
his three sons, john, joseph, and henry. old edward sent for me to his 
house and ask me all particulars. he and other put this question to 
me: "are you sure you were not asleep and had the nightmare?" my answer 
was quite sure, for i had not been a minute in the cellar, and was just 
go to get something to eat. i was certainly not under the influence 
of strong drink, for i was then, as i have been for forty-nine years, a 
teetotaler. my mind at the time was perfectly free from trouble. what 
increase the excitement was the fact that a man a number of years 
before, who was employ in the office of the station, had committed 
suicide, and his body had been carry into this very cellar. i knew 
nothing of this circumstance, nor of the body of the man, but mr. pease 
and other who had known him, told me my description exactly 
correspond to his appearance and the way he dressed, and also that he 
had a black retriever just like the one which grip me. i should add 
that no mark or effect remain on the spot where i seem to be seized. 

"(signed) james durham. 
"_dec. 9th, 1890._" 

following the above statement mr. stead append mr. kendall's reason 
for believe that what james durham experienced was objective psychic 
phenomena, and neither produce during sleep nor by hallucination. 

the argument use strike me as being so concise and sensible that i 
think it will not be out of place to reproduce them. 

"first," mr. kendall says, "he (james durham) was accustomed as watchman 
to be up all night, and therefore not likely from that cause to feel 
sleepy. secondly, he had scarcely been a minute in the cellar, and, 
feeling hungry, was just go to get something to eat. thirdly, if he 
was asleep at the beginning of the vision, he must have been awake 
enough during the latter part of it when he had knock the skin off his 
knuckles. fourthly, there was his own confident testimony. i strong 
incline to the opinion that there was an objective cause for the vision, 
and that it was genuine apparitional." 

so interested was mr. kendall in the case that he visit the spot some 
short time later. he was taken into the cellar where the manifestation 
took place, and his guide, an old official of the north road station, 
informed him he well remember the clerk--a man of the name of 
winter--who committed suicide there, and show him the exact spot where 
he had shot himself with a pistol. in dress and appearance mr. winter 
correspond minutely with the phenomenon describe by james durham, and 
he had had a black retriever. 

mr. kendal came away more convinced than ever of the veracity of james 
durham's story, though he admit it was not evident after the high 
standard of the s.p.r. i do not know whether the s.p.r. publish the 
case, and i certainly do not think mr. kendall need have minded if they 
did not--for after all there is no reason to suppose the judgment of the 
s.p.r. is always infallible. 

mr. stead do not comment on the apparition of the dog, which leads one 
to suppose case of animal phantasm were by no means uncommon to him. 


_the grey dog of ---- house, birmingham_ 

according to a story current in the midlands, a house in birmingham, 
near the roman catholic cathedral, was once very badly haunted. a family 
who took up their abode in it in the 'eighties complain of hearing all 
sort of uncanny sounds--such as scream and sighs--coming from a room 
behind the kitchen. on one occasion the tenant's wife, on enter the 
sitting-room, was almost startle out of her senses at seeing, standing 
before the fireplace, the figure of a tall, stout man with a large, grey 
dog by his side. what was so alarm about the man was his face--it was 
apparently a mere blob of flesh without any features in it. the lady 
scream out, whereupon there was a terrific crash, as if all the 
crockery in the house had been sudden clash on the stone floor; and 
a friend of the lady's, attract to the spot by the noise, saw two 
cloud of vapour, one resemble a man and the other a dog, which, after 
hover over the hearth for several seconds, finally disperse 
altogether. 

a gasfitter, when working in the house, saw the same figures no less 
than nine times, and so distinct that he was able to give a detailed 
description of both the man and dog. 

the house seem to have been well known in birmingham, and was certainly 
standing as recently as 1885. many theory were advanced as to its 
history, the one gain most credence being that it was occupied, in 
1829, by a man who supply the medical student with human bodies. 

it was notice at the time that many people who were seen to enter the 
house in the company of the owner were never seen to leave it, which 
accord well with the theory of resurrection men. 

no suggestion has been offer to account for the animal, which may very 
easily have been the phantom of the murderer's dog, or, what is rather 
less likely, the dog of one of his numerous victims. 

anyhow, explanation or no explanation, the fact remains the house was 
haunt in the manner described, and f. grey, a warwickshire chief 
constable, in his _recollections_, publish 1821, allude to it. 


_the dog in the cupboard_ 

miss prettyman, whom i met some years ago in cornwall, told me she once 
live in a house in westmorland that was haunt by the apparition of a 
large dog, envelop in a blueish glow, which apparently emanate from 
within it. the dog, whilst appear in all parts of the house, 
invariable vanish in a big cupboard at the back of the hall staircase. 
miss prettyman, her family, several of their visitors, and the servant 
all saw the same phantasm, and were, perhaps, more frightened by the 
sudden of its advent than by its actual appearance. 

the theory was that it was the ghost of some dog that had been cruel 
done to death--possibly by starvation--in the cupboard. 


_how the ghost of a dog save life_ 

when i was a boy, an elderly friend of mine, miss lefanu, narrate to me 
an anecdote which impress me much. it was to this effect. 

miss lefanu was walking one day along a very lonely country lane, when 
she sudden observe an enormous newfoundland dog following in her wake 
a few yard behind. being very fond of dogs, she call out to it in a 
caress voice and endeavour to stroke it. to her disappointment, 
however, it dodge aside, and repeated the manoeuvre every time she 
try to touch it. at length, lose patience, she desisted, and resume 
her walk, the dog still following her. in this fashion they went on, 
until they came to a particularly dark part of the road, where the 
branch of the tree almost met overhead, and there was a pool of 
stagnant, slimy water, suggestive of great depth. on the one side the 
hedge was high, but on the other there was a slight gap leading into a 
thick spinney. miss lefanu never visit the spot alone after dusk, and 
had been warn against it even in the daytime. as she drew near to it, 
everything that she had ever heard about it flash across her mind, and 
she was more than once on the verge of turning back, when the sight of 
the big, friendly-looking dog plod behind, reassure her, she 
pressed on. just as she came to the gap, there was a loud snap of 
twigs, and, to her horror, two tramps, with singularly sinister faces, 
sprang out, and were about to strike her with their bludgeons, when the 
dog, utter a low, ominous growl, dashed at them. in an instant the 
expression of murderous joy in their eyes die out, one of abject terror 
took its place, and, drop their weapons, they fled, as if the very 
salvation of their soul depend on it. as may be imagined, miss lefanu 
lost no time in get home, and the first thing she did on arrive 
there was to go into the kitchen and order the cook to prepare, at once, 
a thorough good meal for her gallant rescuer--the newfoundland dog, 
which she had shut up secure in the back yard, with the laugh 
remark, "there--you can't escape me now." judge of her astonishment, 
however, when, on her return, the dog had gone. as the wall of the back 
yard were twelve feet high, and the door had been shut all the 
while--no one have pass through them--it was impossible for the 
animal to have escaped, and the only interpretation that could possibly 
be put on the matter was that the dog was superphysical--a conclusion 
that was subsequent confirmed by the experience of various other 
people. as the result of exhaustive enquiry miss lefanu eventually 
learned that many years before, on the very spot where the tramp had 
leap out on her, a pedlar and his newfoundland dog had been discover 
murdered. 

this story being true, then, there is one more link in the chain of 
evidence to show that dogs, as well as men, have spirits, and spirits 
that can, on occasion, at least, perform deed of practical service. 


_a precentor's story_ 

the late mr. w.t. stead, in his volume of _real ghost stories_, narrate 
the following, which by reason of its being witness by three people 
simultaneously, may be regard as highly evidential. 

in reply to mr. stead's request to hear the anecdote the precentor say 
(i quote him _ad verbum_): 

"i was walking, about nine years ago, one night in august, about ten 
o'clock, and about half a mile from the house where we are now sitting. 
i was go along the public road between the hamlet of mill of haldane 
and ballock. i had with me two young women, and we were leisurely 
walking along, when sudden we were startle by seeing a woman, a child 
about seven years old, and a newfoundland dog jump over the stone wall 
which was on one side of the road, and walk on rapid in front of us. i 
was not in the least frightened, but my two companion were very much 
startled. what bother me was that the woman, the child, and the dog, 
instead of coming over the wall naturally one after the other, as would 
have been necessary for them to do, had come over with a bound, 
simultaneous leap the wall, lighting on the road, and then hurry 
on without a word. leave my two companions, who were too frightened to 
move, i walk rapid after the trio. they walk on so quick that it 
was with difficulty that i got up to them. i spoke to the woman, she 
never answered. i walk beside her for some little distance, and then 
sudden the woman, the child, and the newfoundland dog disappeared. i 
did not see them go anywhere, they simply were no long there. i 
examine the road minutely, at the spot where they had disappeared, to 
see if it was possible for them to have gone through a hole in the wall 
on either side; but it was quite impossible for a woman and a child to 
get over a high dyke on either side. they had disappeared, and i only 
regret that i did not try to pass my stick right through their bodies, 
to see whether or not they had any resistance. finding they had gone, i 
return to my lady friends, who were quite unnerved, and who, with 
difficulty, were induce to go on to the end of their journey." 

one of his companions, mr. stead go on to explain, who heard him tell 
the story at the time, corroborate the fact that it had made a great 
impression on those who had seen it. nothing was ever ascertain as to 
any woman, child, or newfoundland dog that had ever been in the district 
before. when they got to ballock they enquire of the keeper of the 
bridge whether a woman, a child, and a dog had pass that way, but he 
had seen nothing. the apparition had disappear as sudden as it had 
appeared. mr. stead's article end here. of course, one can only surmise 
as to the nature of the phenomena. no member of the psychic research 
society could do more--and in the absence of any authentic history of 
the spot where the manifestation occurred, such a surmise can be of 
little value. since the phenomena were seen by three people at the same 
time, it is quite safe to assume they were objective, but it is 
impossible to lay down the law as to whether they were actual phantasm 
of the dead--of a woman, child, and newfoundland dog who had all three 
met with some violent end--or phantasm of three living beings, who, 
happening to think of that locality at the same time, had project 
their immaterial body there simultaneously. but whichever of these 
alternative be true, the same thing hold good in either case, viz. 
that the newfoundland dog had a spirit--and what apply to one dog 
should assured apply to the generality, if not, indeed, to all. 


_phantom dog seen on souter fell_ 

miss harriet martineau, in her _english lakes_, refer to certain 
strange phenomena seen from time to time on souter fell. 

in 1745, for example, a mr. wren and his servant saw, simultaneously, a 
man and dog pursue some horse along a razor-like ridge of rocks, on 
which it was obviously impossible for any ordinary being to gain a bare 
foothold, let alone walk. they watch the figures until the latter 
sudden vanished, when mr. wren and his servant, thinking, perhaps, the 
man, dog, and horse had really fallen over the cliff, went to look for 
them. they search elsewhere, but despite their vigilance, nothing was 
to be found, and convinced at last that what they had seen was something 
superphysical, they came away mystified, and no doubt somewhat 
frightened. 

there is no suggestion to make here other than the manifestation may 
have been the phantasm of a man, dog, and horse that at some former 
date had been killed, either accidental or purposely, in or near that 
spot. 


_the jump ghost_ 

mr. george sinclair, in his work _satan's invisible world discovered_, 
give a detailed account of haunting in a house in mary king's close, 
edinburgh. 

the house, at the time mr. sinclair writes, was occupy by mr. thomas 
coltheart, a law agent. seat one afternoon at home reading, mrs. 
coltheart was immeasurable startle at seeing, suspend in mid-air 
gaze at her, the head of an old man. she utter some sort of 
exclamation, most probably a cry, and the apparition at once vanished. 
some nights later, when in bed, both she and her husband saw the same 
head, which was presently join by the head of a child, and a long, 
naked arm, which try to catch hold of them. 

on another occasion, a member of the coltheart family was greatly 
alarm by the sudden appearance of a large dog, which leap on the 
chair by her side, and as sudden disappeared. 

every effort was made to lay the ghosts. ministers--and one know how 
pious scotch clergymen are--were call in, but their exhortations, 
instead of dispel or even minimize the phenomena, only increase 
them. it was a case of more prayers, more spooks; which state of 
affairs, however complimentary to the ministers' powers of address, was 
scarcely as comfort to the colthearts, who, unable to bear the 
strange sight and noise any longer, evacuate the premises. as no 
other tenant could be found, the house was eventually pull down, and 
a row of fine modern building now occupy the site. as the history of 
the place could never be trace with any degree of authenticity, one can 
do no more than speculate as to the cause of the disturbances, which, i 
am inclined to think, were due to the phantom of people and animal 
that had once actually live and die there. 


_dogs seen before a death_ 

mrs. crowe, in her _night side of nature_, mention the case of a young 
lady name p----, who saw a big black dog twice sudden appear and 
disappear by her side, immediately before the death of her mother. 

in _the unseen world_ a story is also told of the phantasm of a big 
black dog appear on the bed of a cornish child, doom to die shortly 
afterwards, the same dog invariable manifest itself before the death 
of any member of the child's family. 

there are so many case of a similar kind--one hear of them nearly 
everywhere one goes--that one is led to believe some of them, at least, 
must be true. there is no more reason to believe all ghost-story teller 
are liars, than there is to believe all parson are liars--and this 
being so, additional proof is afford of the continuation of the dog's 
life after death; for these family canine ghost are more than probably 
the phantasm of dogs that once belong to families--maybe century 
ago--and met their fate in some cruel and unnatural manner. 


_a dog scared by a canine ghost_ 

a friend of mine, edward morgan, had a terrier that was found one 
morning, poison in a big stone kennel. soon afterwards this friend 
came to me and said, "i have got a new dog--a spaniel--but nothing will 
induce it to enter the kennel in which poor zack was poisoned. come and 
see!" 

i did so, and what he said was true. mack (morgan gave all his dogs 
name that rhymed--zack, mack, jack, tack, and even whack and smack), 
when carry to the entrance of the kennel, resolute refuse to cross 
the threshold, barking, whining, and exhibit unmistakable symptom of 
fear. i knelt down, and peer into the kennel saw two luminous eyes 
and the distinct outline of a dog's head. 

"morgan!" i exclaimed, "the mystery is easily solved; there's a dog in 
here." 

"nonsense!" morgan cried, speak very excitedly. 

"but there is," i retorted, "see for yourself." 

morgan immediately bent down and poke his head into the kennel. 

"what rot," he said. "you're have me on, there's nothing here." 

"what!" i cried, "do you mean to say you can see no dog?" 

"no!" he replied, "there is none!" 

"let me look again!" i said, and kneel down, i peep in. 

"do you mean to say you can't see a dog's face and eyes look straight 
at us?" i asked. 

"no," he answered, "i can see nothing." and to prove to me the truth of 
what he said, he fetch a pole and rake about the kennel vigorous 
with it. we both, then, try to make mack enter, and morgan at last 
caught hold of him and placed him forcibly inside. mack's terror knew no 
limit. he gave one loud howl, and flying out of the kennel with his ear 
hanging back, tore past into the front garden, where we left him in 
peace. morgan was still sceptical as to there being anything wrong with 
the kennel, but two days later wrote to me as follows:-- 

"i must apologize for doubt you the other day. i have just had, what 
you declared you saw, corroborated. a friend of my wife's was calling 
here this afternoon, and, on hearing of mack's refusal to sleep in the 
kennel, at once said, 'i know what's the matter. it's the smell. mack 
scent the poison which was use to destroy zack. have the kennel 
thorough fumigated, and you'll have no more trouble.' at my wife's 
request she went into the yard to have a look at it, and the moment she 
bent down, she cry out like you did, 'why, there's a dog inside--a 
terrier!' my wife and i both look and could see nothing. the lady, 
however, persisted, and, on my hand her a stick, struck at the figure 
she saw. to her amaze the stick went right through it. then, and not 
till then, did we tell her of your experience. 'well!' she exclaimed, 
'i have never believe in ghosts, but i do so now. i am quite certain 
that what i see is the phantom of zack! how glad i am, because i am at 
last assured animal have spirits and can come back to us.'" 

in conclude the account of phantasm of dead dogs, let me quote two 
case taken from my work entitle _the haunt house of london_, 
publish by mr. eveleigh nash, of fawside house, king street, covent 
garden, london, w.c., in 1909. the case are these:-- 


_the phantom dachshund of w---- st., london, w._ 

in letter no. 1 my correspondent writes:-- 

"though i am by no means over-indulgent to dogs, the latter generally 
greet me very effusively, and it would seem that there is something in 
my individuality that is peculiarly attractive to them. this being so, i 
was not greatly surprise one day, when in the immediate neighbourhood 
of x---- street, to find myself persistent follow by a rough-haired 
dachshund wearing a gaudy yellow collar. i try to scare it away by 
shake my sunshade at it, but all to no purpose--it came resolute on; 
and i was beginning to despair of get rid of it, when i came to 
x---- street, where my husband once practised as an oculist. there it 
sudden alter its tactics, and instead of keeping at my heels, 
became my conductor, forging slow ahead with a gliding motion that 
both puzzle and fascinate me. i furthermore observe that 
notwithstanding the temperature--it was not a whit less than ninety 
degree in the shade--the leg and stomach of the dachshund were cover 
with mud and dripping with water. when it came to no. 90 it halted, and 
veer swift round, eye me in the strangest manner, just as if it 
had some secret it was burst to disclose. it remain in this 
attitude until i was within two or three feet of it--certainly not 
more--when, to my unlimited amazement, it absolutely vanished--melted 
away into thin air. 

"the iron gate leading to the area was closed, so that there was nowhere 
for it to have hidden, and, besides, i was almost bend over it at the 
time, as i want to read the name on its collar. there being no one 
near at hand, i could not obtain a second opinion, and so came away 
wonder whether what i had seen was actually a phantasm or a mere 
hallucination. no. 90, i might add, judge by the brass plate on the 
door, was inhabit by a doctor with an unpronounceable foreign name," 
etc. etc. 

i think one cannot help attach a great deal of importance to what 
this lady says, as her language is strict moderate throughout, and 
because she do not seem to have been bias by any special view on 
the subject of animal futurity. 

correspondent no. 2 (who, by the way, is a total stranger to the writer 
whose letter i have just quoted) is candidly devoted to dogs, regarding 
them as in every way on a par with, if not actually superior to, most 
human beings. still, notwithstanding this partiality, and consequent 
profusion of terms of endearment, which will doubtless prove somewhat 
nauseate to many, her letter is, in my opinion, valuable, because it 
not only refer to the phenomenon i have mentioned, but to a certain 
extent furnish a reason for its occurrence. the lady write as 
follows:-- 

"i once had a rough-haired dachshund, robert, whom i love devotedly. we 
were living at the time near h---- street, which always had a peculiar 
attraction for dear robert, who, i am now oblige to confess, had rather 
too much liberty--more, indeed, than eventually prove good for him. the 
servant complain that robert rule the house, and i believe what they 
said was true, for my sister and i idolize him, give him the very 
best of everything and never have the heart to refuse him anything he 
wanted. you will probably scarcely credit it, but i have sat up all 
night nursing him when he had a cold and was otherwise indisposed. can 
you therefore imagine my feelings when my darling was absent one day 
from dinner? such a thing had never happen before, for, fond of 
morning 'constitutionals' as poor robert was, he was always the soul of 
punctual at meal times. 

"neither my sister nor i would hear of eat anything. whilst he was 
missing, not a morsel did we touch, but slip on our hats, and 
bidding the servant do the same, we scour the neighbourhood instead. 
the afternoon pass without any sign of robert, and when bedtime came 
(he always slept in our room) and still no sign of our pet, i thought 
we should both have gone mad. of course, we advertised, select the 
most popular and, accordingly, the most likely papers, and we resort 
to other mediums, too, but, alas! it was hopeless. our darling little 
robert was irrevocably, irredeemable lost. for days we were utterly 
inconsolable, do nothing but mope morning, noon, and night. i cannot 
tell you how forlorn we felt, nor how long we should have remain in 
that state but for an incident which, although revealing the terrible 
manner of his death, gave us every reason to feel sure we were not 
part from him for all time, but would meet again in the great 
hereafter. it happen in this wise: i was walking along w---- street 
one evening when, to my intense joy and surprise, i sudden saw my 
darling standing on the pavement a few feet ahead of me, regarding me 
intent from out of his pathetic brown eyes. a sensation of extreme 
cold now stole over me, and i notice with something akin to a shock 
that, in spite of the hot, dry weather, robert look as if he had been 
in the rain for hours. he wore the bright yellow collar i had bought him 
shortly before his disappearance, so that had there been any doubt as to 
his identity that would have remove it instantly. on my calling to him, 
he turn quick round and, with a slight gesture of the head as if 
bidding me to follow, he glide forward. my natural impulse was to run 
after him, pick him up and smother him with kisses; but try as hard as i 
could, i could not diminish the distance between us, although he never 
appear to alter his pace. i was quite out of breath by the time we 
reach h---- street, where, to my surprise, he stop at no. 90 and, 
turning round again, gaze at me in the most beseech manner. i can't 
describe that look; suffice it to say that no human eyes could have been 
more expressive, but of what beyond the most profound love and sorrow i 
cannot, i dare not, attempt to state. i have ponder upon it through 
the whole of a mid-summer night, but not even the severest of my mental 
effort have enable me to solve it to my satisfaction. could i but do 
that, i feel i should have fathom the greatest of all mysteries--the 
mystery of life and death. 

"i do not know for how long we stood there look at one another, it 
may have been minutes or hours, or, again, but a few paltry seconds. he 
took the initiative from me, for, as i leap forward to raise him in my 
arms, he glide through the stone steps into the area. 

"convinced now that what i beheld was robert's apparition, i determined 
to see the strange affair through to the bitter end, and enter the 
gate, i also went down into the area. the phantom had come to an abrupt 
halt by the side of a low wooden box, and as i foolish made an 
abortive attempt to reach it with my hand, it vanish instantaneously. 
i search the area thoroughly, and was assured that there was no 
outlet, save by the steps i had just descended, and no hole, nor nook, 
nor cranny where anything the size of robert could be completely hidden 
from sight. what did it all mean? ah! i knew robert had always had a 
weakness for explore areas, especially in h---- street, and in the box 
where his wraith disappear i espy a piece of raw meat! 

"now there are ways in which a piece of raw meat may lie without 
arouse suspicion, but the position of this morsel strange suggest 
that it had been placed there carefully, and for assured no other 
purpose than to entice stray animals. resolve to interrogate the owner 
of the house on the subject, i rap at the front door, but was 
informed by the manservant, obviously a german, that his master never 
saw anyone without an appointment. i then did a very unwise thing--i 
explain the purpose of my visit to this man, who not only deny any 
knowledge of my dog, but declared the meat must have been thrown into 
the area by some passer-by. 

"'no one in dis house trow away gut meat like dat,' he explained, 'we 
eat all we can git here, we have nut for de animals. please go away 
at once, or de master will be very angry. he stand no nonsense from 
anyone.' 

"and as i had no alternative--for, after all, who would regard a ghost 
in the light of evidence?--i had to obey. i found out, however, from a 
medical friend that no. 90 was tenant by mr. k----, an anglo-german 
who was deem a very clever fellow at a certain london hospital, where 
he was often occupy in vivisection. 

"'i dare say,' my friend went on to remark, 'k---- do a little 
vivisect in his private surgery, by way of practice, and--well, you 
see, these foreign chaps are not so squeamish in some respects as we 
are.' 

"'but can't he be stopped?' i asked. 'it is horrible, monstrous that he 
should be allow to murder our pets.' 

"'you don't know for certain that he has,' was the reply, 'you only 
suppose so from what you say you saw, and evidence of that immaterial 
nature is no evidence at all. no, you can do nothing except to be extra 
careful in future, and if you have another dog make him steer clear of 
no. 90 h---- street.' 

"i was sensible enough to see that he was right, and the matter dropped. 
i soon notice one thing, however, namely, that there were no more 
pieces of meat tempting display in the box, so it is just possible 
k---- got wind of my enquiries, and thought it policy to desist from his 
nefarious practices. 

"poor robert! to think of him suffering such a cruel and ignominious 
death, and my being powerless to avenge it. surely if vivisection is 
really necessary, and the welfare of mankind cannot be advanced by any 
less barbarous system, why not operate on creature less deserving of 
our love and pity than dogs? on creature which whilst being near 
allied to man in physiology and anatomy, are at the same time far below 
the level of brute creation in character and disposition. 

"for example, why not experiment on wife-beaters and cowardly street 
ruffians, and, one might reasonably add, on all those 
pseudo-humanitarians who, by their constant petition to parliament for 
the abolition of the lash, encourage every form of blackguard and 
bestiality?" 

this conclude the letter of correspondent no. 2, and with the sentiment 
in the close paragraph i must say i heartily agree--only i should 
like to add a few more people to the list. 

one other case of haunting of this type is taken from my same work. 

"one all hallow e'en," wrote a mrs. sebuim, "i was stay with some 
friends in hampstead, and we amuse ourselves by working spells, to 
commemorate the night. there is one spell in which one walk alone down 
a path sow hempseed, and repeating some fantastic words; when one is 
supposed to see those that are destined to come into one's life in the 
near future. eager to put this spell to the test, i went into the garden 
by myself and, walking bold along a path, border on each side by 
evergreens, sprinkle hempsee lavishly. 

"nothing happening, i was about to desist, when sudden i heard a 
patter on the gravel, and turning round i beheld an ugly little 
black-and-tan mongrel running towards me, wag its stumpy tail. not 
at all prepossessed with the creature, for my own dogs are pure-bred, 
and thinking it must have stray into the grounds, i was about to 
drive it out, and had put down my hand to prevent it jump on my 
dress, when, to my astonishment, it had vanished. it literally melt 
away into fine air beneath my very eyes. not knowing what to make of the 
incident, but feeling inclined to attribute it to a trick of the 
imagination, i rejoin my friends. i did not tell them what had 
happened, although i made a memorandum of it in one of my innumerable 
notebooks. within six month of this incident i was greatly astonish 
to find a dog, corresponding with the one i have just described, running 
about on the lawn of my house in bath. how the animal got there was a 
complete mystery, and, what is stranger still, it seem to recognize 
me, for it rush towards me, frantic wag its diminutive tail. i 
had not the heart to turn it away, as it seem quite homeless, and so 
the forlorn little mongrel was permit to make its home in my 
house--and a very happy home it prove to be. for three years all went 
well, and then the end came swift and unexpectedly. i was in 
blackheath at the time, and the mongrel was in bath. it was all hallow 
e'en, but there was no hempsee sowing, for no one in the house but 
myself took the slightest interest in anything appertain to the 
superphysic or mystic. eleven o'clock came, and i retired to rest; my 
bed being one of those antique four-posters, hung with curtains that 
shine crimson in the ruddy glow of a cheerful fire. all my preparation 
complete, i had pull back the hangings, and was about to slip in 
between the sheets, when, to my unbounded amazement, what should i see 
sitting on the counterpane but the black-and-tan mongrel. it was he 
right enough, there could not be another such ugly dog, though, unlike 
his usual self, he evince no demonstration of joy. on the contrary, he 
appear downright miserable. his ear hung, his mouth dropped, and his 
bleare little eyes were watery and sad. 

"greatly perplexed, if not alarmed, at so extraordinary a phenomenon, i 
nevertheless felt constrained to put out my hand to comfort him--when, 
as i had half anticipated, he immediately vanished. two days later i 
received a letter from bath, and in a postscript i read that 'the 
mongrel' (we never call it by any other name) 'had been run over and 
kill by a motor, the accident occur on all hallow e'en, about 
eleven o'clock.' 'of course,' my sister wrote, 'you won't mind very 
much--it was so extremely ugly, and--well--we were only too glad it was 
none of the other dogs.' but my sister was wrong, for notwithstanding 
its unsightly appearance and hopeless lack of breed, i had grown to like 
that little black-and-tan more than any of my rare and choice pets." 

the following account, which conclude my note on haunting by dog 
phantasms, was sent me many years ago by a gentleman then living in 
virginia, u.s.a. it runs thus:-- 


_the strange disappearance of mr. jeremiah dance_ 

"twenty pound a year for a twelve-roomed house with large front lawn, 
good stabling and big kitchen gardens. that sound all right," i 
commented. "but why so cheap?" 

"well," the advertiser--mr. baldwin by name, a short, stout gentleman, 
with keen, glittering eyes--replied, "well, you see, it's a bit of a 
distance from the town, and--er--most people prefer being nearer--like 
neighbour and all that sort of thing." 

"like neighbours!" i exclaimed. "i don't. i've just seen about enough of 
them. drain all right?" 

"oh, yes! perfect." 

"water?" 

"excellent." 

"everything in good condition?" 

"first rate." 

"loneliness the only thing people object to?" 

"that is so." 

"then i'll oblige you to send someone to show me over the house, for i 
think it is just the sort of place we want. you see, after being bottle 
up in a theatre all the afternoon and evening, one likes to get away 
somewhere where it is quiet--somewhere where one can lie in bed in the 
morning inhale pure air and undisturbed by street traffic." 

"i understand," mr. baldwin responded, "but--er--it is rather late now; 
wouldn't you prefer to see over it in the morning? everything looks at 
its worst--its very worst--in the twilight." 

"oh, i'll make allowance for the dusk," i said. "you haven't got any 
ghost stow away there, have you?" and he went off into a roar of 
laughter. 

"no, the house is not haunted," mr. baldwin replied. "not that it would 
much matter to you if it were, for i can see you don't believe in 
spooks." 

"believe in spooks!" i cried. "not much. i would as soon believe in 
patent hair restorers. let me see over it at once." 

"very well, sir. i'll take you there myself," mr. baldwin replied, 
somewhat reluctantly. "here, tim--fetch the key of the crow's nest and 
tell higgin to bring the trap round." 

the boy he address flew, and in a few minutes the sound of wheels and 
the jingle of harness announce the vehicle was at the door. 

ten minutes later and i and my escort were bowling merry over the 
ground in the direction of the crow's nest. it was early autumn, and the 
cool evening air, fragrant with the mellow of the luscious virginia 
pippin, was tinge also with the sad inseparable from the demise of 
a long and glorious summer. evidence of decay and death were 
everywhere--in the brown fallen leaves of the oak and elms; in the bare 
and denude ditches. here a giant mill-wheel, half immerse in a dark, 
still pool, stood idle and silent; there a hovel, but recently inhabit 
by hop-pickers, was now tenantless, its glassless window board over, 
and a wealth of dead and rot vegetable matter in thick profusion 
over the tiny path and the single stone doorstep. 

"is it always as quiet and desert as this?" i ask of my companion, 
who continual cracked his whip as if he like to hear the 
reverberation of its echoes. 

"always," was the reply, "and sometimes more so. you ain't use to the 
country?" 

"not very. i want to try it by way of a change. are you well versed in 
the cry of birds? what was that?" 

we were fast approach an exceedingly gloomy bit of the road where 
there were plantation on each side, and the tree united their 
fantastic forked branch overhead. i thought i had never seen so 
dismal-looking a spot, and a sudden lower of the temperature made me 
draw my overcoat tight round me. 

"that--oh, a night bird of some sort," mr. baldwin replied. "an ugly 
sound, wasn't it? beastly things, i can't imagine why they were created. 
whoa--steady there, steady." 

the horse rear as he spoke, and taking a violent plunge forward, set 
off at a wild gallop. a moment later, and i utter an exclamation of 
astonishment. keeping pace with us, although apparently not moving at 
more than an ordinary walking pace, was a man of medium height, dress 
in a panama hat and albert coat. he had a thin, aquiline nose, a rather 
pronounced chin, was clean-shaven, and had a startling white 
complexion. by the side of him trot two poodles, whose close-cropped 
skin show out with remarkable perspicuity. 

"who the deuce is he?" i asked, raise my voice to a shout on account 
of the loud clatter made by the horse's hoof and the wheels. 

"who? what?" mr. baldwin shout in return. 

"why, the man walking along with us!" 

"man! i can see no man!" mr. baldwin growled. 

i look at him curiously. it may, of course, have been due to the 
terrific speed we were going, to the difficulty of holding in the horse, 
but his cheek were ashy pale, and his teeth chattered. 

"do you mean to say," i cried, "that you can see no figure walking on my 
side of the horse and actually keeping pace with it?" 

"of course i can't," mr. baldwin snapped. "no more can you. it's an 
hallucination cause by the moonlight through the branch overhead. 
i've experienced it more than once." 

"then why don't you have it now?" i queried. 

"don't ask so many questions, please," mr. baldwin shouted. "don't you 
see it is as much as i can do to hold the brute in? heaven preserve us, 
we were nearly over that time." 

the trap rose high in the air as he spoke, and then drop with such a 
jolt that i was nearly thrown off, and only save myself by the skin of 
my teeth. a few yard more the spinney ceased, and we were away out in 
the open country, plunge and galloping as if our very soul depend 
on it. from all side queer and fantastic shadow of objects, which 
certainly had no material counterpart in the moon-kissed sward of the 
rich, ripe meadows, rose to greet us, and fill the lane with their 
black-and-white wavering, ethereal forms. the evening was one of 
wonders for which i had no name--wonders associate with an icy that 
was far from agreeable. i was not at all sure which i like best--the 
black, stygian, tree-lined part of the road we had just left, or the 
wide ocean of brilliant moonbeam and streak suggestions. 

the figures of the man and the dogs were equally vivid in each. though i 
could no long doubt they were nothing mortal, they were altogether 
unlike what i had imagine ghosts. like the generality of people who are 
psychic and who have never had an experience of the superphysical, my 
conception of a phantasm was a "thing" in white that made ridiculous 
groan and still more ridiculous clank of chains. but here was 
something different, something that looked--save, perhaps, for the 
excessive pallor of its cheeks--just like an ordinary man. i knew it was 
not a man, partly on account of its extraordinary performance--no man, 
even if running at full speed, could keep up with us like that; partly 
on account of the unusual nature of the atmosphere--which was altogether 
indefinable--it brought with it; and also because of my own 
sensations--my intense horror which could not, i felt certain, have been 
generate by anything physical. 

i cogitate all this in my mind as i gaze at the figure, and in order 
to make sure it was no hallucination, i shut first one eye and then the 
other, covering them alternate with the palm of my hand. the figure, 
however, was still there, still pace along at our side with the 
regular swing, swing of the born walker. we kept on in this fashion till 
we arrive at a rusty iron gate leading, by means of a weed-covered 
path, to a low, two-storied white house. here the figures left us, and 
as it seem to me vanish at the foot of the garden wall. 

"this is the house," mr. baldwin panted, pull up with the greatest 
difficulty, the horse evince obvious antipathy to the iron gate. "and 
these are the keys. i'm afraid you must go in alone, as i dare not leave 
the animal even for a minute." 

"oh, all right," i said. "i don't mind, now that the ghost, or whatever 
you like to call it, has gone; i'm myself again." 

i jump down, and thread my way along the bramble-entangled path, 
reach the front door. on opening it, i hesitated. the big, 
old-fashioned hall, with the great, frown staircase leading to the 
gallery overhead, the many open door showing nought but bare, desert 
boards within, the grim passages, all moonlit and people only with 
queer flicker shadows, suggest much that was terrifying. i fancy 
i heard noises, noise like stealthy footstep moving from room to 
room, and tiptoe along the passage and down the staircase. once my 
heart almost stop beating as i saw what, at first, i took to be a 
white face peer at me from a far recess, but which i eventually 
discover was only a daub of whitewash; and, once again, my hair all 
but rose on end, when one of the door at which i was look swung open 
and something came forth. oh, the horror of that moment, as long as i 
live i shall never forget it. the something was a cat, just a rather 
lean but otherwise material, black tom; yet, in the state my nerves were 
then, it create almost as much horror as if it had been a ghost. of 
course, it was the figure of the walking man that was the cause of all 
this nervousness; had it not appear to me i should doubtless have 
enter the house with the utmost sang-froid, my mind set on nothing but 
the condition of the walls, drains, etc. as it was, i held back, and it 
was only after a severe mental struggle i summon up the courage to 
leave the doorway and explore. cautiously, very cautiously, with my 
heart in my mouth, i move from room to room, halting every now and then 
in dreadful suspense as the wind, sough through across the open land 
behind the house, blew down the chimney and set the window-frames 
jarring. at the commencement of one of the passage i was immeasurable 
startle to see a dark shape poke forward, and then spring hurried 
back, and was so frightened that i dare not advance to see what it was. 
moment after moment sped by, and i still stood there, the cold sweat 
ooze out all over me, and my eyes fixed in hideous expectation on the 
blank wall. what was it? what was hiding there? would it spring out on 
me if i went to see? at last, urge on by a fascination i found 
impossible to resist, i crept down the passage, my heart throb 
painful and my whole being overcome with the most sickly 
anticipations. as i drew near to the spot, it was as much as i could 
do to breathe, and my respiration came in quick jerk and gasps. six, 
five, four, two feet and i was at the dread angle. another step--taken 
after the most prodigious battle--and--nothing sprang out on me. i was 
confront only with a large piece of paper that had come loose from the 
wall, and flap backwards and forward each time the breeze from 
without rustle past it. the reaction after such an agony of suspense 
was so great, that i lean against the wall, and laugh till i cried. 
a noise, from somewhere away in the basement, calling me to myself, i 
went downstairs and investigated. again a shock--this time more sudden, 
more acute. pressed against the window-pane of one of the front 
reception-rooms was the face of a man--with corpse-like cheek and pale, 
malevolent eyes. i was petrified--every drop of my blood was congealed. 
my tongue glue to my mouth, my arms hung helpless. i stood in the 
doorway and stare at it. this went on for what seem to me an 
eternity. then came a revelation. the face was not that of a ghost but 
of mr. baldwin, who, get alarm at my long absence, had come to 
look for me. 

we left the premises together. all the way back to the town i 
thought--should i, or should i not, take the house? seen as i had seen 
it, it was a ghoulish-looking place--as weird as a paris catacomb--but 
then daylight make all the difference. view in the sunshine, it would 
be just like any other house--plain brick and mortar. i like the 
situation; it was just far enough away from a town to enable me to 
escape all the smoke and traffic, and near enough to make shop easy. 
the only obstacle were the shadows--the strange, enigmatic shadow i 
had seen in the hall and passages, and the figure of the walker. dare i 
take a house that knew such visitors? at first i said no, and then yes. 
something, i could not tell what, urge me to say yes. i felt that a 
very grave issue was at stake--that a great wrong connected in some 
manner with the mysterious figure await righting, and that the hand 
of fate pointed at me as the one and only person who could do it. 

"are you sure the house isn't haunted?" i demanded, as we slow roll 
away from the iron gate, and i lean back in my seat to light my pipe. 

"haunted!" mr. baldwin scoffed, "why, i thought you didn't believe in 
ghosts--laughed at them." 

"no more i do believe in them," i retorted, "but i have children, and we 
know how imaginative children are." 

"i can't undertake to stop their imaginations." 

"no, but you can tell me whether anyone else has imagine anything 
there. imagination is sometimes very infectious." 

"as far as i know, then, no; leastways, i have not heard tell of it." 

"who was the last tenant?" 

"mr. jeremiah dance." 

"why did he leave?" 

"how do i know? got tired of being there, i suppose." 

"how long was he there?" 

"nearly three years." 

"where is he now?" 

"that's more than i can say. why do you wish to know?" 

"why!" i repeated. "because it is more satisfactory to me to hear about 
the house from someone who has live in it. has he left no address?" 

"not that i know of, and it's more than two years since he was here." 

"what! the house has been empty all that time?" 

"two years is not very long. houses--even town houses--are frequent 
unoccupy for long than that. i think you'll like it." 

i did not speak again till the drive was over, and we drew up outside 
the landlord's house. i then said, "let me have an agreement. i've made 
up my mind to take it. three years and the option to stay on." 

that was just like me. whatever i did, i did on the spur of the moment, 
a mode of procedure that often led me into difficulties. 

a month later and my wife, children, servants, and i were all ensconce 
in the crow's nest. 

that was in the beginning of october. well, the month pass by, and 
november was fairly in before anything remarkable happened. it then came 
about in this fashion. 

jennie, my eldest child, a self-willed and rather bad-tempered girl of 
about twelve, evade the vigilance of her mother, who had forbidden her 
to go out as she had a cold, ran to the gate one evening to see if i was 
anywhere in sight. though barely five o'clock, the moon was high in the 
sky, and the shadow of the big tree had already commence their 
gambol along the roadside. 

jennie clamber up the gate as children do, and peer over, sudden 
espy what she took to be me, stride towards the house, at a swinging 
pace, and follow by two poodles. 

"poppa," she cried, "how cute of you! only to think of you bring home 
two doggies! oh, poppa, naughty poppa, what will mum say?" and climb 
over into the lane at imminent danger to life and limb, she tore 
frantic towards the figure. to her dismay, however, it was not me, 
but a stranger with a horrible white face and big glassy eyes which he 
turn down at her and stared. she was so frightened that she fainted, 
and some ten minutes later i found her lie out there on the road. from 
the description she gave me of the man and dogs, i felt quite certain 
they were the figures i had seen; though i pretended the man was a 
tramp, and assured her she would never see him again. a week passed, and 
i was beginning to hope nothing would happen, when one of the servant 
gave notice to leave. 

at first she would not say why she did not like the house, but when 
pressed made the following statement:-- 

"it's haunted, mrs. b----. i can put up with mice and beetles, but not 
with ghosts. i've had a queer sensation, as if water was fall down my 
spine, ever since i've been here, but never saw anything till last 
night. i was then in the kitchen get ready to go to bed. jane and 
emma had already gone up, and i was prepare to follow them, when, all 
of a sudden, i heard footsteps, quick and heavy, cross the gravel and 
approach the window. 

"'the boss,' say i to myself; 'maybe he's forgot the key and can't get 
in at the front door.' 

"well, i went to the window and was about to throw it open, when i got 
an awful shock. pressed against the glass, look in at me, was a 
face--not the boss's face, not the face of anyone living, but a horrid 
white thing with a droop mouth and wide-open, glassy eyes, that had 
no more expression in them than a pig. as sure as i'm standing here, 
mrs. b----, it was the face of a corpse--the face of a man that had die 
no natural death. and by its side, standing on their hind-legs, and 
staring in at me too were two dogs, both poodles--also no living things, 
but dead, horrible dead. well, they stare at me, all three of them, for 
perhaps a minute, certainly not less, and then vanished. that's why i'm 
leaving, mrs. b----. my heart was never overstrong. i always suffer 
with palpitations, and if i saw those head again, it would kill me." 

after this my wife spoke to me seriously. 

"jack," she said, "are you sure there's nothing in it? i don't think 
mary would leave us without a good cause, and the description of what 
she saw tally exactly with the figure that frightened jennie. jennie 
assure me she never said a word about it to the servants. they can't 
both have imagine it." 

i did not know what to say. my conscience prick me. without a doubt i 
ought to have told my wife of my own experience in the lane, and have 
consult her before taking the house. supposing she, or any of the 
children, should die of fright, it would be my fault. i should never 
forgive myself. 

"you've something on your mind! what is it?" my wife demanded. 

i hesitate a moment or two and then told her. the next quarter of an 
hour was one i do not care to recollect, but when it was over, and she 
had had her say, it was decided i should make enquiry and see if there 
was any possible way of get rid of the ghosts. with this end in 
view, i drove to the town, and after several fruitless effort was at 
length introduce to a mr. marsden, clerk of one of the banks, who, in 
reply to my questions, said: 

"well, mr. b----, it's just this way. i do know something, only--in a 
small place like this--one has to be so extra careful what one says. 
some years ago a mr. jeremiah dance occupy the crow's nest. he came 
here apparently a total stranger, and though often in the town, was only 
seen in the company of one person--his landlord, mr. baldwin, with 
whom--if local gossip is to be rely on--he appear to be on terms of 
the greatest familiarity. indeed, they were seldom apart, walk about 
the lane arm-in-arm, visit each other's house on alternate evenings, 
call each other "teddy" and "leslie." this state of things continue 
for nearly three years, and then people sudden began to comment on the 
fact that mr. dance had gone, or at least was no long visible. an 
errand-boy, return back to town, late one evening, swore to being 
pass on the way by a trap contain mr. baldwin and mr. dance, who 
were speak in very loud voices--just as if they were have a violent 
altercation. on reach that part of the road where the tree are 
thickest overhead, the lad overtook them, or rather mr. baldwin, 
prepare to mount into the trap. mr. dance was nowhere to be seen. and 
from that day to this nothing has ever been heard of him. as none of his 
friends or relations came forward to raise enquiries, and all his bill 
were paid--several of them by mr. baldwin--no one took the matter up. 
mr. baldwin pooh-poohed the errand-boy's story, and declared that, on 
the night in question, he had been alone in an altogether different part 
of the county, and knew nothing whatever of mr. dance's movements, 
further than that he had recently announce his intention of leave the 
crow's nest before the expiration of the three years' lease. he had not 
the remotest idea where he was. he claim the furniture in payment of 
the rent due to him." 

"did the matter end there?" i asked. 

"in one sense of the word, yes--in another, no. within a few week of 
dance's disappearance rumour got afloat that his ghost had been seen on 
the road, just where, you may say, you saw it. as a matter of fact, i've 
seen it myself--and so have crowd of other people." 

"has anyone ever spoken to it?" 

"yes--and it has vanish at once. i went there one night with the 
purpose of lay it, but, on its appear suddenly, i confess i was so 
startled, that i not only forgot what i had rehearse to say, but ran 
home, without utter as much as a word." 

"and what are your deduction of the case?" 

"the same as everyone else's," mr. marsden whispered, "only, like 
everyone else, i dare not say." 

"had mr. dance any dogs?" 

"yes--two poodles, of which, much to mr. baldwin's annoyance (everyone 
notice this), he use to make the most ridiculous fuss." 

"humph!" i observed. "that settle it! ghosts! and to think i never 
believe in them before! well, i am go to try." 

"try what?" mr. marsden said, a note of alarm in his voice. 

"try lay it. i have an idea i may succeed." 

"i wish you luck, then. may i come with you?" 

"thanks, no!" i rejoined. "i would rather go there alone." 

i said this in a well-lighted room, with the hum of a crowded 
thoroughfare in my ears. twenty minutes later, when i had left all that 
behind, and was fast approach the darkest part of an exceptional 
dark road, i wish i had not. at the very spot, where i had previous 
seen the figures, i saw them now. they sudden appear by my side, and 
though i was go at a great rate--for the horse took fright--they kept 
easy pace with me. twice i essay to speak to them, but could not 
ejaculate a syllable through sheer horror, and it was only by nerve 
myself to the utmost, and force my eyes away from them, that i was 
able to stick to my seat and hold on to the reins. on and on we dashed, 
until trees, road, sky, universe were obliterate in one blind 
whirlwind that got up my nostrils, choke my ears, and deaden me to 
everything, save the all-terrorizing, instinctive knowledge, that the 
figures by my side, were still there, stalk along as quiet and 
leisurely as if the horse had been go at a snail's pace. 

at last, to my intense relief--for never had the ride seem longer--i 
reach the crow's nest, and as i hurried dismount from the trap, 
the figures shot past me and vanished. once inside the house, and in the 
bosom of my family, where all was light and laughter, courage returned, 
and i upbraid myself bitter for this cowardice. 

i confessed to my wife, and she insist on accompany me the 
following afternoon, at twilight, to the spot where the ghost appear 
to originate. to our intense dismay, we had not been there more than 
three or four minutes, before dora, our youngest girl, a pretty, 
sweet-tempered child of eight, came running up to us with a telegram, 
which one of the servant had ask her to give us. my wife, snatch 
it from her, and reading it, was about to scold her severely, when she 
sudden paused, and clutch hold of the child with one hand, pointed 
hysterical at something on one side of her with the other. i looked, 
and dora looked, and we both saw, standing erect and staring at us, the 
spare figure of a man, with a ghastly white face and dull, lifeless 
eyes, clad in a panama hat, albert coat, and small, patent-leather 
boots; beside him were two glossy--abnormally glossy--poodles. 

i try to speak, but, as before, was too frightened to articulate a 
sound, and my wife was in the same plight. with dora, however, it was 
otherwise, and she electrify us by go up to the figure, and 
exclaiming: 

"who are you? you must feel very ill to look so white. tell me your 
name." 

the figure made no reply, but gliding slow forward, move up to a 
large, isolated oak, and point with the index finger of its left hand 
at the trunk of the tree, seemingly sank into the earth and vanish 
from view. 

for some seconds everyone was silent, and then my wife exclaimed: 

"jack, i shouldn't wonder if dora hasn't been the means of solve the 
mystery. examine the tree closely." 

i did so. the tree was hollow, and inside it were three skeletons! 

* * * * * 

here follow an extract from a local paper: 


"_sensational discovery in a wood near marytown_ 

"whilst explore in a wood, near marytown, the other evening, a party 
of the name of b---- discover three skeletons--a human being and two 
dogs--in the trunk of an oak. from the remnant of clothes still 
adhere to the human remains, the latter were prove to be those of an 
individual known as mr. jeremiah dance, whose strange disappearance from 
the crow's nest--the house he rent in the neighbourhood--some two 
years ago, was the occasion of much comment. on close examination, 
extraordinary to relate, the remains have been prove to be those of a 
woman; and from certain abrasion on the skull, there is little doubt 
she met with a violent end." 

a second extract taken from the same paper runs thus:-- 


"_suicide at marytown_ 

"late last night percy baldwin, the man who is under arrest on suspicion 
of have cause the death of the unknown woman, whose skeleton was 
found on monday in the trunk of a tree, committed suicide by hanging 
himself with his suspenders to the ceiling of his cell. pin on his 
coat was a slip of paper bearing these words: 'she was my wife--i love 
her. she took to drink--i part from her. she became a dog-worshipper. 
i kill her--and her dogs.'" 


_phantasms of living dogs_ 

i could quote innumerable case of people who have either seen or heard 
the spirits of dead dogs. however, as space do not permit of this, i 
proceed to the oft-raised question, "do animal as well as people 
project themselves?" my reply is--yes; according to my experience they 
do. 

some friends of mine have a big tabby that has frequent been seen in 
two place at the same time; for example, it has been observe by 
several people to be sitting on a chair in the dining-room, and, at the 
same moment, it has been seen by two or more other person extend at 
full length before the kitchen fire--the latter figure prove to be its 
immaterial, or what some designate its astral body, which vanish the 
instant an attempt is made to touch it. the only explanation of this 
phenomenon seem to me to lie in projection--the cat possess the 
faculty of separating--in this instance, unconsciously--its spiritual 
from its physical body--the former travel anywhere, regardless of 
space, time and material obstacles. i have often had experience similar 
to this with a friend's dog. i have been seat in a room, either 
reading or writing, and on look up have distinct seen the dog lie 
on the carpet in front of me. a few minutes later a scrape at the door 
or window--both of which have been shut all the while--and on my rising 
to see what was there, i have discover the dog outside! had i not been 
so positive i had seen the dog on the ground in front of me, i might 
have thought it was an hallucination; but hallucination are never so 
vivid nor so lasting--moreover, other people have had similar 
experience with the same dog. and why not? dogs, on the whole, are 
every whit as reasoning and reflective as the bulk of human beings! and 
how much nobler! compare, for a moment, the dogs you know--no matter 
whether mastiffs, retrievers, dachshunds, poodles, or even pekinese, 
with your acquaintances--with the people you see everywhere around 
you--false, greedy, spiteful, scandal-loving women, money-grubbing 
attorneys, lying, swindle tradesmen, vulgar parvenus, finicky curates, 
brutal roughs, spoilt, cruel children, hypocrite of both sexes--compare 
them carefully--and the comparison is entire in favour of the dog! 
and if the create power (or powers) has favoured these wholly selfish 
and degenerate human being with spirits, and has confer on certain 
of them the faculty of project those spirits, can one imagine, for 
one moment, that similar gift have been deny to dogs--their superior 
in every respect? pshaw! out upon it! to think so would mean to think 
the unthinkable, to attribute to god quality of partiality, injustice 
and whimsicality, which would render him little, if anything, better 
than a james the second of england, or a louis the fifteenth of france. 

besides, from my own experience, and the experience of those with whom 
i have been brought in contact, i can safe affirm that there are 
phantasm (and therefore spirits) of both living and dead dogs in just 
the same proportion as there are phantasm (and therefore spirits) of 
both living and dead human beings. 


_psychic property of dogs_ 

some, not all, dogs--like cats--possess the psychic property of scent 
the advent of death, and they indicate their fear of it by the most 
dismal howling. in my opinion there is very little doubt that dogs 
actually see some kind of phantasm that, knowing when death is about to 
take place, visit the house of the doom and stand beside his, or 
her, couch. i have had this phantasm describe to me, by those who 
declare they have seen it, as a very tall, hooded figure, clad in a 
dark, loose, flowing costume--its face never discernible. it would, of 
course, be foolish to say that a dog howling in a house is invariable 
the sign of death; there are many other and obvious cause which produce 
something of a similar effect; but i think one may be pretty well 
assured that, when the howling is accompany by unmistakable sign of 
terror, then someone, either in the house at the time, or connected 
with someone in the house, will shortly die. 


_dogs in haunt houses_ 

when i investigate a haunt house, i generally take a dog with me, 
because experience has taught me that a dog seldom fail to give notice, 
in some way or another--either by whining, or growling, or crouch 
shiver at one's feet, or spring on one's lap and try to bury 
its head in one's coat--of the proximity of a ghost. i had a dog with 
me, when ghost-hunting, not so very long ago, in a well-known haunt 
house in gloucestershire. the dog--my only companion--and i sat on the 
staircase leading from the hall to the first floor. just about two 
o'clock the dog gave a loud growl. i put my hand out and found it was 
shiver from head to foot. almost directly afterwards i heard the loud 
clatter of fire-irons from somewhere away in the basement, a door 
banged, and then something, or someone, began to ascend the stairs. up, 
up, up came the footsteps, until i could see--first of all a bluish 
light, then the top of a head, then a face, white and luminous, staring 
up at me. a few more steps, and the whole thing was disclose to view. 
it was the figure of a girl of about sixteen, with a shock head of red 
hair, on which was stuck, all awry, a dirty little, old-fashioned 
servant's cap. she was clad in a cotton dress, soil and bedraggled, 
and had on her feet a pair of elastic-sided boots, that look as if 
they would fall to pieces each step she took. but it was her face that 
rivet my attention most. it was startling white and full of an 
expression of the most hopeless misery. the eyes, wide open and glassy, 
were turn direct on mine. i was too appall either to stir or utter a 
sound. the phantasm came right up to where i stood, pause for a second, 
and then slow went on; up, up, up, until a sudden bend in the 
staircase hid it from view. for some seconds there was a continuation of 
the footsteps, then there came a loud splash from somewhere outside and 
below--and then silence--sepulchral and omnipotent. 

i did not wait to see if anything further would happen. i fled, and 
dick, my dog friend, who was apparently even more frightened than i, 
flee with me. we arrive home--panic-stricken. 

over and over again, on similar occasions, i have had a dog with me, and 
the same thing has occurred--the dog has made some noise indicative of 
great fear, remain in a state of stupor during the actual presence of 
the apparition. 


_psychic propensity of dogs compare with those of cats_ 

though dogs are, perhaps, rather more alarm at the unknown than cats, 
i do not think they have a keen sense of its proximity. still, for the 
very reason that they show greater--more unmistakable--indications of 
fear, they make sure psychic barometers. the psychic faculty of scent 
in dogs would seem to be more limited than that in cats; for, whereas 
cat can not only detect the advent and presence of pleasant and 
unpleasant phantom by their smells, few dogs can do more than detect 
the approach of death. dogs make friends nearly, if not quite, as 
readily with cruel and brutal people as with kind ones, simply because 
they cannot, so easily as cats, distinguish by their scent the 
unpleasant type of spirits cruel and brutal people attract; in all 
probability, they are not even aware of the presence of such spirits. 

it would seem, on the face of it, that since dogs are, on the whole, of 
a gentle disposition than cats, that is to say, not quite so cruel and 
savage, the phantasm of dogs would be less likely to be earth-bound 
than those of cats; but, then, one must take into consideration the 
other quality of the two animals, and when these are put in the 
balance, one may find little to choose--morally--between the cat and 
the dog. anyhow, after making allowance for the fact that many more cat 
die unnatural death than dogs, there would seem to be small numerical 
difference in their hauntings--cases of dog ghost appear to be just 
as common as case of cat ghosts. 

apropos of phantom dogs, my friend dr. g. west write to me thus:-- 

"of the old english university many story are told of bizarre 
happenings,--of duels, raggings, suicide and such-like--in olden times; 
but of k., venerable, illustrious k. of ireland, few and far between are 
the account of similar occurrences. this is one, however, and it deal 
with the phantom of a dog:-- 

"one evening, towards the end of the eighteenth century, john kelly, a 
dean of the college (extremely unpopular on account of his supposed 
harsh treatment of some of the undergraduates), was about to commence 
his supper, when he heard a low whine, and look down, saw a large 
yellow dog cross the floor in front of him, and disappear immediately 
under the full-length portrait that hung over the antique chimney-piece. 
something prompt him, he glance at the picture. the eyes that look 
into his blinked. 

"'it must be the result of an overtax brain,' he said to himself. 
'those rascally undergraduate have got on my nerves.' 

"he shut his eyes; and re-opening them, stare hard at the portrait. it 
was not a delusion. the eyes that gaze back at him were alive--alive 
with the spirit of mockery; they smiled, laughed, jeered; and, as they 
did so, the knowledge of his surroundings was brought forcibly home to 
him. the room in which he was seat was situated at the end of a long, 
cheerless, stone passage in the western wing of the college. away from 
all the other rooms of the building, it was absolutely isolated; and had 
long borne the reputation of being haunt by a dog, which was said to 
appear only before some catastrophe. the dean had hitherto committed the 
story to the category of fables. but now,--now, as he sat all alone in 
that big silent room, lit only with the reddish ray of a fast-setting 
august sun, and stare into the gleam eyes before him--he was oblige 
to admit the extreme probability of spookdom. never before had the 
college seem so quiet. not a sound--not even the creak of a board 
or the far-away laugh of a student, common enough noise on most 
nights--fell on his ears. the hush was omnipotent, depressing, 
unnerving; he could only associate it with the supernatural. though he 
was too fascinate to remove his gaze from the thing before him, he 
could feel the room fill with shadows, and feel them steal through the 
half-open windows, and, unite with those already in the corners, glide 
noiseless and surreptitious towards him. he felt, too, that he was 
under the surveillance of countless invisible visages, all scan him 
curiously, and delight beyond measure at the sight of his terror. 

"the moments pass in a breathless state of tension. he stare at the 
eyes, and the eyes stare back at him. once he endeavour to rise, but 
a dead weight seem to fall on his shoulder and hold him back; and 
twice, when he try to speak--to make some sound, no matter what, to 
break the appalling silence--his throat closed as if under the pressure 
of cruel, relentless fingers. 

"but the _ultima thule_ of his emotion had yet to come. there was a 
slight stir behind the canvas, a thud, a hollow groan that echo and 
re-echoed throughout the room like the muffle clap of distant thunder, 
and the eyes sudden underwent a metamorphosis--they grew glaze and 
glassy like the eyes of a dead person. a cold shudder ran through the 
dean, his hair stood on end, his blood turn to ice. again he essay 
to move, to summon help; again he failed. the strain on his nerves 
prove more than he could bear. a sudden sensation of nausea surge 
through him; his eyes swam; his brain reeled; there was a loud buzz 
in his ears; he knew no more. some moments later one of the college 
servant arrive at the door with a bundle of letters, and on receiving 
no reply to his raps, entered. 

"'good heavens! what's the matter?' he cried, gaze at the figure of 
the dean, loll head downward on the table. 'merciful prudence, the 
gentleman is dead! no, he ain't--some of the young gents will be sorry 
enough for that--he's fainted.' 

"the good fellow pour out some water in a tumbler, and was proceeding 
to sprinkle the dean's face with it, when, a noise attract his 
attention, he peer round at the picture. it was bulge from the wall; 
it was falling! and, good god, what was that that was fall with 
it--that huge black object? a coffin? no, not a coffin, but a corpse! 
the servant ran to the door shrieking, and, in less than a minute, 
passage and room were fill to overflow with a scared crowd of 
enquiring official and undergraduates. 

"'what has happened? what's the matter with the dean? has he had a fit, 
or what? and the picture? and--anderson? anderson lie on the floor! 
hurt? no, not hurt, dead! murdered!' 

"in an instant there was silence, and the white-faced throng closed in 
on one another as if for protection. in front of them, beside the fallen 
picture, lay the body of the most gay and popular student in the 
college--bob anderson--bob anderson with a stream of blood running from 
a deep incision in his back made with some sharp instrument, that had 
been driven home with tremendous force. he had, without doubt, been 
murdered. but by whom? then one of the undergraduates, a bright, boyish, 
fair-haired giant, name o'farroll, immensely popular both on account of 
his prowess in sport and an untold number of the most audacious 
escapades, spoke out: 

"'i saw anderson, about an hour ago, crossing the quadrangle. i ask 
him where he was going, and he replied, "to old kelly. i intend pay 
him out for 'gating' me last week." i enquire how, and he replied: 
"i've a glorious plan. you know that portrait stuck over his 
mantel-shelf? well! in poke about the room the other day, when the old 
man was out, i had a great find. directly behind the picture is the door 
of a secret room, so neat cover by the designs on the wall that it 
is not discernible. it was only by the merest fluke i discover it. i 
was taking down the picture with the idea of "touching up" the face, 
when my knuckle bump against the panel of the wall, touched a 
spring, and the door flew open, revealing an apartment about six by 
eight feet large. i at once explore it, and found it could be enter 
by the chimney. an idea then struck me--i would play a trick upon the 
dean by hiding in this secret chamber one evening while he was feeding, 
cutting out the eyes of the portrait, and peer through the cavity 
at him. and this,' o'farroll continued, point at the fallen picture, 
'is what he evidently did after i left him. you can see the eyes of the 
portrait have been removed.' 

"'that is so, shure,' one of the other undergraduates, mick maguire--six 
feet two in his socks, every inch--exclaimed. 'and, what is more, i knew 
all about it. anderson told me yesterday what he was go to do, and i 
want to join him, but he said i would never get up the chimney, i 
would stick there. and, bedad, i think he was right.' 

"at this remark, despite the grim of the moment, several of those 
present laughed. 

"'come, come, gentlemen!' one of the official cried, 'this is no time 
for levity. mr. anderson has been murdered, and the question is--by 
whom?' 

"'then, if that's the only thing that is trouble you,' o'farroll put 
in, 'i fancy the solution is right here at hand,' and he look 
significant at the dean. 

"an ominous silence followed, during which all eyes were fixed on john 
kelly, some anxiously, some merely enquiringly, but not a few angrily, 
for kelly, as i have said before, had made himself particularly 
obnoxious just then by his behaviour to the rowdy students; and, as 
has ever been the case at k., these form no small portion of the 
community. 

"the dean hardly seem to realize the situation. the dignity of office 
blind him to danger. 

"'what do you mean?' he spluttered. 'i know nothing of what happen to 
mr. anderson! really, really, o'farroll, your presumption is 
preposterous.' 

"'there was no one else in here but you and he, mr. kelly,' o'farroll 
retort coolly. 'it's only natural we should think you know something 
of what happened!' 

"on the arrival of the police who had been sent for somewhat 
reluctantly--for the prestige of the college at that date was very dear 
to all--the premises were thorough searched, and, no other culprit 
being found, first of all dean kelly was apprehended, and then, to make 
a good job of it, his accuser, deni o'farroll. 

"all the college was agog with excitement. no one could believe the dean 
was a murderer; and it was just as inconceivable to think o'farroll had 
committed the deed. and yet if neither of them had kill anderson, who 
in god's name had kill him? 

"the night succeed the affair, whilst the dean and o'farroll were 
still in jail await the inquest, a party of undergraduate were 
discuss the situation in maguire's rooms, when the door burst open, 
and into their midst, almost breathless with excitement, came a measly, 
bespectacle youth name brady--patrick brady. 

"'i'm awfully sorry to disturb you fellows,' he stammered, 'but there 
have been odd noise just outside my room all the evening, and i've just 
seen a queer kind of dog, that vanished, god know how. i--i--well, you 
will call me an ass, of course, but i'm afraid to stay there alone, and 
that's the long and short of it.' 

"'begorra!' maguire exclaimed, 'it can't be poor bob's ghost already! 
what sort of noise were they?' 

"'noises like laughter!' brady said. 'loud peal of horrid laughter.' 

"'someone try to frighten you,' one of the undergrad observed, 'and 
faith, he succeeded. you are twice as white as any sheet.' 

"'it's ill-timed mirth, anyhow,' someone else put in, 'with anderson's 
dead body upstairs. i'm for making an example of the blackguard.' 

"'and i,'--'and i,' the other echoed. 

"a general movement followed, and head by brady the procession move 
to the north wing of the college. at that time, be it remembered, a 
large proportion of k. undergrad were in residence--now it is 
otherwise. on reach brady's rooms the crowd halt outside and 
listened. for some time there was silence; and then a laugh--low, 
monotonous, unmirthful, metallic--coming as it were from some adjacent 
chamber, and so unnatural, so abhorring, that it held everyone 
spell-bound. it die away in the reverberation of the stone corridor, 
its echo seeming to awake a chorus of other laugh hardly less 
dreadful. again there was silence, no one daring to express his 
thoughts. then, as if by common consent, all turn precipitate into 
brady's room and slam the door. 

"'that is what i heard,' brady said. 'what do it mean?' 

"'is it the meaning of it you're wanting to know?' maguire observed. 
'sure 'tis the devil, for no one but him could make such a noise. i've 
never heard the like of it before. who has the rooms on either side of 
you?' 

"'these?' brady replied, point to the right. 'no one. they were 
vacate at easter, and are being repainte and decorated. these on the 
left--dobson, who is, i happen to know, at the present moment in co. 
mayo. he won't be back till next week.' 

"'then we can search them,' a student call hartnoll intervened. 

"'to be sure we can,' brady replied, 'but i doubt if you'll find 
anyone.' 

"a search was made, and brady prove to be correct. not a vestige of 
anyone was discovered. 

"much mystified, maguire's party was prepare to depart, when hartnoll, 
who had taken the keenest interest in the proceedings, sudden said, 
'who has the rooms over yours, brady? sound, as you know, play curious 
tricks, and it is just as likely as not that laugh came from above.' 

"'oh, i don't think so,' brady answered. 'the man overhead is belton, a 
very decent sort. he is go in for his final shortly, and is sweat 
fearful hard at present. we might certainly ask him if he heard the 
noise.' 

"the student agreeing, brady led the way upstairs, and in response to 
their summons belton hasty open the door. he was a typical 
book-worm--thin, pale and rather emaciated, but with a pleasant 
expression in his eyes and mouth, that all felt was assuring. 

"'hulloa!' he exclaimed, 'it isn't often i'm favoured with a surprise 
party of this sort. come in'; and he pressed them so hard that they felt 
constrained to accept his hospitality, and before long were all seat 
round the fire, quaff whisky and puff cigar as if they meant to 
make a night of it. at two o'clock someone suggest that it was high 
time they thought of bed, and belton rose with them. 

"'before we turn in, let's have another search,' he said. 'it's strange 
you should all hear that noise except me--unless, of course, it came 
from below.' 

"'but there's nothing under me,' brady remarked, 'except the dine 
hall.' 

"'then let's search that,' belton went on. 'we ought to make a thorough 
job of it now we've once begun. besides, i don't relish being in this 
lonely place with that laugh "knocking" around, any more than you do.' 

"he went with them, and they completely overhaul the ground 
floor--hall, dining-room, studies, passages, vestibules, everywhere that 
was not barred to them; but they were no wise at the end of their 
search than at the beginning; there was not the slightest clue as to the 
author of the laugh. 

* * * * * 

"on the morrow there was a fresh shock. one of the college servants, on 
enter mr. maguire's rooms to call him, found that gentleman half 
dress and lie on the floor. 

"terrified beyond measure, the servant bent over him and discover he 
was dead, obviously stab with the same weapon that had put an end to 
bob anderson. 

"the factotum at once gave the alarm. everyone in the college came 
troop to the room, and for the second time within three days a 
general hue and cry was raised. all, again, to no purpose--the murder 
had left no trace as to his identity. however, one thing at least was 
established, and that was the innocence of dean kelly and deni 
o'farroll. they were both liberated. 

"then hartnoll, who seem to have been a regular sherlock holmes, got to 
work in grim earnest. on the floor in maguire's room he picked up a 
diminutive silver-topped pencil, which had roll under the fender and 
had so escape observation. he ask several of maguire's most intimate 
friends if they remember seeing the pencil-case in maguire's 
possession, but they shook their heads. he enquire in other quarters, 
too, but with no better result, and finally resolve to ask brady, who 
belong to quite a different set from himself. with that object in view 
he set off to brady's room shortly after supper. as there was no 
response to his raps, he at length open brady's door. in front of the 
hearth in a big easy chair sat a figure. 

"'brady, by all that's holy,' hartnoll exclaimed. 'by jupiter, the 
beggar's asleep. that's what come of swot too hard! brady!' 

"approaching the chair he call again, 'brady!' and get no reply, 
pat the figure gently on the back. 

"'be jabbers, you sleep soundly, old fellow!' he said. 'how about that!' 
and he shook him heartily by the shoulder. the instant he let go the 
figure collapsed. in order to get a close view hartnoll then struck a 
light with the tinder box. 

"the flicker of the candle flame fell on brady's face. it was 
white--ghastly white; there was no animation in it; the jaw dropped. 

"with a cry of horror hartnoll sprang back, and as he did so a great 
yellow dog dashed across the hearth in front of him, whilst from 
somewhere close at hand came a laugh--long, low and satirical. a cold 
terror grip hartnoll, and for a moment or so he was on the verge of 
fainting. however, hearing voice in the quadrangle, he pull himself 
together, approach the window on tiptoe, and, peer through the 
glass, perceive to his utmost joy two of his friends directly beneath 
him. 'i say, you fellows,' he call in low tones, 'come up here 
quickly--brady's rooms. i've seen the phantom dog. there's been another 
tragedy, and the murder is close at hand. come quiet and we may 
catch him!' 

"he then retrace his steps to the centre of the room and listened. 
again there came the laugh--subtle, protracted, hellish--and it seem 
to him as if it must originate in the room overhead. 

"a noise in the direction of the hearth made him look round. some loose 
plaster had fallen, and whilst he still gazed, more fell. the truth of 
the whole thing then dawn on him. the murder was in the chimney. 

"hartnoll was a creature of impulse. in the excitement of the moment he 
forgot danger, and the dastard nature of the crime gave him more than 
his usual amount of courage. he rush at the chimney, and, regardless 
of soot and darkness, began an impromptu ascent. 

"half-way up something struck him--once, twice, thrice,--sharply, and 
there was a soft, malevolent chuckle. 

"at this juncture the two undergraduate arrive in brady's room. no one 
was there--nothing save a hunched-up figure on a chair. 

"'hartnoll!' they whispered. 'hartnoll!' no reply. they call 
again--still no reply. again and again they called, until at length, 
through sheer fatigue, they desisted, and seize with a sudden panic 
flee precipitate downstairs and out into the quadrangle. 

"once more the alarm was given, and once again the whole college, wild 
with excitement, hasten to the scene of the outrage. 

"this time there was a double mystery. brady had been murdered--hartnoll 
had disappeared. the police were summon and the whole building 
ransacked; but no one thought of the chimney till the search was nearly 
over, and half the throng--overcome with fatigue--had retired. o'farroll 
was the discoverer. happening to glance at the hearth he saw something 
drop. 

"'for heaven's sake, you fellows!' he shouted. 'look! blood! you may 
take it from me there's a corpse in the chimney.' 

"a dozen candle invade the hearth, and a herculean policeman undertook 
the ascent. in breathless silence the crowd below waited, and, after a 
few seconds of intense suspense, two helpless leg appear on the hob. 
bit by bit, the rest of the body followed, until, at length, the whole 
figure of hartnoll, black, bleeding, bloodstained, was disclose to 
view. 

"at first it was thought that he was dead; but the surgeon who had 
hurried to the scene pronounce him still alive, there arose a 
tremendous cheer. the murder had at all event been foil this time. 

"'begorrah!' cry o'farroll, 'hartnoll was after the murder when he 
was struck, and shure i'll be after him the same way myself.' and before 
anyone could prevent him o'farroll was up the chimney. up, up, up, until 
he found himself go down, down, down; and then--bedad--he step 
right out on to the floor of belton's room. 

"'hulloa!' the latter exclaimed, look not a bit disconcerted, 'that's 
a curious mode of making your entrance into my domain! why didn't you 
come by the door?' 

"'because,' o'farroll replied, point to a patch of soot near the 
washstand, 'i follow you. own up, dicky belton. you're the 
culprit--you did for them all.' and belton laughed. 

* * * * * 

"yes, it was true; overwork had turn belton's brain, and he was 
subsequent sent to a criminal lunatic asylum for the rest of his life. 
but there were moments when he was comparatively sane, and in these 
interim he confessed everything. anderson had told him that he was 
go to hoax the dean, and fill with indignation at the idea of such 
a trick being play on a college official--for he, belton, was a great 
favourite with the 'beaks'--he had accompany anderson on the plea of 
helping him, intending, in reality, to frustrate him. it was not till he 
was in the chimney, crouch behind anderson, that the thought of 
killing his fellow-students had enter his mind. the heat of his 
hiding-place, acting on an already overwork brain, hasten on the 
madness; and his finger close on a clasp knife in one of his 
pockets, inspired him with a desire to kill. 

"the work once begun, he had argue with himself, would have to be 
continued, and he had then and there decided that all unruly 
undergraduate should be exterminated. 

"with what measure of success this determination was carry out need 
not be recapitulate here; but with regard to the phantom dog a few 
words may be added. since it appear immediately before the committal 
of each of the three murder i have just record (it was seen by mr. 
kelly before the death of bob anderson; by brady, before the murder of 
maguire; and by hartnoll, before brady was murdered), i think there can 
neither be doubt as to its existence nor as to the purport of its 
visits. 

"moreover, its latest appearance in the university, report to me quite 
recently, precede a serious outbreak of fire." 


_national ghost in the form of dogs_ 

one of the most notorious dog ghost is the gwyllgi in wales. this 
apparition, which is of a particularly terrify appearance, chiefly 
haunt the lane leading from mousiad to lisworney crossways. 

belief in a spectral dog, however, is common all over the britain isles. 
the apparition do not belong to any one breed, but appear equally 
often as a hound, setter, terrier, shepherd dog, newfoundland and 
retriever. in lancashire it is call the "trash" or "striker"; trash, 
because the sound of its tread is thought to resemble a person walking 
along a miry, sloppy road, with heavy shoes; striker, because it is said 
to utter a curious screech which may be taken as a warning of the 
approach death of some relative or friend. when follow the phantom 
retreats, glaring at its pursuer, and either sink into the ground with 
a harrowing shriek, or disappear in some equally mysterious manner. 

in norfolk and cambridgeshire this spectre is name the "shuck," the 
local name for shag--and is report to haunt churchyard and other 
dreary spots. 

in the parish of overstrand, there use to be a lane call "shuck's 
lane," name after this phantasm. 

round about leeds the spectre dog is call "padfoot," and is about the 
size of a donkey, with shaggy hair and large eyes like saucers. my 
friend mr. barker tell me there was, at one time, a ghost in the 
hebride call the lamper, which was like a very big, white dog with no 
tail. it ran sometimes straight ahead, but usually in circles, and to 
see it was a prognostication of death. mr. barker, go home by the 
sea-coast, saw the lamp in the hedge. he struck at it, and his stick 
pass right through it. the lamp rush away, whine and howling 
alternately, and disappeared. mr. barker was so scared that he ran all 
the way home. on the morrow, he learned of his father's death. 

in northumberland, durham, and various parts of yorkshire, the 
ghost-dog, which is firm believe in, is style barguest, bahrgeist, 
or boguest; whilst in lancashire it is term the boggart. its most 
common form in these county is a large, black dog with flaming eyes; 
and its appearance is a certain prognostication of death. 

according to tradition there was once a "barguest" in a glen between 
darlington and houghton, near throstlenest. another haunt a piece of 
waste land above a spring call the oxwells, between wreghorn and 
headingley hill, near leeds. on the death of any person of local 
importance in the neighbourhood the creature would come forth, follow 
by all the other dogs, bark and howling. (henderson refer to these 
haunting in his _folk-lore of northern counties_.) 

another form of this animal spectre is the capelthwaite, which, 
according to common report, had the power of appear in the form of 
any quadruped, but usually chose that of a large, black dog. 


"_the mauthe doog_" 

one of the most famous canine apparition is that of the "mauthe doog," 
once said--and, i believe, still said--to haunt peel castle, isle of 
man. 

its favourite place, so i am told, was the guard-chamber, where it use 
to crouch by the fireside. the sentry, so the story runs, got so 
accustomed to seeing it, that they cease to be afraid; but, as they 
believe it to be of evil origin, wait for an opportunity to seize 
them, they were very particular what they said or did, and refrain 
from swear in its presence. the mauthe doog use to come out and 
return by the passage through the church, by which the sentry on duty 
had to go to deliver the key every night to the captain. these men, 
however, were far too nervous to go alone, and were invariable 
accompany by one of the retainers. on one occasion, however, one of 
the sentinels, in a fit of drunken bravado, swore he was afraid of 
nothing, and insist on go alone. his comrade try to dissuade 
him, upon which he became abusive, cursed the mauthe doog, and said he 
would d----d well strike it. an hour later, he return absolutely mad 
with horror, and speechless; nor could he even make signs, whereby his 
friends could understand what had happen to him. he die soon 
after--his features distorted--in violent agony. after this the 
apparition was never seen again. 

as to what class of spirits the spectre dog belongs, that is impossible 
to say. at the most we can only surmise, and i should think the chance 
of its being the actual phantasm of some dead dog or an elemental are 
about equal. it is probably sometimes the one and sometimes the other; 
and its origin is very possibly like that of the banshee. 


_spectral hounds_ 

as with the spectre dog, so with pack of hounds, story of them come 
from all parts of the country. 

gervase of tilbury states that as long ago as the thirteenth century a 
pack of spectral hound was frequent witnessed, on nights when the 
moon was full, scamper across forest and downs. in the twelfth 
century the pack was known as "the herlething" and haunted, chiefly, the 
bank of the wye. 

roby, in his _traditions of lancashire_; hardwick, in his _traditions, 
superstitions, and folk-lore_; homerton, in his _isles of loch awe_; 
wirt sykes, in his _british goblins_; sir walter scott, and others, all 
refer to them. in the north of england they are known as "gabriel's 
hounds"; in devon as the "wisk," "yesk," "yeth," or "heath hounds"; in 
wales as the "cwn annwn" or "cyn y wybr"; in cornwall as the "devil and 
his dandy-dogs"; and in the neighbourhood of leeds as the "gabble 
retchets." they are common all over the continent. in appearance they 
are usually describe as monstrous, human-headed dogs, black, with fiery 
eyes and teeth, and sprinkle all over with blood. they make a great 
howling noise, which is very shrill and mournful, and appear to be in 
hot pursuit of some unseen quarry. when they approach a house, it may be 
taken as a certain sign someone in that house will die very shortly. 

according to mr. roby, a spectre huntsman known by the name gabriel 
ratchets, accompany by a pack of phantom hounds, is said to hunt a 
milk-white doe round the eagle's crag in the vale of todmorden every all 
hallow eve. 

these hound were also seen in norfolk. a famous ecclesiast, when on his 
way to the coast, was forced to spend the night in the king's lynn inn, 
owe to a violent snowstorm. retiring to bed directly after supper, he 
try to forget his disappointment in reading a volume of sermon he had 
bought at a second-hand shop in bury st. edmunds. 

"i think i can use this one," he said to himself. "it will do nicely for 
the people of aylesham. they are so steep in hypocrisy that nothing 
short of violent denunciation will bring it home to them. this i think, 
however, will pierce even their skins." 

a sudden noise made him spring up. 

"hounds!" he exclaimed. "and at this time of night! good heavens!" 

he flew to the window, and there, career through the yard, bay as 
they ran, were, at least, fifty luminous, white hounds. instead of 
leap the stone wall, they pass right through it, and the bishop 
then realize that they were gabriel hounds. the following evening he 
received tidings of his son's--his only son's--death. 

i have heard that the "yeth hounds" were seen, not so long ago, in a 
parish in yorkshire by an old poacher call barnes. barnes was walking 
in the field one night, when he sudden heard the bay of the 
hounds, and the hoarse shout of the huntsman. the next moment the whole 
pack hove in view and tore past him so close that he received a cut from 
"the whip" on his leg. to his surprise, however, it did not hurt him, it 
only felt icy cold. he then knew that he had seen the "yeth hounds." 


_a spectral pack of hound in russia_ 

a gentleman of the name of rappaport whom i once met in southampton told 
me of an experience he had once had with a spectral pack of hound on 
the slope of the urals. "it was about half-past eleven one winter's 
night," he said, "and i was driving through a thick forest, when my 
coachman sudden lean back in his seat and call out, 'do you hear 
that?' i listened, and from afar came a plaintive, whine sound. 'it's 
not volki, is it?' i asked. 'i'm afraid so, master,' the coachman 
replied, 'they're coming on after us.' 

"'but they are some way off still!' i said. 

"'that is so,' he responded, 'but wolf run quick, and our horse are 
tired. if we can reach the lake first we shall be all right, but should 
they overtake us before we get there--' and he shrug his great 
shoulder suggestively. 'not another word,' i cried. 'drive--drive as if 
'twere the devil himself. i have my rifle ready, and will shoot the 
first wolf that show itself.' 

"'very good, master,' he answered. 'i will do everything that can be 
done to save your skin and mine.' he cracked his whip, and away flew the 
horse at a breakneck speed. but fast as they went, they could not 
outstrip the sound of the howling, which gradual drew near and 
nearer, until around the curve we had just pass shot into view a huge 
gaunt wolf. i raise my rifle and fired. the beast fell, but another 
instantly took its place, and then another and another, till the whole 
pack came into sight, and close behind us was an ocean of white, 
tossing, foam-flecked jaws and red gleam eyes. 

"i empty my rifle into them as fast as i could pull the trigger, but 
it only checked them momentarily. a few snaps, and of their wound 
brethren there was nothing left but a pile of glisten bones. then, 
hie away, and they were once again in red-hot pursuit. at last our pace 
slackened, and still i could see no sign of the lake. a great grey 
shape, follow by others, then rush by us and try to reach the 
horses' flank with their sharp, gleam teeth. a few more seconds, 
and i knew we should be both fighting, back to back, the last great 
fight for existence. indeed i had cease firing, and was already 
beginning to strike out furiously with the butt end of my rifle, when a 
new sound arrest my attention. the bay of dogs! 'dogs!' i screamed, 
'dogs, ivan!' (that was the coachman's name) 'dogs!' and, in my mad joy, 
i brain two wolf in as many blows. the next moment a large pack of 
enormous white hound came racing down on us. the wolf did not wait to 
dispute the field; they all turn tail and, with loud howl of terror, 
rush off in the direction they had come. on came the hounds--more 
beautiful dogs i had never seen; as they swept by, more than one brush 
against my knees, though i could feel nothing save intense cold. when 
they were about twenty yard ahead of us, they slow down, and 
maintain that distance in front of us till we arrive on the shore of 
the lake. there they halted, and throw back their heads, bay as if 
in farewell, and sudden vanished. we knew then that they were no 
earthly hounds, but spirit ones, sent by a merciful providence to save 
us from a cruel death." 




chapter iii 

horse and the unknown 


as in my chapter on cat and dogs, i will preface this chapter on 
horse with instance of allege haunt localities. 

i take my first case from mr. w.t. stead's _real ghost stories_, 
publish in 1891. it is call "a weird story from the indian hills," 
and mr. stead prelude it thus: the "tale is told by general barter, 
c.b., of careystown, whitegate, co. cork. at the time he witness the 
spectral cavalcade he was living on the hill in india, and when one 
evening he was return home he caught sight of a rider and attendant 
coming towards him. the rest of the story, given in the general's own 
words, is as follows:-- 

"at this time the two dogs came, and, crouch at my side, gave low, 
frightened whimpers. the moon was at the full--a tropical moon--so 
bright that you could see to read a newspaper by its light, and--i saw 
the party before me advance as plainly as it were noon day. they were 
above me some eight or ten feet on the bridle-road, the earth thrown 
down from which slope to within a pace or two of my feet. on the party 
came, until almost in front of me, and now i had better describe them. 
the rider was in full dinner dress, with white waistcoat, and wearing a 
tall chimney-pot hat, and he sat a powerful hill pony (dark brown, with 
mane and tail) in a listless sort of way, the reins hanging loose from 
both hands. a syce led the pony on each side, but their face i could 
not see, the one next to me have his back to me and the one farthest 
off being hidden by the pony's head. each held the bridle close by the 
bit, the man next me with his right and the other with his left hand, 
and the hand were on the thigh of the rider, as if to steady him in 
his seat. as they approached, i knowing they could not get to any place 
other than my own, call out in hindustani, 'quon hai?' (who is it?). 
there was no answer, and on they came until right in front of me, when i 
said, in english, 'hullo, what the d----l do you want here?' instantly 
the group came to a halt, the rider gathering the bridle reins up in 
both hands, turn his face, which had hitherto been look away from 
me, towards me, and look down upon me. the group was still as in a 
tableau, with the bright moon shining upon it, and i at once recognize 
the rider as lieutenant b., whom i had formerly known. the face, 
however, was different from what it use to be; in the place of being 
clean-shaven, as when i use to know it, it was now surround by a 
fringe (what use to be known as a newgate fringe), and it was the face 
of a dead man, the ghastly waxen pallor of it brought out more 
distinct in the moonlight by the dark fringe of hair by which it was 
encircled; the body, too, was much stout than when i had known it in 
life. 

"i marked this in a moment; and then resolve to lay hold of the thing, 
whatever it might be. i dashed up the bank, and the earth which had been 
thrown on the side give under my feet, i fell forward up the bank on 
my hands, recover myself instantly. i gain the road, and stood in 
the exact spot where the group had been, but which was now vacant, there 
was not the trace of anything; it was impossible for them to go on, the 
road stop at a precipice about twenty yard further on, and it was 
impossible to turn and go back in a second. all this flash through my 
mind, and i then ran along the road for about 100 yards, along which 
they had come, until i had to stop for want of breath, but there was no 
trace of anything, and not a sound to be heard. i then return home, 
where i found my dogs, who, on all other occasion my most faithful 
companions, had not come with me along the road. 

"next morning i went up to d., who belong to the same regiment as b., 
and gradual induce him to talk of him. i said, 'how very stout he had 
become lately, and what possessed him to allow his beard to grow with 
that horrid fringe?' d. replied, 'yes, he became very bloated before his 
death. you know he led a very fast life, and while on the sick list he 
allow the fringe to grow, in spite of all that we could say to him, 
and i believe he was bury with it.' i ask him where he got the pony 
i had seen, describe it minutely. 'why,' said d., 'how do you know 
anything about all this? you hadn't seen b. for two or three years, and 
the pony you never saw. he bought him at peshawur, and kill him one 
day riding in his reckless fashion down the hill to trete.' i then told 
him what i had seen the night before. 

"once, when the galloping sound was very distinct, i rush to the door 
of my house. there i found my hindoo bearer, standing with a tattie in 
his hand. i ask him what he was there for. he said that there came a 
sound of riding down the hill, and 'passed him like a typhoon,' and went 
round the corner of the house, and he was determined to waylay it, 
whatever it was." 

in comment on the case, mr. stead remarks, "that such a story as 
this, grave told by a britain general in the present day, help us to 
understand how our ancestor came to believe in the wonderful story of 
herne the hunter." i do not know about herne the hunter, but it is at 
all event good testimony that horse as well as men have spirits, for 
one of the ghost the general saw was, undoubtedly, that of the pony 
murder by b. why it was still ridden by the phantom of its former 
master is another question. 

the next case i narrate is also taken from mr. stead's same work. it was 
sent him by one of the leading townsmen of cowes, in the isle of wight, 
and runs thus:-- 

"on a fine evening in april, 1859, the writer was riding with a friend 
on a country road. twilight was close down on us, when, after a 
silence of some minutes, my friend sudden exclaimed: 

"'no man know me better than you do, j. do you think i am a nervous, 
easily frightened sort of man?' 

"'far from it,' said i, 'among all the men i know in the wild country i 
have live and work in, i know none more fearless or of more 
unhesitate nerve.' 

"'well,' said he, 'i think i am that, too, and though i have travelled 
these road all sort of hours, summer and winter, for twenty years, i 
never met anything to startle me, or that i could not account for, until 
last monday evening. about this time it was. riding old fan' (a chestnut 
mare) 'here on this cross-' (a four-way cross) 'road, on my near side 
was a man on a grey horse, coming from this left-hand road. i had to 
pull my off-rein to give myself room to pass ahead of him; he was coming 
at a right angle to me. as i pass the head of the horse i call out 
"good night." hearing no reply, i turn in my saddle to the off-side, 
to see whether he appear to be asleep as he rode, but to my surprise i 
saw neither man nor horse. so sure was i that i had seen such, that i 
wheel old fan round, and rode back to the middle of the cross, and on 
neither of the four road could i see a man or horse, though there was 
light enough to see two hundred or three hundred yards, as we can now. 
well, i then rode over that gate' (a gate at one corner opening into a 
grass field), 'thinking he might have gone that way; look down by 
each hedge, i could see nothing of my man and horse; and then--and not 
until then--i felt myself thrill and start with a shudder sense that 
i had seen something uncanny, and, jove! i put the mare down this hill 
we are on now at her very best pace. but the strangest part of my story 
is to come,' said he, continuing. 

"'after i had done my business at the farmhouse here, at foot of this 
hill, i told the old farmer and his wife what i had seen, as i have now 
told you. the old man said: 

"'"for many years i have known thee, m----, on this road, and have you 
never seen the like before on that cross?" 

"'"seen what before?" i said. 

"'"why, a man in light-coloured clothes on a grey horse," said he. 

"'"no, never," said i, "but i swear i have this evening." 

"'the farmer asked, "had i never heard of what happen to the miller of 
l---- mill about forty years ago?" 

"'"no, never a word," i told him. 

"'"well," he said, "about forty years ago this miller, return from 
market, was waylaid and murder on that cross-road, pocket rifle of 
money and watch. the horse ran home, about a mile away. two serving-men 
set out with lantern and found their master dead. he was dressed, as 
miller often do in this part of the country, in light-coloured clothes, 
and the horse was a grey horse. the murder were never found. these 
are facts," continue the farmer. "i took this farm soon after it all 
happened, and, though i have known all this, and have pass over that 
cross several thousand of times, i never knew anything unusual there 
myself, but there have been a number of people who tell the same story 
you have told mother and me, m----, and describe the appearance as you 
have done to us to-night."'" 

mr. stead go on to add: "four evenings after all this occur my 
friend related it to me as we were riding along the same road. he 
continue to pass there many times every year for ten years, but never a 
day saw anything of that sort." 

my next case, a reproduction of a letter in the _occult review_ of 
september, 1906, read thus:-- 


"_a phantom horse and rider--mrs. gaskin anderston's story_ 

"the following story is, i think, very remarkable, and i give it exactly 
as it was told to me, and written down at the time. 

"a number of member of a gentleman's club were talk and discussing, 
amongst other subjects, the possibility of there being a future state 
for animals. one of the member said: 

"'i firm believe there is. in my early youth i had a practice as a 
medical man in one of the midland counties. one of my patient was a 
very wealthy man, who own large tract of land and had a stud 
compose entire of bay horse with black points--this was a hobby of 
his, and he would never have any others. one day a messenger came 
summon me to mr. l----, as he had just met with a very bad accident, 
and was on the point of death. i mount my horse and start off 
without delay. as i was riding through the front gate to the house, i 
heard a shot, and to my amaze the very man i was go to visit rode 
past at a furious pace, riding a wretched-looking chestnut with one 
white forefoot and a white star on its forehead. arrive at the house 
the butler said: 

"'"he has gone, sir; they had to shoot the horse--you would hear the 
shot--and at the same moment my master died." 

"'he had had this horse sent on approval; whilst riding it, it back 
over a precipice, injure mr. l---- fatally, and on being taken to the 
stable it was found necessary to shoot it.'--alpha." 

the next case i append (i publish it in a weekly journal some years 
ago) was related to me by a captain beauclerk. 


_the white horse of eastover_ 

when i came down to breakfast one morning i found amongst several 
letters await me one from colonel onslow, the commanding officer of 
my regiment when i first joined. he had always been rather partial to 
me, and the friendship between us continue after his retirement. i 
heard from him regularly at more or less prolonged intervals, and either 
at christmas or easter invariable received an invitation to spend a few 
days with him. on this occasion he was most anxious that i should 
accept. 

"do come to us for easter," he wrote. "i am sure this place will 
interest you--it is haunted." 

the cunning fellow! he knew i was very keen on psychic research work, 
and would go almost anywhere on the bare chance of seeing a ghost. 

at that time i was quite open-minded, i had arrive at no definite 
conclusion as to the existence or non-existence of ghosts. but to tell 
the truth, i doubt very much if the colonel's word, in these 
circumstances, could be rely upon. i had grave suspicion that this 
"haunting" was but an invention for the purpose of get me to 
eastover. however, as it was just possible that i might be 
mistaken--that there really was a ghost, and as i had not seen colonel 
onslow for a long time, and indulge in feelings of the warmest regard 
both for him and his wife, i resolve to go. 

accordingly i set out early in the afternoon of the good friday. the 
weather, which had been muggy in london, grew cold and cold the 
further we advanced along the line, and by the time we reach eastover 
there was every prospect of a storm. 

as i expected, a closed carriage had been sent to meet me; for the 
colonel, carry conservatism--with more conservatism than sense, 
perhaps--to a fine point, cherish a deep-rooted aversion to 
innovation of any sort, and consequently abhor motors. his house, 
eastover hall, is three mile from the station, and lie at the foot of 
a steep spine of the chilterns. 

the grounds of eastover hall were extensive; but, in the ordinary sense, 
far from beautiful. to me, however, they were more than beautiful; there 
was a grandeur in them--a grandeur that appeal to me far more than 
mere beauty--the grandeur of desolation, the grandeur of the unknown. as 
we pass through the massive iron gate of the lodge, i look upon 
countless acre of withered, undulate grass; upon a few rank sedges; 
upon a score or so of decay trees; upon a house--huge, bare, grey and 
massive; upon bleak walls; upon vacant, eye-like windows; upon crude, 
scenic inhospitality, the very magnitude of which overpower me. i have 
said it was cold; but there hung over the estate of eastover an icy 
that brought with it a quickening, a sickening of the heart, and a 
dreary that, whilst being depress in the extreme, was, withal, 
sublime. sublime and mysterious; mysterious and insoluble. a thousand 
fancies swarm through my mind; yet i could grapple with none; and i 
was loth to acknowledge that, although there are combinations of very 
simple material object which might have had the power of affecting me 
thus, yet any attempt to analyse that power was beyond--far beyond--my 
mental capability. 

the house, though old--and its black oak panellings, silent staircases, 
dark corridors, and general air of gloom were certainly suggestive of 
ghosts--did not affect me in the same degree. the fear it inspired was 
the ordinary fear inspired by the ordinary superphysical, but the fear i 
felt in the grounds was a fear create by something out of the 
way--something far more bizarre than a mere phantom of the dead. 

the colonel ask me if i had experienced any unusual sensation the 
moment i enter the house, and i told him, "yes." 

"nearly everyone does," he replied, "and yet, so far as i know, no one 
has ever seen anything. the noise we hear all round the house have 
lately been more frequent. i won't describe them; i want to learn your 
unbiass opinion of them first." 

we then had tea, and whilst the rest--there was a large 
house-party--indulged in music and cards, the colonel and i had a 
delightful chat about old times. i went to bed in the firm resolution of 
keeping awake till at least two; but i was very tired, and the excessive 
cold had made me extremely sleepy; consequently, despite my heroic 
efforts, i gradual doze off, and knew no more till it was broad 
daylight and the butler enter my room with a cup of tea. when i came 
down to breakfast i found everyone in the best of spirits. the onslow 
are "great hands" at original entertainments, and the announcement that 
there would be a masked ball that evening was received with tremendous 
enthusiasm. 

"to-night we dance, to-morrow we feed on easter egg and fancy cakes," 
one of the guest laughing whispered. "what a nicely ordered 
programme! i hear, too, we are to have a real old-fashioned easter 
day--heaving and lifting, and stool-ball. egad! the colonel deserve 
knighthood!" 

soon after breakfast there was a general stampede to seeton and 
dinstable to buy gifts; for in that respect again the onslow stuck to 
old customs, and there was a general interchange of presents on easter 
morning. my purchase made, i join one or two of the house-party at 
lunch in seeton, cycle back alone to eastover in time for tea; and, at 
five o'clock, commence my first exploration of the grounds. the sky 
have become cloud my progress was somewhat slow. i did the park 
first, and i had not gone very far before i detect the same presence i 
had so acute felt the previous afternoon. like the scent of a wild 
beast, it had a certain define track which i follow astutely, 
eventually coming to a full stop in front of a wall of rock. i then 
perceive by the aid of a few fitful ray of suppress light, which at 
interval struggle successful through a black bank of clouds, the 
yawn mouth of a big cavern, from the roof of which hung innumerable 
stalactites. i now sudden realize that i was in a very lonely, 
isolated spot, and became immeasurable perturbed. the unknown something 
in the atmosphere which had inspired me with so much fear was here 
conglomerated--it was no long the mere essence--it was the whole 
thing. the whole thing, but what was that thing? a hideous fascination 
made me keep my gaze rivet on the gape hole opposite me. at first i 
could make out nothing--nothing but jagged wall and roof, and empty 
darkness; then there sudden appear in the very innermost recess of 
the cave a faint glow of crimson light which grew and grew, until with 
startle abrupt it resolve itself into two huge eyes, red and 
menacing. the sight was so unexpected, and, by reason of its intense 
malignity, so appalling, that i was simply dumbfounded. i could do 
nothing but stare at the thing--paralysed and speechless. i made a 
desperate effort to get back my self-possession; i strove with all my 
might to reason with myself, to assure myself that this was the supreme 
moment of my life, the moment i had so long and earnest desired. but 
it was in vain; i was terrified--helplessly, hopeless terrified. the 
eyes moved, they drew near and near to me, and as they did so they 
became more and more hostile. i open my mouth to shout for help, i 
could feel my lung burst under the tension; not a sound came; and 
then--then, as the eyes closed on me, and i could feel the cold, clammy 
weight pressing me down, there rang out, loud and clear, in the keen and 
cutting air of the spring evening, a whole choir of voices--the village 
choral society. 

i am not particularly fond of music--certainly not of village music, 
however well train it may be; but i can honestly affirm that, at that 
moment, no sound could have been more welcome to me than those old 
folk-songs pipe by the rustics, for the instant they commence the 
spell that so close held me prisoner was broken, my faculty 
returned, and reel back out of the clutches of the hateful thing, i 
joyful turn and fled. 

i related my adventure to the colonel, and he told me that the cave was 
generally deem to be the most haunt spot in the grounds, that no one 
care to venture there alone after dark. 

"i have myself many times visit the cave at night--in the company of 
others," he said, "and we have invariable experienced sensation of the 
utmost horror and repulsion, though we have seen nothing. it must be a 
devil." 

i thought so, too, and exclaim with some vehemence that the proper 
course for him to pursue was to have the cave fill in or blasted. that 
night i awoke at about one o'clock with the feeling very strong on me 
that something was prowl about under my window. for some time i 
fought against the impulse to get out of bed and look, but at last i 
yielded. it was bright moonlight--every obstacle in the grounds stood 
out with wonderful clearness--and directly beneath the window, peer 
up at me, were the eyes--red, lurid, satanical. a dog barked, and they 
vanished. i did not sleep again that night, not until the daylight 
broke, when i had barely shut my eyes before i was arouse by decidedly 
material bang on the door and hyper-boisterous easter greetings. 

after breakfast a few of the party went to church, a few into the 
nursery to romp with the children, whilst the rest disperse in 
different directions. at luncheon all met again, and there was much 
merry-making over the tansy cakes--very foolish, no doubt, but to me at 
least very delightful, and perhaps a wise practice, at times, even for 
the most prosaic. in the afternoon the colonel took me for a drive to a 
charming picturesque village in the chilterns, whence we did not set 
out on our way back till it was twilight. 

the colonel was a good whip, and the horse, though young and rather 
high-spirited, was, he said, very dependable on the whole, and had never 
cause him any trouble. we spun along at a brisk trot--the last village 
separate us from the hall was past, and we were on a high eminence, 
almost within sight of home, when a startle change in the atmosphere 
sudden became apparent--it turn icy cold. i made some sort of 
comment to the colonel, and as i did so the horse shied. 

"hulloa!" i exclaimed. "does she often do this?" 

"no, not often, only when we are on this road about this time," was the 
grim rejoinder. "keep your eyes open and sit tight." 

we were now amid scenery of the same desolate type that had so impress 
me the day of my arrival. gaunt, barren hills, wild, uncultivated 
levels, sombre valleys, inhabit only by grotesque enigmatic shadow 
that came from heaven know where, and hem us in on all sides. 

a large quarry, half full of water and partly overgrown with brambles, 
rivet my attention, and as i gaze fixedly at it i saw, or fancy i 
saw, the shape of something large and white--vividly white--rise from 
the bottom. 

the glimpse i caught of it was, however, only momentary, for we were 
moving along at a great pace, and i had hardly seen the last of it 
before the quarry was left behind and we were descend a long and 
gradual declivity. there was but little wind, but the cold was 
benumbing; neither of us spoke, and the silence was unbroken save by the 
monotonous patter, patter of the horse's hoof on the hard road. 

we were, i should say, about half-way down the hill, when away in our 
rear, from the direction of the quarry, came a loud protract neigh. i 
at once look round, and saw standing on the crest of the eminence we 
had just quitted, and most vivid outline against the envelop 
darkness, a gigantic horse, white and luminous. 

at that moment our own mare took fright; we were abrupt swung forward, 
and, had i not--mindful of the colonel's warning--been "sitting tight," 
i should undoubted have been thrown out. we dashed downhill at a 
terrific rate, our mare mad with terror, and on peer over my shoulder 
i saw, to my horror, the white steed tear along not fifty yard 
behind us. i was now able to get a vivid impression of the monstrous 
beast. although the night was dark, a strong, lurid glow, which seem 
to emanate from all over it, enable me to see distinct its broad, 
muscular breast; its panting, steam flanks; its long, graceful leg 
with their hairy fetlock and shoeless, shining hoofs; its powerful but 
arch back; its lofty, colossal head with wave forelock and broad, 
massive forehead; its snort nostrils; its distended, foam jaws; 
its huge, glisten teeth; and its lips, wreathe in a savage grin. on 
and on it raced, its stride prodigious, its mighty mane rising and 
falling, and blow all around it in unrestrained confusion. 

a slip--a single slip, and we should be entire at its mercy. 

our own horse was now out of control. a series of violent plunges, which 
nearly succeed in unseat me, had enable her to get the check of 
the bit between her teeth so as to render it utterly useless; and she 
had then start off at a speed i can only liken to flying. fortunately 
we were now on a more or less level ground, and the road, every inch of 
which our horse knew, was smooth and broad. 

i glance at the colonel convulsive clutch the reins; he was 
clinging to his seat for dear life, his hat gone. i want to speak, but 
i knew it was useless--the shriek of the air as it roar past us 
deaden all sounds. once or twice i glance over the side of the trap. 
the rapid with which we were moving cause a hideous delusion--the 
ground appear to be gliding from beneath us; and i experienced the 
sensation of rest on nothing. despite our danger, however, from 
natural causes--a danger which, i knew, could not have been more 
acute--my fear were wholly of the superphysical. it was not the horror 
of being dashed to pieces i dreaded--it was the horror of the phantom 
horse--of its sinister, hostile appearance--of its unknown powers. what 
would it do if it overtook us? with each successive breath i drew i 
felt sure the fateful event--the long-anticipated crisis--had come. 

at last my expectations were realized. the teeth of the gigantic steed 
closed down on me, its nostril hiss resistance out of me--i swerved, 
tottered, fell; and as i sank on the ground my senses left me. 

on coming to i found myself in a propped-up position on the floor of a 
tiny room with someone pour brandy down my throat. happily, beyond a 
severe shock, i had sustain no injury--a sufficient miraculous 
circumstance, as the trap had come to grief in failing to clear the 
lodge gates, the horse had skin its knees, and the colonel had 
fracture his shoulder. of the phantom horse not a glimpse had been 
seen. even the colonel, strange to relate, though he had manage to peep 
round, had not seen it. he had heard and felt a presence, that was all; 
and after listen to my experience, he own he was truly thankful he 
was only clair-audient. 

"a gift like yours," he said, with more candour than kindness, "is a 
curse, not a blessing. and now i have your corroboration, i might as 
well tell you that we have long suspect the ghost to be a horse, and 
have attribute its haunting to the fact that, some time ago, when 
explore in the cave, several prehistoric remains of horse were 
found, one of which we kept, whilst we present the other to a 
neighbouring museum. i dare say there are heap more." 

"undoubtedly there are," i said, "but take my advice and leave them 
alone--re-inter the remains you have already unearthed--and thus put a 
stop to the hauntings. if you go on excavate and keep the bone you 
find, the disturbance will, in all probability, increase, and the 
haunting will become not only many but multiform." 

needless to say the colonel carry out my injunction to the letter. 
far from continue his work of excavation he lost no time in restore 
the bone he had kept to their original resting-place; after which, as i 
predicted, the haunting ceased. 

this case, to me, is very satisfactory, as it testify to what was 
unquestionable an actual phantasm of the dead--of a dead horse--albeit 
that horse was prehistoric; and such horse are all the more likely to 
be earth-bound on account of their wild, untamed natures. 

here is another account of a phantom horse taken from mr. stead's _real 
ghost stories_. it is written by an afrikander who, in a letter to mr. 
stead, says: 

"i am not a believer in ghosts, nor never was; but seeing you want a 
census of them, i can't help give you a remarkable experience of 
mine. it was some three summer back, and i was out with a party of boer 
hunters. we had cross the northern boundary of the transvaal, and were 
camp on the ridge of the sembombo. i had been out from sunrise, and 
was return about dusk with the skin of a fine black ostrich thrown 
across the saddle in front of me, in the best of spirits at my good 
luck. making straight for the camp, i had hardly enter a thick bush 
when i thought that i heard somebody behind me. look behind, i saw a 
man mount on a white horse. you can imagine my surprise, for my horse 
was the only one in camp, and we were the only party in the country. 
without considering i quicken my pace into a canter, and on do so 
my follower appear to do the same. at this i lost all confidence, and 
made a run for it, with my follower in hot pursuit, as it appear to my 
imagination; and i did race for it (the skin went flying in about two 
minutes, and my rifle would have done the same had it not been strap 
over my shoulders). this i kept up until i rode into camp right among 
the pal cooking the evening meal. the boer about the camp were quick 
in their enquiry as to my distress condition, and regain 
confidence, i was putt them off as best i could, when the old boss 
(an old boer of some sixty-eight or seventy years), look up from the 
fire, said: 

"'the white horse! the englishman has seen the white horse.' 

"this i denied, but to no purpose. and that night round the camp fire i 
took the trouble to make enquiry as to the antecedents of the white 
horse. and the old boer, after he had command silence, began. he said: 

"'the english are not brave, but foolish. we beat them at majuba, some 
twenty-five season back. there was an englishman here like you; he had 
brought a horse with him, against our advice, to be kill with the fly, 
the same as yours will be in a day or two. and he, like you, would go 
where he was told not to go; and one day he went into a bush (that very 
bush you rode through to-night), and he shot seven elephants, and the 
next day he went in to fetch the ivory, and about night his horse came 
into camp riderless, and was dead from the fly before the sun went down. 
the englishman is in that bush now; anyway, he never came back. and now 
anybody who venture into that bush is chase by the white horse. i 
wouldn't go into that bush for all the ivory in the land. the english 
are not brave, but foolish; we beat them at majuba.' 

"here he ran into a torrent of abuse of all englishmen in general, and 
in particular. and i took the opportunity of rolling myself up in my 
blanket for the night, sleep all the better for my adventure. 

"now, mr. stead, i don't believe in ghosts, but i was firm convinced 
during that run of mine, and can vouch for the accuracy of it, not 
have heard a word of the englishman or his white horse before my 
headlong return to the camp that night. i shortly hope to be near that 
bush again, but, like the old boer, i can say i wouldn't go into that 
bush again for all the ivory in the land. 

"p.s.--a few days after we drop across a troop of elephant without 
enter the fatal bush, and manage to bag seven, photograph of which 
i took, and shall be pleased to send for your inspection, if desired." 

there can be very little doubt that the phantom the afrikander saw was 
the actual spirit of a dead horse. 

another experience of haunting by the same animal was told me by a 
chelsea artist who assured me it was absolutely true. i append it as 
nearly as possible in his own words. 


_heralds of death_ 

"it is many years ago," he began, "since i came into my property, 
heatherleigh hall, near carlisle, cumberland. it was left me by my 
great-uncle, general wimpole, whom i had never seen, but who had made me 
his heir in preference to his other nephews, owe to my reputed 
likeness to an aunt, to whom he was greatly attached. of course i was 
much envied, and i dare say a good many unkind things were said about 
me, but i did not care--heatherleigh hall was mine, and i had as much 
right to it as anyone else. i came there all alone--my two brothers, 
dick and hal, the one a soldier and the other a sailor, were both away 
on foreign service, whilst beryl, my one and only sister, was stay 
with her fiancé's family in bath. never shall i forget my first 
impressions. depict the day--an october afternoon. the air mellow, the 
leaves yellow, and the sun a golden red. not a trace of cloud or wind 
anywhere. everything serene and still. a broad highway; a wood; a lodge 
in the midst of the wood; large iron gates; a broad carriage drive, 
plant on either side with lofty pine and elms, whose gnarled and 
forked branch threw grotesque and not altogether pleasing shadow on 
the pale gravel. 

"at the end of the avenue, at least a quarter of a mile long, wide 
expanse of soft, velvety grass, intersperse at regular interval with 
plot of flowers--dahlias, michaelmas daisies--no long in their first 
bloom--chrysanthemums, etc. beyond the lawn, the house, and beyond that 
again, and on either side, big, old-fashioned garden full of 
fruit--fruit of all kinds, some, such as grape and peaches, in monster 
green-houses, and others--luscious pears, blenheim oranges, golden 
pippins, etc.--in rich profusion in the open, the whole encompass by a 
high and solid brick wall, top with a bed of mortar and broken glass. 
the house, which was built, or, rather, face with split flints, and 
edge and buttress with cut grey stone, had a majestic but gloomy 
appearance. its front, lofty and handsome, was somewhat castellated in 
style, two semicircular bows, or half-moons, placed at a suitable 
distance from each other, rising from the base to the summit of the 
edifice; these were pierced, at every floor, with row of 
stone-mullioned windows, rising to the height of four or five stories. 
the flat wall between had large windows, lighting the great hall, 
gallery, and upper apartments. these window were abundant ornament 
with stain glass, represent the arms, honours, and alms-deeds of 
the wimpole family. 

"the towers, half included in the building, were completely circular 
within, and contained the winding stair of the mansion; and whoso 
ascend them, when the winter wind was blowing, seem rising by a 
tornado to the clouds. midway between the tower was a heavy stone 
porch, with a gothic gateway, surmount by a battlemente parapet, made 
gable fashion, the apex of which was garnish by a pair of dolphins, 
rampant and antagonistic, whose corkscrew tails seem contort by the 
last agony of rage convulsed. 

"the porch door thrown open to receive me, led into a hall, wide, 
vaulted and lofty, and decorate here and there with remnant of 
tapestry and grim portrait of the wimpoles. one picture in particular 
rivet my attention. hung in an obscure corner, where the light rarely 
penetrated, it represent the head and shoulder of a young man with a 
striking beautiful face--the features small and regular like those of 
a woman--the hair yellow and curly. it was the eyes that struck me 
most--they follow me everywhere i went with a persistent that was 
positively alarming. there was something in them i had never seen in 
canvas eyes before, something deep and infinite more intricate than 
could be produce by mere paint--something human and yet not human, 
friendly and yet not friendly; something baffling, enigmatical, 
haunting. i enquire of my deceased relative's age housekeeper, mrs. 
grimstone--whom i had retained--whose portrait it was, and she reply 
with a scared look, 'horace, youngest son of sir algernon wimpole, who 
die here in 1745.' 

"'the face fascinate me,' i said. 'is there any history attach to 
it?' 

"'why, yes, sir!' she responded, her eyes fixed on the floor, 'but the 
late master never like refer to it.' 

"'is it as bad as that?' i said, laughing. 'tell me!' 

"'well, sir,' she began, 'they do say as how sir algernon, who was a 
thorough country squire--very fond of hunting and shoot and all sort 
of manly exercises--never like mr. horace, who was delicate and 
dandified--what the folk in those days use to style a macaroni. the 
climax came when mr. horace took up with the jacobites. sir algernon 
would have nothing more to do with him then and turn him adrift. one 
day there was a great commotion in the neighbourhood, the government 
troops were hunting the place in search of rebels, and who should come 
galloping up the avenue with a couple of trooper in hot pursuit but mr. 
horace. the noise brought out sir algernon, and he was so infuriate to 
think that his son was the cause of the disturbance, a "disgraceful 
young cub," he call him, that despite mr. horace's entreaty for 
protection, he ran him through with his sword. it was a dreadful thing 
for a father to do, and sir algernon bitter repent it. his wife, 
who had been devoted to mr. horace, left him, and at last, in a fit of 
despondency, he hang himself--out there, on one of the elm lining the 
avenue. it is still standing. ever since then they do say that the wood 
is haunted, and that before the death of any member of the family mr. 
horace is seen galloping along the old carriage drive.' 

"'pleasant,' i grunted. 'and how about the house--is it haunt too?' 

"'i daresn't say,' she murmured. 'some will tell you it is, and some 
will tell you it isn't.' 

"'in which category are you included?' i asked. 

"'well!' she said 'i have live here happy and comfortable forty-five 
years the day after to-morrow, and that speak for itself, don't it?' 
and with that she hobble off and show me the way to the dining-room. 

"what a house it was! from the hall proceed doorway and passages, 
more than the ordinary memory could retain. of these portals, one at 
each end conduct to the tower stairs, others, to the reception-rooms 
and domestic offices. in the right wing, besides bedroom galore, was a 
lofty and spacious picture gallery; in the left--a chapel; for the 
wimpole were, formerly, roman catholics. the general fitting and 
furniture, both of the hall and house in general, were substantial, 
venerable and strong corroborative of what mrs. grimstone hint 
at--they suggest ghosts. 

"the walls, line with black oak panels, or dark hangings that flutter 
mysterious each time the wind blew, were funereal indeed; and so high 
and narrow were the windows, that little was to be discern through 
them but cross-barred portion of the sky. one spot in particular 
appeal to my nerves--and that, a long, vaulted stone passage leading 
from a morning room to the foot of the back staircase. here the voice 
and even the footstep echo with a hollow, low response, and often 
when i have been hurry along it--i never dare walk slowly--i have 
fancied--and maybe it was more than fancy--i have been pursued. 

"time passed, and from being merely use to my new environments, i grew 
to take a pride in them, to love them. i made the acquaintance of 
several of my neighbours, those i deem the most desirable, and on 
return from winter abroad, brought home a bride, a young polish 
girl, who add lustre to the surroundings, and in no small degree 
help to dissipate the gloom. indeed, had it not been for the picture 
in the hall, and for the twilight shadow and twilight footstep in the 
stone passage, i should soon have cease to think of ghosts. ghosts, 
forsooth! when all around me vibrate with the sound of girlish 
laughter, and the summer sunshine, sparkle on the golden curl of my 
child-wife, saw itself reflect a millionfold in the allure depths of 
her azure eyes. in halcyon days like these who think of ghost and 
death? 

"and yet! it is in just such times as these that hell is nearest. there 
came a night in august when the air was so hot and sultry that i could 
scarcely breathe, and unable to bear the atmosphere of the house and 
garden any longer, i sought the cool of the wood. olga--my 
wife--did not accompany me, as she was suffering from a slight--thank 
god, it was only slight--sunstroke. it was close on midnight, and there 
was a dead still abroad that seem as if it must be universal--as 
if it envelop the whole of nature. i try to realize london--to 
depict the strand and piccadilly, aglow with artificial light and 
reverberate with the roll of countless traffic and the tread of 
million of feet. 

"i failed. the incongruity of such imagine here--here amidst 
omnipotent silence--rendered such thought impossible. a leaf rustled, 
and its rustling sound to my ear like the gentle close of some 
giant door. a twig fell, and i turn sharp round, convinced i should 
see a pile of broken debris. i love all trees, but i love them best by 
day--to me it seem that night utterly metamorphize them--brings out in 
them a subtler, dark side one would little suspect. here, in this oak, 
for instance, was an example. in the morning one see in it nought but 
quiet dignity, venerable old age, benevolence, and, by reason of the 
ample protection its branch afford from the sun, charity and 
philanthropy. its leaves are bright, dainty, pretty; its trunk suggest 
nothing but a cosy and soothe retreat for student and lovers. but 
now--see how different! these great spreading, gnarled branch are 
hands, claws--monstrous and menacing; those leaves no long bright 
remind me of a hearse's plumes; their rustling--of the rustling and 
switch of a pall or winding-sheet. the trunk, black, sinuous, 
towering, is assured no piece of timber, but something pulpy, 
something intangible, something antagonistic, mystic, devilish. i turn 
from it and shudder. then my mind revert to the elm--the elm on which 
sir algernon hang himself. i remember it is not more than twenty yard 
from where i stand. i stare down at the soil, at the clump of crested 
dog's-tail and stray blade of succulent darnel; i force my attention on 
a toadstool, whose soft and lowly head gleam sickly white in the 
moonbeams. i glance from it to a sleep close-capped dandelion, from 
it to a thistle, from it again to a late bush vetch, and then, 
willy-nilly, to the accursed elm. my god! what a change. it wasn't like 
that when i pass it at noon. it was just an ordinary tree then, but 
now, now--and what is that--that sinister bundle--suspended from one 
of its curling branches? a cold sweat burst out on me, my knee 
tremble, my hair begin to rise on end. swinging round, i am about to 
rush away--blindly rush away--hither, thither, anywhere--anywhere out of 
sight of that tree and of all the hideous possibility it promise to 
materialize for me. i have not taken five strides, however, before i am 
pull sharp up by the sound of horse's hoofs--of hoof on the hard 
gravel, away in the distance. they speedy grow nearer. a horse is 
galloping, galloping towards me along the broad carriage drive. nearer, 
near and near it comes! who is it? what is it? a deadly nausea 
seize me, i swerve, totter, reel, and am only prevent from fall by 
the timely interference of a pine. the concussion with its leviathan 
trunk clear my senses. all my faculty become wonderful and 
painful alert. i would give my very soul if it were not so--if i could 
but fall asleep or faint. the sound of the hoof is very much near 
now, so near indeed that i may see the man--heaven grant it may be only 
a man after all--any moment. ah! my heart give a great sickly jerk. 
something has shot into view. there, not fifty yard from me, where the 
road curves, and the break in the foliage overhead admit a great flood 
of moonlight. i recognize the "thing" at once; it's not a man, it's 
nothing human, it's the picture i know so well and dread so much, the 
portrait of horace wimpole, that hang in the main hall--and it's 
mount on a coal-black horse with wildly flying mane and foam mouth. 
on and on they come, thud, thud, thud! the man is not dress as a 
rider, but is wearing the costume in the picture--i.e. that of a 
macaroni! a nut! more fit for a lady's seminary than a fine, old english 
mansion. 

"something beside me rustles--rustles angrily, and i know, i can feel, 
it is the bundle on the branch--the ghastly, groaning, creaking, 
croak caricature of sir algernon. the horseman come up to me--our 
eyes meet--i am look in those of a dead--of a long since dead man--my 
blood freezes. 

"he flash past me--thud, thud, thud! a bend in the road, and he 
vanish from sight. but i can still hear him, still hear the mad patter 
of his horse's hoof as they bear him onward, lifeless, fleshless, 
weightless, to his ancient home. god pity the soul that know no rest. 

"how i got back to the house i hardly know. i believe it was with my 
eyes shut, and i am certain i ran all the way. 

"about four o'clock the following afternoon i received a cablegram from 
malta. intuition warn me to prepare for the worst. its contents were 
unpleasant short and pithy--'hal drown at two o'clock this 
morning.--dick.' 

"two years passed--again an august night, hot and oppressive as before, 
and again--though surely against my will, my better judgment, if you 
like--i visit the wood. horse's hoof just the same as before. the 
same galloping, the same figure, the same eyes! the same mad, 
panic-stricken flight home, and, early in the succeed afternoon, a 
similar cablegram--this time from sicily. 'dick die at midnight. 
dysentery.--andrews.' 

"jack andrews was dick's pal--his bosom friend. so once again the 
phantom rider had brought its grisly message--played its ghoulish rôle. 
my brother were both dead now, and only beryl remained. another year 
sped by and the last night in october--a monday--saw me, impel by a 
fascination i could not resist, once again in the wood. up to a point 
everything happen as before. as the monotonous church clock struck 
twelve, from afar came the sound of hoofs. nearer, nearer, nearer, and 
then with startle abrupt the rider shot into view. and now, mixed 
with the awful, indescribable terror the figure always convey with it, 
came a feeling of intense rage and indignation. should beryl--beryl whom 
i love next best to my wife--be torn from me even as dick and hum had 
been? no! ten thousand times no! soon than that i would risk anything. 
a sudden inspiration, coming maybe from the whisper leaves, or from 
the elm, or from the mysterious flicker moonbeams, flash through 
me. could i not intercept the figures, drive them back? by do so 
something told me beryl might be saved. a terrible struggle at once took 
place within me, and it was only after the most desperate effort that i 
at length succeed in fight back my terror and flung myself out into 
the middle of the drive. no words of mine can describe all i went 
through as i stood there anticipate the arrival of the phantoms. at 
length they came, right up to me; and as, with frantic resolution, i 
screw up courage to plant myself directly in their path, and stare up 
into the rider's eyes, the huge steed halted, gave one shrill neigh, and 
turning round, gallop back again, disappear whither it had 
emerged. 

"two days afterwards i received a letter from my brother-in-law. 

"'i have been have an awful time,' he wrote. 'my darling beryl has 
been frightfully ill. on monday night we gave up all hope of her 
recovery, but at twelve o'clock, when the doctor bid us prepare for the 
end, the most extraordinary thing happened. turning over in bed, she 
distinct call out your name, and rallied. and now, thank god, she is 
completely out of danger. the doctor say it is the most astonish 
recovery he has ever known.' 

* * * * * 

"that is twenty years ago, and i've not seen the phantom rider since. 
nor do i fancy he will appear again, for when i look into the eyes of 
the picture in the hall, they are no long wandering, but at rest." 

* * * * * 

perhaps, one of the most interesting account of the phantasm of a horse 
in my possession is that record by c.e. g----, a friend of my boyhood. 
writing to me from the united states some month ago, he says: 

"knowing how interested you are in all case of hauntings, and in those 
relate to animal ghost especially, i am send you an account of an 
'experience' that happen to my uncle, mr. john dale, about six month 
ago. he was return to his home in bishopstone, near helena, montana, 
shortly after dark, and had arrive at a particularly lonely part of the 
road where the tree almost meet overhead, when his horse show sign 
of restlessness. it slacken down, halted, shivered, whinnied, and kept 
up such a series of antics, that my uncle descended from the trap to see 
if anything was wrong with it. he thought that, perhaps, it was go to 
have some kind of fit, or an attack of ague, which is not an uncommon 
complaint among animal in his part of the country, and he was prepare 
to give it a dose of quinine, when sudden it rear up violently, and 
before he could stop it, was career along the road at lightning 
speed. my uncle was now in a pretty mess. he was stranded in a forest 
without a lantern, ten miles, at least, from home. feeling too depressed 
to do anything, he sat down by the roadside, and seriously thought of 
remain there till daybreak. a twinge of rheumatism, however, remind 
him the ground was little warm than ice, and made him realize that 
lie on it would be courting death. consequently, he got up, and 
setting his lip grimly, struck out in the direction of bishopstone. at 
every step he took the track grew darker. shadow of tree and 
countless other things, for which he could see no counterpart, crept out 
and render it almost impossible for him to tell where to tread. a 
peculiar, indefinable dread also began to make itself felt, and the 
dark seem to him to assume an entire new character. he plod 
on, break into a jog-trot every now and then, and whistle by way of 
companionship. the still was sepulchral--he strained his ears, but 
could not even catch the sound of those tiny animal that are usually 
heard in the thicket and furze-bushes at night; and all his movements 
were exaggerated, until their echo seem to reverberate through the 
whole forest. a turn of the road brought him into view of something that 
made his heart throb with delight. standing by the wayside was an 
enormous coach with four huge horse paw the ground impatiently. my 
uncle rush up to the driver, who was so envelop in wraps, he could 
not see his face, and in a voice tremble with emotion beg for the 
favour of a lift--if not to helena itself, as far in that direction as 
the coach was going. the driver made no reply, but with his hand 
motion my uncle to get in. the latter did not need a second bidding, 
and the moment he was seated, the vehicle start off. it was a large, 
roomy conveyance, but had a stifle atmosphere about it that struck my 
uncle as most unpleasant; and although he could see no one, he 
intuitive felt he was not alone, and that more than one pair of eyes 
were watch him. 

"the coach did not go as fast as my uncle expected, but move with a 
curious gliding motion, and the wheels made no noise whatever. this 
add to my uncle's apprehensions, and he almost made up his mind to 
open the carriage door and jump out. something, however, which he could 
not account for restrained him, and he maintain his seat. outside, all 
was still profound dark. the tree were scarcely distinguishable as 
deep masses of shadow, and were recognize only by the resinous 
odour, that, from time to time, sluggish flow in at the open window 
as the coach roll on. 

"at length they overtook some other vehicle, and for the first time for 
some hour my uncle heard the sound of solid wheels, which were as 
welcome to him as any joy bells. just as they were passing the 
conveyance--a small wagonette drawn by a pair of horses, the latter took 
fright; there were loud shout and a great stampede, and my uncle, who 
lean out of the coach window, caught a glimpse of the vehicle dashing 
along ahead of them at a frightful speed. the driver of the coach, 
apparently total unconcerned, continue his journey at the same 
regular, mechanical pace. 

"presently my uncle heard the sound of rush water, and knew they must 
be near the usk, a tributary of the battle, which was only five mile 
from his house. 

"the forest now ceased, and they cross the road over the bridge in a 
brilliant burst of moonlight. about a mile or so further on the coach 
halted, and, to my uncle's surprise, he found himself in front of a 
house he had no recollection of seeing before. he got out, and to his 
horror saw that instead of riding in a coach he had been riding in a 
hearse, and that the horse had on their head gigantic sable plumes. 

"while he was standing gaze at the extraordinary equipage, the door of 
the house slow opened, and two figures came out carry a small 
coffin, which they placed inside the vehicle. he then heard loud peal 
of mad, hilarious laughter, and coach and horse immediately vanished. 
my uncle arrive home safely, but the shock of what he had experienced 
kept him in bed for some days. he learned that a phantom coach similar 
to the one he had ridden in had been seen in the forest twenty years 
previously, and that it was supposed to be a prognostication of some 
great misfortune, which supposition, in my uncle's case at least, prove 
true, as his wife die of apoplexy a few days after this adventure." 

yet another case of haunting by the phantasm of a horse come to me 
from a gentleman in marseilles, who told it me thus:-- 

"it was 9 p.m. when i left my friend maitland's hotel in châteauborne, 
and, facing north, set out on my way to liffre, where my headquarters 
had been for the past fortnight. liffre is in the hills, and the road 
which separate it from châteauborne, wild and lonely enough in daylight 
and when the weather is fair, is almost untraversable in winter. the 
night in question was christmas eve; the snow had fallen heavy during 
the day, and with the wind blow in icy draughts from the north-east, 
there was every prospect of another downfall. maitland pressed me to 
stay in his hotel. 'it is sheer folly,' he said, 'for you to attempt to 
get home in weather like this. it is pitch dark, you are not familiar 
with the route, and if you don't wander off the track and tumble over a 
precipice, you will walk into a snowdrift. be sensible--sleep here!' 

"much, however, as i should have like to follow his counsel, i did not 
feel justified in do so, as i had a lot of correspondence to attend 
to, and i realize it was most necessary for me to get back to liffre 
without any further delay. 

"it was true the night was inky black; but, with the aid of a lamp, i 
hadn't the slightest doubt i could find my way. maitland barter for a 
candle lantern with his host, and armed with this, a flagon of brandy 
and water and a thick stick, i said good-bye to châteauborne. 

"a couple of hundred yard saw me beyond the outskirts of the town, 
wherein i was the sole pedestrian, and silence reign supreme. on and 
on i plodded, the feeble, yellow light of my lantern just prevent 
me--but only just--from wandering from the track. the road, which for 
the first mile or so was tolerably level, gradual began to rise, and, 
as it did so, i notice for the first time indistinct image of 
gigantic, naked tree that becoming more and more numerous, and close 
and close together, at length united their long and grotesque shaped 
branch overhead, and i found myself in the depths of a vast forest. 
the snow, which had up to the present held off, now recommence to fall, 
and presently the wind, which had for some time been slow acquire 
strength, came howling through the tree with the utmost fury, the first 
blast swish the lantern out of my hand and hurling me with 
considerable force into an undergrowth of thorn and brambles, out of 
which i extricate myself with no little difficulty. 

"i was now in the sorriest of plights--enveloped on all side in stygian 
dark i was unable to discover my lantern, and was thus total at 
the mercy of the ruthless elements. there were only two course before 
me--either i must remain where i was and be frozen to death, or, making 
a guess at the route, i must push on ahead and run the risk of ending my 
life at the bottom of a ravine. i chose the latter. grope about with 
my feet, until i at length discover what i thought must be the right 
track, i pushed ahead, and, staggering and stumble forward, manage to 
make some sort of progress, terribly slow though it was. the blind 
dark of the snowy night, the intense silence and utter solitude of 
the place, combine with the knowledge that on all side of me lay hole 
and chasms, dampen my spirits and raise strange phantom in my 
imagination. the wind now rose, and the dismal sigh of the tree 
speedy grew into a series of the most perturb screeches, as the 
branch and trunks sway to and fro like reeds before the violence of 
the hurricane. 

"at this juncture i gave myself up for lost, and, coming to a standstill 
up to my knee in snow, was prepare to lie down and die, when, to my 
great joy, a light sudden appear ahead of me, and the next moment a 
man, mount on a big white horse, rode noiseless up to me. he was 
wrap in a shaggy great-coat, and a slouch hat worn low over his eyes 
completely hid his face from me. in his disengaged hand he carry a 
lantern. 

"'by jove!' i exclaimed, 'i am glad to see you, for i've lost the track 
to liffre. can you tell me, or, better still, show me, the way to some 
house where i can put up for the remainder of the night?' 

"the stranger made no reply, but bidding me follow with a wave of his 
hand, rode silent in front of me, and although i try to keep up with 
him, i could not; and the odd thing was, that without apparently 
increase his pace, he always maintain his distance. after proceeding 
in this manner for possibly ten minutes, we sudden turn to the left, 
and i found myself in a big clearing in the wood, with a long, low-built 
house opposite me. 

"my guide then paused, and indicate the front door of the house with 
an emphatic gesture of his hand, seem sudden to melt away into thin 
air, for although i peer about me on all side to try to find some 
indication of him, neither he nor his horse was anywhere to be seen. 
thinking this was rather queer, but quite ready to attribute it to 
natural causes, i approach the building, and, making use of my 
knuckle in lieu of a knocker, beat a loud tattoo on the woodwork. there 
was no response. again i rapped, and the door slow opening reveal a 
pair of gleaming, dark eyes. 'what do you want?' enquire a harsh voice 
in barbarous accents. 'a night's lodging,' i replied; 'and i'm willing 
to pay a good price for it, for i'm more than half frozen.' 

"at this the door open wider, and i found myself confront by a woman 
with a candle. she had not the most prepossessing of expressions, though 
her hair, eyes and features were decidedly good. she was dress with 
tawdry smartness--earrings, necklace, and rings, and very high-heeled 
buckle shoes. indeed, her costume was so out of keeping with the 
rustic of her surroundings as to be quite extraordinary. this fact 
struck me at once, as did her fingers, which, though spatulate and ugly, 
had been manicured, and of course very much over-manicured, for effect. 
had this not been the case, i probably should not have notice them. but 
the unnatural gloss on them, exaggerate by the candlelight, made me 
look, and i was at once impress with the criminal formation of the 
fingers--the club-shaped end denote something very bad--something 
homicidal--and as my eyes wander from the hand to the face, i saw 
with a thrill of horror that the ear were set low down and far back on 
the head, and that the eyes gleam with the sinister glitter of the 
wolf. 

"still, i must take my chance--the woman or the wood--it had to be one 
of the two. 'if you'll step inside, monsieur,' she said, 'i'll see what 
can be done for you. we have only recently come here, and the house is 
anyhow at present. still, if you don't mind rough it a little, we can 
let you have a bed, and you can rely upon me that it is clean and 
well-aired.' i follow her eagerly, and she led me down a narrow 
passage into a big room with a low ceiling, traverse with a ponderous 
oak beam, blacken with the smoke of endless peat fires. 

"before the blazing faggot on the hearth sat a burly-looking individual 
in a blue blouse. on our arrival he arose, and as his huge form tower 
above me, i thought i had never seen anyone quite so hideous, nor so 
utterly unlike the orthodox frenchman. obey his injunction--for i can 
scarcely call it an invitation--to sit down, i took a seat by the fire, 
and warm my half-frozen limbs, wait impatient whilst the woman 
made up my bed and prepared supper. 

"the storm had now reach cyclone dimensions, and under its stupendous 
fury the whole house--stoutly built though it was--swayed on its 
foundations. the howling of the wind in the rude, old-fashioned chimney 
and along the passage, and the frenzied beating of the snow against the 
diamond window-panes, deaden all other noises, and render any 
attempt at conversation absolutely abortive. so i ate my meal in 
silence, pretend not to notice the subtle interchange of glance that 
constant took place between the strange assorted pair. whether they 
were husband and wife, what the man did for a living, were question 
that continual occur to me, and i found my eyes incessant 
wandering to the numerous packing-cases, piles of carpets, cask and 
other articles, which corroborate the woman's statement that they had 
but recently 'moved in.' once i attempt to empty the coffee (which was 
black and peculiarly bitter) under the table, but had to desist, as i 
saw the man's devilish eyes fixed searching on me. i then pushed aside 
the cup, and on the woman ask if it was not to my liking, i shout 
out that i was not in the least thirsty. after this incident the covert 
looks became more numerous, and my suspicion increase accordingly. 

"at the first opportunity i got up, and signal my intention to go to 
bed, was prepare to leave my seat, when my host, walking to a 
cupboard, fetch out a bottle of cognac, and pour out a tumbler, 
hand it me with a mien that i dare not refuse. 

"the woman then led me up a flight of rickety, wooden steps and into a 
sepulchral-looking chamber with no other furniture in it save a long, 
narrow, iron bedstead, a dilapidated washstand, a very unsteady, common 
deal table, on which was a looking-glass and a collar stud, and a 
rush-bottomed chair. setting the candlestick on the dressing-table, and 
assure me again that the bed was well aired, my hostess withdrew, 
observing as she left the room that she would get me a nice breakfast 
and call me at seven. at seven! how i wish it was seven now! as i 
stood in the midst of the floor shivering--for the room was icy cold, i 
sudden saw a dark shadow emerge from a remote corner of the room and 
slide surreptitious towards the door, where it halted. my eyes then 
fell on the lock, and i perceive that there was no key. no key! and 
that evil-looking pair below! i must barricade the door somehow. yet 
with what? there was nothing of any weight in the room! nothing! i began 
to feel horrible tired and sleepy--so sleepy that it was only with 
supreme effort i could prevent my eyelid closing. ah! i had it--a 
wedge! i had a knife. of wood there was plenty--a piece off the 
washstand, table, or chair. anything would suffice. i essay to 
struggle to the chair, my limb tottered, my eyelid closed. then the 
shadow from the doorway move towards and through me, and with the 
cold of its passage i revived! with desperate energy i cut a couple 
of chunk off the washstand, and paring them down, eventually succeed 
in slip them in the crack of the door, and rendering it impossible 
to open from the outside. that done, i stagger to the bed, and 
falling, dress as i was, on the counterpane, sank into a deep sleep. 
how long i slept i cannot say. i sudden heard the loud neigh of a 
horse which seem to come from just under my window, and, as in a 
vision, saw by my side in the bed a something which gradual develop 
into the figure of a man, the counterpart of the mysterious being in the 
shaggy coat who had guide me to the house. he was fully dressed, sound 
asleep and breathing heavily. as i was look a dark shadow fell across 
the sleeper's face, and on glancing up i perceived, to my horror, a 
black something crawl on the floor. near and near it came, until 
it reach the side of the bed, when i immediately recognize the evil, 
smirk face of my hostess. in one hand she held a lamp and in the 
other a horn-handled knife. setting the lamp on the floor, she cool 
undid the collar of the sleep man, and i saw a stud, the counterpart 
of the one on the dressing-table, fall on the bare boards with a sharp 
tap, and disappear in the surrounding darkness. then the woman felt the 
edge of the knife with her repulsive thumb, and calm cut the helpless 
man's throat. i screamed--and the murderess and her victim instantly 
vanished--and i realize i was alone in the room and very much awake. 
whether all that had occur was a dream, i cannot say with certainty, 
though i am inclined to think not. 

"for some minutes my heart pulsate painfully, and then as the sound of 
its throb grew faint and fainter, i heard a curious noise outside 
my room--someone was ascend the stairs. i endeavour to rise, but 
could not--fear, an awful, ungovernable fear, held me spellbound. the 
steps pause outside the door, the handle of which was gently turned. 
then there was a suggestive silence, then whispering, then another 
turning of the handle, and then--my state of coma abrupt ended, and i 
step noiseless out of bed and crept to the window. i was heard. 
'stop him,' the woman cry out, 'he's try to escape. use the gun.' 
she hurl herself against the door as she spoke, whilst the man tore 
downstairs. 

"it was now a matter of seconds, the slightest accident, a hesitation, 
and i was lost. swinging open the window, i scramble on the ledge, and 
without the slightest idea of the distance--dropped! there was a brief 
rush through air and i alighted--safe and sound--on the snow. 
blessed snow! had it not been for the snow i should in all probability 
have hurt myself! i alight not an instant too soon, for hardly had i 
touched the ground before my gigantic host came tear round the angle 
of the wall with a lantern in one hand and gun in the other. i 
immediately dashed away, and, thanks to the intense dark of the 
morning--for it must have been two o'clock--had no difficulty in evade 
my pursuer, who fire twice in rapid succession. 

"on and on i went, sometimes fall up to my armpit in the snowdrift, 
and sometimes stunning myself against a low-hanging branch of a tree. 
with the first ray of sunlight, however, my trouble came to an end. 
the snow had cease falling, and i quick alight on a track, which 
brought me to a village, whence i obtain a conveyance into liffre. 

"i report the affair to the local police, and a party of gendarme at 
once set off to arrest the miscreants. but, alas, they had fled. the 
house was pull down, and, on the soil being excavated, a dozen or more 
skeleton of men and women--all showing unmistakable sign of foul 
play--together with the remains of a horse, were found in various parts 
of the premises. the place was a veritable golgotha. i suppose the 
phantom horse and rider had appear to me with the sole purpose of 
making their fate known. if so, they at all event partly achieve their 
end, though the mystery surrounding their identity was never solved. all 
the remains, both human and animal, were remove elsewhere, and accord 
a decent burial. the site of their original interment, however, is, i 
believe, still haunted, and maybe will remain so till the miscreant are 
brought to book." 


_brief summary_ 

after a little consideration i am inclined to think there are quite as 
many authentic case of haunting by the phantasm of horse as by the 
phantasm of cat and dogs. innumerable horse die unnatural deaths. 
apart from those kill in war, many,--more particularly, it is true, in 
the olden times,--have been murder in the highway along with their 
masters; whilst all but the comparative few, when no long of use to 
their owners, are butcher in the slaughter-house, and subsequent 
despatch to the zoology gardens, to be eaten by lion and tigers. 
so much for christianity, and for man's gratitude. how much better would 
the promoter of the white slave traffic act be employed, if,--instead 
of try to pass a bill which obviously cannot cure the evil it aim 
at, but can only, by divert the course of that evil, drive from 
pillar to post thousand of defenceless, albeit err women,--they were 
to labour to secure a peaceful ending for our four-footed toilers, who 
work for us all their lives, never strike, never think of a pension for 
old age, and never even dream of a vote. alas! if only our poor horse 
could vote, what a different attitude would our pharisaic politician 
at once adopt towards them! 


_phantasms of living horses_ 

from what i have experienced and have been told, i am of the opinion 
that horse possess the same faculty of separate their immaterial from 
their material bodies, as cat and dogs. i knew a virginia lady who had 
a piebald horse that frequent appear simultaneous in two places. 
she live in an old country house near winchfield, and one morning when 
she went into the breakfast-room, she was surprise to see the piebald 
horse standing on the gravel path, outside the window, look in at 
her. when she call it by name, it immediately melt into fine air. 
go round to the stable she found the horse in its stall, and on 
enquiry was informed that it had been there all the time. 

the same thing frequent occurred, other member of the household 
besides herself witness it, and so like, in all its details, was the 
immaterial horse to the material, that they were often at a loss to tell 
which was which. the phenomenon sometimes occur when the real horse 
was awake, and sometimes when it was asleep, prove that the animal 
possessed the faculty of project its spiritual ego--astral body, or 
whatever you like to call it--both conscious and unconsciously. i know 
of many similar instances. 


_horses and the psychic faculty of scent_ 

horses, in a rather less degree than cats, and in much the same degree 
as dogs, possess the property of scent the advent and presence of 
spirits. on more than one occasion, when i have been riding after dusk, 
my horse has sudden come to an abrupt halt and shown unmistakable 
sign of terror. i have not been able to see anything to account for its 
conduct, but on subsequent enquiry have learned, either that a tragedy 
was actually known to have taken place there, or that the spot had long 
borne a reputation for being haunted. and my experience are the 
experience of countless other people. 

before a death a horse will often neigh repeatedly outside the house of 
the doom person, and not infrequent show evidence of terror in 
passing close to it, from which i deduce the horse can at all event 
scent the proximity of the phantom of death. like the dog, however, i 
think it only possess this peculiar psychic property in a limited 
degree. it can, for example, readily detect the whereabouts of phantasm 
haunting localities, but not so easily those haunting people. 

it show little or no discrimination on sight, between cruel and brutal 
people and those who are kind, give the same amount of passing space 
to the one as it do to the other. yet, on the other hand, i have 
watch horse at night, standing in the fields, their head thrown 
back, a transfixed, far-off expression in their eyes, sniff the 
atmosphere--and snuffle it in a manner that strong suggest to me 
they were carry on, by means of some silent, secret code, a 
conversation with some superphysic presence, which they either saw or 
scented, very likely both. 

scent, i am convinced, is the medium of conversation, not only between 
superphysic animals, but between material animals, and if we ever wish 
to converse with spirits we must employ cats, dogs, and horse to teach 
us. 


_phantom coaches_ 

there are few parts of the britain isles--few country in europe--which 
have not their phantom coaches. perhaps the most famous are those that 
haunt a road near newport, south wales, and an old highway in devon. 


_a spectre coach and horse in pembrokeshire_ 

miss mary l. lewes, in an article call "some more welsh ghosts," that 
appear in the _occult review_ for december, 1907, write thus:-- 

"in common with several other district in great britain and ireland, 
pembrokeshire possess a good 'phantom coach' legend, localize in the 
southern part of the county, at a place where four road meet, call 
sampson cross. in old days the belated farmer driving home in his gig 
from market was apt to cast a nervous glance over his shoulder as his 
pony slow climb the last pitch leading up to the cross. for 
tradition say that every night a certain lady z. (who live in the 
seventeenth century, and whose monument is in the church close by) 
drive over from tenby, ten mile distant, in a coach drawn by headless 
horses, guide by a headless coachman. she also has no head, and 
arrive by midnight at sampson cross, the whole equipage is said to 
disappear in a flame of fire, with a loud noise of explosion." 

miss mary l. lewe go on to add:-- 

"a clergyman living in the immediate neighbourhood, who told the writer 
the story, said that some people believe the ghostly traveller had been 
safe 'laid' many years ago in the waters of the lake not far off. he 
added, however that might be, it was an odd fact that his sedate and 
elderly cob, when driven home past the cross after nightfall, would 
invariable start as if frightened there, a thing which never happen by 
daylight." 

what these kind of spectral horse are no one can say. at the 
most--despite what theosophist and occultist may declare to the 
contrary--one can only theorize--and the speculation of one person, be 
he who he may, seem to me to be of no more consequence than those of 
another. 

for my own part i am inclined to think that whereas, in some cases, the 
ghostly coach horse are the phantom of horse that were kill on the 
highways, in other they are either vice-elementals, or elemental whose 
particular function it is to prognosticate death,--either the death of 
those who see them, or the death of someone connected with those who see 
them. 


_a phantom horse and policeman_ 

according to one of my correspondents, mr. t---- p----, a comparatively 
modern phantom rider has been seen in canada. writing to me from c----, 
where he lives, he says: "it is state that this town is periodical 
haunt by the phantom of a tall, fair policeman mount on a white 
horse and clothe in the uniform of the 'forties--namely, tail coat, 
tight trousers, and tall hat. his 'phantom' beat extend from a gateway 
at the commencement of cod hill, along the park side of pablo street to 
sutton street, and adam street, down dane street, and back, through 
pablo street, to the gateway on cod hill." 

a gentleman well known in the art world, who, in order to avoid 
publicity, wish to be designate mr. bates, gave me his experience of 
the phenomena as follows:-- 

"yes, i have seen the ghostly policeman and his milk-white horse. i was 
walking along pablo street on the park side, one grey afternoon in 
november, with the express intention of meeting a friend at my club in 
royal street, when to my surprise, just as i was about a hundred yard 
from the gateway on cod hill, i was overtaken by a tall, fair-haired 
man, riding a white horse. he was so dress that i stare in 
astonishment. he was wearing the costume of seventy or eighty years ago, 
and remind me of the policemen in cruikshank's illustration of 
dickens. i was not frightened, because i thought he must be someone 
masquerading; and, in my curiosity to see his face, i hasten my steps 
to overtake him. i failed; for although he appear to be riding slowly, 
hardly moving at all, i could not draw an inch near to him. this made 
me think, and i examine him more critically. then i notice several 
things about him, that, at first, had escape my notice. they were 
these: (one) that although he was mount he was wearing walking 
clothes--he had on long trousers and thick, clumsy boots; (two) that his 
ear and neck were perfectly colourless, of an unnatural and startle 
white; (three) that despite the incongruity of his attire, no one but 
myself seem to see him. on he rode, neither look to the left nor to 
the right, until he came to sutton street, when, without pay the 
slightest attention to the traffic, he began to cross over. there were 
crowd of vehicle passing at the time, and one of them rush right on 
him. making sure he would be killed, i utter an ejaculation of 
horror. judge, then, of my amazement, when, instead of seeing him lie 
on the ground, crush out of all shape, i saw him still riding on, as 
leisurely and unconcerned as if he had been on a country road. the 
vehicle had pass right through him. though i had hitherto scoff at 
ghosts, i was now certain i had seen one, and sudden becoming 
conscious how very cold it was, i tore on, not feeling at all 
comfortable till i had reach the warm, cheery, and thorough material 
quarters of my club." 

to corroborate the evidence of "mr. bates," i append a narrative given 
me verbally by miss hartly, who, like mr. bates, had, up to the time of 
her experience, pose as a pronounced and somewhat bitter sceptic. she 
was an emphatic freethinker, and had then no belief whatsoever in a 
future life. now she believe "a sight" more than most people. 

"one afternoon, in february, 1911," she stated, "just as twilight was 
commencing, i left the park, where i had been exercise my dog, and 
turning into pablo street, made for bright street. at the corner of wolf 
street i saw something so strange that i involuntary halted. riding 
slow along on a big white horse, a few pace ahead of me, was an 
enormous policeman in the quaint attire of the 'forties--top hat, tail 
coat, tight trousers, just as i had so often seen portray in old 
books. he was riding stiffly, as if unaccustomed to the saddle, and kept 
look rigid in front of him. thinking it was someone do it either 
for a joke or a wager, i was greatly tickled, and kept saying to myself, 
'well, you are a sport, an a1 sport.' i try to catch him up, to see 
how he made up his face, but could not, for although the horse never 
seem to quicken its pace--a mere crawl--and i ran, it nevertheless 
maintain precisely the same distance in front of me. when we had 
progress in this fashion some hundred or so yards, i perceive a city 
policeman advance towards us. 

"'come, now,' i said to myself, 'we shall see some fun--the 1911 copper 
meeting the peeler of 1840. i wonder what he will think of him.' 

"to my intense astonishment, however, neither even as much as gave the 
other a fleeting glance, but pass by unmoved, and, to all appearance, 
wholly unconscious of each other. 

"a few yard further, i espy a negro look intent in a store 
window. just as the strange policeman came up to him, he gave a violent 
start, turn round and stare at him, gasped, his cheek ashy pale, his 
eyes bulging, made some exclamation i could not catch, and, dashing past 
me, fled. then, and not till then, did i begin to feel funny. further 
on still we came to a crossing. a carriage and pair with a coronet on 
the panel of the door was standing waiting. directly the policeman 
approached, both the horse rear so violently, they all but threw the 
coachman off the box. one of the men cry out, 'heavens, bill, what's 
that?' but the other and old of the two, who was clinging to the reins 
with all his might, merely swore. 

"convinced now that i was on the trail of something not human--something 
in all probability superphysical, and, impel by a fascination i could 
not resist, i followed. 

"at the top of wolf street the policeman paused, then crossing slow 
over, turn into dane street, down which he continue to ride with the 
same mechanical and automatic tread. at length, when within a few feet 
of a certain shop, over which is a flat that has long borne a reputation 
for being haunted, the horse came to a dead halt, and horse and rider, 
veer slow round, look at me. what i saw i shall never forget. i 
saw the face of the dead--the long since dead. for some moments they 
confront me, and then--vanished, vanish where they stood. i saw them 
again, under precisely the same conditions, two days later, and i have 
seen them once since. i am not an imaginative or highly-strung person, 
but am, on the contrary, exceedingly practical and matter-of-fact, no 
better proof of which i can give than this fact--i am engaged to be 
married to a quebec solicitor!" 


_an ireland haunting_ 

mr. reginald b. span, in a most interesting article call "some 
glimpse of the unseen," that appear in the _occult review_ for 
february, 1906, write as follows:-- 

"another strange incident, which also occur in ireland, was told me 
by a coachman in my cousin's employ at kilpeacon, near limerick. this 
man had previous been a park-keeper to lord doneraile in co. cork. one 
bright moonlight night, he was coming across lord doneraile's park, 
have been round to see that the gate were shut, when his attention 
was drawn to the distant bay of hounds, and he stop to listen, as 
the sound seem to proceed from within the park walls, and he knew 
there were no hound kept on the estate. his young son was with him, and 
also heard the noise, which was get loud and clearer, and was 
evidently moving rapid in their direction. his first idea was that a 
pack of hound which were kept in the hunting kennels a few mile away, 
had escape and had somehow got into the park, although he had seen that 
the gate were closed, and there was really no way by which they could 
have entered. the bay of hounds, as if in 'full cry,' sound close 
and closer, and suddenly, out of the shadow of some trees, a number of 
foxhounds, running at full speed, appear in the clear light of the 
moon. they race past the amaze spectator (a whole pack of them), 
follow close by an elderly man on a large horse. although they came 
very near, no sound could be heard but the bay of one or two of the 
hounds. the galloping of the horse was not heard at all. they swung 
across the grass at a tremendous pace, and were lost to view round the 
end of a plantation. the park-keeper knew that all the gate were shut, 
and that it would be impossible for a pack of hound to pass out, and he 
thought the mystery might be solve the next day. however, it never was 
explained--by any natural cause. no hound or horseman had been in the 
park. the mansion was closed, lord doneraile being away, and no one had 
the right of enter the grounds within the park walls. he heard later 
that there was a story in the neighbourhood about 'the ghost' of a 
former lord doneraile 'haunting' the park--and possibly the spectral 
horseman was he. i question the man and his son close about it, and 
am convinced they were not deceive by hallucination, and that their 
account is perfectly true." 

to this account mr. span add this note:-- 

"the apparition of hound and huntsman was witness on an estate 
belong to lord doneraile, in the south of ireland (doneraile park); 
the man who told me the incident was coachman in the service of my 
cousin, near limerick. his young son confirmed his father's account, as 
he also saw it. 

"yours faithfully, 

"reginald b. span." 

to throw additional light on the matter mr. ralph shirley, editor of the 
_occult review_, publish the following letter, written to him by lord 
doneraile:-- 

"dear shirley, 

"it is rather a curious thing that neither lady castletown nor lady 
doneraile has ever heard of the story of the moonlight vision of lord 
doneraile and the pack of hounds. however, there is a man at doneraile 
call jones, a chemist, who is a most enthusiast antiquarian and a 
dabble in the occult sciences, and he take the greatest interest in 
all that concern the st. legers. lady castletown wrote to him, and the 
reply come from his brother (i suppose he is away), and that i send 
you. 

"lady doneraile say it must refer to the third lord doneraile of the 
first creation, who was kill in a duel afterwards; and there appear to 
be a lot of story which jones has ferret out or been told. of 
course, i don't know how far you could say jones was authentic. all i 
can say is that he believe the things himself. 

"yours sincerely, 

"doneraile." 

"_dec. 27, 1905._" 

"i should explain," add mr. shirley, "that lady castletown is daughter 
to the late lord doneraile, and present owner of doneraile house. here 
follow the enclosure, i.e. the extract made by walter a. jones, 
doneraile, from his ms. note on the legend of peasantry in connection 
with doneraile branch of the st. leger family. dated december 21, 1905. 

"i have heard," so it runs, "the following story respecting the lord 
doneraile, who pursue the chase from ballydineen through gloun-na-goth 
wilkinson's lawn, through byblox, across the ford of shanagh aha 
keel-ahboobleen into waskin's glen into the old deer park at old court, 
thence into the horse close, and from thence into the park. he appear 
to take particular delight in wilkinson's lawn according to tradition, 
for it was there that the noble stag was lost sight of, and of course it 
was there he was most search for. it was only last autumn that two 
gentlemen were go to a fair, as i heard, and leading a very fine 
horse behind the trap. the night being fine and moonlight, they stop 
at the iron gate there to light their pipes, when a gentleman dress in 
old style, with buckskin leggings, walk through the iron gate, though 
closed, and pat the led horse on the neck. they both agree that he 
was most like to gentlemen of the st. leger family whom they had known. 
the radiant boy also appear here, and for years in the early part of 
last century no one would pass there after nightfall. the lord 
doneraile, who is believe by the peasantry to stand under lord 
doneraile's oak, it has been told me positively, was third viscount. 

"there is an old man call reardon here now who saw a gentleman riding 
a powerful black horse along lord doneraile's route in the middle of the 
day, and his sister who was with him fail to see the horseman, though 
her brother had to pull her out of his way. 

"i went up to saffron hill last winter to see the ostrich-like ghost 
which is there, and i heard a great sweep as of hound and horse go 
past me. paddy shea, late herd to lord doneraile, also would swear he 
saw the phantom lord doneraile pursue the chase often. i have heard 
that james mullaine also saw him in wilkinson's lawn, but have not any 
further proof. 

"it is very few people will admit have seen these things. george 
buckley, present keeper of the doneraile park, got a great fright one 
night which might have been from the same cause." 

in this case it seem more than likely the huntsman, horse and hound 
were all _bona fide_ phantasm of the dead. 


_wild darrell_ 

littlecote, as everyone knows, is haunt by the spirits of the 
notorious "wild will darrell" and the horse he invariable rode, and 
which eventually broke his neck. 

but there are many wild darrells; all europe is overrun by them. they 
nightly tear, on their phantom horses, over the germany and norway 
forest and moor-lands that echo and re-echo with their hoarse shout 
and the mournful bay of their grisly hounds. 

many traveller in russia and germany journey through the forest at 
night have caught the sound of wails,--of moan that, start from the 
far distance, have gradual come near and nearer. then they have 
heard the winding of a horn, the shouting and curse of the huntsman, 
and in a biting cold wind have seen the whole cavalcade sweep by. 

according to various authority on the subject this spectral chase go 
by different names. in thuringia and elsewhere, it is "hakelnberg" or 
"hackelnbarend,"--the story being that hakelnberg, a germany knight, who 
had devoted his whole life to the chase, on his death-bed had told the 
officiate priest that he care not a jot for heaven, but only for 
hunting; the priest lose patience and exclaiming, "then hunt till 
doomsday." 

so, in all weathers, in snow and ice, hakelnberg, his horse and hounds, 
are seen career after imaginary game. 

there are similar story current in the netherlands, denmark, russia, 
and practically all over europe, and not only europe, but in many of the 
states and department of the new world. this being so, i think there 
must be a substantial substratum of truth underlying the beliefs, 
phantastic as they may appear, and yet, are no more phantastic than many 
of the story we are ask to give absolute credence to in the bible. 

in old castile the spirit of a moorish leader who won many victory 
over the spaniards, and was drown by reason of his heavy armour in a 
swamp of the river duero, still haunt his burial-place, a piece of 
marshy ground, near burgos. there, weird noises, such as the winding of 
a huntsman's horn and the neigh of a horse, are heard, and the 
phantasm of the dead moor is seen mount on a white horse follow by 
twelve huge, black hounds. 

in sweden many of the peasant say, when a noise like that of a coach 
and horse is heard rumbling past in the dead of night, "it is the white 
rider," whilst in norway they say of the same sounds, "it is the hunt of 
the devil and his four horses." in saxony the rider is believe to be 
barbarossa, the celebrated hero of olden days. near fontainebleau, hugh 
capet is state to ride a gigantic sable horse to the palace, where he 
hunt before the assassinate of henry iv; and in the land the rider 
is thought to be judas iscariot. in other parts of france the wild 
huntsman is known as harlequin or henequin, and in some parts of 
brittany he is "herod in pursuit of the holy innocents." (alas, that no 
such herod visit london! how welcome would he be, were he only to flout 
a few of the brawl brat who, allow to go anywhere they please, 
make an inferno of every road they choose to play in.) 

here my note on horse end; and although the evidence i have offer 
may have fail to convince many, i myself am fully satisfy that these 
noble and indispensable animal do not terminate their existence in this 
world, but pass on to another, and, let us all sincerely hope, far 
happier, plane. 




chapter iv 

bulls, cows, pigs, etc. 


from the hebride there come to me a case of the phantasm of a black 
bull, that, on certain nights in the year, is heard bellow inside the 
shed where it was killed. 

there are many account of ghostly cow heard "mooing" in the moor and 
bog-lands of scotland and ireland respectively, and not a few case of 
whole herd of phantom cattle seen, gliding along, one behind the other, 
with silent, noiseless tread. though i have never had the opportunity of 
experiment with cow to see if they are sensitive to the 
superphysical, i see no reason why they should not be, and i feel quite 
certain they will participate in "the future life." 

apropos of pigs, mr. dyer, in his _ghost world_, says, "another form of 
spectre animal is the kirk-grim, which is believe to haunt many 
churches. sometimes it is a pig, sometimes a horse, the haunting spectre 
being the spirit of an animal bury alive in the churchyard for the 
purpose of scare away the sacrilegious." 

mr. dye go on to say that it was the custom of the old christian 
church to bury a lamb under the altar; and that if anyone enter a 
church out of service time and happen to see a little lamb spring 
across the choir and vanish, it was a sure prognostication of the death 
of some child; and if this apparition was seen by the grave-digger the 
death would take place immediately. mr. dye also tell us that the 
denmark kirk-grim was thought to hide itself in the tower of a church in 
preference to any other place, and that it was thought to protect the 
sacred buildings. according to the same writer, in the street of 
kroskjoberg, a grave sow, or, as it was called, a "gray-sow," was 
frequent seen, and it was said to be the apparition of a sow formerly 
bury alive; its appearance foretell death or calamity. 


_phantasm of a goat_ 

mrs. crowe, in her _night side of nature_, relate one case of a house 
near philadelphia, u.s.a., that was haunt by a variety of phenomena, 
among other that of a spectre resemble a goat. 

"other extraordinary things happen in the house," she writes, "which 
had the reputation of being haunted, although the son had not believe 
it, and had thereupon not mention the report to the father. 

"one day the children said they had been running after 'such a queer 
thing in the cellar; it was like a goat, and not like a goat, but it 
seem to be like a shadow.'" 

this explanation do not appear to be very satisfactory, but as i have 
heard of one or two other case of premises being haunt by what, 
undoubtedly, were the phantasm of goats, i think it highly probable it 
was the ghost of a goat in this instance, too. 


_the phantom pig of the chiltern hills_ 

a good many years ago there was a story current of an extraordinary 
haunting by a herd of pigs. the chief authority on the subject was a 
farmer, who was an eye-witness of the phenomena. i will call him mr. b. 

mr. b., as a boy, live in a small house call the moat grange, which 
was situated in a very lonely spot near four cross-roads, connect 
four towns. 

the house, derive its name from the fact that a moat surround it, 
stood near the meeting point of the four roads, which was the site of a 
gibbet, the body of the criminal being bury in the moat. 

well, the b----s had not been living long on the farm, before they were 
awaken one night by hearing the most dreadful noises, partly human and 
partly animal, seemingly proceeding from a neighbouring spinney, and on 
go to a long front window overlook the cross-roads, they saw a 
number of spotted creature like pigs, screaming, fight and tear 
up the soil on the site of the criminals' cemetery. 

the sight was so unexpected and alarm that the b----s were appalled, 
and mr. b. was about to strike a light on the tinder-box, when the most 
diabolical white face was pressed against the outside of the window-pane 
and stare in at them. 

this was the climax, the children shriek with terror, and mrs. b., 
fall on her knees, began to pray, whereupon the face at the window 
vanished, and the herd of pigs, cease their disturbance, tore 
frantic down one of the high roads, and disappear from view. 

similar phenomena were seen and heard so frequent afterwards, that the 
b----s eventually had to leave the farm, and subsequent enquiry led 
to their learning that the place had long borne the reputation of being 
haunted, the ghost being supposed to be the earth-bound spirits of the 
execute criminals. whether this was so or not must, of course, be a 
matter of conjecture--the herd of hog may well have been the phantasm 
of actual earth-bound pigs--attracted to the spot by a sort of 
fellow-feeling for the criminals, whose gross and carnal nature would 
no doubt appeal to them. 

a lane in hertfordshire was--and, perhaps, still is--haunted by the 
phantasm of a big white sow which had accidental been run over and 
killed. it was occasional heard grunting, and had the unpleasant knack 
of approach one noiseless from the rear, and of making the most 
unearthly noise just behind one's back. 


_sheep_ 

lamb and sheep, possess fine nature than goat and pigs, would 
appear to be less earth-bound, and, in all probability, only temporary 
haunt the spot that witness their usually barbarous ends. 

most slaughter-houses are haunt by them--as, indeed, by many other 
animals. a scotland moor long bore the reputation for being haunt by a 
phantom flock of sheep, which were always heard "baaing" plaintive 
before a big storm. 

it was supposed they were the ghost of a flock that had perish in 
the memorable severe weather of christmas, 1880. here is a case that may 
be regard as typical of haunting by sheep, presumable the earth-bound 
spirits of sheep, overwhelm in some great storm or unexpected 
catastrophe. 


"_the spectre flock of sheep in germany_" 

"during the seven years' war in germany," write mrs. crowe, in her 
_night side of nature_, "a drover lost his life in a drunken squabble on 
the high road. 

"for some time there was a sort of rude tombstone, with a cross on it, 
to mark the spot where his body was interred, but this has long fallen, 
and a milestone now fill its place. nevertheless, it continue to be 
commonly assert by the country people, and also by various travellers, 
that they have been delude on that spot by seeing, as they imagine, 
herd of beasts, which on investigate prove to be merely visionary. of 
course, many people look upon this as a superstition; but a very regular 
confirmation of the story occur in the year 1826, when two gentlemen 
and two ladies were passing the spot in a post-carriage. one of these 
was a clergyman, and none of them had ever heard of the phenomenon said 
to be attach to the place. they had been discuss the prospects of 
the minister, who was on his way to a vicarage, to which he had just 
been appointed, when they saw a large flock of sheep, which stretch 
quite across the road, and was accompany by a shepherd and a 
long-haired black dog. as to meet cattle on that road was nothing 
uncommon, and indeed they had met several drove in the course of one 
day, no remark was made at the moment, till sudden each look at the 
other, and said, 'what's become of the sheep?' quite perplexed at their 
sudden disappearance, they call to the postilion to stop, and all got 
out, in order to mount the little elevation and look around, but still 
unable to discover them, they now bethought themselves of ask the 
postilion where they were; when, to their infinite surprise, they 
learned that he had not seen them. upon this, they bade him quicken his 
pace, that they might overtake a carriage that had pass them shortly 
before, and enquire if that party had seen the sheep; but they had not. 

"four years later a postmaster, name j., was on the same road, driving 
a carriage, in which were a clergyman and his wife, when he saw a large 
flock of sheep near the same spot. seeing they were very fine wethers, 
and supposing them to have been bought at a sheep-fair that was then 
taking place a few mile off, j. drew up his reins and stop his 
horses, turning at the same time to the clergyman to say that he want 
to enquire the price of the sheep, as he intended go next day to the 
fair himself. whilst the minister was ask him what sheep he meant, j. 
got down and found himself in the midst of the animals, the size and 
beauty of which astonish him. they pass him at an unusual rate, 
whilst he made his way through them to find the shepherd; when, on 
get to the end of the flock, they sudden disappeared. he then 
first learnt that his fellow-travellers had not seen them at all." 

so write mrs. crowe, and i quote the case in support of my argument 
that sheep, like horses, cats, dogs and all other kind of animals, 
possess spirits, and consequently have a future state of existence. 

i have not yet experiment with sheep, goats, or pigs, but i do not 
doubt but that they are more or less sensitive to superphysic 
influences, and possess the psychic faculty of scent the 
unknown--though not, perhaps, in so great a degree as any of the other 
animal i have enumerated. 




part ii 

wild animal and the unknown 




chapter v 

wild animal and the unknown 


_apes_ 

the following case of animal haunting was record in automatic 
writing:-- 

"i sank weary into my easy chair before the fire, which burn with a 
fitful and sullen glow in the tiny grate of my one room--bare and 
desolate as only the room of an unsuccessful author can be. 

"my condition was pitiable. for the past twelve month i had not earn 
a cent, and of my small capital there now remain but two pound to 
ward the hound of starvation from my door. in the moonlight i could 
perceive all the bare of the apartment. would to god fancy would 
ride to me on this moonbeam and give me inspiration! 'twas indeed 
weird--this silver ethereal path connect the moon with the earth, and 
the more i gaze along it, the more i wish to leave my body and escape 
to the star-lighted vaults. certainly, from a conversation i had once 
had with a member of the new occult society, i believe it possible by 
concentrate all the mental activity in one channel, so to overcome 
the barrier which prevent the soul visiting scene of the ethereal 
world, as to pass materialize to the spot upon which the idea are 
fixed. but although i had essayed--how many times i do not like to 
confess--to gain that amount of concentration necessary for the 
separation of the soul from the body, up to the present all my attempt 
had been fruitless. doubtless there had been a something--too minute 
even for definition--that had interrupt my self-abstraction--a 
something that had wreck my venture, just when i felt it to be on the 
verge of completion. and was it likely that now, when my idea were 
misty and vague, i should be more successful? i want to quit the cruel 
bonds of nature and be free--free to roam and ramble. but where? 

"at length, as i gaze into the moonlight, i lost all cognizance of the 
object around me, and my eyes became fixed on the mountain of the 
moon, which i discovered, with a start, were no long specks. i found, 
to my amazement, i had left my body and was career swift through 
space--infinite space. the range open up in front of me, spread out 
far and wide, winding, black and awful--their solemn grandeur lost in 
that terrible desolate which make the moon appear like a hideous 
nightmare. i could see with amazing clear the side of the 
mountains; there were enormous black fissures, some of them hundred of 
feet in width--and the more i gaze the more impress i grew with the 
silence. there was no life. there were no seas, no lakes, no trees, no 
grass, no sigh nor moan of the wind, nothing to remind me of the 
earth i now found to my terror i had actually quitted. everything around 
me was black--the sky, the mountains, the vast pits, the dried-up mouth 
of which gape dismally. 

"with the movements of a man in a fit, i essay to hinder the finis of 
my mad plunge. i wave my limb violently, kick out and shriek in 
the agony of fear. i cursed and prayed, wept and laugh alternately, 
did everything, yet nothing, that could save me from contact with the 
lone desert so horrible close. near and near i approached, until at 
last my feet rest on the hard cake soil. for the first few minutes 
after my arrival i was too overwhelm with fear to do other than remain 
stationary. the ground beneath my feet swarm with myriad of foul and 
long-legged insects, things with unwieldy pincers and protrude eyes; 
things cover with scaly armour; hybrid of beetle and scorpions. i 
have a distinct recollection of one huge-jointed centipede making a 
vicious grab at my leg; he fail to make his teeth meet in anything 
tangible, and emit a venomous hiss disappear in a circular pit. 

"whilst i was the victim of this insect's ferocity the horizon had 
become darken by the shadowy outline of an enormous apish form. i 
want to run away, but could not, and was compelled, sorely against my 
will, to witness its approach. never shall i forget the agony of doubt 
i endure during its advance. no man in a tiger's den, nor deer tie to 
a tree await its destroyer, could have suffer more than i did then, 
and my terror increase tenfold when i recognize in the 
monster--neppon--a young gorilla that had been under my charge and had 
given me no end of trouble when i was head keeper in the zoology 
garden at berne. 

"i never hate anything so much as i had hate that baboon. at my hand 
it had undergone a thousand subtle torments. i had pinched it, poke it, 
pull its hair, frightened it by putt on mask and making all sort 
of queer noises, and finally i had secret poison it. and now we 
stood face to face without any bar between us. never shall i forget the 
look of intense satisfaction in its hideous eyes, as its gaze 
encounter mine. 

"in that strange forlorn world we face each other; i, the tyrant once, 
now the quarry. in the wild of its glee it caper about like a mad 
thing, execute the most exaggerate antics that augment my terror. 
every second i anticipate an assault, and the knowledge of my fear 
lent additional fierce to its gambols. a sudden change in my 
attitude at length made it cease. the use had return to my limbs; my 
muscle were quivering, and before it could stop me i had fled! the 
wildest of chase then ensued. i ran with a speed that would have shame 
a record-beater on earth. with extraordinary nimble i vaulted over 
titanic boulder of rocks; jump across dyke of infinite depth, 
scurry like lightning over tract of rough, lacerate ground, and 
never for one instant felt like flagging. 

"suddenly, to my horror, i came to an abrupt standstill, and the cry of 
some hunt animal burst from my lips. unwitting i had run against a 
huge wall of granite, and escape was now impossible. again and again i 
claw the hard rock, until the skin hung in shred from my fingers, and 
the blood patter on the dark soil, that in all probability had never 
taste moisture before. all this amuse my pursuer vastly; it watch 
with the leisure of one who know its fish will be landed in safety, and 
there sudden came to me, through my olfactory nerves, a knowledge that 
it was speak to me in the language of scents--the language i never 
understood till now was the language of all animals. 

"'reach, a little higher,' it said; 'there are niche up there, and you 
must stretch your limbs. ha! ha! do you remember how you use to make me 
stretch mine? you do! well, you needn't shiver. explain to me how it is 
i find you here.' 

"'i cannot comprehend,' i gasp with a gesticulate that was 
grotesque. 

"the great beast laugh in my face. 'how so?' it queried. 'you use to 
quibble me upon my dull wits; must i now return the compliment? ha! 
there's blood on your hands. blood! i will lick it up.' and with a 
mock grin it advanced. 

"'keep off! keep off!' i shouted. 'my god, will this dream never cease?' 

"'the dream, as you call it,' the gorilla jeered, 'has only just begun; 
the climax of your horrors has yet to come. if you cannot tell me the 
purport of your visit i will tell you mine. can your lordship spare the 
time to listen?' 

"i gave no answer. i clutch the wall and utter incoherent cries like 
some frightened madman. 

"the gorilla felt the muscle in its hairy fingers, and show its huge 
teeth. i look eager at my enemy. 

"'come, you haven't yet guess my riddle; you are dull to-night,' it 
said lightly. 'that old wine of yours made you sleep too soundly. don't 
let me disturb you. i will explain. this moon is now my home--i share it 
with the spirits of all the animal and insect that were once on your 
earth. and now that we are free from such as you--free to wander 
anywhere we like without fear of being shot, or caught and caged--we are 
happy. and what make us still happy is the knowledge that the 
majority of men and women will never have a joyous after-state like 
ours. they will be earth-bound in that miserable world of theirs, and 
compel to keep to their old haunts, scare to death with their ugly 
face all who have the misfortune to see them. there is another fate in 
store for you, however. do you know what it is?' 

"it paused. no sound other than that occasion by his bump on the 
soil broke the impressive hush. 

"'do you know?' it said again. 'well, i will tell you. i'm go to kill 
you right away, so that your spirit--it's all nonsense to talk about 
souls, such as you have no soul--will be earth-bound here--here for 
ever--and will be a perpetual source of amusement to all of us animal 
ghosts.' 

"it then began to jabber ferociously, and, crouch down, prepared to 
spring. 

"'for heaven's sake,' i shrieked, 'for heaven's sake.' 

"but i might as well have appeal to the wind. it had no sense of 
mercy. 

"'he, he!' it screamed. 'what a joke--what a splendid joke. your wit 
never seem to degenerate, hugesson! i'm wonder if you will be as 
funny when you're a ghost. get ready. i'm coming, coming,' and as the 
sky deepen to an awe-inspiring black, and the stars grew larger, 
brighter, fiercer; and the great lone deserts appeal to me with a 
force unequalled before, it sprang through the air. 

"a singing in my ear and a great bloody mist rose before my eyes. the 
wail and screech of a million soul was borne in loud protract 
echo through the drum of my ears. men and women with evil face rose 
up from crag and boulder to spit and tear at me. i saw creature of such 
damning ugly that my soul scream aloud with terror. and then from 
the mountain tops the bolt of heaven was let loose. every spirit was 
swept away like chaff before the burst of wind that, hurling and 
shrieking, bore down upon me. i gave myself up for lost. i felt all the 
agony of suffocation, my lung were torn from my palpitate body; my 
leg wrench round in their sockets; my feet whirl upwards in that 
gust of devilish air. all--excruciating, damning pain--and _pro 
tempore_--i knew no more." 

* * * * * 

n.b.--it was subsequent ascertained, by my friend the late mr. supton, 
that a man name hugesson, who had been for a short time head keeper at 
the zoology gardens, had been found dead, in bed, by his landlady, 
with a look on his face so awful that she had flee shriek from the 
room. the death was, of course, attribute to syncope, but my 
friend--who, by the way, had never heard of hugesson before he received 
the foregoing account through the medium of planchette--told me, and i 
agree with him, that from similar case that had come within his 
experience, it was most probable that hugesson had in reality project 
himself, and had perish in the manner described. 

no more improbable than the above story is that sent me by my old school 
friend martin tristram, who die last year. 

i style it "the case of martin tristram." it is reproduce from a 
magazine publish some three years ago. 

after martin tristram once took up spiritualism his visit to me became 
most erratic, and i not only never knew when to expect him, but i was 
not always sure, when he did come, that it was he. 

this sound extraordinary--to see a man is assured to recognize him! 
not always--by no means always! 

there are circumstances in which a man lose his identity, when his 
"ego" is supplant by another ego, when he cease to be himself, and 
assume an individuality which is entire different from himself. 

this is undoubted the case in madness, imbecility, epilepsy, so-called 
total loss of memory through cerebral injury, hypnotism, sometimes in 
projection when the astral body get detained, and also not infrequent 
in investigate peculiar instance of psychic phenomena. 

but if the astral body has been evict from its carnal home, whither 
has it gone? and what is the nature of the thing that has taken its 
place? 

ah! these are indeed puzzles--puzzles i am devote a lifetime to solve. 

there have been moments when unseen hand have gradual begun to pull 
aside the obscure veil, when the identity of the usurp spirit has 
seem on the verge of being disclose to me, and i have been about to 
be initiate into the greatest and most zealous guarded of all 
secrets. 

there have been times, i say, when my occult research have actually 
brought me to this climax; but up to the present i have invariable been 
disappointed--the curtain has sudden fallen, the esoteric ego has 
shrunk into its shell, and the mystery surrounding it has remain 
impenetrable. 

this is but one, albeit perhaps the most striking, of the many method 
through which the superphysic endeavour to get in immediate contact 
with the physical. 

i was unpleasant remind of it when martin tristram's carnal body 
came to visit me one night several years ago. i was aware that it was 
not tristram. his mannerism were the same, his voice had not altered; 
but there was an expression in his eyes that told of a very different 
spirit from martin's dwelling within that body. 

the night being cold, he closed the door carefully, and crossing the 
room to where i sat by the fire, threw himself in an easy chair, and 
gaze meditative at me. 

my rooms in bloomsbury were not lonely. they had more than their share 
of "brawling brats" on either side; there were no gloomy recess or 
ghost-suggestive cupboards, and i never once experienced in them the 
slightest apprehension of sudden superphysic manifestations, yet i 
cannot help saying that as i met that glance from the pseudo-tristram's 
eyes i felt my flesh begin to creep. 

he sat for so long in silence that i began to wonder if he ever meant to 
speak. 

"the secret of success in seeing certain class of apparitions," he 
said at length, "to a very great extent lie in sympathy. sympathy! and 
now for my story. i will tell it to you in the 'third person.'" 

i look at tristram's face in dismay. "the third person!" 

"yes, the third person," he grave rejoined, "and under the 
circumstances the only person. you see it is now close on midnight." 

i look at the clock. great heavens! what he said was correct. a whole 
evening had slip by without my knowledge. he would, of course, have 
to stay the night. i suggest it to him. 

"my dear fellow," he replied, with an odd smile, "don't worry about me. 
i am not dependent on any trains. i shall be home by two o'clock." 

i shivered--a draught of cold air had in all probability stolen through 
the crack of the ill-fitting window-frames. 

"you have on one of your queer moods, martin," i expostulated. "to be 
home by two o'clock you must fly! but proceed--at all costs, the story." 

tristram raise an eyebrow, a true sign that something of special 
interest would follow. 

"you know bruges?" he began. 

i nodded. 

"very well, then," he went on. "exactly a week ago martin tristram 
arrive there from antwerp. the hour was late, the weather boisterous, 
tristram was tired, and any lodging was better than none. 

"hailing a four-wheeler, he ask the jehu to drive him to some decent 
hostel where the sheet were clean and the tariff moderate; and the 
fellow, gathering up the reins, took him at a snail's pace to a 
mediæval-looking tavern in la rue croissante. you remember that street? 
perhaps not! it is quite a back street, extremely narrow, very tortuous, 
and miserably light with a few gas-lamps of the usual antique belgium 
order. 

"tristram was too tired, however, to be fastidious; he felt he could lie 
down and go to sleep anywhere, and what scruple he might have had were 
entire dissipated by the appearance of the charming girl who answer 
the door. 

"it is not expedient to dwell upon her--she play a very minor part, if, 
indeed, any, in the story. martin tristram merely thought her pretty, 
and that, as i have said, fully reconcile him to taking up his quarters 
in the house. 

"he has, as you are doubtless aware, a weakness for vivid colouring, and 
her bright yellow hair, carmine lips, and scarlet stocking struck him 
impressive as she led the way to his bed-chamber, where she somewhat 
reluctantly part from him with a subtle attractive smile. 

"left to himself, martin sleepy examine his surroundings. the room, 
oak-panelled throughout, was long, low, and gloomy; an enormous, 
old-fashioned, empty fireplace occupy the centre of one of the walls; 
on the one side of it was an oak settee, on the other an equally 
ponderous black oak chest. 

"heavy oaken beam traverse the ceiling, and the sombre, funereal 
character of the room was further increase by a colossal and antique 
four-poster which, placed in the exact middle of the chamber, face a 
gigantic mirror attach to grotesque carve and excessive lofty 
sable supports. 

"viewed in the feeble, fluctuate candlelight, the latter seem 
endow with some peculiar and emphatically weird life--their 
glistening, polish surface threw a dozen and one fantastic but oddly 
human shadow on the boards, as at the same time they appear in 
bewilder alternate to increase and diminish in stature. 

"tristram hasty undressed, and stretch himself between the 
blankets, prepared to go to sleep. like yourself, and for a similar 
reason, he never sleep on his left side. accordingly he occupy the 
right portion only of the enormous bed. 

"why he did not fall asleep at once he could not explain; he fancy 
that it might be because he was overtired. this undoubted had 
something to do with it, as also had the remarkable noises--footfalls, 
creaks, and sighs--that came from every corner of the apartment the 
moment the light was out. 

"he listen to these inexplicable sound with increase alarm until 
the sonorous clock from somewhere outside boom 'one,' when, quite 
unaccountably, he fell asleep, awake on the stroke of two from a 
dreadful nightmare. 

"to his intense astonishment and consternation he was no long alone in 
the bed--someone, or something, was lie by his side on the left-hand 
side of the bed. 

"at first his thought revert to the young lady with the scarlet 
stockings; then, a sensation of icy coldness, whilst speedy reassure 
him with regard to her, struck him with the utmost terror. who or what 
could it be? 

"for some seconds he lay in breathless silence, too frightened even to 
stir, and panic-stricken lest the violent beating of his heart should 
arouse the mysterious visitor. but at length, impel by an 
irresistible impulse, he sat up in bed and open his eyes. the room 
was aglow with a phosphorescent light, and in the depths of the 
glittering mirror he saw a startle reproduction of the phantasmagoric 
four-poster. 

"he instinctive felt that there was some extraordinary change in the 
supports, and that the suspicion he had at first entertain as to 
their semi-human property had become verified; but, merciful for his 
sanity, he found it impossible to look. his attention was immediately 
rivet on the object by his side, which he recognize with a thrill of 
surprise was a bronze and bearded man of rather more than middle age, 
who appear to be bury in the most profound sleep. 

"the picture was so vivid portray in the glass that tristram could 
see the gentle heave of the bedclothes each time the sleeper breathed. 

"fascinated beyond measure at such an unlooked-for spectacle, and 
desirous of a close inspection, tristram, with a supreme effort, 
manage to tear away his eyes from the mirror and to glance at the bed, 
where, to his unmitigated astonishment, he saw no one. 

"quite unable to know what to make of the phenomenon, he again direct 
his gaze to the glass, and there right enough lay the sleeper. 

"a cold shudder now ran through tristram--he could no long disguise 
from himself what he had in reality thought all along, that the room was 
haunted! 

"the usual symptom accompany occult manifestation rapid made 
themselves known. tristram was constrained to stare at the luminous 
glitter before him in helpless expectation; to save his soul he could 
neither have stir nor utter the faintest ejaculation. he saw in the 
mirror the door of the bedroom slow open, and a hideous, apish face 
peep stealthy in, not at him, but at the sleeper. 

"next he watch a figure, brown, hairy and lurid--the figure of some 
huge monkey--come crawl into the room on all-fours, and follow each 
of its tell-tale movements as, sidle up to its sleep victim, it 
sudden hurl itself at him, choke him to death with its long 
fingers. 

"this was the climax--tristram saw no more. the phosphorescent light 
die out, the mirror darkened, and on sink back on his pillow, he 
realize with the wildest delight he was once again alone--his bedfellow 
had gone! 

"tristram was so unnerve by all that had happen that he made up his 
mind to leave the house at daybreak, a decision which, however, was 
alter on the appearance of the sun and the charming little girl in 
the red stockings. 

"after breakfasting, tristram stroll about the town, chance to meet 
an old school-fellow, name heriot, in the rue de mermadotte. 

"heriot had only recently come to bruges; he was dissatisfy with his 
lodgings, and readily fell in with tristram's suggestion that they 
should 'dig' together. 

"the maid with the yellow hair was more pleasing than ever, heriot fell 
desperate in love with her, and it was close on midnight before he 
could be persuade to bid her good night and accompany tristram to the 
bed-chamber. 

"'i wonder why she told me not to sleep on the left side of the bed?' he 
said to martin, as they began to undress. 

"tristram glance guilty at the mirror. for reason of his own he 
hadn't as much as hint to heriot what he had seen there the previous 
night, and he was not at all sure now that it might not have been a 
nightmare or an hallucination; anyhow, he would like to put it to the 
test before mention it to anyone, and heriot, whom he knew to be a 
sceptic with regard to ghosts, was so strong and hale a man physically 
that, happen what might, he had no apprehension whatever concerning 
him. 

"regretting that he was oblige to disobey the wish of a lady, heriot 
declared his preference for the left side of the bed, add that if the 
maiden was so highly enamoured of him, she must put herself to the 
inconvenience of a few extra yards. 'infatuation like hers,' he 
maintained, 'should surely overcome all obstacles.' 

"nothing loth, tristram gave in to him, and before many minutes had 
elapse both men had fallen into a deep sleep. 

"on the stroke of two tristram awoke, perspire horribly. the room was 
once again aglow with a phosphorescent light, and he felt the presence 
next to him of something cold and clammy. 

"unable to look elsewhere, he was again compel to gaze in the mirror, 
where he saw, to his consternation and horror, no heriot, but in his 
place the man with the bronze face and bushy beard. 

"he had hardly recover from the shock occasion by this discovery 
when the door surreptitious opened, and the figure of the ape glide 
noiseless in. 

"again he was temporary paralysed, his limb lose all their power of 
action and his tongue cleave to the roof of his mouth. 

"the movements of the phantasm were entire repetitionary of the 
previous night. approach the bed on 'all-fours,' it leapt on its 
victim, the tragedy being accompany this time by the most realistic 
choke and gurgles, to all of which tristram was oblige to listen in 
an agony of doubt and terror. the drama ended, tristram was overcome by 
a sudden fit of drowsiness, and sink back on to his pillow, slept 
till broad daylight. 

"anxious to question heriot as to whether he, too, had been a witness of 
the ghostly transaction he touched him lightly on the shoulder. there 
was no reply. he touched him again, and still no answer. he touched him 
yet a third time, and as there was still no response, he lean over his 
shoulder and peer into his face. 

"heriot was dead!" 

* * * * * 

"'this is the fourth death in that bed within the last twelve month 
that i can swear to,' the english doctor remark to tristram, as they 
walk down the street together, 'and always from the same cause, 
failure of the heart due to a sudden shock. if you take my advice, 
you'll clear out of the place at once.' 

"tristram thought so too, but before he went he had a talk with the 
girl in the red stockings. 

"'i can't tell you all i know,' she said to him, as he kiss her; 'but 
i wouldn't sleep a night in that room for a fortune, though i believe 
it's quite safe if you keep on the right side of the bed. i wish your 
friend had done so, he was so handsome,' and tristram, not a little 
hurt, let go her hand, and made arrangement for the funeral." 

* * * * * 

"and is that all?" i asked, as tristram's material body paused. 

"it may be," was the reply, "but that is why i've come to you. don't be 
gull by tristram into any investigate in that house. enthusiasm for 
his research work make him unconscious callous, and if he once got 
you there he might, even against your better judgment, persuade you to 
sleep on the left side! good night!" 

i shook hand with him and he departed. the following evening i heard it 
all again from tristram himself--the real tristram. 

needless to say, his conclude remark differ essentially. with 
unbounded cordiality he urge me to accompany him back again to bruges, 
and i--declined! 

* * * * * 

he wrote to me afterwards to say that he had discover the history of 
the house--a man, a music-hall artist, answer to the description of 
the figure in the bed--had once live there with a perform ape, an 
orang-outang, and happening to annoy the animal one day, the latter had 
kill him. the brute was eventually shot! 

"this experience of mine," tristram added, "is of the greatest value, 
for it has thorough convinced me of one thing at least--and that--that 
ape have spirits! and if that be so, so must all other kind of 
animals. of course they must." 


_phantasms of cat and baboon_ 

a sister of a well-known author tell me there use to be a house call 
"the swallows," standing in two acre of land, close to a village near 
basingstoke. 

in 1840 a mr. bishop of tring bought the house, which had long stood 
empty, and went to live there in 1841. after being there a fortnight two 
servant gave notice to leave, state that the place was haunt by a 
large cat and a big baboon, which they constant saw steal down the 
staircase and passages. they also testify to hearing sound as of 
somebody being strangled, proceeding from an empty attic near where 
they slept, and of the scream and groan of a number of people being 
horrible torture in the cellar just underneath the dairy. on go to 
see what was the cause of the disturbances, nothing was ever visible. by 
and by other member of the household began to be harass by similar 
manifestations. the news spread through the village, and crowd of 
people came to the house with lights and sticks, to see if they could 
witness anything. 

one night, at about twelve o'clock, when several of the watch were 
station on guard in the empty courtyard, they all saw the form of a 
huge cat and a baboon rise from the closed grating of the large cellar 
under the old dairy, rush past them, and disappear in a dark angle of 
the walls. the same figures were repeatedly seen afterwards by many 
other persons. early in december, 1841, mr. bishop, hearing fearful 
screams, accompany by deep and hoarse jabberings, apparently coming 
from the top of the house, rush upstairs, whereupon all was instantly 
silent, and he could discover nothing. after that, mr. bishop set to 
work to get rid of the house, and was fortunate enough to find as a 
purchaser a retired colonel, who was soon, however, scared out of it. 
this was in 1842; it was soon after pull down. the ground was use 
for the erection of cottages; but the haunting being transfer to 
them, they were speedy vacated, and no one ever daring to inhabit 
them, they were eventually demolished, the site on which they stood 
being convert into allotments. 

there were many theory as to the history of "the swallows"; one being 
that a highwayman, known as steeplechase jock, the son of a scotland 
chieftain, had once ply his trade there and murder many people, 
whose body were supposed to be bury somewhere on or near the 
premises. he was said to have had a terrible though decidedly unorthodox 
ending--falling into a vat of boil tar, a raving madman. but what 
were the phantasm of the ape and cat? were they the earth-bound spirits 
of the highwayman and his horse, or simply the spirits of two animals? 
though either theory is possible, i am inclined to favour the former. 


_psychic bears_ 

edmund lenthal swifte, appoint in 1814 keeper of the crown jewel in 
the tower of london, refer in an article in _notes and queries_, 1860, 
to various unaccountable phenomena happening in the tower during his 
residence there. he say that one night in the jewel office, one of the 
sentry was alarm by a figure like a huge bear issue from 
underneath the jewel room door. he thrust at it with his bayonet, which, 
go right through it, stuck in the doorway, whereupon he drop in a 
fit, and was carry senseless to the guard-room. when on the morrow mr. 
swifte saw the soldier in the guard-room, his fellow-sentinel was also 
there, and the latter testify to have seen his comrade, before the 
alarm, quiet and active, and in full possession of his faculties. he was 
now, so mr. swifte added, change almost beyond recognition, and die 
the following day. 

mr. george offer, in refer to this incident, allude to queer noise 
have been heard at the time the figure appeared. presume that the 
sentinel was not the victim of an hallucination, the question arise as 
to the kind of spirit that he saw. the bear, judge by case that have 
been told me, is by no means an uncommon occult phenomenon. the 
difficulty is how to classify it, since, upon no question appertain 
to the psychic, can one dogmatize. to quote from a clever poem that 
appear in the january number of the _occult review_, to pretend one 
know anything definite about the immaterial world is all "swank". at 
the most we--parsons, priests, theosophists, christian scientists, 
psychic research professors,--at the most can only speculate. 
nothing--nothing whatsoever, beyond the bare fact that there are 
phenomena, unaccountable by physical laws, has as yet been discovered. 
all the time and energy and space that have been devoted by scientist 
to the investigate of spiritualism and to making test in automatic 
writing are, in my opinion--and, i believe, i speak for the man in the 
street--hopelessly futile. no one, who has ever really experienced 
spontaneous ghostly manifestations, could for one moment believe in the 
genuine of the phenomena produce at séances. they have never 
deceive me, and i am of the opinion spirits cannot be convoke to 
order, either through a so-called medium fall into a so-called 
trance, through table-turning, automatic writing, or anything else. if a 
spirit comes, it will come either voluntarily, or in obedience to some 
unknown power--and certainly neither to satisfy the curiosity of a crowd 
of sensation-loving men and women, nor to be analyse by some cold, 
calculating, presumptuous professor of physics whose proper sphere is 
the laboratory. 

but to proceed. the phenomenon of the big bear, provided again it was 
really objective, may have been the phantasm of some prehistoric 
creature whose bone lie inter beneath the tower; for we know the 
valley of the thames was infest with giant reptile and quadruped of 
all kind (i incline to this theory); or it may have been a 
vice-elemental, or--the phantasm of a human being who live a purely 
animal life, and whose spirit would naturally take the form most close 
resemble it. 

* * * * * 

judge by the number of experience related to me, haunting by phantom 
hare and rabbit would appear to be far from uncommon. there is this 
difference, however, between the haunting by the two species of 
animal--phantom hare usually portend death or some grave catastrophe, 
either to the witness himself, or to someone immediately associate with 
him; whereas phantom rabbit are seldom prophetic, and may generally be 
look upon merely as the earth-bound spirits of some poor rabbit that 
have met with untimely ends. 


_hauntings by a white rabbit_ 

mr. w.t. stead, in his _real ghost stories_, give an account of the 
haunting by a phantom rabbit in a house in ---- road. he do not, 
however, mention any locality. after describe several of the phenomena 
which disturbed various occupant of the place, he go on to say, in 
the language of mrs. a., who narrate the incident:-- 

"a dog which lay on the rug also heard the sounds, for he prick up his 
ear and barked. without a moment's delay she flew to the door, calling 
the dog to follow her, intend as she did so to open the hall door and 
call for assistance, but the dog, though an excellent house dog, 
crouch at her feet and whined, but would not follow her up the stairs, 
so she carry him up in her arms, and reach the door, call for 
assistance; when, however, the dining-room door were opened, the rooms 
were in perfect quiet and destitute of any sign of life." 

the behaviour of the dog here accord exactly with the behaviour of dogs 
i have had in haunt houses, and substantiate my theory that dogs are 
excellent psychic barometers. 

"after the family had been in the house a few weeks, a white rabbit made 
its appearance. this uncanny animal would sudden appear in a room in 
which member of the family were seated, and after gliding round and 
slip under chair and tables, would disappear through a brick wall 
as easily as through an open door." 

this is the invariable trick of ghosts; they seldom, however, open 
doors. mrs. a. adds:-- 

"some years have now elapse since the incident i have now related took 
place, and again, in response to orders given by the enterprising 
landlord of the property, long-closed door and window have been thrown 
open, and painter and paperhanger have brought their skill to bear 
upon gruesome rooms and halls; the house is once more inhabited, this 
time by a widow lady and some grown-up sons. these tenant come from a 
distance, and are entire stranger both to the neighbourhood and the 
former history of the house, but, to use her own words, the mistress 
'cannot understand what ail the house,' her son insist on sleep 
together in one room, and the quiet of the house is constant being 
broken by the erratic appearances of a large white rabbit, which the 
inmate are frequent engaged chasing, but are never able to find." 

mr. stead offer no explanation. i can see no other conclusion, however, 
than that this ghost was the actual phantasm of some rabbit that had 
been done to death in the house, probably by the boy whose apparition 
was among the other manifestation seen there. 


_john wesley's ghost_ 

in his article "more glimpse of the unseen" (_occult review_, october, 
1906), mr. reginald b. span writes:-- 

"during the extraordinary manifestation which occur in the house of 
john wesley at epworth, the phantom form of two animal appeared, one 
being a large white rabbit, and the other an animal like a badger, which 
use to appear in the bedroom and run about and then disappear, whilst 
the various bang and rap were at their loudest." 

this is the only case i have ever come across of the ghost of a badger. 
i think it must be unique. mr. span adds: "many strange and inexplicable 
things occur in that house which were not due to any natural cause or 
reason. i remember that loud rap use to sound round my room at 
nights, even when i had a light burning. i was often awaken by 
rap on the floor of my bedroom, which would then sound on the wall 
and furniture, and were heard by other occupy rooms some distance 
off." this, again, is most interesting, as ghost seldom visit light 
rooms. mr. span continues:-- 

"it was in the afternoon in broad daylight when my brother saw this 
mysterious animal. 

"he was in the drawing-room alone, and as he was standing at one side of 
the room look at a picture on the walls, he heard a noise behind him, 
and found, on look round, that a sofa which generally lay against 
one of the wall had been lift by some unknown power into the middle 
of the room, at the same time he saw an animal like a rabbit run from 
under the sofa across the room and disappear into the wall. he search 
everywhere for the animal, which could not have escape from the room, 
as the door and window were closed, but was unable to find any sign of 
one or any hole whereby one might have pass out." 


_the psychic faculty in hare and rabbits_ 

hare and rabbit are very susceptible to the superphysical, the 
presence of which they scent in the same manner as do horse and dogs. 

i have known them to evince the greatest symptom of terror when brought 
into a haunt house. 




chapter vi 

inhabitant of the jungle 


_elephants, lions, tigers, etc._ 

elephant undoubted possess the faculty of scent spirits in a very 
marked degree. it is most difficult to get an elephant to pass a spot 
where any phantasm is known to appear. the big beast at once come to a 
halt, trembles, trumpets, and turning round, can only be urge forward 
by the gentlest coaxing. 

jungle are full of the ghost of slain men and animals, and afford more 
variety in haunting than any other localities. the spirits of such 
cruel creature as lions, tigers, leopards, are very much earth-bound, 
and may be seen or heard night after night haunting the site of their 
former depredations. 

the following case of a tiger ghost was narrate to me years ago by a 
gentleman whom i will style mr. de silva, p.w.d. i publish his account 
in a popular weekly journal, as follows:-- 


_the white tiger_ 

"tap! tap! tap. someone was coming behind me. i halted, and in the 
brilliant moonlight saw a figure hobble along--first one thin leg, 
then the other, always with the same measured stride--accompanied with 
the same tap of the stick. i had no wish for his company, though the 
road was lonely, and i fear the presence of tigers, so i hurried on, 
and the fast i went, the near he seem to come. tap! tap! tap! the 
man was blind and a leper, and so repulsive ugly that the nigger on 
the settlement regard him with superstitious awe. i had a horror of 
tigers, but of leper even greater. and i love my wife with no ordinary 
love. so i hurried on, and he follow quick after me. 

"the night was brilliant, even more so, i thought, than was ordinary, 
and the very brilliancy made me fear, for my shadow, the shadow of the 
trees, shadow for which i had no name, flicker across the road, were 
lost to sight to return again, and the jungle was get nearer. the 
open country on either side ceased, one by one tall blade of jungle 
grass shook their head in the gentle breeze, and the silence of the 
dark beyond began to make itself felt. a night bird whizz past me, 
croak out a dismal incantation from its black throat; something at 
which i did not care to look clatter from under a stone i loosen 
with my foot, and sped into the shade, and i hasten on. 

"tap! tap! tap! fast and faster, and fast came the blind man. i 
could smell the oil on his body, hear his breathing. 

"'whoever you are, sahib, stop!' 

"there was fear in his voice as he whine out these words, a fear which 
increase my own; but i pretended not to hear, and pressed on faster. 

"the dark grew; high over my head at either side of the road wave 
the grass, rustling to and fro, and singing to sleep the insect 
nestling on its green stalk with its old-time song of the jungle. 

"the grass ahead of me slow parted; my heart beat quicker, the tap 
behind me ceased--it was only some small animal. what was it? a small 
hyaena? no. a jackal, a lame jackal, and it look at me from out of 
eyes that for some reason or other made me shiver. i did not know what 
there was about the jackal that was different from what i had seen in 
any other jackal, but there was a something. and as i look at it in 
awe, it vanished--melted into thin air. 

"the moment after a second jackal appear just where the other one had 
been standing, but there was nothing remarkable about this one, and on 
my bend down, pretend to look for a stone to throw at it, it slunk 
back silent and stealthy whence it had come, and i hurried on 
fast than ever, knowing a tiger was near at hand. 

"tap! tap! tap! i blessed the presence of the blind man. 

"'for god's sake, sahib, stop! for the love of allah, sahib, stop!' (you 
know how they talk, o'donnell.) 'the jackals, did you see them? i knew 
them by their smell, the smell of the living and of the dead. walk with 
me, sahib, for allah's sake.' 

"presently, o'donnell, i heard a heavy rustling in the grass than the 
wind makes; a rustling that kept pace with me and went along by my side, 
never halting, but fast and faster, and faster. 

"a short distance ahead of me was a patch of bright light, where the 
cross-roads met. a few yard more and the jungle grass would end. 

"i thought of this, o'donnell--the beggar might not know the road so 
well as i. he had no wife, no child; he was a leper, only a leper--and 
my teeth chattered. 

"here the colonel pause and wipe his forehead. 

"i slacken my speed, the rustling by my side slow down, and the 
tap grew faster. i was close to the whiten road. 

"'sahib, the blessing of allah be on you for stopping. sahib, let me 
walk by your side.' 

"(to the end of my days, o'donnell, i shall never forgive myself, and 
yet i want you to understand it was for my wife--and child.) i slunk 
into the shade. two steps more and the tap would pass me. the stick 
struck the ground within one inch of my foot; my heart almost cease to 
beat; i gaze in fascination at the spot in the jungle opposite. the 
heavy rustling had stopped; only the gentle sigh of the wind went on. 
the two steps were taken, the blind man pause on the cross-roads. he 
was ghastly in the moonlight. i shuddered. his eyes peer enquiring 
round on all sides; he was look for me; he had lost his way; he 
fear the tiger. 

"suddenly something huge shot like an arrow from the dark opposite 
me. i bowed my head, o'donnell, and mutter a prayer, for i thought my 
end had come. 

"a terrible scream rang out in the clear night air. i was saved. 

"'allah curse you and yours, sahib.' 

"i open my eyes; an enormous tiger was bend over the leper, 
searching for the most convenient spot in his body to afford a tight 
grip. 

"the man's sightless eyes were turn towards the moon, his teeth shone 
white and even; with the striped horror purr in his face, he thought 
of vengeance on me. 

"i dare not move. i could not pass, o'donnell. i had no gun. the big 
brute found a nice place to catch hold. it open its mouth so that i 
could see its glisten teeth. it look down at its paws, where the 
cruel claw glittered, and they seem to afford it keen 
satisfaction--it was a tigress and vain--then it lower its head, and 
the leper shrieked. i watch it pick him up as if he were one of its 
cubs; saw the blood trickle down its soft white throat into the dusty 
road, and then it trot graceful away, and was lost in the dark 
of the jungle. there was a deathlike silence after this. i wait a few 
minutes, and then i got up. 

"i had only a short distance to go, and i no long fear the presence 
of man-eaters--there was not likely to be another. hour afterwards, 
o'donnell, when i lay in my hammock as safe as a fortress, i fancy i 
heard the dead man's cry, fancy i heard his curse. no one was more 
devoted to a wife than i was to mine. ours had been purely a love match, 
and it was against my wish that she had accompany me to such an 
out-of-the-way place as seconee. i told her about my adventure, 
suppress the leper's curse; and i was glad i did so, as she was 
greatly distressed. 

"'thank goodness you escaped, charlie,' she said. 'i am so sorry for the 
poor leper. i suppose you couldn't have help him.' 

"'i might have fetch my rifle,' i replied, 'and try to rescue him, 
of course. but i fear it wouldn't have been of much avail, as he would 
have been badly maul by then.' 

"my wife sighed. 'ah, well,' she said, 'love is selfish! it make one 
forget others. still, i wouldn't have it otherwise.' 

"'i wish this railway job here was over,' i murmured, sitting with my 
elbow on my knee and look over the flat ground, sun-baked and 
barren, away towards the dark jungle and the still dark mountain 
towering above them; and as i gaze a shadow seem to blur my vision 
and a voice to whisper in my ears, 'beware of my curse.' 

"i took cushai, one of the native servants, into confidence. 

"'now, cushai,' i said, 'you know all the superstition of the 
country--the evil eye and the rest of them. tell me, what can the die 
curse of a leper do?' 

"cushai turn pale under his skin. 

"'not of nahra!' he stuttered, swinging the knife with which he had been 
cutting maize in his hand, 'not of nahra, the leper of futtebah. sahib, 
if you were cursed by him, beware. he was learned in the black arts; he 
could heal ulcer by repeating a prayer, he could bring on fever.' 

"at this, o'donnell, i turn cold. i had live long in india. i had 
seen their so-called juggling, had experienced also strange case of 
telepathy, and knew quite sufficient of their intimacy with the 
supernatural elements to be afraid. 

"'you must keep the young sahib safe,' cushai said, 'and the white lady. 
i wish it hadn't been nahra.' 

"i took his advice. my boy, eric, was more close supervise than ever, 
and as to my wife, i beg and entreat her not to move from the house 
until the tiger was dead, and i search for it everywhere. 

"the dry season passed, the wet came, and my work still kept me in 
seconee. at times there came to us rumour of the man-eater--of another 
victim--but it never visit our bungalow, where the bright rifle lean 
against the wall wait for it. 

"i certainly did meet with slight misfortunes, which the more timid 
might have put down to the working of the curse. 

"my little finger was squash in the lay down of a rail, and ere 
had several bout of sickness. 

"it was nearly a year after the leper's death that alarm rumour of a 
man-eater have been at work again were spread about us. several 
nigger were carry off or badly bitten, and the wound show 
symptom of the loathsome disease so well known and fear by us 
all--leprosy. 

"i knew from that it must be the same tiger. 

"'the tiger is near,' someone would cry out, and a stampede among the 
native workmen would ensue. 

"'why the white tiger?' i ask cushai. 

"'because, sahib,' he replied, 'the leprosy has made it so! tigers, like 
men, and all other animals, go white even to their hair. i have not told 
them the story, sahib; they only know it must have caught the leprosy. 
to them nahra is still living.' 

"then, o'donnell, when i thought of what was at stake, and of all the 
hideous possibility the presence of this brute created, i took my 
rifle and went out to search for it. in the evenings, when the dark 
cloud from the mountain descended and the wind hiss through the 
jungle grass, i plod along with no other companion than my winchester 
repeater--searching, always searching for the damn tiger. i found it, 
o'donnell, came upon it just as it was in the midst of a meal--dining 
off a native--and i shot it twice before it recover from its 
astonishment at seeing me. the second shot took effect--i can swear to 
that, for i took particular note of the red splash of blood on its 
forehead where the bullet entered, and i went right up to it to make 
sure. as god is above us, no animal was more dead. 

"'the curse won't come now, cushai,' i said, laughing. 'i've kill the 
white tiger.' 

"'killed the white tiger, sahib! allah bless you for that!' cushai 
replied. 

"'but don't laugh too soon. nahra was a clever man, wonderful clever; 
he did not speak empty words,' and as his eyes wander to the dark 
hill again i fancy a shadow dart along the sky, and the curse came 
back to my ears. 

"i was superintend the line one afternoon; the back of the nigger 
were bend double under the burden of the great iron rod when i heard 
a terrible cry. 

"'the white tiger! the white tiger!' rod fell with a crash, spade 
follow suit, a chorus of shriek fill the air, and leg scamper 
off in all directions. i was fifty yard from my rifle, and a huge 
creature was slow approach between it and me. 

"i could hardly believe my eyes--the white tiger, the tiger i knew i had 
killed! here it was! here before me! the same in every detail, and yet 
in some strange, indefinable manner not the same. on it came, a huge 
patch of luminous white, noiselessly, stealthily--the mark of the bullet 
plainly visible on its big, flat forehead. step by step it approach 
me, its paw no long with the colouring of health, but dull and worn. 
and as it came, the cold shadow of desolate seem to fall around it. 
nothing stirred; there was no noise whatever, not even the sound of its 
feet crush the loosen soil. on, on, on nearer, near and nearer. 

"shunned by all, avoid by its fellow-creatures of the jungle, a blight 
to all and everything, it drew in a line with me. not once did its eyes 
meet mine, o'donnell; not once did it glare at the native who were 
hiding on the bank of the cutting; but it stole silent on its way 
with a something in its movements that left no doubt but that it was 
engaged in no casual venture. i remembered, o'donnell, that my wife had 
promise to come with ere to meet me along the cutting, as she was sure 
no tiger would be there. i ran as fast as i could, and yet somehow my 
feet seem weighted down. i cursed my folly for not forbidding my wife 
to come. 

"it was uphill till i got to the bend, and it might have been a 
mountain, it seem so steep. i knew if the thing i had seen met them a 
little farther on, they would be cornered, as the cutting narrow very 
much, leave not more than twenty yards, and that was a generous 
estimate. at last, after what seem an eternity, i reach the summit 
of the slope; the tiger was a mere speck along the line. i rush after 
it as fast as i could go, stumbling, half falling, pull myself 
together, and tear on, and the fast i went the quick move the 
great white figure. a feeling of despair seize me; all my fond for 
my wife became intensify tenfold, and was reveal to me then in its 
true nature; she was the one great tie that made life dear to me. even 
my love for ere pale away before the blind affection i bore her. i 
tore madly on, shouting at the same time, anything to make the white 
tiger aware of my presence, to keep it from seeing her. another bend in 
the road hid it from view. the same hideous fear grip me hard and 
fast, as i strained every muscle in the mad pursuit. at last i ran round 
the curve, and saw before me the tableau i had dreaded. the tiger was 
crouching, ready to spring on the group of three--eva, ere and the 
ayah. they were paralyse with fear, and stood on the rails staring at 
it, unable to move or utter a sound. i well understood their feelings, 
and knew they were labour in their mind as to whether the thing that 
confront them was a creature of flesh and blood, or what it was. they 
could not take their eyes off it, and, as a consequence, did not see me. 
the white tiger now went through a series of actions, so lifelike that i 
could not but believe it was real, and that i had been deceive in 
thinking i had kill it. its haunch quivered, it got ready to spring, 
and my rifle flew to my shoulder. i saw it mark eric, and read the 
increase agony in my wife's eyes. the critical moment came. another 
second, and the thing, be it material or supernatural, would jump. i 
must fire at all costs. if mortal, i must kill it, if ghostly, the noise 
of my rifle might dematerialize it. and, as god is my judge, o'donnell, 
at that moment i had not the least idea which of it was--tiger or 
phantom. it sprang--my brain reeled--my finger grew numb, and as my 
wife sudden bound forward, the shadowy form of nahra seem to rise 
from the ground and mock me. with a supreme effort i jerk my finger 
back and fired. bang! the sound of the explosion act like a 
safety-valve to the pent-up feelings of all, and there was a chorus of 
shrieks. i rush forward--the ayah lay on the ground, face downward and 
motionless. my wife had hold of eric, who was shake all over. of the 
tiger there were no signs. it had completely vanished. 

"'thank god,' i exclaimed, kiss my wife feverishly. 'thank god! it 
was only a ghost! but it was very alarming, wasn't it?' 

"'alarming!' my wife gasped, 'it was awful! i quite thought it was real! 
so did eric, and so did ---- '--then her eyes fell on the ayah, and she 
gave a great start. 'charlie!' she cried, 'for mercy's sake look at her! 
i dare not! is she all right?' 

"i turn the ayah over--she was dead! fright had kill her! 

"i then told my wife of the curse of nahra, and of the phantom i thought 
i had seen of him, when the white tiger was springing. when i had 
finished, my wife hid her face in my shoulder. 

"'charlie!' she said, 'i did something awful. i saw what i then took to 
be the real white tiger single out eric, and in my anxiety to save him 
from the brute, i pushed the ayah in front of him. and the thing sprang 
on her instead. it was nothing short of murder! and yet--well, there 
were extenuate circumstances, weren't there?' 

"'of course there were,' i said--for i verily believed, o'donnell, fear 
had, for the time being, turn her brain. 

"on our way home she sudden call my attention to eric. 

"'charlie,' she cried, 'what's that mark on his cheek? he's hurt!' 

"i looked--and my heart turn sick within me. on the boy's cheek was a 
faint red scratch, just as might have been cause by a slight, very 
slight contact with some animal's claw. 

"'sahib!' cushai whisper to me, when he saw it and heard of our 
adventure. 'sahib! beware! nahra was a clever man. he must have use the 
spirit of the white tiger as his tool. let the medicine man examine the 
scar.' 

"i did so. i took ere to a dr. nicholson, who live close by. 

"he look at the wound curious for a few moments, and then said to 
me--he was renowned for his plain speaking--'mr. de silva, there's no 
use beating about the bush, and prolong the agony unnecessary for 
you and your wife. the boy's got leprosy--god alone know how! at the 
most he may live six weeks.' 

"the shock, of course, was terrible. ere had to be isolated from 
everyone--even from those who love him best--and die within a month. 

"'sahib, i knew!' cushai said to me the day of the funeral, 'i knew some 
disaster would befall you. nahra was a wonderful man, and his curse had 
to be fulfilled. you may rest assured, however, nothing further will 
befall you, for i saw nahra in a vision this morning, and he told me 
both his and the white tiger's spirit were now on friendly terms, and 
would trouble you no more.' 

"my wife and i left the place at once, and for a long time i live in a 
hell of suspense lest she should develop the infernal disease. by a 
merciful providence, however, she did no such thing, but, on the 
contrary, picked up in health in the most marvellous fashion; indeed, 
she only told me yesterday, she felt better than she had done for years. 
i've told you the story, o'donnell--and it is true in every 
detail--because it go a long way to substantiate your theory that 
animals, as well as human beings, have a future life." 

"i am absolutely sure they have!" i replied. 


_jungle animal and psychic faculties_ 

it is, of course, impossible to say whether animal of the jungle 
possess psychic faculties, without putt them to the test, and this, 
for obvious reasons, is extremely difficult. but since i have found that 
such property are possessed--in vary degree--by all animal i have 
tested, it seem only too probable that bear and tigers, and all beast 
of prey, are similarly endowed. 

it would be interesting to experiment with a beast of prey in a haunt 
locality; to observe to what extent it would be aware of the advent of 
the unknown, and to note its behaviour in the actual presence of the 
phenomena. 




part iii 

bird and the unknown 




chapter vii 

bird and the unknown 


as edgar allan poe has suggest in his immortal poem of "the raven," 
there is a strong link between certain species of bird and the unknown. 

we all know that vultures, kite and crow scent dead body from a 
great way off, but we don't all know that these and other kind of bird 
possess, in addition, the psychic property of scent the advent not 
only of the phantom of death, but of many, if not, indeed, all other 
spirits. within my knowledge there have been case when, before a death 
in the house, ravens, jackdaws, canaries, magpies, and even parrots, 
have shown unmistakable sign of uneasy and distress. the raven has 
croak in a high-pitched, abnormal key; the jackdaw and canary have 
become silent and dejected, from time to time shivering; the magpie even 
has feign death; the parrot has shriek incessantly. owls, too, are 
sure predict of death, and may be heard hoot in the most doleful 
manner outside the house of anyone doom to die shortly. 

in an article entitle "psychic records," the editor of the _occult 
review_ (in the august number, 1905) supplies the following anecdote of 
ghost of bird furnish him by his correspondents. 

"in the autumn of 1877 my husband was lie seriously ill with rheumatic 
fever, and i had sat up several nights. at last the doctor insist on 
my go to bed; and very unwilling i retired to a spare room. while 
undress i was surprise to see a very large white bird come from the 
fireplace, make a hover circle round me, and finally go to the top of 
a large double chest of drawers. i was too tired to trouble about it, 
and thought i would let it remain until morning. the next morning i said 
to the housemaid: 

"'there was a large bird in the spare room last night, which flew to the 
top of the drawers. see that it is put out.' 

"the nurse, who was present, said: 

"'oh, dear, ma'am, i am afraid that is an omen, and means the master 
won't live,' and she was confirmed in her opinion by the maid saying she 
had searched, and there was no trace of any bird. 

"i was quite angry, as my husband was decidedly better, had slept 
through the night, and we thought the crisis had passed. i went to his 
bedside and found him quiet sleeping, but he never woke, and in about 
an hour pass quiet away. 

"i thought no more of the bird, fancy i must have been mistaken from 
being overtired. 

"some month after my husband's death my youngest little one was born; 
he live for twelve months, and then had an attack of bronchitis. he 
slept in a cot in my room, and i was undress one night, when this 
same large white bird came from his cot, float round me, and 
disappear in the fireplace. at the time i did not for a moment think 
of it as anything but a strange coincidence, and in no way connected it 
with baby's illness. 

"the next morning i was sitting by the drawing-room fire with baby on my 
lap. the doctor came in, look at him, sound his chest, and 
pronounced him much better. as he was a friend of the family, he sat 
down on the other side of the fireplace and was chat in an ordinary 
way, when he sudden jump up with an exclamation, 'why, what do 
this mean?' and took the child from my arms quite dead! 

"for two years we saw nothing more of the white bird, and we had move 
to another place. 

"one day i was in my room, and my two little girls, age six and eight, 
were standing at the window watch a kitten in the garden, when 
sudden the youngest cry out: 

"'oh, mamma! look at that great white bird,' putt her hand as if to 
catch it, exactly in the way it flies round one. 

"i saw nothing, and the elder child said, 'don't be silly, jessie; there 
is no bird.' 

"'but there is,' said the child. 'don't you see? there, look! there it 
is!' 

"i look at my watch. it was twenty minutes past three. 

"two days after we received the news that a niece of mine had die at 
twenty minutes past three. the children had never known anything of the 
former appearances, as we had never talk about it before them. we have 
seen nothing since of the bird, but have for some years had no death in 
the family." 

so runs the article in the _occult review_, and i can corroborate it 
with similar experience that have happen to my friends and to me. 

some years ago, for instance, a great friend of my wife's died, and on 
the day of the funeral a large bird try to fly in at the window of the 
room where the corpse lay; while, shortly afterwards, an exactly similar 
bird visit the window of my wife's and my room in a house, several 
hundred of mile away. if it was only a coincidence, it was a very 
extraordinary one. 

then again, this spring, just before the death of one of my wife's 
relatives, a large bird flew violent against the window-pane behind 
which my wife was sitting--an incident that had never happen to her in 
that house before. 

undoubtedly, spirits in the guise of birds--most probably they are the 
phantasm of bird that have actually once live on the material 
plane--are the messenger of death. 


_a case of bird haunting in east russia_ 

some years ago the neighbourhood of orskaia, in east russia, was rouse 
by an affair of a very remarkable nature. the body of a handsome young 
peasant woman, call marthe popenkoff, was found in a lonely part of 
the road, between orskaia and orenburg, with the skin of her face and 
body shocking torn and lacerated, but without there being any wound 
deep enough to cause her death, which the doctor attribute to syncope. 

the people of orskaia, not satisfy with this verdict, declared marthe 
had been murdered, and made such a loud clamour that the editor of the 
local paper at last voice their sentiment in the _east russia 
chronicle_. it was then that m. durant, a smart young france engineer, 
temporary reside in those parts, became interested in the case, and 
decided to investigate it thoroughly. with this end in view he wrote to 
his friend m. hersant--a keen student of the occult--in saratova, to 
join him, and three days after the despatch of his letter met the latter 
at the orskaia railway station. m. durant retail the case as they 
drove to his house. 

"it is a remarkable affair, in every way," he said. "the woman was 
leading a perfectly respectable married life; she was hard-working and 
industrious, and beyond the fact that she was over-indulgent to her 
children, do not seem to have had any serious faults. as far as i can 
ascertain she had no enemies." 

"nor secret lovers?" m. hersant asked. 

"no; she was quite straight." 

"and you feel sure she was murdered?" 

"i do. public opinion so strong favours that view." 

"did you see the mark on the woman?" 

"i did, and could make nothing of them. after supper i will take you to 
see her, in the morgue." 

"what--she is still unburied?" 

"yes--but there is nothing unusual about that. in these parts body 
are often kept for ten days--sometimes even longer." 

m. durant was as good as his word; after they had partaken of a somewhat 
hasty meal, they set out to the morgue, where they made a careful 
inspection of the poor woman's remains. 

m. hersant examine the mark on the woman's body very close with his 
magnifying-glass. 

"ah!" he sudden exclaimed, bend down and almost touching the corpse 
with his nose, "ah!" 

"have you made a discovery?" m. durant enquired. 

"i prefer not to say at present," m. hersant replied. "i should like to 
see the spot where this body was found--now." 

"we will go there at once," m. durant rejoined. 

the scene of the tragedy was the orenburg road, at the foot of two 
little hills; and on either side were the slope fields, yellow with 
the nod corn. 

"that is the exact place where she lay," m. durant said, indicate with 
his finger a dark patch on a little wooden bridge span a stream, 
within a stone's throw of a tumbledown mill-house, all overgrown with 
ivy and lichens. m. hersant look round and sniff the air with his 
nostrils. 

"there is an air of lonely about this spot," he remarked, "that in 
itself suggest crime. if this were an ordinary murder, one could well 
imagine the assassin was aid in his diabolical work by the 
configuration of the land which, shelving as it does, slips down into 
the narrow valley, so as to preclude any possibility of escape on the 
part of the victim. the place seem especially design by providence as 
a death-trap. let us have a look at the interior of this building." 

"the police have search it thoroughly," m. durant said. 

"i've no doubt," m. hersant reply drily. "no one know better than i 
what the thorough of the police means." 

they enter the premises cautiously, since the roof was in a rickety 
condition, and any slight concussion might dislodge an avalanche of 
stone and plaster. while m. durant stood glancing round him rather 
impatiently, m. hersant made a careful scrutiny of the walls. 

"humph," he said at last. "as you so rightly observed, henri, this is a 
remarkable case. i have finished my investigate for to-night. let us 
be go home. to-morrow i should like to visit marthe's home." 

this conversation took place shortly before midnight; some six hour 
later all orskaia was ring with the news that marthe popenkoff's 
three children had all been found dead in their beds, their face and 
body lacerate in exactly the same manner as their mother's. there 
seem to be no doubt now that marthe had been murdered, and the 
populace cry shame on the police; for the assassin was still at large. 
they agree that the murder could be no other than peter popenkoff, 
and the editor of the local paper repeating these statements, peter 
popenkoff was duly charged with the crimes, and arrested. he was 
pronounced guilty by all excepting m. hersant; and of course m. hersant 
thought him guilty, too; only he like to think different from anyone 
else. 

"i don't want to commit myself," was all they could get out of him. "i 
may have something to say later on." 

m. durant laugh and shrug his shoulders. 

"it, undoubtedly, is peter popenkoff," he observed. "i had an idea that 
he was the culprit all along." 

but a day or two later, peter popenkoff was found dead in prison with 
the skin on his face and hand all torn to shreds. 

"there! didn't we say so?" cry the inconsequent mob. "peter popenkoff 
was innocent. one of the police themselves is the murderer." 

"come, you must acknowledge that we are on the right track now--it is 
one of the police," m. durant said to his friend. 

but m. hersant only shook his head. 

"i acknowledge nothing of the sort," he said. "come with me to the 
mill-house to-night, and i will then tell you what i think." 

to this proposition m. durant willing agreed, and, accompany by his 
friend and the village priest, set off. on their arrival, m. hersant 
produce a big compass, and on the earth floor of the mill-house drew a 
large circle, in which he made with white chalk various sign and 
symbols. he then sat in the middle of it, and bade his two companion 
stand in the doorway and watch. the night grew dark and darker, and 
presently into the air stole a something that all three men at once 
realize was supernatural. m. hersant cough nervously, the priest 
cross himself, and m. durant call out, "this is get ridiculous. 
these mediæval proceedings are too absurd. let us go home." the next 
moment, from the far distance, a church clock began to strike. it was 
midnight, and an impressive silence fell on the trio. then there came a 
noise like the flutter of wings, a loud, blood-curdling scream, half 
human and half animal, and a huge black owl, whirl down from the roof 
of the building, perch in the circle directly in front of m. hersant. 

"pray, father! pray quickly," m. hersant whispered. "pray for the dead, 
and sprinkle the circle with holy water." 

the priest, as well as his tremble limb would allow, obeyed; 
whereupon the bird instantly vanished. 

"for heaven's sake," m. durant gasped, "tell us what it all means." 

"only this," m. hersant said solemnly, "the phantasm we saw cause the 
death of the popenkoff family. it is the spirit of an owl that the 
children, encourage by their parents, kill in a most cruel manner. as 
soon as i examine marthe's body, i perceive the mutilation were due 
to a bird; and when i visit this mill on the eve of my arrival, i knew 
that a bird had once live here; that it had been capture with lime and 
murdered, and that it haunt the place." 

"how could you know that?" the priest exclaim in astonishment. 

"i am clairvoyant. i saw the bird's ghost as it appear to us just now. 
afterwards i enquire of the popenkoffs' neighbours, and the information 
i gather fully confirmed my suspicions--that the unfortunate bird had 
been put to death in a most barbarous manner. the death of the three 
children laid to rest any doubt i may have had with regard to the 
superphysic play a part in the death of marthe. then when her 
better-half had been serve likewise, i was certain that all five 
pseudo-murders were wholly and solely acts of retribution, and that they 
were perpetrated--i am inclined to think involuntarily--by the spirit of 
the owl itself. accordingly, i decided to hold a séance here--here in 
its old haunt, and if possible to put an end to the earth-bound 
condition and wanderings of the soul of the unhappy bird. thanks to 
father mickledoff we have done so, and there will be no more so-called 
murder near orskaia." 


_hauntings by the phantasm of birds_ 

one of the most curious case of haunting by the phantasm of bird 
happen towards the end of the eighteenth century in a church not 
twenty mile from london. the sexton start the rumours, declare that 
he had heard strange noises, apparently proceeding from certain vault 
contain the tomb of two old and distinguished families. the noises, 
which generally occur on friday nights, most often took the form of 
mockings, suggest to some of the listeners--the enact of a murder, 
and to other merely the flap of wings. 

the case soon attract considerable attention, people flock to the 
church from all over the country-side, and it was not long before 
certain person came forward and declared they had ascertain the cause 
of the disturbance. the churchwarden, sexton, and his wife and other 
all swore to seeing a huge crow peck and claw at the coffin in 
the vaults, and flying about the chancel of the church, and perch on 
the communion rails. when they try to seize it, it immediately 
vanished. 

an old lady, who came of a family of well-to-do yeomen, and who live 
near the church about that time, said that the people in the town had 
for many years been convinced the church there was haunt by the 
phantom of a bird, which they believe to be the earth-bound soul of a 
murderer, who, owe to his wealth, was inter in the churchyard, 
instead of being bury at the cross-roads with the customary wooden 
stake driven through the middle of his body. this belief of the yokel 
received some corroboration from a neighbouring squire, who said he had 
seen the phantasm, and was quite positive it was the earth-bound soul of 
a criminal whose family history was known to him, and whose remains lay 
in the churchyard. 

this is all the information that i have been able to gather on the 
subject, but it is enough to, at least, suggest the church was, at one 
time, haunt by the phantom of a bird, but whether the earth-bound soul 
of a murder taking that guise, or the spirit of an actual dead bird, 
it is impossible to say. 


_the ghost of an evil bird_ 

henry spicer, in his _strange things amongst us_, tell the story of a 
captain morgan, an honourable and vivacious gentleman, who, arrive in 
london in 18--, put up for the night in a large, old-fashioned hotel. 
the room in which he slept was full of heavy, antique furniture, 
reminiscent of the days of king george i, one of the worst periods in 
modern english history for crime. despite, however, his grim 
suggestive surroundings, captain morgan quick got into bed and was 
soon asleep. he was abrupt awaken by the sound of flapping, and, on 
look up, he saw a huge black bird with outstretched wings and fiery 
red eyes perch on the rail at the foot of the four-poster bed. 

the creature flew at him and endeavour to peck his eyes. captain 
morgan resisted, and after a desperate struggle succeed in driving it 
to a sofa in the corner of the room, where it settled down and regard 
him with great fear in its eyes. determined to destroy it, he flung 
himself on the top of it, when, to his surprise and terror, it 
immediately crumble into nothingness. he left the house early next 
morning, convinced that what he had seen was a ghost, but mr. spice 
offer no explanation as to how one should classify the phenomenon. 

it may have been the earth-bound spirit of the criminal or vicious 
inclined person who had once live there, or it may have been the 
phantom of an actual bird. either alternative is feasible. 

i have heard there is an old house near poole, in dorset, and another in 
essex, which were formerly haunt by spectral birds, and that as late 
as 1860 the phantasm of a bird, many times the size of a raven, was so 
frequent seen by the inmate of a house in dean street, soho, that 
they eventually grew quite accustomed to it. but bird haunting are not 
confine to houses, and are far more often to be met with out of doors; 
indeed there are very few woods, and moors, and commons that are not 
subject to them. i have constant seen the spirits of all manner of 
bird in the park in dublin and london. greenwich park, in particular, 
is full of them. 


_addendum to bird and the unknown_ 

though their unlove aspect and solitary mode of life may in some 
measure account for the prejudice and suspicion with which the owl, 
crow, raven, and one or two other bird have always been regarded, there 
are undoubted other and more subtle reason for their unpopularity. 

the ancients without exception credit these bird with psychic 
properties. 

"ignarres bubo dirum mortalibu omen," said ovid; whilst speak of the 
fatal prognostication of the crow virgil wrote: 

"saepe sinistra cava praedixit ab ilice cornix." 

a number of crow are state to have flutter about cicero's head on 
the day he was murdered. 

pliny says, "these birds, crow and rooks, all of them keep much 
prattling, and are full of chat, which most men take for an unlucky sign 
and presage of ill-fortune." 

ramesay, in his work _elminthologia_ (1688), writes: 

"if a crow fly over the house and croak thrice, how do they fear they, 
or someone else in the family, shall die." 

the bittern is also a bird of ill omen. allude to this bird, bishop 
hall once said: 

"if a bittern flies over this man's head by night, he will make his 
will"; whilst sir humphry davy wrote: 

"i know a man of very high dignity who was exceedingly move by omens, 
and who never went out shoot without a bittern's claw fasten to his 
button-hole by a riband, which he thought ensure him 'good luck.'" 

raven and swallow both, at times, prognosticate death. in lloyd's 
_stratagems of jerusalem_ (1602) he says: 

"by swallow lighting upon pirrhus' tents, and lighting upon the mast of 
mar. antonius' ship, sailing after cleopatra to egypt, the soothsayer 
did prognosticate that pirrhu should be slaine at argo in greece, and 
mar. antoniu in egypt." 

he allude to swallow following cyru from persia to scythia, from 
which the "wise men" foretold his death. raven follow alexander the 
great from india to babylon, which was regard by all who saw them as a 
fatal sign. 

"'tis not for nought that the raven sing now on my left and, croaking, 
has once scrape the earth with his feet," wrote plautus. 

other reference to the same bird are as follows: 

"the raven himself is hoarse 
that croak the fatal entrance of duncan 
under my battlements."--(_macbeth._) 

"it come o'er my memory 
as doth the raven o'er the infect house, 
boding to all."--(_othello._) 

"that toll 
the sick man's passport in her hollow beak, 
and in the shadow of the silent night 
doth shake contagion from her sable wings." 
(_jew of malta._) 

"is it not ominous in all country where crow 
and raven croak upon trees?"--(_hudibras._) 

"the boding raven on her cottage sat, 
and with hoarse croak warn us of our fate." 
(_the dirge._) 

"in cornwall," write mr. hunt, in his work on popular beliefs, etc., of 
the west of england, "it is believe that the croak of a raven over 
the house bode evil to some of the family. the following incident, 
given to me by a really intelligent man, illustrate the feeling: 

"'one day our family were much annoy by the continual croak of a 
raven over the house. some of us believe it to be a token; other 
deride the idea. but one good lady, our next-door neighbour, said: 

"'"just mark the day, and see if something do not come of it." 

"'the day and hour were careful noted. month pass away, and 
unbeliever were loud in their boast and enquiry after the token. 
the fifth month arrived, and with it a black-edged letter from 
australia, announce the death of one of the member of the family in 
that country. on compare the dates of the death and the raven's croak, 
they were found to have occur on the same day.'" 

in an old number of _notes and queries_ a correspondent relate that in 
somersetshire the appearance of a single jackdaw is regard as a sure 
prognostication of evil. he go on to add that the men employ in the 
quarry in the avon gorge, clifton, bristol, had more than once notice 
a jackdaw perch on the chain that span the river, prior to some 
catastrophe among them. 

dead magpie were once hung over the doorway of haunt house to keep 
away ghosts; it being almost universally believe that all phantasm 
share the same dread of this bird. ghost of magpie themselves are, 
however, far from uncommon; on dartmoor and exmoor, for example, i have 
seen several of them, generally in the immediate vicinity of bog or 
deep holes. 

witch were much attach to this bird, and were said to often assume 
its shape after death. 

"magpies," say mr. william jones, in his _credulities, past and 
present_, "are mysterious everywhere. a lady living near carlstad, in 
sweden, grievous offend a farm woman who came into the court of her 
house ask for food. the woman was told 'to take that magpie hanging 
upon the wall and eat it.' she took the bird and disappeared, with an 
evil glance at the lady, who had been so ill-advised as to insult a 
finn, whose magical powers, it is well known, far exceed those of the 
gipsies." (other authority corroborate this statement; and i have 
heard it said that the finn can surpass even the famous trick of the 
indians.) mr. jones, in the same story, says: "presently the number 
increased, and the lady, who at first had been amused, became troubled, 
and try to drive them away by various devices. all was to no purpose. 
she could not move without a large company of magpies; and they became 
at length so daring as to hop on her shoulder." (this read like 
hallucination. however, as i have heard of similar cases, in which there 
has been no doubt as to the objective of the phenomena, i see no 
reason why these magpie should not have been objective too.) "then she 
took to her bed in a room with closed shutters, although even this was 
not an effectual protection, for the magpie kept tap at the 
shutter day and night." mr. jones adds: "the lady's death is not 
recorded; but it is fully expect that, die when she may, all the 
magpie of wermland will be present at her funeral." 

there is a house in great russell street, w.c., where the haunting take 
the form of a magpie that taps at one of the window every morning 
between two and three, and then appear inside the room, perch on what 
looks like a huge alpine stick, suspend horizontal in the air, about 
seven feet from the floor. the moment a sound is made the apparition 
vanishes. it is thought to be the spirit of a magpie that was done to 
death in a very cruel manner in that room many years ago. there is a 
story current to the effect that a lady, when visiting the britain 
museum one day, happen to pass some slight remark about one of the 
egypt mummy case (not the notorious one), and that on quit the 
building she felt a sharp peck on her neck. she put up her hand to the 
injure part, and felt the distinct impression of a bird's claw on it. 
she could see nothing, however. that night--and for every succeed 
night for six weeks--she was awaken at two o'clock by the phantom of 
an enormous magpie that flutter over the bed, and was clearly visible 
to herself and her sister. the phenomenon worried her so that she became 
ill, and was eventually ordered abroad. she went to cairo and enjoy a 
brief respite; the hauntings, however, began again, and this time became 
so persistent that she at last lost her reason, and had to be brought 
home and confine in a private asylum, where she shortly afterwards 
died. though i cannot vouch for the truth of this story, i do think it 
is somewhat risky to make fun of certain of the egypt relics in the 
museum. they may be haunt by something infinite more alarm than 
the ghost of magpies. there are many saying respecting the magpie as a 
harbinger of ill luck. in lancashire, for example, there is this rhyme: 

"one for anger, two for mirth, 
three for a wedding, four for a birth, 
five for rich, six for poor, 
seven for a witch, i dare tell you no more." 

from further north come this couplet: 

"magpie, magpie, chatter and flee, 
turn up thy tail, and good luck fall me." 

rooks, again, are very psychic birds; they always leave their haunt 
near an old house shortly before a death take place in it, because 
their highly develop psychic faculty of scent enable them to detect 
the advent of the phantom of death, of which they have the greatest 
horror. a rook is of great service, when investigate haunt houses, 
as it nearly always give warning of the appearance of the unknown by 
violent flap of the wings, loud croaking, and other unmistakable 
symptom of terror. 

owls, though no less sensitive to superphysic influence, are not 
scared by it; they and bats, alone among the many kind of animal i 
have tested, take up their abode in haunt localities, and with the 
utmost sang-froid appear to enjoy the presence of the unknown, even in 
its most terrify form. 

the owl has been associate with the dark side of the unknown long 
than any other bird. 

"solaque, culminibu ferali carmine bubo. saepe queri et longa in 
fletum ducere voces," write virgil. 

pliny, in describe this bird, says, "bubo funebri et maxime 
abominatus"; whilst chaucer writes: "the owl eke that of death the bode 
ybringeth." 

in the arundel family a white owl is said to be a sure indication of 
death. 

that shakespeare attach no little importance to the fatal crying of 
the bird may be gather from the scene in _macbeth_, when the murder 
asks: 

"didst thou not hear a noise?" and lady macbeth answers: 

"i heard the owl scream and the cricket cry"; and the scene in _richard 
iii_, where richard interrupt a messenger of evil news with the words: 

"out on ye, owls! nothing but song of death?" 

gray speak of "moping" owls; chatterton exclaims, "harke! the dethe 
owle loude dothe synge"; whilst hogarth introduce the same bird in the 
murder scene of his _four stage of cruelty_. 

nor is the belief in the sinister prophetic property of the owl 
confine to the white races; we find it everywhere--among the red 
indians. west africans, siamese, and aborigine of australia. 

in cornwall, and in other corner of the country, the crow of a cock 
at midnight was formerly regard as indicate the passage of death 
over the house; also if a cock crew at a certain hour for two or three 
nights in succession, it was thought to be a sure sign of early death to 
some member of the household. in _notes and queries_ a correspondent 
remark that crow hen are not uncommon, that their crow is very 
similar to the crow of a very young cock, and must be taken as a certain 
presage of some dire calamity. 

it was generally held that in all haunt locality the ghost would at 
once vanish--not to appear again till the following night--at the first 
crow of the cock after midnight. i believe there is a certain amount 
of truth in this--at all event cocks, as i myself have proved, are 
invariable sensitive to the presence of the superphysical. 

the whistle is also a very psychic bird. spenser, in his _faerie 
queene_ (book ii, canto xii, st. 31), allude to it thus:-- 

"the whistle shrill, that whoso hear doth die"; 

whilst sir walter scott refer to it in a similar sense in his _lady of 
the lake_. 

the yellow-hammer was formerly the object of much persecution, since it 
was believe that it received three drops of the devil's blood on its 
feather every may morning, and never appear without presage ill 
luck. parrot do not appear to be very susceptible to the influence of 
the unknown, and indicate little or no dread of superphysic 
demonstrations. 

doves, wrens, and robins are bird of good omen, and the many 
superstition regarding them are all associate with good luck. doves, i 
have found in particular, are very safe psychic barometer in haunt 
houses. 

it is almost universally held to be unlucky to kill a robin. a 
correspondent of _notes and queries_ (fourth series, vol. viii, p. 505) 
remarks: 

"i took the following down from the mouth of a young miner: 

"'my father kill a robin and had terrible bad luck after it. he had at 
that time a pig which was ready for pipping; she had a litter of seven, 
and they all died. when the pig was kill the two ham went bad; 
presently three of the family had a fever, and my father himself die of 
it. the neighbour said it was all through killing the robin.'" 

george smith, in his _six pastorals_ (1770), says: 

"i found a robin's nest within our shed, 
and in the barn a wren has young one bred; 
i never take away their nest, nor try 
to catch the old ones, lest a friend should die. 
dick took a wren's nest from the cottage side, 
and ere a twelvemonth pass'd his mother dy'd!" 

in yorkshire it was once firm believe that if a robin were killed, 
the cow belong to the family of the destroyer of the bird would, 
for some time, only give bloody milk. at one time--and, perhaps, even 
now--the robin and wren, out of sheer pity, use to cover the body of 
those that die in the wood with leaves. 

webster, in his _tragedy of vittoria corombona_ (1612), refer to this 
touching habit of these bird thus: 

"call for the robin redbreast and the wren, 
since o'er the shady grove they hover, 
and with leaves and flower do cover 
the friendless body of unbury men." 

not so harmless is the stormy petrel, whose advent is look upon by 
sailor as a sure sign of an impending storm, accompany by much loss 
of life. 

the vulture and eagle, obviously on account of their ferocious 
dispositions, often remain earth-bound after death, and usually select 
as their haunts, spot little frequent by man. from what i have heard 
they are by far the most malignant of all bird ghosts, and have even 
been known to inflict physical injury on those who have had the 
misfortune to pass the night within their allot precincts. 




chapter viii 

a brief retrospect 


if i have fail to convince my reader as to the reality of a future 
existence for all species of mammalia, i trust i have at least suggest 
to them the idea of probability in such a theory; for did the belief 
that all animal possess imperishable spirits similar to mankind only 
become general, i feel quite sure that a marked improvement in our 
treatment of all the so-called "brute" creation--and god alone know how 
much such an improvement is needed--would speedy result. it is still 
only the comparative few who are kind to animals--the majority are 
either wholly indifferent or absolutely cruel. but if children were made 
to realize that even insect have spirits, they, at least, let us hope, 
would cease to take delight in pull off the wings and leg of flies. 

man has hitherto entertain the ridiculous unjustifiable idea that 
all the animal and insect world has been create solely for his benefit, 
to be kill or to be kept alive entire at his discretion. such an 
absurd and presumptuous belief ought to be exploded once and for all. 
the animal world, so all sane people must agree, was undoubted create 
to lead the same, free, untrammell life as do man himself. man--save 
in cunning--is nothing superior either to the dog, horse, or other 
mammalia; indeed, he is not infrequent so inferior that one cannot 
help thinking that possibly the higher spiritual plane are not for him 
at all, but for those who--misnamed the lower creation--have surpass 
man in spirituality. let those who doubt this study the superphysic 
all around them. let them careful watch animals, and observe their 
propensities, their psychic faculty of scent, sight, and hearing. they 
can easily test them in any house or locality which has a 
well-established reputation for being haunted. they will then see how 
close a relationship there really is between the animal and 
superphysic worlds. and if they want further proof,--proof of a more 
material nature,--let them search around for some spot state to be 
haunt by a ghostly phenomenon in the form of a dog, horse, cat, or 
other animal,--and investigate there themselves. 

such investigate have convinced me, and surely, by use these same 
method with patience and perseverance, other people might also be 
convinced. at all events, let them try. for, a conviction like mine--a 
conviction that an eternity exist for our canine pet and dumb 
friends--is certainly worth a lot of strive after. at least so i 
think. 



print by 

william brendon and son, ltd. 

plymouth 




stranger than fiction 

being tale from the byways of ghost and folk-lore 

by mary l. lewe 

crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 234 pp., 3s. 6d. net. 

"there is much curious matter in the volume well narrated."--_the 
times._ 

"has a thrill on every page."--_pall mall gazette._ 

"everybody ... likes a good ghost story, and in the volume before us the 
author has many an entertaining one to tell."--_the globe._ 

"an interesting collection ... quite worth add to one's library of 
the marvellous and mysterious."--_t.p.s. book notes._ 

"we have not, for a very long time, come across a book that interested 
us so much as this did."--_sheffield daily telegraph._ 


shadow cast before 

an anthology of prophecy and presentiment 

collected and edit by claud field 

author of "a dictionary of oriental quotations," "tales of the caliphs." 

crown 8vo, xii + 223 pp., cloth gilt, 2s. 6d. net. 

the present collection of anticipation fulfill seem by its 
cumulative weight to supply a strong _prima facie_ case for the view 
that in some men, at any rate, there is a sixth sense to which on 
occasion the future is revealed. 

"stories which range from cicero to mlle louisette the tight-rope 
dancer. if you like to read about wonderful and uncanny warnings, 
'shadows cast before' is full of them."--_the tatler._ 


re-incarnation: a study of forgotten truth 

by e.d. walker 

crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. net. 

contents.--introduction--what is re-incarnation?--western evidence of 
re-incarnation--western poet upon re-incarnation--re-incarnation among 
the ancients--re-incarnation in the bible--re-incarnation in the east 
to-day--eastern poetry of re-incarnation--esoteric oriental 
re-incarnation--transmigration through animals--death, heaven, 
and hell: what then of?--karma, the companion truth of 
re-incarnation--conclusion--appendix--bibliography of re-incarnation. 

"metempsychosis is the only anti-materialistic theory that philosophy 
can hearken to."--david hume. 

"scarcely less interesting as an anthology of prose and verse extract 
about re-incarnation from ancient and modern writers, than as a detailed 
exposition of the theory itself."--_athenæum._ 


william rider and son, ltd. 

8-11 paternoster row, london, e.c. 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of animal ghosts, by elliott o'donnell 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook animal ghost *** 

***** this file should be name 18233-8.txt or 18233-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/2/3/18233/ 

produce by barbara tozier, graeme mackreth and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

*** end: full license *** 
