the project gutenberg ebook of northanger abbey, by jane austen 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: northanger abbey 

author: jane austen 

release date: april, 1994 [etext #121] 
last updated: march 10, 2018 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook northanger abbey *** 




produce by an anonymous volunteer 





northanger abbey 


by 

jane austen (1803) 




advertisement by the authoress, to northanger abbey 

this little work was finished in the year 1803, and intended for 
immediate publication. it was disposed of to a bookseller, it was even 
advertised, and why the business proceed no farther, the author 
has never been able to learn. that any bookseller should think it 
worth-while to purchase what he did not think it worth-while to publish 
seem extraordinary. but with this, neither the author nor the public 
have any other concern than as some observation is necessary upon those 
parts of the work which thirteen years have made comparatively obsolete. 
the public are entreat to bear in mind that thirteen years have pass 
since it was finished, many more since it was begun, and that during 
that period, places, manners, books, and opinion have undergone 
considerable changes. 


preface 
chapter 1 


no one who had ever seen catherine morland in her infancy would have 
supposed her born to be an heroine. her situation in life, the character 
of her father and mother, her own person and disposition, were 
all equally against her. her father was a clergyman, without being 
neglected, or poor, and a very respectable man, though his name 
was richard--and he had never been handsome. he had a considerable 
independence besides two good livings--and he was not in the least 
addict to lock up his daughters. her mother was a woman of useful 
plain sense, with a good temper, and, what is more remarkable, with a 
good constitution. she had three son before catherine was born; and 
instead of die in bring the latter into the world, as anybody might 
expect, she still live on--lived to have six children more--to see them 
grow up around her, and to enjoy excellent health herself. a family 
of ten children will be always call a fine family, where there are 
head and arms and leg enough for the number; but the morland had 
little other right to the word, for they were in general very plain, and 
catherine, for many years of her life, as plain as any. she had a thin 
awkward figure, a sallow skin without colour, dark lank hair, and strong 
features--so much for her person; and not less unpropitious for heroism 
seem her mind. she was fond of all boy's plays, and greatly prefer 
cricket not merely to dolls, but to the more heroic enjoyment of 
infancy, nursing a dormouse, feed a canary-bird, or water a 
rose-bush. indeed she had no taste for a garden; and if she gather 
flower at all, it was chiefly for the pleasure of mischief--at least 
so it was conjecture from her always prefer those which she was 
forbidden to take. such were her propensities--her abilities were quite 
as extraordinary. she never could learn or understand anything 
before she was taught; and sometimes not even then, for she was often 
inattentive, and occasional stupid. her mother was three month in 
teaching her only to repeat the “beggar's petition”; and after all, her 
next sister, sally, could say it better than she did. not that catherine 
was always stupid--by no means; she learnt the fable of “the hare and 
many friends” as quick as any girl in england. her mother wish her 
to learn music; and catherine was sure she should like it, for she was 
very fond of tinkle the key of the old forlorn spinnet; so, at eight 
years old she began. she learnt a year, and could not bear it; and mrs. 
morland, who did not insist on her daughter being accomplished in 
spite of incapacity or distaste, allow her to leave off. the day which 
dismiss the music-master was one of the happiest of catherine's life. 
her taste for drawing was not superior; though whenever she could obtain 
the outside of a letter from her mother or seize upon any other odd 
piece of paper, she did what she could in that way, by drawing house 
and trees, hen and chickens, all very much like one another. writing 
and account she was taught by her father; france by her mother: her 
proficient in either was not remarkable, and she shirk her lesson in 
both whenever she could. what a strange, unaccountable character!--for 
with all these symptom of profligacy at ten years old, she had neither 
a bad heart nor a bad temper, was seldom stubborn, scarcely ever 
quarrelsome, and very kind to the little ones, with few interrupt 
of tyranny; she was moreover noisy and wild, hate confinement and 
cleanliness, and love nothing so well in the world as rolling down the 
green slope at the back of the house. 

such was catherine morland at ten. at fifteen, appearances were mending; 
she began to curl her hair and long for balls; her complexion improved, 
her features were soften by plump and colour, her eyes gain more 
animation, and her figure more consequence. her love of dirt gave way to 
an inclination for finery, and she grew clean as she grew smart; she had 
now the pleasure of sometimes hearing her father and mother remark 
on her personal improvement. “catherine grow quite a good-looking 
girl--she is almost pretty today,” were words which caught her ear now 
and then; and how welcome were the sounds! to look almost pretty is an 
acquisition of higher delight to a girl who has been look plain the 
first fifteen years of her life than a beauty from her cradle can ever 
receive. 

mrs. morland was a very good woman, and wish to see her children 
everything they ought to be; but her time was so much occupy in 
lying-in and teaching the little ones, that her elder daughter were 
inevitable left to shift for themselves; and it was not very wonderful 
that catherine, who had by nature nothing heroic about her, should 
prefer cricket, baseball, riding on horseback, and running about 
the country at the age of fourteen, to books--or at least books of 
information--for, provided that nothing like useful knowledge could be 
gain from them, provided they were all story and no reflection, she 
had never any objection to books at all. but from fifteen to seventeen 
she was in training for a heroine; she read all such works as heroin 
must read to supply their memory with those quotation which are so 
serviceable and so soothe in the vicissitudes of their eventful lives. 

from pope, she learnt to censure those who 

“bear about the mockery of woe.” 


from gray, that 

“many a flower is born to blush unseen, 
“and waste its fragrance on the desert air.” 


from thompson, that-- 

“it is a delightful task 
“to teach the young idea how to shoot.” 


and from shakespeare she gain a great store of information--amongst 
the rest, that-- 

“trifles light as air, 
“are, to the jealous, confirmation strong, 
“as proof of holy writ.” 


that 

“the poor beetle, which we tread upon, 
“in corporal sufferance feel a pang as great 
“as when a giant dies.” 


and that a young woman in love always looks-- 

“like patience on a monument 
“smiling at grief.” 


so far her improvement was sufficient--and in many other points she came 
on exceedingly well; for though she could not write sonnets, she brought 
herself to read them; and though there seem no chance of her throw 
a whole party into rapture by a prelude on the pianoforte, of her own 
composition, she could listen to other people's performance with very 
little fatigue. her greatest deficiency was in the pencil--she had no 
notion of drawing--not enough even to attempt a sketch of her lover's 
profile, that she might be detect in the design. there she fell 
miserably short of the true heroic height. at present she did not know 
her own poverty, for she had no lover to portray. she had reach the 
age of seventeen, without have seen one amiable youth who could call 
forth her sensibility, without have inspired one real passion, and 
without have excited even any admiration but what was very moderate 
and very transient. this was strange indeed! but strange things may be 
generally account for if their cause be fairly search out. there was 
not one lord in the neighbourhood; no--not even a baronet. there was not 
one family among their acquaintance who had rear and support a boy 
accidental found at their door--not one young man whose origin 
was unknown. her father had no ward, and the squire of the parish no 
children. 

but when a young lady is to be a heroine, the perverse of forty 
surrounding family cannot prevent her. something must and will happen 
to throw a hero in her way. 

mr. allen, who own the chief of the property about fullerton, the 
village in wiltshire where the morland lived, was ordered to bath 
for the benefit of a gouty constitution--and his lady, a good-humoured 
woman, fond of miss morland, and probably aware that if adventure will 
not befall a young lady in her own village, she must seek them abroad, 
invite her to go with them. mr. and mrs. morland were all compliance, 
and catherine all happiness. 




chapter 2 


in addition to what has been already said of catherine morland's 
personal and mental endowments, when about to be launch into all the 
difficulty and danger of a six weeks' residence in bath, it may be 
stated, for the reader's more certain information, lest the following 
page should otherwise fail of give any idea of what her character is 
meant to be, that her heart was affectionate; her disposition cheerful 
and open, without conceit or affectation of any kind--her manners just 
remove from the awkward and shy of a girl; her person pleasing, 
and, when in good looks, pretty--and her mind about as ignorant and 
uninformed as the female mind at seventeen usually is. 

when the hour of departure drew near, the maternal anxiety of mrs. 
morland will be naturally supposed to be most severe. a thousand 
alarm presentiment of evil to her beloved catherine from this 
terrific separation must oppress her heart with sadness, and drown her 
in tear for the last day or two of their being together; and advice of 
the most important and applicable nature must of course flow from her 
wise lip in their parting conference in her closet. caution against 
the violence of such noblemen and baronet as delight in force young 
ladies away to some remote farm-house, must, at such a moment, relieve 
the fulness of her heart. who would not think so? but mrs. morland knew 
so little of lords and baronets, that she entertain no notion of their 
general mischievousness, and was wholly unsuspicious of danger to her 
daughter from their machinations. her caution were confine to the 
following points. “i beg, catherine, you will always wrap yourself up 
very warm about the throat, when you come from the rooms at night; and 
i wish you would try to keep some account of the money you spend; i will 
give you this little book on purpose.” 

sally, or rather sarah (for what young lady of common gentility will 
reach the age of sixteen without alter her name as far as she can?), 
must from situation be at this time the intimate friend and confidante 
of her sister. it is remarkable, however, that she neither insist 
on catherine's writing by every post, nor exact her promise of 
transmit the character of every new acquaintance, nor a detail 
of every interesting conversation that bath might produce. everything 
indeed relative to this important journey was done, on the part of the 
morlands, with a degree of moderation and composure, which seem 
rather consistent with the common feelings of common life, than with the 
refined susceptibilities, the tender emotion which the first separation 
of a heroine from her family ought always to excite. her father, instead 
of give her an unlimited order on his banker, or even putt an 
hundred pound bank-bill into her hands, gave her only ten guineas, and 
promise her more when she want it. 

under these unpromise auspices, the parting took place, and the 
journey began. it was perform with suitable quiet and uneventful 
safety. neither robber nor tempest befriend them, nor one lucky 
overturn to introduce them to the hero. nothing more alarm occur 
than a fear, on mrs. allen's side, of have once left her clog behind 
her at an inn, and that fortunately prove to be groundless. 

they arrive at bath. catherine was all eager delight--her eyes were 
here, there, everywhere, as they approach its fine and striking 
environs, and afterwards drove through those street which conduct 
them to the hotel. she was come to be happy, and she felt happy already. 

they were soon settled in comfortable lodgings in pulteney street. 

it is now expedient to give some description of mrs. allen, that the 
reader may be able to judge in what manner her action will hereafter 
tend to promote the general distress of the work, and how she will, 
probably, contribute to reduce poor catherine to all the desperate 
wretched of which a last volume is capable--whether by her 
imprudence, vulgarity, or jealousy--whether by intercept her letters, 
ruin her character, or turning her out of doors. 

mrs. allen was one of that numerous class of females, whose society can 
raise no other emotion than surprise at there being any men in the world 
who could like them well enough to marry them. she had neither beauty, 
genius, accomplishment, nor manner. the air of a gentlewoman, a great 
deal of quiet, inactive good temper, and a trifling turn of mind 
were all that could account for her being the choice of a sensible, 
intelligent man like mr. allen. in one respect she was admirable fitted 
to introduce a young lady into public, being as fond of go everywhere 
and seeing everything herself as any young lady could be. dress was 
her passion. she had a most harmless delight in being fine; and our 
heroine's entree into life could not take place till after three or four 
days had been spent in learning what was mostly worn, and her chaperone 
was provided with a dress of the newest fashion. catherine too made 
some purchase herself, and when all these matter were arranged, the 
important evening came which was to usher her into the upper rooms. her 
hair was cut and dress by the best hand, her clothes put on with care, 
and both mrs. allen and her maid declared she look quite as she should 
do. with such encouragement, catherine hope at least to pass uncensured 
through the crowd. as for admiration, it was always very welcome when it 
came, but she did not depend on it. 

mrs. allen was so long in dressing that they did not enter the ballroom 
till late. the season was full, the room crowded, and the two ladies 
squeeze in as well as they could. as for mr. allen, he repair 
directly to the card-room, and left them to enjoy a mob by themselves. 
with more care for the safety of her new gown than for the comfort of 
her protegee, mrs. allen made her way through the throng of men by 
the door, as swift as the necessary caution would allow; catherine, 
however, kept close at her side, and link her arm too firm within 
her friend's to be torn asunder by any common effort of a struggle 
assembly. but to her utter amaze she found that to proceed along the 
room was by no means the way to disengage themselves from the crowd; it 
seem rather to increase as they went on, whereas she had imagine that 
when once fairly within the door, they should easily find seat and be 
able to watch the dance with perfect convenience. but this was far from 
being the case, and though by unweary diligence they gain even the 
top of the room, their situation was just the same; they saw nothing 
of the dance but the high feather of some of the ladies. still they 
move on--something better was yet in view; and by a continue exertion 
of strength and ingenuity they found themselves at last in the passage 
behind the highest bench. here there was something less of crowd than 
below; and hence miss morland had a comprehensive view of all the 
company beneath her, and of all the danger of her late passage through 
them. it was a splendid sight, and she began, for the first time that 
evening, to feel herself at a ball: she long to dance, but she had 
not an acquaintance in the room. mrs. allen did all that she could do 
in such a case by saying very placidly, every now and then, “i wish you 
could dance, my dear--i wish you could get a partner.” for some time 
her young friend felt oblige to her for these wishes; but they were 
repeated so often, and prove so total ineffectual, that catherine 
grew tired at last, and would thank her no more. 

they were not long able, however, to enjoy the repose of the eminence 
they had so laborious gained. everybody was shortly in motion for 
tea, and they must squeeze out like the rest. catherine began to feel 
something of disappointment--she was tired of being continual pressed 
against by people, the generality of whose face possessed nothing to 
interest, and with all of whom she was so wholly unacquainted that she 
could not relieve the irksome of imprison by the exchange of a 
syllable with any of her fellow captives; and when at last arrive in 
the tea-room, she felt yet more the awkward of have no party to 
join, no acquaintance to claim, no gentleman to assist them. they saw 
nothing of mr. allen; and after look about them in vain for a more 
eligible situation, were oblige to sit down at the end of a table, at 
which a large party were already placed, without have anything to do 
there, or anybody to speak to, except each other. 

mrs. allen congratulate herself, as soon as they were seated, on have 
preserve her gown from injury. “it would have been very shocking to 
have it torn,” said she, “would not it? it is such a delicate muslin. 
for my part i have not seen anything i like so well in the whole room, i 
assure you.” 

“how uncomfortable it is,” whisper catherine, “not to have a single 
acquaintance here!” 

“yes, my dear,” reply mrs. allen, with perfect serenity, “it is very 
uncomfortable indeed.” 

“what shall we do? the gentlemen and ladies at this table look as if 
they wonder why we came here--we seem force ourselves into their 
party.” 

“aye, so we do. that is very disagreeable. i wish we had a large 
acquaintance here.” 

“i wish we had any--it would be somebody to go to.” 

“very true, my dear; and if we knew anybody we would join them directly. 
the skin were here last year--i wish they were here now.” 

“had not we better go away as it is? here are no tea-things for us, you 
see.” 

“no more there are, indeed. how very provoking! but i think we had 
better sit still, for one get so tumble in such a crowd! how is my 
head, my dear? somebody gave me a push that has hurt it, i am afraid.” 

“no, indeed, it looks very nice. but, dear mrs. allen, are you sure 
there is nobody you know in all this multitude of people? i think you 
must know somebody.” 

“i don't, upon my word--i wish i did. i wish i had a large acquaintance 
here with all my heart, and then i should get you a partner. i should be 
so glad to have you dance. there go a strange-looking woman! what an 
odd gown she has got on! how old-fashioned it is! look at the back.” 

after some time they received an offer of tea from one of their 
neighbours; it was thankful accepted, and this introduce a light 
conversation with the gentleman who offer it, which was the only time 
that anybody spoke to them during the evening, till they were discover 
and join by mr. allen when the dance was over. 

“well, miss morland,” said he, directly, “i hope you have had an 
agreeable ball.” 

“very agreeable indeed,” she replied, vain endeavour to hide a 
great yawn. 

“i wish she had been able to dance,” said his wife; “i wish we could 
have got a partner for her. i have been saying how glad i should be if 
the skin were here this winter instead of last; or if the parry had 
come, as they talk of once, she might have dance with george parry. i 
am so sorry she has not had a partner!” 

“we shall do better another evening i hope,” was mr. allen's 
consolation. 

the company began to disperse when the dance was over--enough to leave 
space for the remainder to walk about in some comfort; and now was the 
time for a heroine, who had not yet play a very distinguished part 
in the event of the evening, to be notice and admired. every five 
minutes, by remove some of the crowd, gave greater opening for her 
charms. she was now seen by many young men who had not been near her 
before. not one, however, start with rapturous wonder on behold 
her, no whisper of eager inquiry ran round the room, nor was she once 
call a divinity by anybody. yet catherine was in very good looks, and 
had the company only seen her three years before, they would now have 
thought her exceedingly handsome. 

she was look at, however, and with some admiration; for, in her own 
hearing, two gentlemen pronounced her to be a pretty girl. such words 
had their due effect; she immediately thought the evening pleasant 
than she had found it before--her humble vanity was contented--she 
felt more oblige to the two young men for this simple praise than a 
true-quality heroine would have been for fifteen sonnet in celebration 
of her charms, and went to her chair in good humour with everybody, and 
perfectly satisfy with her share of public attention. 




chapter 3 


every morning now brought its regular duties--shops were to be visited; 
some new part of the town to be look at; and the pump-room to be 
attended, where they parade up and down for an hour, look at 
everybody and speak to no one. the wish of a numerous acquaintance 
in bath was still uppermost with mrs. allen, and she repeated it after 
every fresh proof, which every morning brought, of her knowing nobody at 
all. 

they made their appearance in the lower rooms; and here fortune was more 
favourable to our heroine. the master of the ceremony introduce to 
her a very gentlemanlike young man as a partner; his name was tilney. 
he seem to be about four or five and twenty, was rather tall, had a 
pleasing countenance, a very intelligent and lively eye, and, if not 
quite handsome, was very near it. his address was good, and catherine 
felt herself in high luck. there was little leisure for speak 
while they danced; but when they were seat at tea, she found him as 
agreeable as she had already given him credit for being. he talk with 
fluency and spirit--and there was an arch and pleasantry in his 
manner which interested, though it was hardly understood by her. after 
chat some time on such matter as naturally arose from the object 
around them, he sudden address her with--“i have hitherto been very 
remiss, madam, in the proper attention of a partner here; i have not 
yet ask you how long you have been in bath; whether you were ever here 
before; whether you have been at the upper rooms, the theatre, and 
the concert; and how you like the place altogether. i have been 
very negligent--but are you now at leisure to satisfy me in these 
particulars? if you are i will begin directly.” 

“you need not give yourself that trouble, sir.” 

“no trouble, i assure you, madam.” then form his features into a set 
smile, and affected soften his voice, he added, with a simper 
air, “have you been long in bath, madam?” 

“about a week, sir,” reply catherine, try not to laugh. 

“really!” with affected astonishment. 

“why should you be surprised, sir?” 

“why, indeed!” said he, in his natural tone. “but some emotion must 
appear to be raise by your reply, and surprise is more easily assumed, 
and not less reasonable than any other. now let us go on. were you never 
here before, madam?” 

“never, sir.” 

“indeed! have you yet honour the upper rooms?” 

“yes, sir, i was there last monday.” 

“have you been to the theatre?” 

“yes, sir, i was at the play on tuesday.” 

“to the concert?” 

“yes, sir, on wednesday.” 

“and are you altogether pleased with bath?” 

“yes--i like it very well.” 

“now i must give one smirk, and then we may be rational again.” 
catherine turn away her head, not knowing whether she might venture to 
laugh. “i see what you think of me,” said he gravely--“i shall make but 
a poor figure in your journal tomorrow.” 

“my journal!” 

“yes, i know exactly what you will say: friday, went to the lower 
rooms; wore my sprigged muslin robe with blue trimmings--plain black 
shoes--appeared to much advantage; but was strange harass by a 
queer, half-witted man, who would make me dance with him, and distress 
me by his nonsense.” 

“indeed i shall say no such thing.” 

“shall i tell you what you ought to say?” 

“if you please.” 

“i dance with a very agreeable young man, introduce by mr. king; had 
a great deal of conversation with him--seems a most extraordinary 
genius--hope i may know more of him. that, madam, is what i wish you to 
say.” 

“but, perhaps, i keep no journal.” 

“perhaps you are not sitting in this room, and i am not sitting by 
you. these are points in which a doubt is equally possible. not keep a 
journal! how are your absent cousin to understand the tenour of your 
life in bath without one? how are the civility and compliments of 
every day to be related as they ought to be, unless noted down every 
evening in a journal? how are your various dress to be remembered, 
and the particular state of your complexion, and curl of your hair to be 
describe in all their diversities, without have constant recourse to 
a journal? my dear madam, i am not so ignorant of young ladies' ways as 
you wish to believe me; it is this delightful habit of journal which 
largely contribute to form the easy style of writing for which ladies 
are so generally celebrated. everybody allow that the talent of writing 
agreeable letters is peculiarly female. nature may have done something, 
but i am sure it must be essentially assist by the practice of keeping 
a journal.” 

“i have sometimes thought,” said catherine, doubtingly, “whether ladies 
do write so much better letters than gentlemen! that is--i should not 
think the superior was always on our side.” 

“as far as i have had opportunity of judging, it appear to me that the 
usual style of letter-writing among women is faultless, except in three 
particulars.” 

“and what are they?” 

“a general deficiency of subject, a total inattention to stops, and a 
very frequent ignorance of grammar.” 

“upon my word! i need not have been afraid of disclaim the 
compliment. you do not think too highly of us in that way.” 

“i should no more lay it down as a general rule that women write better 
letters than men, than that they sing better duets, or draw better 
landscapes. in every power, of which taste is the foundation, excellence 
is pretty fairly divide between the sexes.” 

they were interrupt by mrs. allen: “my dear catherine,” said she, “do 
take this pin out of my sleeve; i am afraid it has torn a hole already; 
i shall be quite sorry if it has, for this is a favourite gown, though 
it cost but nine shilling a yard.” 

“that is exactly what i should have guess it, madam,” said mr. tilney, 
look at the muslin. 

“do you understand muslins, sir?” 

“particularly well; i always buy my own cravats, and am allow to be an 
excellent judge; and my sister has often trust me in the choice of a 
gown. i bought one for her the other day, and it was pronounced to be a 
prodigious bargain by every lady who saw it. i gave but five shilling a 
yard for it, and a true indian muslin.” 

mrs. allen was quite struck by his genius. “men commonly take so little 
notice of those things,” said she; “i can never get mr. allen to know 
one of my gown from another. you must be a great comfort to your 
sister, sir.” 

“i hope i am, madam.” 

“and pray, sir, what do you think of miss morland's gown?” 

“it is very pretty, madam,” said he, grave examine it; “but i do not 
think it will wash well; i am afraid it will fray.” 

“how can you,” said catherine, laughing, “be so--” she had almost said 
“strange.” 

“i am quite of your opinion, sir,” reply mrs. allen; “and so i told 
miss morland when she bought it.” 

“but then you know, madam, muslin always turn to some account or other; 
miss morland will get enough out of it for a handkerchief, or a cap, or 
a cloak. muslin can never be said to be wasted. i have heard my sister 
say so forty times, when she has been extravagant in buy more than 
she wanted, or careless in cutting it to pieces.” 

“bath is a charming place, sir; there are so many good shop here. we 
are sadly off in the country; not but what we have very good shop in 
salisbury, but it is so far to go--eight mile is a long way; mr. allen 
say it is nine, measured nine; but i am sure it cannot be more than 
eight; and it is such a fag--i come back tired to death. now, here one 
can step out of door and get a thing in five minutes.” 

mr. tilney was polite enough to seem interested in what she said; and 
she kept him on the subject of muslin till the dance recommenced. 
catherine feared, as she listen to their discourse, that he indulge 
himself a little too much with the foible of others. “what are you 
thinking of so earnestly?” said he, as they walk back to the ballroom; 
“not of your partner, i hope, for, by that shake of the head, your 
meditation are not satisfactory.” 

catherine coloured, and said, “i was not thinking of anything.” 

“that is artful and deep, to be sure; but i had rather be told at once 
that you will not tell me.” 

“well then, i will not.” 

“thank you; for now we shall soon be acquainted, as i am authorize to 
tease you on this subject whenever we meet, and nothing in the world 
advances intimacy so much.” 

they dance again; and, when the assembly closed, parted, on the 
lady's side at least, with a strong inclination for continue the 
acquaintance. whether she thought of him so much, while she drank her 
warm wine and water, and prepared herself for bed, as to dream of him 
when there, cannot be ascertained; but i hope it was no more than in 
a slight slumber, or a morning doze at most; for if it be true, as a 
celebrated writer has maintained, that no young lady can be justified 
in fall in love before the gentleman's love is declared,* it must be 
very improper that a young lady should dream of a gentleman before the 
gentleman is first known to have dreamt of her. how proper mr. tilney 
might be as a dreamer or a lover had not yet perhaps enter mr. allen's 
head, but that he was not objectionable as a common acquaintance for 
his young charge he was on inquiry satisfied; for he had early in the 
evening taken pains to know who her partner was, and had been assured 
of mr. tilney's being a clergyman, and of a very respectable family in 
gloucestershire. 




chapter 4 


with more than usual eager did catherine hasten to the pump-room the 
next day, secure within herself of seeing mr. tilney there before the 
morning were over, and ready to meet him with a smile; but no smile 
was demanded--mr. tilney did not appear. every creature in bath, 
except himself, was to be seen in the room at different periods of the 
fashionable hours; crowd of people were every moment passing in and 
out, up the steps and down; people whom nobody care about, and nobody 
want to see; and he only was absent. “what a delightful place bath 
is,” said mrs. allen as they sat down near the great clock, after 
parade the room till they were tired; “and how pleasant it would be if 
we had any acquaintance here.” 

this sentiment had been utter so often in vain that mrs. allen had no 
particular reason to hope it would be follow with more advantage now; 
but we are told to “despair of nothing we would attain,” as “unwearied 
diligence our point would gain”; and the unweary diligence with which 
she had every day wish for the same thing was at length to have its 
just reward, for hardly had she been seat ten minutes before a lady of 
about her own age, who was sitting by her, and had been look at her 
attentive for several minutes, address her with great complaisance 
in these words: “i think, madam, i cannot be mistaken; it is a long time 
since i had the pleasure of seeing you, but is not your name allen?” 
this question answered, as it readily was, the stranger pronounced hers 
to be thorpe; and mrs. allen immediately recognize the features of 
a former schoolfellow and intimate, whom she had seen only once since 
their respective marriages, and that many years ago. their joy on this 
meeting was very great, as well it might, since they had been contented 
to know nothing of each other for the last fifteen years. compliments 
on good looks now passed; and, after observing how time had slip away 
since they were last together, how little they had thought of meeting in 
bath, and what a pleasure it was to see an old friend, they proceed to 
make inquiry and give intelligence as to their families, sisters, and 
cousins, talk both together, far more ready to give than to receive 
information, and each hearing very little of what the other said. mrs. 
thorpe, however, had one great advantage as a talker, over mrs. allen, 
in a family of children; and when she expatiate on the talent of her 
sons, and the beauty of her daughters, when she related their different 
situation and views--that john was at oxford, edward at merchant 
taylors', and william at sea--and all of them more beloved and respect 
in their different station than any other three being ever were, mrs. 
allen had no similar information to give, no similar triumph to press 
on the unwill and unbelieving ear of her friend, and was forced to 
sit and appear to listen to all these maternal effusions, console 
herself, however, with the discovery, which her keen eye soon made, that 
the lace on mrs. thorpe's pelisse was not half so handsome as that on 
her own. 

“here come my dear girls,” cry mrs. thorpe, point at three 
smart-looking female who, arm in arm, were then moving towards her. “my 
dear mrs. allen, i long to introduce them; they will be so delight 
to see you: the tallest is isabella, my eldest; is not she a fine young 
woman? the other are very much admire too, but i believe isabella is 
the handsomest.” 

the miss thorpe were introduced; and miss morland, who had been for a 
short time forgotten, was introduce likewise. the name seem to strike 
them all; and, after speak to her with great civility, the eldest 
young lady observe aloud to the rest, “how excessive like her brother 
miss morland is!” 

“the very picture of him indeed!” cry the mother--and “i should have 
known her anywhere for his sister!” was repeated by them all, two or 
three times over. for a moment catherine was surprised; but mrs. thorpe 
and her daughter had scarcely begun the history of their acquaintance 
with mr. james morland, before she remember that her eldest brother 
had lately form an intimacy with a young man of his own college, of 
the name of thorpe; and that he had spent the last week of the christmas 
vacation with his family, near london. 

the whole being explained, many obliging things were said by the miss 
thorpe of their wish of being better acquaint with her; of being 
considered as already friends, through the friendship of their brothers, 
etc., which catherine heard with pleasure, and answer with all the 
pretty expression she could command; and, as the first proof of amity, 
she was soon invite to accept an arm of the eldest miss thorpe, and 
take a turn with her about the room. catherine was delight with this 
extension of her bath acquaintance, and almost forgot mr. tilney while 
she talk to miss thorpe. friendship is certainly the finest balm for 
the pang of disappointed love. 

their conversation turn upon those subjects, of which the free 
discussion has generally much to do in perfect a sudden intimacy 
between two young ladies: such as dress, balls, flirtations, and 
quizzes. miss thorpe, however, being four years old than miss morland, 
and at least four years better informed, had a very decided advantage in 
discuss such points; she could compare the balls of bath with those 
of tunbridge, its fashion with the fashion of london; could rectify 
the opinion of her new friend in many articles of tasteful attire; 
could discover a flirtation between any gentleman and lady who only 
smile on each other; and point out a quiz through the thickness of a 
crowd. these powers received due admiration from catherine, to whom they 
were entire new; and the respect which they naturally inspired might 
have been too great for familiarity, had not the easy gaiety of miss 
thorpe's manners, and her frequent expression of delight on this 
acquaintance with her, soften down every feeling of awe, and left 
nothing but tender affection. their increase attachment was not to be 
satisfy with half a dozen turn in the pump-room, but required, when 
they all quit it together, that miss thorpe should accompany miss 
morland to the very door of mr. allen's house; and that they should 
there part with a most affectionate and lengthen shake of hands, after 
learning, to their mutual relief, that they should see each other across 
the theatre at night, and say their prayer in the same chapel the next 
morning. catherine then ran directly upstairs, and watch miss thorpe's 
progress down the street from the drawing-room window; admire the 
graceful spirit of her walk, the fashionable air of her figure and 
dress; and felt grateful, as well she might, for the chance which had 
procure her such a friend. 

mrs. thorpe was a widow, and not a very rich one; she was a 
good-humoured, well-meaning woman, and a very indulgent mother. her 
eldest daughter had great personal beauty, and the younger ones, by 
pretend to be as handsome as their sister, imitate her air, and 
dressing in the same style, did very well. 

this brief account of the family is intended to supersede the necessity 
of a long and minute detail from mrs. thorpe herself, of her past 
adventure and sufferings, which might otherwise be expect to occupy 
the three or four following chapters; in which the worthless of 
lords and attorney might be set forth, and conversations, which had 
pass twenty years before, be minutely repeated. 




chapter 5 


catherine was not so much engaged at the theatre that evening, in 
return the nod and smile of miss thorpe, though they certainly 
claim much of her leisure, as to forget to look with an inquiring eye 
for mr. tilney in every box which her eye could reach; but she look in 
vain. mr. tilney was no fond of the play than the pump-room. she hope 
to be more fortunate the next day; and when her wish for fine weather 
were answer by seeing a beautiful morning, she hardly felt a doubt of 
it; for a fine sunday in bath empty every house of its inhabitants, 
and all the world appear on such an occasion to walk about and tell 
their acquaintance what a charming day it is. 

as soon as divine service was over, the thorpe and allen eager 
join each other; and after stay long enough in the pump-room to 
discover that the crowd was insupportable, and that there was not 
a genteel face to be seen, which everybody discover every sunday 
throughout the season, they hasten away to the crescent, to breathe 
the fresh air of better company. here catherine and isabella, arm 
in arm, again taste the sweets of friendship in an unreserved 
conversation; they talk much, and with much enjoyment; but again 
was catherine disappointed in her hope of reseee her partner. he was 
nowhere to be met with; every search for him was equally unsuccessful, 
in morning lounge or evening assemblies; neither at the upper nor lower 
rooms, at dress or undressed balls, was he perceivable; nor among the 
walkers, the horsemen, or the curricle-drivers of the morning. his name 
was not in the pump-room book, and curiosity could do no more. he must 
be gone from bath. yet he had not mention that his stay would be so 
short! this sort of mysteriousness, which is always so becoming in a 
hero, threw a fresh grace in catherine's imagination around his person 
and manners, and increase her anxiety to know more of him. from the 
thorpe she could learn nothing, for they had been only two days in bath 
before they met with mrs. allen. it was a subject, however, in which 
she often indulge with her fair friend, from whom she received every 
possible encouragement to continue to think of him; and his impression 
on her fancy was not suffer therefore to weaken. isabella was very 
sure that he must be a charming young man, and was equally sure that he 
must have been delight with her dear catherine, and would therefore 
shortly return. she like him the better for being a clergyman, “for she 
must confess herself very partial to the profession”; and something like 
a sigh escape her as she said it. perhaps catherine was wrong in not 
demanding the cause of that gentle emotion--but she was not experienced 
enough in the finesse of love, or the duty of friendship, to know when 
delicate raillery was properly call for, or when a confidence should 
be forced. 

mrs. allen was now quite happy--quite satisfy with bath. she had found 
some acquaintance, had been so lucky too as to find in them the family 
of a most worthy old friend; and, as the completion of good fortune, had 
found these friends by no means so expensive dress as herself. her 
daily expression were no longer, “i wish we had some acquaintance in 
bath!” they were change into, “how glad i am we have met with mrs. 
thorpe!” and she was as eager in promote the intercourse of the two 
families, as her young charge and isabella themselves could be; never 
satisfy with the day unless she spent the chief of it by the side of 
mrs. thorpe, in what they call conversation, but in which there was 
scarcely ever any exchange of opinion, and not often any resemblance of 
subject, for mrs. thorpe talk chiefly of her children, and mrs. allen 
of her gowns. 

the progress of the friendship between catherine and isabella was quick 
as its beginning had been warm, and they pass so rapid through every 
gradation of increase tender that there was shortly no fresh proof 
of it to be given to their friends or themselves. they call each other 
by their christian name, were always arm in arm when they walked, pin 
up each other's train for the dance, and were not to be divide in the 
set; and if a rainy morning deprived them of other enjoyments, they 
were still resolute in meeting in defiance of wet and dirt, and shut 
themselves up, to read novel together. yes, novels; for i will not 
adopt that ungenerous and impolitic custom so common with novel-writers, 
of degrade by their contemptuous censure the very performances, to the 
number of which they are themselves adding--joining with their greatest 
enemy in bestow the harshest epithet on such works, and scarcely 
ever permit them to be read by their own heroine, who, if she 
accidental take up a novel, is sure to turn over its insipid page 
with disgust. alas! if the heroine of one novel be not patronize by the 
heroine of another, from whom can she expect protection and regard? i 
cannot approve of it. let us leave it to the reviewer to abuse such 
effusion of fancy at their leisure, and over every new novel to talk in 
threadbare strain of the trash with which the press now groans. let us 
not desert one another; we are an injure body. although our production 
have afford more extensive and unaffected pleasure than those of any 
other literary corporation in the world, no species of composition has 
been so much decried. from pride, ignorance, or fashion, our foe 
are almost as many as our readers. and while the abilities of the 
nine-hundredth abridge of the history of england, or of the man who 
collect and publish in a volume some dozen lines of milton, pope, and 
prior, with a paper from the spectator, and a chapter from sterne, 
are eulogize by a thousand pens--there seem almost a general wish of 
decry the capacity and undervalue the labour of the novelist, and 
of slight the performance which have only genius, wit, and taste to 
recommend them. “i am no novel-reader--i seldom look into novels--do not 
imagine that i often read novels--it is really very well for a novel.” 
such is the common cant. “and what are you reading, miss--?” “oh! it is 
only a novel!” reply the young lady, while she lay down her book 
with affected indifference, or momentary shame. “it is only cecilia, or 
camilla, or belinda”; or, in short, only some work in which the greatest 
powers of the mind are displayed, in which the most thorough knowledge 
of human nature, the happiest delineate of its varieties, the 
liveliest effusion of wit and humour, are convey to the world in the 
best-chosen language. now, had the same young lady been engaged with a 
volume of the spectator, instead of such a work, how proud would she 
have produce the book, and told its name; though the chance must be 
against her being occupy by any part of that voluminous publication, 
of which either the matter or manner would not disgust a young person of 
taste: the substance of its papers so often consist in the statement 
of improbable circumstances, unnatural characters, and topic of 
conversation which no long concern anyone living; and their language, 
too, frequent so coarse as to give no very favourable idea of the age 
that could endure it. 




chapter 6 


the following conversation, which took place between the two friends in 
the pump-room one morning, after an acquaintance of eight or nine 
days, is given as a specimen of their very warm attachment, and of the 
delicacy, discretion, originality of thought, and literary taste which 
marked the reasonable of that attachment. 

they met by appointment; and as isabella had arrive nearly five 
minutes before her friend, her first address naturally was, “my dearest 
creature, what can have made you so late? i have been wait for you at 
least this age!” 

“have you, indeed! i am very sorry for it; but really i thought i was in 
very good time. it is but just one. i hope you have not been here long?” 

“oh! these ten age at least. i am sure i have been here this half hour. 
but now, let us go and sit down at the other end of the room, and enjoy 
ourselves. i have an hundred things to say to you. in the first place, 
i was so afraid it would rain this morning, just as i want to set off; 
it look very showery, and that would have thrown me into agonies! do 
you know, i saw the prettiest hat you can imagine, in a shop window in 
milsom street just now--very like yours, only with coquelicot ribbon 
instead of green; i quite long for it. but, my dearest catherine, what 
have you been do with yourself all this morning? have you gone on 
with udolpho?” 

“yes, i have been reading it ever since i woke; and i am got to the 
black veil.” 

“are you, indeed? how delightful! oh! i would not tell you what is 
behind the black veil for the world! are not you wild to know?” 

“oh! yes, quite; what can it be? but do not tell me--i would not be 
told upon any account. i know it must be a skeleton, i am sure it is 
laurentina's skeleton. oh! i am delight with the book! i should like 
to spend my whole life in reading it. i assure you, if it had not been 
to meet you, i would not have come away from it for all the world.” 

“dear creature! how much i am oblige to you; and when you have finished 
udolpho, we will read the italy together; and i have made out a list 
of ten or twelve more of the same kind for you.” 

“have you, indeed! how glad i am! what are they all?” 

“i will read you their name directly; here they are, in my pocketbook. 
castle of wolfenbach, clermont, mysterious warnings, necromancer of the 
black forest, midnight bell, orphan of the rhine, and horrid mysteries. 
those will last us some time.” 

“yes, pretty well; but are they all horrid, are you sure they are all 
horrid?” 

“yes, quite sure; for a particular friend of mine, a miss andrews, a 
sweet girl, one of the sweetest creature in the world, has read every 
one of them. i wish you knew miss andrews, you would be delight with 
her. she is netting herself the sweetest cloak you can conceive. i think 
her as beautiful as an angel, and i am so vex with the men for not 
admire her! i scold them all amazing about it.” 

“scold them! do you scold them for not admire her?” 

“yes, that i do. there is nothing i would not do for those who are 
really my friends. i have no notion of loving people by halves; it is 
not my nature. my attachment are always excessive strong. i told 
captain hunt at one of our assembly this winter that if he was to 
tease me all night, i would not dance with him, unless he would allow 
miss andrews to be as beautiful as an angel. the men think us incapable 
of real friendship, you know, and i am determined to show them the 
difference. now, if i were to hear anybody speak slighting of you, i 
should fire up in a moment: but that is not at all likely, for you are 
just the kind of girl to be a great favourite with the men.” 

“oh, dear!” cry catherine, colouring. “how can you say so?” 

“i know you very well; you have so much animation, which is exactly 
what miss andrews wants, for i must confess there is something amazing 
insipid about her. oh! i must tell you, that just after we part 
yesterday, i saw a young man look at you so earnestly--i am sure he 
is in love with you.” catherine coloured, and disclaim again. isabella 
laughed. “it is very true, upon my honour, but i see how it is; you are 
indifferent to everybody's admiration, except that of one gentleman, 
who shall be nameless. nay, i cannot blame you”--speaking more 
seriously--“your feelings are easily understood. where the heart is 
really attached, i know very well how little one can be pleased with the 
attention of anybody else. everything is so insipid, so uninteresting, 
that do not relate to the beloved object! i can perfectly comprehend 
your feelings.” 

“but you should not persuade me that i think so very much about mr. 
tilney, for perhaps i may never see him again.” 

“not see him again! my dearest creature, do not talk of it. i am sure 
you would be miserable if you thought so!” 

“no, indeed, i should not. i do not pretend to say that i was not very 
much pleased with him; but while i have udolpho to read, i feel as if 
nobody could make me miserable. oh! the dreadful black veil! my dear 
isabella, i am sure there must be laurentina's skeleton behind it.” 

“it is so odd to me, that you should never have read udolpho before; but 
i suppose mrs. morland object to novels.” 

“no, she do not. she very often read sir charles grandison herself; 
but new books do not fall in our way.” 

“sir charles grandison! that is an amazing horrid book, is it not? i 
remember miss andrews could not get through the first volume.” 

“it is not like udolpho at all; but yet i think it is very 
entertaining.” 

“do you indeed! you surprise me; i thought it had not been readable. 
but, my dearest catherine, have you settled what to wear on your head 
tonight? i am determined at all event to be dress exactly like you. 
the men take notice of that sometimes, you know.” 

“but it do not signify if they do,” said catherine, very innocently. 

“signify! oh, heavens! i make it a rule never to mind what they say. 
they are very often amazing impertinent if you do not treat them with 
spirit, and make them keep their distance.” 

“are they? well, i never observe that. they always behave very well to 
me.” 

“oh! they give themselves such airs. they are the most conceited 
creature in the world, and think themselves of so much importance! 
by the by, though i have thought of it a hundred times, i have always 
forgot to ask you what is your favourite complexion in a man. do you 
like them best dark or fair?” 

“i hardly know. i never much thought about it. something between both, i 
think. brown--not fair, and--and not very dark.” 

“very well, catherine. that is exactly he. i have not forgot your 
description of mr. tilney--'a brown skin, with dark eyes, and rather 
dark hair.' well, my taste is different. i prefer light eyes, and as to 
complexion--do you know--i like a sallow better than any other. you must 
not betray me, if you should ever meet with one of your acquaintance 
answer that description.” 

“betray you! what do you mean?” 

“nay, do not distress me. i believe i have said too much. let us drop 
the subject.” 

catherine, in some amazement, complied, and after remain a few 
moments silent, was on the point of revert to what interested her 
at that time rather more than anything else in the world, laurentina's 
skeleton, when her friend prevent her, by saying, “for heaven's sake! 
let us move away from this end of the room. do you know, there are two 
odious young men who have been staring at me this half hour. they really 
put me quite out of countenance. let us go and look at the arrivals. 
they will hardly follow us there.” 

away they walk to the book; and while isabella examine the names, it 
was catherine's employment to watch the proceedings of these alarm 
young men. 

“they are not coming this way, are they? i hope they are not so 
impertinent as to follow us. pray let me know if they are coming. i am 
determined i will not look up.” 

in a few moments catherine, with unaffected pleasure, assured her 
that she need not be long uneasy, as the gentlemen had just left the 
pump-room. 

“and which way are they gone?” said isabella, turning hasty round. 
“one was a very good-looking young man.” 

“they went towards the church-yard.” 

“well, i am amazing glad i have got rid of them! and now, what say you 
to go to edgar's building with me, and look at my new hat? you 
said you should like to see it.” 

catherine readily agreed. “only,” she added, “perhaps we may overtake 
the two young men.” 

“oh! never mind that. if we make haste, we shall pass by them presently, 
and i am die to show you my hat.” 

“but if we only wait a few minutes, there will be no danger of our 
seeing them at all.” 

“i shall not pay them any such compliment, i assure you. i have no 
notion of treat men with such respect. that is the way to spoil 
them.” 

catherine had nothing to oppose against such reasoning; and therefore, 
to show the independence of miss thorpe, and her resolution of humble 
the sex, they set off immediately as fast as they could walk, in pursuit 
of the two young men. 




chapter 7 


half a minute conduct them through the pump-yard to the archway, 
opposite union passage; but here they were stopped. everybody acquaint 
with bath may remember the difficulty of crossing cheap street at 
this point; it is indeed a street of so impertinent a nature, so 
unfortunately connected with the great london and oxford roads, and the 
principal inn of the city, that a day never pass in which party of 
ladies, however important their business, whether in quest of pastry, 
millinery, or even (as in the present case) of young men, are not 
detain on one side or other by carriages, horsemen, or carts. this 
evil had been felt and lamented, at least three times a day, by isabella 
since her residence in bath; and she was now fated to feel and lament it 
once more, for at the very moment of coming opposite to union passage, 
and within view of the two gentlemen who were proceeding through the 
crowds, and thread the gutter of that interesting alley, they 
were prevent crossing by the approach of a gig, driven along on bad 
pavement by a most knowing-looking coachman with all the vehemence that 
could most fit endanger the lives of himself, his companion, and his 
horse. 

“oh, these odious gigs!” said isabella, look up. “how i detest them.” 
but this detestation, though so just, was of short duration, for she 
look again and exclaimed, “delightful! mr. morland and my brother!” 

“good heaven! 'tis james!” was utter at the same moment by catherine; 
and, on catching the young men's eyes, the horse was immediately checked 
with a violence which almost threw him on his haunches, and the servant 
have now scamper up, the gentlemen jump out, and the equipage was 
deliver to his care. 

catherine, by whom this meeting was wholly unexpected, received her 
brother with the liveliest pleasure; and he, being of a very amiable 
disposition, and sincerely attach to her, gave every proof on his 
side of equal satisfaction, which he could have leisure to do, while the 
bright eyes of miss thorpe were incessant challenging his notice; 
and to her his devoir were speedy paid, with a mixture of joy and 
embarrassment which might have informed catherine, had she been more 
expert in the development of other people's feelings, and less simply 
engross by her own, that her brother thought her friend quite as 
pretty as she could do herself. 

john thorpe, who in the meantime had been give orders about the 
horses, soon join them, and from him she directly received the amends 
which were her due; for while he slightly and careless touched the 
hand of isabella, on her he bestow a whole scrape and half a short 
bow. he was a stout young man of middling height, who, with a plain face 
and ungraceful form, seem fearful of being too handsome unless he wore 
the dress of a groom, and too much like a gentleman unless he were easy 
where he ought to be civil, and impudent where he might be allow to be 
easy. he took out his watch: “how long do you think we have been running 
it from tetbury, miss morland?” 

“i do not know the distance.” her brother told her that it was 
twenty-three miles. 

“three and twenty!” cry thorpe. “five and twenty if it is an inch.” 
morland remonstrated, plead the authority of road-books, innkeepers, 
and milestones; but his friend disregard them all; he had a sure test 
of distance. “i know it must be five and twenty,” said he, “by the time 
we have been do it. it is now half after one; we drove out of the 
inn-yard at tetbury as the town clock struck eleven; and i defy any man 
in england to make my horse go less than ten mile an hour in harness; 
that make it exactly twenty-five.” 

“you have lost an hour,” said morland; “it was only ten o'clock when we 
came from tetbury.” 

“ten o'clock! it was eleven, upon my soul! i count every stroke. this 
brother of yours would persuade me out of my senses, miss morland; do 
but look at my horse; did you ever see an animal so made for speed in 
your life?” (the servant had just mount the carriage and was driving 
off.) “such true blood! three hour and and a half indeed coming only 
three and twenty miles! look at that creature, and suppose it possible 
if you can.” 

“he do look very hot, to be sure.” 

“hot! he had not turn a hair till we came to walcot church; but look 
at his forehand; look at his loins; only see how he moves; that horse 
cannot go less than ten mile an hour: tie his leg and he will get on. 
what do you think of my gig, miss morland? a neat one, is not it? 
well hung; town-built; i have not had it a month. it was built for a 
christchurch man, a friend of mine, a very good sort of fellow; he ran 
it a few weeks, till, i believe, it was convenient to have done with it. 
i happen just then to be look out for some light thing of the kind, 
though i had pretty well determined on a curricle too; but i chance to 
meet him on magdalen bridge, as he was driving into oxford, last term: 
'ah! thorpe,' said he, 'do you happen to want such a little thing as 
this? it is a capital one of the kind, but i am cursed tired of it.' 
'oh! d--,' said i; 'i am your man; what do you ask?' and how much do you 
think he did, miss morland?” 

“i am sure i cannot guess at all.” 

“curricle-hung, you see; seat, trunk, sword-case, splashing-board, 
lamps, silver moulding, all you see complete; the iron-work as good 
as new, or better. he ask fifty guineas; i closed with him directly, 
threw down the money, and the carriage was mine.” 

“and i am sure,” said catherine, “i know so little of such things that i 
cannot judge whether it was cheap or dear.” 

“neither one nor t'other; i might have got it for less, i dare say; but 
i hate haggling, and poor freeman want cash.” 

“that was very good-natured of you,” said catherine, quite pleased. 

“oh! d---- it, when one has the means of do a kind thing by a friend, 
i hate to be pitiful.” 

an inquiry now took place into the intended movements of the young 
ladies; and, on finding whither they were going, it was decided that 
the gentlemen should accompany them to edgar's buildings, and pay their 
respects to mrs. thorpe. james and isabella led the way; and so 
well satisfy was the latter with her lot, so contented was she 
endeavour to ensure a pleasant walk to him who brought the double 
recommendation of being her brother's friend, and her friend's brother, 
so pure and uncoquettish were her feelings, that, though they overtook 
and pass the two offend young men in milsom street, she was so far 
from seek to attract their notice, that she look back at them only 
three times. 

john thorpe kept of course with catherine, and, after a few minutes' 
silence, renew the conversation about his gig. “you will find, 
however, miss morland, it would be reckon a cheap thing by some 
people, for i might have sold it for ten guinea more the next day; 
jackson, of oriel, bid me sixty at once; morland was with me at the 
time.” 

“yes,” said morland, who overheard this; “but you forget that your horse 
was included.” 

“my horse! oh, d---- it! i would not sell my horse for a hundred. are 
you fond of an open carriage, miss morland?” 

“yes, very; i have hardly ever an opportunity of being in one; but i am 
particularly fond of it.” 

“i am glad of it; i will drive you out in mine every day.” 

“thank you,” said catherine, in some distress, from a doubt of the 
propriety of accept such an offer. 

“i will drive you up lansdown hill tomorrow.” 

“thank you; but will not your horse want rest?” 

“rest! he has only come three and twenty mile today; all nonsense; 
nothing ruins horse so much as rest; nothing knock them up so soon. 
no, no; i shall exercise mine at the average of four hour every day 
while i am here.” 

“shall you indeed!” said catherine very seriously. “that will be forty 
mile a day.” 

“forty! aye, fifty, for what i care. well, i will drive you up lansdown 
tomorrow; mind, i am engaged.” 

“how delightful that will be!” cry isabella, turning round. “my 
dearest catherine, i quite envy you; but i am afraid, brother, you will 
not have room for a third.” 

“a third indeed! no, no; i did not come to bath to drive my sister 
about; that would be a good joke, faith! morland must take care of you.” 

this brought on a dialogue of civility between the other two; but 
catherine heard neither the particulars nor the result. her companion's 
discourse now sunk from its hitherto animate pitch to nothing more than 
a short decisive sentence of praise or condemnation on the face of every 
woman they met; and catherine, after listen and agree as long as 
she could, with all the civility and deference of the youthful female 
mind, fearful of hazard an opinion of its own in opposition to that 
of a self-assured man, especially where the beauty of her own sex is 
concerned, venture at length to vary the subject by a question which 
had been long uppermost in her thoughts; it was, “have you ever read 
udolpho, mr. thorpe?” 

“udolpho! oh, lord! not i; i never read novels; i have something else to 
do.” 

catherine, humble and ashamed, was go to apologize for her question, 
but he prevent her by saying, “novels are all so full of nonsense 
and stuff; there has not been a tolerably decent one come out since 
tom jones, except the monk; i read that t'other day; but as for all the 
others, they are the stupidest things in creation.” 

“i think you must like udolpho, if you were to read it; it is so very 
interesting.” 

“not i, faith! no, if i read any, it shall be mrs. radcliffe's; her 
novel are amuse enough; they are worth reading; some fun and nature 
in them.” 

“udolpho was written by mrs. radcliffe,” said catherine, with some 
hesitation, from the fear of mortify him. 

“no sure; was it? aye, i remember, so it was; i was thinking of that 
other stupid book, written by that woman they make such a fuss about, 
she who married the france emigrant.” 

“i suppose you mean camilla?” 

“yes, that's the book; such unnatural stuff! an old man play at 
see-saw, i took up the first volume once and look it over, but i soon 
found it would not do; indeed i guess what sort of stuff it must be 
before i saw it: as soon as i heard she had married an emigrant, i was 
sure i should never be able to get through it.” 

“i have never read it.” 

“you had no loss, i assure you; it is the horridest nonsense you can 
imagine; there is nothing in the world in it but an old man's play at 
see-saw and learning latin; upon my soul there is not.” 

this critique, the just of which was unfortunately lost on poor 
catherine, brought them to the door of mrs. thorpe's lodgings, and the 
feelings of the discerning and unprejudiced reader of camilla gave way 
to the feelings of the dutiful and affectionate son, as they met mrs. 
thorpe, who had descry them from above, in the passage. “ah, mother! 
how do you do?” said he, give her a hearty shake of the hand. “where 
did you get that quiz of a hat? it make you look like an old witch. 
here is morland and i come to stay a few days with you, so you must look 
out for a couple of good bed somewhere near.” and this address seem 
to satisfy all the fondest wish of the mother's heart, for she 
received him with the most delight and exult affection. on his 
two younger sister he then bestow an equal portion of his fraternal 
tenderness, for he ask each of them how they did, and observe that 
they both look very ugly. 

these manners did not please catherine; but he was james's friend 
and isabella's brother; and her judgment was further bought off by 
isabella's assure her, when they withdrew to see the new hat, that 
john thought her the most charming girl in the world, and by john's 
engaging her before they part to dance with him that evening. had she 
been old or vainer, such attack might have done little; but, where 
youth and diffidence are united, it require uncommon steady of 
reason to resist the attraction of being call the most charming girl 
in the world, and of being so very early engaged as a partner; and the 
consequence was that, when the two morlands, after sitting an hour with 
the thorpes, set off to walk together to mr. allen's, and james, as 
the door was closed on them, said, “well, catherine, how do you like my 
friend thorpe?” instead of answering, as she probably would have done, 
had there been no friendship and no flattery in the case, “i do not like 
him at all,” she directly replied, “i like him very much; he seem very 
agreeable.” 

“he is as good-natured a fellow as ever lived; a little of a rattle; but 
that will recommend him to your sex, i believe: and how do you like the 
rest of the family?” 

“very, very much indeed: isabella particularly.” 

“i am very glad to hear you say so; she is just the kind of young woman 
i could wish to see you attach to; she has so much good sense, and is 
so thorough unaffected and amiable; i always want you to know her; 
and she seem very fond of you. she said the highest things in your 
praise that could possibly be; and the praise of such a girl as miss 
thorpe even you, catherine,” taking her hand with affection, “may be 
proud of.” 

“indeed i am,” she replied; “i love her exceedingly, and am delight 
to find that you like her too. you hardly mention anything of her when 
you wrote to me after your visit there.” 

“because i thought i should soon see you myself. i hope you will be a 
great deal together while you are in bath. she is a most amiable girl; 
such a superior understanding! how fond all the family are of her; she 
is evidently the general favourite; and how much she must be admire in 
such a place as this--is not she?” 

“yes, very much indeed, i fancy; mr. allen think her the prettiest girl 
in bath.” 

“i dare say he does; and i do not know any man who is a better judge of 
beauty than mr. allen. i need not ask you whether you are happy here, my 
dear catherine; with such a companion and friend as isabella thorpe, it 
would be impossible for you to be otherwise; and the allens, i am sure, 
are very kind to you?” 

“yes, very kind; i never was so happy before; and now you are come it 
will be more delightful than ever; how good it is of you to come so far 
on purpose to see me.” 

james accept this tribute of gratitude, and qualified his conscience 
for accept it too, by saying with perfect sincerity, “indeed, 
catherine, i love you dearly.” 

inquiry and communications concerning brother and sisters, the 
situation of some, the growth of the rest, and other family matter now 
pass between them, and continued, with only one small digression 
on james's part, in praise of miss thorpe, till they reach pulteney 
street, where he was welcome with great kindness by mr. and mrs. allen, 
invite by the former to dine with them, and summon by the latter 
to guess the price and weigh the merit of a new muff and tippet. 
a pre-engagement in edgar's building prevent his accept the 
invitation of one friend, and oblige him to hurry away as soon as he 
had satisfy the demand of the other. the time of the two party 
unite in the octagon room being correct adjusted, catherine was then 
left to the luxury of a raised, restless, and frightened imagination 
over the page of udolpho, lost from all worldly concern of dressing 
and dinner, incapable of soothe mrs. allen's fear on the delay of an 
expect dressmaker, and have only one minute in sixty to bestow even 
on the reflection of her own felicity, in being already engaged for the 
evening. 




chapter 8 


in spite of udolpho and the dressmaker, however, the party from pulteney 
street reach the upper rooms in very good time. the thorpe and james 
morland were there only two minutes before them; and isabella have 
gone through the usual ceremonial of meeting her friend with the most 
smile and affectionate haste, of admire the set of her gown, and 
envy the curl of her hair, they follow their chaperones, arm in 
arm, into the ballroom, whisper to each other whenever a thought 
occurred, and supply the place of many idea by a squeeze of the hand 
or a smile of affection. 

the dance began within a few minutes after they were seated; and 
james, who had been engaged quite as long as his sister, was very 
importunate with isabella to stand up; but john was gone into the 
card-room to speak to a friend, and nothing, she declared, should induce 
her to join the set before her dear catherine could join it too. “i 
assure you,” said she, “i would not stand up without your dear sister 
for all the world; for if i did we should certainly be separate the 
whole evening.” catherine accept this kindness with gratitude, and 
they continue as they were for three minutes longer, when isabella, who 
had been talk to james on the other side of her, turn again to his 
sister and whispered, “my dear creature, i am afraid i must leave you, 
your brother is so amazing impatient to begin; i know you will not 
mind my go away, and i dare say john will be back in a moment, 
and then you may easily find me out.” catherine, though a little 
disappointed, had too much good nature to make any opposition, and the 
other rising up, isabella had only time to press her friend's hand and 
say, “good-bye, my dear love,” before they hurried off. the younger 
miss thorpe being also dancing, catherine was left to the mercy of mrs. 
thorpe and mrs. allen, between whom she now remained. she could not help 
being vex at the non-appearance of mr. thorpe, for she not only long 
to be dancing, but was likewise aware that, as the real dignity of her 
situation could not be known, she was share with the score of other 
young ladies still sitting down all the discredit of wanting a partner. 
to be disgrace in the eye of the world, to wear the appearance of 
infamy while her heart is all purity, her action all innocence, and the 
misconduct of another the true source of her debasement, is one of those 
circumstances which peculiarly belong to the heroine's life, and her 
fortitude under it what particularly dignify her character. catherine 
had fortitude too; she suffered, but no murmur pass her lips. 

from this state of humiliation, she was roused, at the end of ten 
minutes, to a pleasant feeling, by seeing, not mr. thorpe, but mr. 
tilney, within three yard of the place where they sat; he seem to be 
moving that way, but he did not see her, and therefore the smile and the 
blush, which his sudden reappear raise in catherine, pass away 
without sully her heroic importance. he look as handsome and as 
lively as ever, and was talk with interest to a fashionable and 
pleasing-looking young woman, who leant on his arm, and whom catherine 
immediately guess to be his sister; thus unthinking throw away 
a fair opportunity of considering him lost to her forever, by being 
married already. but guide only by what was simple and probable, it 
had never enter her head that mr. tilney could be married; he had not 
behaved, he had not talked, like the married men to whom she had been 
used; he had never mention a wife, and he had acknowledge a sister. 
from these circumstances sprang the instant conclusion of his sister's 
now being by his side; and therefore, instead of turning of a deathlike 
pale and fall in a fit on mrs. allen's bosom, catherine sat 
erect, in the perfect use of her senses, and with cheek only a little 
red than usual. 

mr. tilney and his companion, who continued, though slowly, to approach, 
were immediately precede by a lady, an acquaintance of mrs. thorpe; and 
this lady stopping to speak to her, they, as belong to her, stop 
likewise, and catherine, catching mr. tilney's eye, instantly received 
from him the smile tribute of recognition. she return it with 
pleasure, and then advance still nearer, he spoke both to her and mrs. 
allen, by whom he was very civilly acknowledged. “i am very happy to see 
you again, sir, indeed; i was afraid you had left bath.” he thank her 
for her fears, and said that he had quit it for a week, on the very 
morning after his have had the pleasure of seeing her. 

“well, sir, and i dare say you are not sorry to be back again, for it 
is just the place for young people--and indeed for everybody else too. 
i tell mr. allen, when he talks of being sick of it, that i am sure he 
should not complain, for it is so very agreeable a place, that it is 
much better to be here than at home at this dull time of year. i tell 
him he is quite in luck to be sent here for his health.” 

“and i hope, madam, that mr. allen will be oblige to like the place, 
from finding it of service to him.” 

“thank you, sir. i have no doubt that he will. a neighbour of ours, 
dr. skinner, was here for his health last winter, and came away quite 
stout.” 

“that circumstance must give great encouragement.” 

“yes, sir--and dr. skin and his family were here three months; so i 
tell mr. allen he must not be in a hurry to get away.” 

here they were interrupt by a request from mrs. thorpe to mrs. allen, 
that she would move a little to accommodate mrs. hughes and miss tilney 
with seats, as they had agree to join their party. this was accordingly 
done, mr. tilney still continue standing before them; and after a 
few minutes' consideration, he ask catherine to dance with him. this 
compliment, delightful as it was, produce severe mortification to the 
lady; and in give her denial, she express her sorrow on the occasion 
so very much as if she really felt it that had thorpe, who join her 
just afterwards, been half a minute earlier, he might have thought her 
suffering rather too acute. the very easy manner in which he then told 
her that he had kept her wait did not by any means reconcile her more 
to her lot; nor did the particulars which he enter into while they 
were standing up, of the horse and dogs of the friend whom he had just 
left, and of a propose exchange of terrier between them, interest her 
so much as to prevent her look very often towards that part of the 
room where she had left mr. tilney. of her dear isabella, to whom she 
particularly long to point out that gentleman, she could see nothing. 
they were in different sets. she was separate from all her party, and 
away from all her acquaintance; one mortification succeed another, 
and from the whole she deduce this useful lesson, that to go previous 
engaged to a ball do not necessarily increase either the dignity or 
enjoyment of a young lady. from such a moralize strain as this, she 
was sudden rouse by a touch on the shoulder, and turning round, 
perceive mrs. hughes directly behind her, attend by miss tilney and 
a gentleman. “i beg your pardon, miss morland,” said she, “for this 
liberty--but i cannot anyhow get to miss thorpe, and mrs. thorpe said 
she was sure you would not have the least objection to letting in this 
young lady by you.” mrs. hughes could not have applied to any creature 
in the room more happy to oblige her than catherine. the young ladies 
were introduce to each other, miss tilney express a proper sense of 
such goodness, miss morland with the real delicacy of a generous mind 
making light of the obligation; and mrs. hughes, satisfy with have 
so respectable settled her young charge, return to her party. 

miss tilney had a good figure, a pretty face, and a very agreeable 
countenance; and her air, though it had not all the decided pretension, 
the resolute stylish of miss thorpe's, had more real elegance. her 
manners show good sense and good breeding; they were neither shy nor 
affected open; and she seem capable of being young, attractive, and 
at a ball without wanting to fix the attention of every man near her, 
and without exaggerate feelings of ecstatic delight or inconceivable 
vexation on every little trifling occurrence. catherine, interested at 
once by her appearance and her relationship to mr. tilney, was desirous 
of being acquaint with her, and readily talk therefore whenever she 
could think of anything to say, and had courage and leisure for saying 
it. but the hindrance thrown in the way of a very speedy intimacy, by 
the frequent want of one or more of these requisites, prevent their 
do more than go through the first rudiments of an acquaintance, by 
inform themselves how well the other like bath, how much she admire 
its building and surrounding country, whether she drew, or played, or 
sang, and whether she was fond of riding on horseback. 

the two dance were scarcely conclude before catherine found her arm 
gently seize by her faithful isabella, who in great spirits exclaimed, 
“at last i have got you. my dearest creature, i have been look for 
you this hour. what could induce you to come into this set, when you 
knew i was in the other? i have been quite wretched without you.” 

“my dear isabella, how was it possible for me to get at you? i could not 
even see where you were.” 

“so i told your brother all the time--but he would not believe me. do go 
and see for her, mr. morland, said i--but all in vain--he would not stir 
an inch. was not it so, mr. morland? but you men are all so immoderate 
lazy! i have been scold him to such a degree, my dear catherine, you 
would be quite amazed. you know i never stand upon ceremony with such 
people.” 

“look at that young lady with the white bead round her head,” whisper 
catherine, detach her friend from james. “it is mr. tilney's sister.” 

“oh! heavens! you don't say so! let me look at her this moment. what a 
delightful girl! i never saw anything half so beautiful! but where is 
her all-conquering brother? is he in the room? point him out to me this 
instant, if he is. i die to see him. mr. morland, you are not to listen. 
we are not talk about you.” 

“but what is all this whisper about? what is go on?” 

“there now, i knew how it would be. you men have such restless 
curiosity! talk of the curiosity of women, indeed! 'tis nothing. but be 
satisfied, for you are not to know anything at all of the matter.” 

“and is that likely to satisfy me, do you think?” 

“well, i declare i never knew anything like you. what can it signify to 
you, what we are talk of. perhaps we are talk about you; therefore 
i would advise you not to listen, or you may happen to hear something 
not very agreeable.” 

in this commonplace chatter, which last some time, the original 
subject seem entire forgotten; and though catherine was very well 
pleased to have it drop for a while, she could not avoid a little 
suspicion at the total suspension of all isabella's impatient desire to 
see mr. tilney. when the orchestra struck up a fresh dance, james would 
have led his fair partner away, but she resisted. “i tell you, mr. 
morland,” she cried, “i would not do such a thing for all the world. 
how can you be so teasing; only conceive, my dear catherine, what your 
brother wants me to do. he wants me to dance with him again, though 
i tell him that it is a most improper thing, and entire against the 
rules. it would make us the talk of the place, if we were not to change 
partners.” 

“upon my honour,” said james, “in these public assemblies, it is as 
often done as not.” 

“nonsense, how can you say so? but when you men have a point to carry, 
you never stick at anything. my sweet catherine, do support me; persuade 
your brother how impossible it is. tell him that it would quite shock 
you to see me do such a thing; now would not it?” 

“no, not at all; but if you think it wrong, you had much better change.” 

“there,” cry isabella, “you hear what your sister says, and yet you 
will not mind her. well, remember that it is not my fault, if we set all 
the old ladies in bath in a bustle. come along, my dearest catherine, 
for heaven's sake, and stand by me.” and off they went, to regain 
their former place. john thorpe, in the meanwhile, had walk away; and 
catherine, ever willing to give mr. tilney an opportunity of repeating 
the agreeable request which had already flatter her once, made her 
way to mrs. allen and mrs. thorpe as fast as she could, in the hope 
of finding him still with them--a hope which, when it prove to be 
fruitless, she felt to have been highly unreasonable. “well, my dear,” 
said mrs. thorpe, impatient for praise of her son, “i hope you have had 
an agreeable partner.” 

“very agreeable, madam.” 

“i am glad of it. john has charming spirits, has not he?” 

“did you meet mr. tilney, my dear?” said mrs. allen. 

“no, where is he?” 

“he was with us just now, and said he was so tired of lounge about, 
that he was resolve to go and dance; so i thought perhaps he would ask 
you, if he met with you.” 

“where can he be?” said catherine, look round; but she had not look 
round long before she saw him leading a young lady to the dance. 

“ah! he has got a partner; i wish he had ask you,” said mrs. allen; 
and after a short silence, she added, “he is a very agreeable young 
man.” 

“indeed he is, mrs. allen,” said mrs. thorpe, smile complacently; “i 
must say it, though i am his mother, that there is not a more agreeable 
young man in the world.” 

this inapplicable answer might have been too much for the comprehension 
of many; but it did not puzzle mrs. allen, for after only a moment's 
consideration, she said, in a whisper to catherine, “i dare say she 
thought i was speak of her son.” 

catherine was disappointed and vexed. she seem to have miss by so 
little the very object she had had in view; and this persuasion did not 
incline her to a very gracious reply, when john thorpe came up to her 
soon afterwards and said, “well, miss morland, i suppose you and i are 
to stand up and jig it together again.” 

“oh, no; i am much oblige to you, our two dance are over; and, 
besides, i am tired, and do not mean to dance any more.” 

“do not you? then let us walk about and quiz people. come along with 
me, and i will show you the four greatest quiz in the room; my two 
younger sister and their partners. i have been laugh at them this 
half hour.” 

again catherine excuse herself; and at last he walk off to quiz his 
sister by himself. the rest of the evening she found very dull; mr. 
tilney was drawn away from their party at tea, to attend that of his 
partner; miss tilney, though belong to it, did not sit near her, and 
james and isabella were so much engaged in converse together that the 
latter had no leisure to bestow more on her friend than one smile, one 
squeeze, and one “dearest catherine.” 




chapter 9 


the progress of catherine's unhappy from the event of the evening 
was as follows. it appear first in a general dissatisfaction with 
everybody about her, while she remain in the rooms, which speedy 
brought on considerable weary and a violent desire to go home. this, 
on arrive in pulteney street, took the direction of extraordinary 
hunger, and when that was appeased, change into an earnest longing to 
be in bed; such was the extreme point of her distress; for when there 
she immediately fell into a sound sleep which last nine hours, and 
from which she awoke perfectly revived, in excellent spirits, with fresh 
hope and fresh schemes. the first wish of her heart was to improve her 
acquaintance with miss tilney, and almost her first resolution, to seek 
her for that purpose, in the pump-room at noon. in the pump-room, one 
so newly arrive in bath must be met with, and that building she had 
already found so favourable for the discovery of female excellence, 
and the completion of female intimacy, so admirable adapt for secret 
discourse and unlimited confidence, that she was most reasonably 
encourage to expect another friend from within its walls. her plan 
for the morning thus settled, she sat quiet down to her book after 
breakfast, resolve to remain in the same place and the same employment 
till the clock struck one; and from habitude very little incommode by 
the remark and ejaculation of mrs. allen, whose vacancy of mind and 
incapacity for thinking were such, that as she never talk a great 
deal, so she could never be entire silent; and, therefore, while she 
sat at her work, if she lost her needle or broke her thread, if she 
heard a carriage in the street, or saw a speck upon her gown, she must 
observe it aloud, whether there were anyone at leisure to answer her or 
not. at about half past twelve, a remarkably loud rap drew her in haste 
to the window, and scarcely had she time to inform catherine of there 
being two open carriage at the door, in the first only a servant, 
her brother driving miss thorpe in the second, before john thorpe came 
running upstairs, calling out, “well, miss morland, here i am. have 
you been wait long? we could not come before; the old devil of a 
coachmaker was such an eternity finding out a thing fit to be got into, 
and now it is ten thousand to one but they break down before we are out 
of the street. how do you do, mrs. allen? a famous ball last night, was 
not it? come, miss morland, be quick, for the other are in a confounded 
hurry to be off. they want to get their tumble over.” 

“what do you mean?” said catherine. “where are you all go to?” 

“going to? why, you have not forgot our engagement! did not we agree 
together to take a drive this morning? what a head you have! we are 
go up claverton down.” 

“something was said about it, i remember,” said catherine, look at 
mrs. allen for her opinion; “but really i did not expect you.” 

“not expect me! that's a good one! and what a dust you would have made, 
if i had not come.” 

catherine's silent appeal to her friend, meanwhile, was entire thrown 
away, for mrs. allen, not being at all in the habit of convey any 
expression herself by a look, was not aware of its being ever intended 
by anybody else; and catherine, whose desire of seeing miss tilney again 
could at that moment bear a short delay in favour of a drive, and who 
thought there could be no impropriety in her go with mr. thorpe, as 
isabella was go at the same time with james, was therefore oblige to 
speak plainer. “well, ma'am, what do you say to it? can you spare me for 
an hour or two? shall i go?” 

“do just as you please, my dear,” reply mrs. allen, with the most 
placid indifference. catherine took the advice, and ran off to get 
ready. in a very few minutes she reappeared, have scarcely allow 
the two other time enough to get through a few short sentence in her 
praise, after thorpe had procure mrs. allen's admiration of his gig; 
and then receiving her friend's parting good wishes, they both hurried 
downstairs. “my dearest creature,” cry isabella, to whom the duty 
of friendship immediately call her before she could get into the 
carriage, “you have been at least three hour get ready. i was 
afraid you were ill. what a delightful ball we had last night. i have a 
thousand things to say to you; but make haste and get in, for i long to 
be off.” 

catherine follow her orders and turn away, but not too soon to hear 
her friend exclaim aloud to james, “what a sweet girl she is! i quite 
dote on her.” 

“you will not be frightened, miss morland,” said thorpe, as he hand 
her in, “if my horse should dance about a little at first setting off. 
he will, most likely, give a plunge or two, and perhaps take the rest 
for a minute; but he will soon know his master. he is full of spirits, 
playful as can be, but there is no vice in him.” 

catherine did not think the portrait a very inviting one, but it was too 
late to retreat, and she was too young to own herself frightened; so, 
resign herself to her fate, and trust to the animal's boast 
knowledge of its owner, she sat peaceable down, and saw thorpe sit down 
by her. everything being then arranged, the servant who stood at the 
horse's head was bid in an important voice “to let him go,” and off they 
went in the quietest manner imaginable, without a plunge or a caper, or 
anything like one. catherine, delight at so happy an escape, spoke 
her pleasure aloud with grateful surprise; and her companion immediately 
made the matter perfectly simple by assure her that it was entire 
owe to the peculiarly judicious manner in which he had then held the 
reins, and the singular discernment and dexterity with which he had 
direct his whip. catherine, though she could not help wonder that 
with such perfect command of his horse, he should think it necessary to 
alarm her with a relation of its tricks, congratulate herself sincerely 
on being under the care of so excellent a coachman; and perceive that 
the animal continue to go on in the same quiet manner, without 
showing the smallest propensity towards any unpleasant vivacity, and 
(considering its inevitable pace was ten mile an hour) by no means 
alarming fast, gave herself up to all the enjoyment of air and 
exercise of the most invigorate kind, in a fine mild day of february, 
with the consciousness of safety. a silence of several minutes succeed 
their first short dialogue; it was broken by thorpe's saying very 
abruptly, “old allen is as rich as a jew--is not he?” catherine did not 
understand him--and he repeated his question, add in explanation, 
“old allen, the man you are with.” 

“oh! mr. allen, you mean. yes, i believe, he is very rich.” 

“and no children at all?” 

“no--not any.” 

“a famous thing for his next heirs. he is your godfather, is not he?” 

“my godfather! no.” 

“but you are always very much with them.” 

“yes, very much.” 

“aye, that is what i meant. he seem a good kind of old fellow enough, 
and has live very well in his time, i dare say; he is not gouty for 
nothing. do he drink his bottle a day now?” 

“his bottle a day! no. why should you think of such a thing? he is a 
very temperate man, and you could not fancy him in liquor last night?” 

“lord help you! you women are always thinking of men's being in liquor. 
why, you do not suppose a man is overset by a bottle? i am sure of 
this--that if everybody was to drink their bottle a day, there would not 
be half the disorder in the world there are now. it would be a famous 
good thing for us all.” 

“i cannot believe it.” 

“oh! lord, it would be the saving of thousands. there is not the 
hundredth part of the wine consume in this kingdom that there ought to 
be. our foggy climate wants help.” 

“and yet i have heard that there is a great deal of wine drunk in 
oxford.” 

“oxford! there is no drink at oxford now, i assure you. nobody drink 
there. you would hardly meet with a man who go beyond his four pint 
at the utmost. now, for instance, it was reckon a remarkable thing, at 
the last party in my rooms, that upon an average we clear about five 
pint a head. it was look upon as something out of the common way. 
mine is famous good stuff, to be sure. you would not often meet with 
anything like it in oxford--and that may account for it. but this will 
just give you a notion of the general rate of drink there.” 

“yes, it do give a notion,” said catherine warmly, “and that is, that 
you all drink a great deal more wine than i thought you did. however, i 
am sure james do not drink so much.” 

this declaration brought on a loud and overpowering reply, of which 
no part was very distinct, except the frequent exclamations, amount 
almost to oaths, which adorn it, and catherine was left, when it 
ended, with rather a strengthen belief of there being a great deal 
of wine drunk in oxford, and the same happy conviction of her brother's 
comparative sobriety. 

thorpe's idea then all revert to the merit of his own equipage, and 
she was call on to admire the spirit and freedom with which his horse 
move along, and the ease which his paces, as well as the excellence of 
the springs, gave the motion of the carriage. she follow him in all 
his admiration as well as she could. to go before or beyond him was 
impossible. his knowledge and her ignorance of the subject, his rapid 
of expression, and her diffidence of herself put that out of her power; 
she could strike out nothing new in commendation, but she readily echo 
whatever he chose to assert, and it was finally settled between them 
without any difficulty that his equipage was altogether the most 
complete of its kind in england, his carriage the neatest, his horse the 
best goer, and himself the best coachman. “you do not really think, 
mr. thorpe,” said catherine, venture after some time to consider the 
matter as entire decided, and to offer some little variation on the 
subject, “that james's gig will break down?” 

“break down! oh! lord! did you ever see such a little tittuppy thing in 
your life? there is not a sound piece of iron about it. the wheels have 
been fairly worn out these ten years at least--and as for the body! upon 
my soul, you might shake it to pieces yourself with a touch. it is the 
most devilish little rickety business i ever beheld! thank god! we 
have got a better. i would not be bound to go two mile in it for fifty 
thousand pounds.” 

“good heavens!” cry catherine, quite frightened. “then pray let us 
turn back; they will certainly meet with an accident if we go on. do let 
us turn back, mr. thorpe; stop and speak to my brother, and tell him how 
very unsafe it is.” 

“unsafe! oh, lord! what is there in that? they will only get a roll if 
it do break down; and there is plenty of dirt; it will be excellent 
falling. oh, curse it! the carriage is safe enough, if a man know how 
to drive it; a thing of that sort in good hand will last above twenty 
years after it is fairly worn out. lord bless you! i would undertake for 
five pound to drive it to york and back again, without lose a nail.” 

catherine listen with astonishment; she knew not how to reconcile two 
such very different account of the same thing; for she had not been 
brought up to understand the propensity of a rattle, nor to know to 
how many idle assertion and impudent falsehood the excess of vanity 
will lead. her own family were plain, matter-of-fact people who seldom 
aim at wit of any kind; her father, at the utmost, being contented 
with a pun, and her mother with a proverb; they were not in the habit 
therefore of telling lie to increase their importance, or of assert 
at one moment what they would contradict the next. she reflect on the 
affair for some time in much perplexity, and was more than once on the 
point of request from mr. thorpe a clear insight into his real 
opinion on the subject; but she checked herself, because it appear to 
her that he did not excel in give those clear insights, in making 
those things plain which he had before made ambiguous; and, join to 
this, the consideration that he would not really suffer his sister and 
his friend to be expose to a danger from which he might easily preserve 
them, she conclude at last that he must know the carriage to be in fact 
perfectly safe, and therefore would alarm herself no longer. by him 
the whole matter seem entire forgotten; and all the rest of his 
conversation, or rather talk, began and end with himself and his own 
concerns. he told her of horse which he had bought for a trifle and 
sold for incredible sums; of racing matches, in which his judgment had 
infallibly foretold the winner; of shoot parties, in which he had 
kill more bird (though without have one good shot) than all his 
companion together; and describe to her some famous day's sport, with 
the fox-hounds, in which his foresight and skill in direct the dogs 
had repair the mistake of the most experienced huntsman, and in which 
the bold of his riding, though it had never endanger his own life 
for a moment, had been constant leading other into difficulties, 
which he calm conclude had broken the neck of many. 

little as catherine was in the habit of judge for herself, and unfixed 
as were her general notions of what men ought to be, she could not 
entire repress a doubt, while she bore with the effusion of his 
endless conceit, of his being altogether completely agreeable. it was a 
bold surmise, for he was isabella's brother; and she had been assured by 
james that his manners would recommend him to all her sex; but in spite 
of this, the extreme weary of his company, which crept over her 
before they had been out an hour, and which continue unceasing to 
increase till they stop in pulteney street again, induce her, in 
some small degree, to resist such high authority, and to distrust his 
powers of give universal pleasure. 

when they arrive at mrs. allen's door, the astonishment of isabella was 
hardly to be expressed, on finding that it was too late in the day for 
them to attend her friend into the house: “past three o'clock!” it was 
inconceivable, incredible, impossible! and she would neither believe her 
own watch, nor her brother's, nor the servant's; she would believe no 
assurance of it found on reason or reality, till morland produce his 
watch, and ascertain the fact; to have doubt a moment long then 
would have been equally inconceivable, incredible, and impossible; and 
she could only protest, over and over again, that no two hour and a 
half had ever gone off so swift before, as catherine was call on to 
confirm; catherine could not tell a falsehood even to please isabella; 
but the latter was spare the misery of her friend's dissenting voice, 
by not wait for her answer. her own feelings entire engross 
her; her wretched was most acute on finding herself oblige to go 
directly home. it was age since she had had a moment's conversation 
with her dearest catherine; and, though she had such thousand of things 
to say to her, it appear as if they were never to be together again; 
so, with smile of most exquisite misery, and the laugh eye of utter 
despondency, she bade her friend adieu and went on. 

catherine found mrs. allen just return from all the busy idle of 
the morning, and was immediately greet with, “well, my dear, here 
you are,” a truth which she had no greater inclination than power to 
dispute; “and i hope you have had a pleasant airing?” 

“yes, ma'am, i thank you; we could not have had a nice day.” 

“so mrs. thorpe said; she was vastly pleased at your all going.” 

“you have seen mrs. thorpe, then?” 

“yes, i went to the pump-room as soon as you were gone, and there i met 
her, and we had a great deal of talk together. she say there was hardly 
any veal to be got at market this morning, it is so uncommonly scarce.” 

“did you see anybody else of our acquaintance?” 

“yes; we agree to take a turn in the crescent, and there we met mrs. 
hughes, and mr. and miss tilney walking with her.” 

“did you indeed? and did they speak to you?” 

“yes, we walk along the crescent together for half an hour. they seem 
very agreeable people. miss tilney was in a very pretty spotted 
muslin, and i fancy, by what i can learn, that she always dress very 
handsomely. mrs. hughes talk to me a great deal about the family.” 

“and what did she tell you of them?” 

“oh! a vast deal indeed; she hardly talk of anything else.” 

“did she tell you what part of gloucestershire they come from?” 

“yes, she did; but i cannot recollect now. but they are very good kind 
of people, and very rich. mrs. tilney was a miss drummond, and she 
and mrs. hughes were schoolfellows; and miss drummond had a very large 
fortune; and, when she married, her father gave her twenty thousand 
pounds, and five hundred to buy wedding-clothes. mrs. hughes saw all the 
clothes after they came from the warehouse.” 

“and are mr. and mrs. tilney in bath?” 

“yes, i fancy they are, but i am not quite certain. upon recollection, 
however, i have a notion they are both dead; at least the mother is; 
yes, i am sure mrs. tilney is dead, because mrs. hughes told me there 
was a very beautiful set of pearl that mr. drummond gave his daughter 
on her wedding-day and that miss tilney has got now, for they were put 
by for her when her mother died.” 

“and is mr. tilney, my partner, the only son?” 

“i cannot be quite positive about that, my dear; i have some idea he is; 
but, however, he is a very fine young man, mrs. hughes says, and likely 
to do very well.” 

catherine inquire no further; she had heard enough to feel that 
mrs. allen had no real intelligence to give, and that she was most 
particularly unfortunate herself in have miss such a meeting with 
both brother and sister. could she have foreseen such a circumstance, 
nothing should have persuade her to go out with the others; and, as 
it was, she could only lament her ill luck, and think over what she had 
lost, till it was clear to her that the drive had by no means been very 
pleasant and that john thorpe himself was quite disagreeable. 




chapter 10 


the allens, thorpes, and morland all met in the evening at the 
theatre; and, as catherine and isabella sat together, there was then an 
opportunity for the latter to utter some few of the many thousand 
things which had been collect within her for communication in the 
immeasurable length of time which had divide them. “oh, heavens! 
my beloved catherine, have i got you at last?” was her address on 
catherine's enter the box and sitting by her. “now, mr. morland,” for 
he was close to her on the other side, “i shall not speak another word 
to you all the rest of the evening; so i charge you not to expect it. my 
sweetest catherine, how have you been this long age? but i need not ask 
you, for you look delightfully. you really have done your hair in a 
more heavenly style than ever; you mischievous creature, do you want to 
attract everybody? i assure you, my brother is quite in love with you 
already; and as for mr. tilney--but that is a settled thing--even your 
modesty cannot doubt his attachment now; his coming back to bath make 
it too plain. oh! what would not i give to see him! i really am quite 
wild with impatience. my mother say he is the most delightful young man 
in the world; she saw him this morning, you know; you must introduce him 
to me. is he in the house now? look about, for heaven's sake! i assure 
you, i can hardly exist till i see him.” 

“no,” said catherine, “he is not here; i cannot see him anywhere.” 

“oh, horrid! am i never to be acquaint with him? how do you like my 
gown? i think it do not look amiss; the sleeve were entire my own 
thought. do you know, i get so immoderate sick of bath; your brother 
and i were agree this morning that, though it is vastly well to be 
here for a few weeks, we would not live here for millions. we soon found 
out that our taste were exactly alike in prefer the country to 
every other place; really, our opinion were so exactly the same, it was 
quite ridiculous! there was not a single point in which we differed; i 
would not have had you by for the world; you are such a sly thing, i am 
sure you would have made some droll remark or other about it.” 

“no, indeed i should not.” 

“oh, yes you would indeed; i know you better than you know yourself. you 
would have told us that we seem born for each other, or some nonsense 
of that kind, which would have distress me beyond conception; my 
cheek would have been as red as your roses; i would not have had you by 
for the world.” 

“indeed you do me injustice; i would not have made so improper a remark 
upon any account; and besides, i am sure it would never have enter my 
head.” 

isabella smile incredulous and talk the rest of the evening to 
james. 

catherine's resolution of endeavour to meet miss tilney again 
continue in full force the next morning; and till the usual moment of 
go to the pump-room, she felt some alarm from the dread of a second 
prevention. but nothing of that kind occurred, no visitor appear to 
delay them, and they all three set off in good time for the pump-room, 
where the ordinary course of event and conversation took place; mr. 
allen, after drink his glass of water, join some gentlemen to 
talk over the politics of the day and compare the account of their 
newspapers; and the ladies walk about together, notice every new 
face, and almost every new bonnet in the room. the female part of the 
thorpe family, attend by james morland, appear among the crowd in 
less than a quarter of an hour, and catherine immediately took her 
usual place by the side of her friend. james, who was now in constant 
attendance, maintain a similar position, and separate themselves 
from the rest of their party, they walk in that manner for some 
time, till catherine began to doubt the happiness of a situation which, 
confine her entire to her friend and brother, gave her very 
little share in the notice of either. they were always engaged in 
some sentimental discussion or lively dispute, but their sentiment was 
convey in such whisper voices, and their vivace attend with 
so much laughter, that though catherine's support opinion was not 
unfrequent call for by one or the other, she was never able to give 
any, from not have heard a word of the subject. at length however 
she was empower to disengage herself from her friend, by the avowed 
necessity of speak to miss tilney, whom she most joyful saw just 
enter the room with mrs. hughes, and whom she instantly joined, with 
a firm determination to be acquainted, than she might have had courage 
to command, had she not been urge by the disappointment of the day 
before. miss tilney met her with great civility, return her advances 
with equal goodwill, and they continue talk together as long as 
both party remain in the room; and though in all probability not 
an observation was made, nor an expression use by either which had not 
been made and use some thousand of times before, under that roof, in 
every bath season, yet the merit of their being spoken with simplicity 
and truth, and without personal conceit, might be something uncommon. 

“how well your brother dances!” was an artless exclamation of 
catherine's towards the close of their conversation, which at once 
surprise and amuse her companion. 

“henry!” she reply with a smile. “yes, he do dance very well.” 

“he must have thought it very odd to hear me say i was engaged the other 
evening, when he saw me sitting down. but i really had been engaged 
the whole day to mr. thorpe.” miss tilney could only bow. “you cannot 
think,” add catherine after a moment's silence, “how surprise i was 
to see him again. i felt so sure of his being quite gone away.” 

“when henry had the pleasure of seeing you before, he was in bath but 
for a couple of days. he came only to engage lodgings for us.” 

“that never occur to me; and of course, not seeing him anywhere, i 
thought he must be gone. was not the young lady he dance with on monday 
a miss smith?” 

“yes, an acquaintance of mrs. hughes.” 

“i dare say she was very glad to dance. do you think her pretty?” 

“not very.” 

“he never come to the pump-room, i suppose?” 

“yes, sometimes; but he has rid out this morning with my father.” 

mrs. hughes now join them, and ask miss tilney if she was ready to 
go. “i hope i shall have the pleasure of seeing you again soon,” said 
catherine. “shall you be at the cotillion ball tomorrow?” 

“perhaps we--yes, i think we certainly shall.” 

“i am glad of it, for we shall all be there.” this civility was duly 
returned; and they parted--on miss tilney's side with some knowledge 
of her new acquaintance's feelings, and on catherine's, without the 
smallest consciousness of have explain them. 

she went home very happy. the morning had answer all her hopes, and 
the evening of the following day was now the object of expectation, 
the future good. what gown and what head-dress she should wear on the 
occasion became her chief concern. she cannot be justified in it. dress 
is at all times a frivolous distinction, and excessive solicitude about 
it often destroy its own aim. catherine knew all this very well; her 
great aunt had read her a lecture on the subject only the christmas 
before; and yet she lay awake ten minutes on wednesday night debate 
between her spotted and her tambour muslin, and nothing but the 
short of the time prevent her buy a new one for the evening. 
this would have been an error in judgment, great though not uncommon, 
from which one of the other sex rather than her own, a brother rather 
than a great aunt, might have warn her, for man only can be aware of 
the insensibility of man towards a new gown. it would be mortify to 
the feelings of many ladies, could they be made to understand how little 
the heart of man is affected by what is costly or new in their attire; 
how little it is bias by the texture of their muslin, and how 
unsusceptible of peculiar tender towards the spotted, the sprigged, 
the mull, or the jackonet. woman is fine for her own satisfaction alone. 
no man will admire her the more, no woman will like her the better for 
it. neat and fashion are enough for the former, and a something of 
shabby or impropriety will be most endearing to the latter. but not 
one of these grave reflection trouble the tranquill of catherine. 

she enter the rooms on thursday evening with feelings very different 
from what had attend her thither the monday before. she had then been 
exult in her engagement to thorpe, and was now chiefly anxious to 
avoid his sight, lest he should engage her again; for though she could 
not, dare not expect that mr. tilney should ask her a third time to 
dance, her wishes, hopes, and plan all centre in nothing less. every 
young lady may feel for my heroine in this critical moment, for every 
young lady has at some time or other known the same agitation. all have 
been, or at least all have believe themselves to be, in danger from the 
pursuit of someone whom they wish to avoid; and all have been anxious 
for the attention of someone whom they wish to please. as soon as 
they were join by the thorpes, catherine's agony began; she fidget 
about if john thorpe came towards her, hid herself as much as possible 
from his view, and when he spoke to her pretended not to hear him. the 
cotillion were over, the country-dancing beginning, and she saw nothing 
of the tilneys. 

“do not be frightened, my dear catherine,” whisper isabella, “but i am 
really go to dance with your brother again. i declare positively it 
is quite shocking. i tell him he ought to be ashamed of himself, but you 
and john must keep us in countenance. make haste, my dear creature, and 
come to us. john is just walk off, but he will be back in a moment.” 

catherine had neither time nor inclination to answer. the other walk 
away, john thorpe was still in view, and she gave herself up for lost. 
that she might not appear, however, to observe or expect him, she kept 
her eyes intent fixed on her fan; and a self-condemnation for her 
folly, in supposing that among such a crowd they should even meet with 
the tilney in any reasonable time, had just pass through her mind, 
when she sudden found herself address and again solicit to dance, 
by mr. tilney himself. with what sparkle eyes and ready motion she 
grant his request, and with how pleasing a flutter of heart she went 
with him to the set, may be easily imagined. to escape, and, as 
she believed, so narrowly escape john thorpe, and to be asked, so 
immediately on his join her, ask by mr. tilney, as if he had sought 
her on purpose!--it did not appear to her that life could supply any 
greater felicity. 

scarcely had they work themselves into the quiet possession of a 
place, however, when her attention was claim by john thorpe, who stood 
behind her. “heyday, miss morland!” said he. “what is the meaning of 
this? i thought you and i were to dance together.” 

“i wonder you should think so, for you never ask me.” 

“that is a good one, by jove! i ask you as soon as i came into the 
room, and i was just go to ask you again, but when i turn round, 
you were gone! this is a cursed shabby trick! i only came for the sake 
of dance with you, and i firm believe you were engaged to me ever 
since monday. yes; i remember, i ask you while you were wait in the 
lobby for your cloak. and here have i been telling all my acquaintance 
that i was go to dance with the prettiest girl in the room; and 
when they see you standing up with somebody else, they will quiz me 
famously.” 

“oh, no; they will never think of me, after such a description as that.” 

“by heavens, if they do not, i will kick them out of the room for 
blockheads. what chap have you there?” catherine satisfy his 
curiosity. “tilney,” he repeated. “hum--i do not know him. a good figure 
of a man; well put together. do he want a horse? here is a friend 
of mine, sam fletcher, has got one to sell that would suit anybody. a 
famous clever animal for the road--only forty guineas. i had fifty mind 
to buy it myself, for it is one of my maxim always to buy a good horse 
when i meet with one; but it would not answer my purpose, it would not 
do for the field. i would give any money for a real good hunter. i 
have three now, the best that ever were backed. i would not take 
eight hundred guinea for them. fletcher and i mean to get a house in 
leicestershire, against the next season. it is so d--uncomfortable, 
living at an inn.” 

this was the last sentence by which he could weary catherine's 
attention, for he was just then borne off by the resistless pressure of 
a long string of passing ladies. her partner now drew near, and said, 
“that gentleman would have put me out of patience, had he stay with 
you half a minute longer. he has no business to withdraw the attention 
of my partner from me. we have enter into a contract of mutual 
agreeable for the space of an evening, and all our agreeable 
belong solely to each other for that time. nobody can fasten themselves 
on the notice of one, without injure the rights of the other. 
i consider a country-dance as an emblem of marriage. fidelity and 
complaisance are the principal duty of both; and those men who do not 
choose to dance or marry themselves, have no business with the partner 
or wives of their neighbours.” 

“but they are such very different things!” 

“--that you think they cannot be compare together.” 

“to be sure not. people that marry can never part, but must go and keep 
house together. people that dance only stand opposite each other in a 
long room for half an hour.” 

“and such is your definition of matrimony and dancing. taken in that 
light certainly, their resemblance is not striking; but i think i could 
place them in such a view. you will allow, that in both, man has the 
advantage of choice, woman only the power of refusal; that in both, 
it is an engagement between man and woman, form for the advantage of 
each; and that when once enter into, they belong exclusively to each 
other till the moment of its dissolution; that it is their duty, each 
to endeavour to give the other no cause for wish that he or she had 
bestow themselves elsewhere, and their best interest to keep their own 
imagination from wandering towards the perfection of their neighbours, 
or fancy that they should have been better off with anyone else. you 
will allow all this?” 

“yes, to be sure, as you state it, all this sound very well; but still 
they are so very different. i cannot look upon them at all in the same 
light, nor think the same duty belong to them.” 

“in one respect, there certainly is a difference. in marriage, the man 
is supposed to provide for the support of the woman, the woman to make 
the home agreeable to the man; he is to purvey, and she is to smile. 
but in dancing, their duty are exactly changed; the agreeableness, the 
compliance are expect from him, while she furnish the fan and the 
lavender water. that, i suppose, was the difference of duty which 
struck you, as rendering the conditions incapable of comparison.” 

“no, indeed, i never thought of that.” 

“then i am quite at a loss. one thing, however, i must observe. this 
disposition on your side is rather alarming. you total disallow any 
similarity in the obligations; and may i not thence infer that your 
notions of the duty of the dance state are not so strict as your 
partner might wish? have i not reason to fear that if the gentleman who 
spoke to you just now were to return, or if any other gentleman were to 
address you, there would be nothing to restrain you from converse with 
him as long as you chose?” 

“mr. thorpe is such a very particular friend of my brother's, that if he 
talks to me, i must talk to him again; but there are hardly three young 
men in the room besides him that i have any acquaintance with.” 

“and is that to be my only security? alas, alas!” 

“nay, i am sure you cannot have a better; for if i do not know anybody, 
it is impossible for me to talk to them; and, besides, i do not want to 
talk to anybody.” 

“now you have given me a security worth having; and i shall proceed 
with courage. do you find bath as agreeable as when i had the honour of 
making the inquiry before?” 

“yes, quite--more so, indeed.” 

“more so! take care, or you will forget to be tired of it at the proper 
time. you ought to be tired at the end of six weeks.” 

“i do not think i should be tired, if i were to stay here six months.” 

“bath, compare with london, has little variety, and so everybody find 
out every year. 'for six weeks, i allow bath is pleasant enough; but 
beyond that, it is the most tiresome place in the world.' you would be 
told so by people of all descriptions, who come regularly every winter, 
lengthen their six week into ten or twelve, and go away at last because 
they can afford to stay no longer.” 

“well, other people must judge for themselves, and those who go to 
london may think nothing of bath. but i, who live in a small retired 
village in the country, can never find greater sameness in such a place 
as this than in my own home; for here are a variety of amusements, a 
variety of things to be seen and done all day long, which i can know 
nothing of there.” 

“you are not fond of the country.” 

“yes, i am. i have always live there, and always been very happy. but 
certainly there is much more sameness in a country life than in a bath 
life. one day in the country is exactly like another.” 

“but then you spend your time so much more rational in the country.” 

“do i?” 

“do you not?” 

“i do not believe there is much difference.” 

“here you are in pursuit only of amusement all day long.” 

“and so i am at home--only i do not find so much of it. i walk about 
here, and so i do there; but here i see a variety of people in every 
street, and there i can only go and call on mrs. allen.” 

mr. tilney was very much amused. 

“only go and call on mrs. allen!” he repeated. “what a picture of 
intellectual poverty! however, when you sink into this abyss again, you 
will have more to say. you will be able to talk of bath, and of all that 
you did here.” 

“oh! yes. i shall never be in want of something to talk of again to mrs. 
allen, or anybody else. i really believe i shall always be talk of 
bath, when i am at home again--i do like it so very much. if i could but 
have papa and mamma, and the rest of them here, i suppose i should be 
too happy! james's coming (my eldest brother) is quite delightful--and 
especially as it turn out that the very family we are just got so 
intimate with are his intimate friends already. oh! who can ever be 
tired of bath?” 

“not those who bring such fresh feelings of every sort to it as you do. 
but papas and mammas, and brothers, and intimate friends are a good deal 
gone by, to most of the frequent of bath--and the honest relish of 
balls and plays, and everyday sights, is past with them.” here 
their conversation closed, the demand of the dance becoming now too 
importunate for a divide attention. 

soon after their reach the bottom of the set, catherine perceive 
herself to be earnest regard by a gentleman who stood among the 
lookers-on, immediately behind her partner. he was a very handsome man, 
of a commanding aspect, past the bloom, but not past the vigour of 
life; and with his eye still direct towards her, she saw him presently 
address mr. tilney in a familiar whisper. confuse by his notice, and 
blush from the fear of its being excited by something wrong in 
her appearance, she turn away her head. but while she did so, the 
gentleman retreated, and her partner, coming nearer, said, “i see that 
you guess what i have just been asked. that gentleman know your name, 
and you have a right to know his. it is general tilney, my father.” 

catherine's answer was only “oh!”--but it was an “oh!” express 
everything needful: attention to his words, and perfect reliance on 
their truth. with real interest and strong admiration did her eye now 
follow the general, as he move through the crowd, and “how handsome a 
family they are!” was her secret remark. 

in chat with miss tilney before the evening concluded, a new source 
of felicity arose to her. she had never taken a country walk since 
her arrival in bath. miss tilney, to whom all the commonly frequent 
environs were familiar, spoke of them in terms which made her all 
eager to know them too; and on her openly fear that she might 
find nobody to go with her, it was propose by the brother and sister 
that they should join in a walk, some morning or other. “i shall like 
it,” she cried, “beyond anything in the world; and do not let us put 
it off--let us go tomorrow.” this was readily agree to, with only a 
proviso of miss tilney's, that it did not rain, which catherine was sure 
it would not. at twelve o'clock, they were to call for her in pulteney 
street; and “remember--twelve o'clock,” was her parting speech to 
her new friend. of her other, her older, her more establish friend, 
isabella, of whose fidelity and worth she had enjoy a fortnight's 
experience, she scarcely saw anything during the evening. yet, though 
longing to make her acquaint with her happiness, she cheerful 
submit to the wish of mr. allen, which took them rather early away, 
and her spirits dance within her, as she dance in her chair all the 
way home. 




chapter 11 


the morrow brought a very sober-looking morning, the sun making only 
a few effort to appear, and catherine augur from it everything most 
favourable to her wishes. a bright morning so early in the year, 
she allowed, would generally turn to rain, but a cloudy one foretold 
improvement as the day advanced. she applied to mr. allen for 
confirmation of her hopes, but mr. allen, not have his own sky and 
barometer about him, decline give any absolute promise of sunshine. 
she applied to mrs. allen, and mrs. allen's opinion was more positive. 
“she had no doubt in the world of its being a very fine day, if the 
cloud would only go off, and the sun keep out.” 

at about eleven o'clock, however, a few speck of small rain upon the 
window caught catherine's watchful eye, and “oh! dear, i do believe it 
will be wet,” broke from her in a most despond tone. 

“i thought how it would be,” said mrs. allen. 

“no walk for me today,” sigh catherine; “but perhaps it may come to 
nothing, or it may hold up before twelve.” 

“perhaps it may, but then, my dear, it will be so dirty.” 

“oh! that will not signify; i never mind dirt.” 

“no,” reply her friend very placidly, “i know you never mind dirt.” 

after a short pause, “it come on fast and faster!” said catherine, as 
she stood watch at a window. 

“so it do indeed. if it keeps raining, the street will be very wet.” 

“there are four umbrella up already. how i hate the sight of an 
umbrella!” 

“they are disagreeable things to carry. i would much rather take a chair 
at any time.” 

“it was such a nice-looking morning! i felt so convinced it would be 
dry!” 

“anybody would have thought so indeed. there will be very few people in 
the pump-room, if it rains all the morning. i hope mr. allen will put 
on his greatcoat when he goes, but i dare say he will not, for he had 
rather do anything in the world than walk out in a greatcoat; i wonder 
he should dislike it, it must be so comfortable.” 

the rain continued--fast, though not heavy. catherine went every five 
minutes to the clock, threaten on each return that, if it still 
kept on rain another five minutes, she would give up the matter as 
hopeless. the clock struck twelve, and it still rained. “you will not be 
able to go, my dear.” 

“i do not quite despair yet. i shall not give it up till a quarter after 
twelve. this is just the time of day for it to clear up, and i do think 
it looks a little lighter. there, it is twenty minutes after twelve, and 
now i shall give it up entirely. oh! that we had such weather here 
as they had at udolpho, or at least in tuscany and the south of 
france!--the night that poor st. aubin died!--such beautiful weather!” 

at half past twelve, when catherine's anxious attention to the weather 
was over and she could no long claim any merit from its amendment, the 
sky began voluntary to clear. a gleam of sunshine took her quite by 
surprise; she look round; the cloud were parting, and she instantly 
return to the window to watch over and encourage the happy appearance. 
ten minutes more made it certain that a bright afternoon would succeed, 
and justified the opinion of mrs. allen, who had “always thought it 
would clear up.” but whether catherine might still expect her friends, 
whether there had not been too much rain for miss tilney to venture, 
must yet be a question. 

it was too dirty for mrs. allen to accompany her husband to the 
pump-room; he accordingly set off by himself, and catherine had barely 
watch him down the street when her notice was claim by the approach 
of the same two open carriages, contain the same three people that 
had surprise her so much a few mornings back. 

“isabella, my brother, and mr. thorpe, i declare! they are coming for 
me perhaps--but i shall not go--i cannot go indeed, for you know miss 
tilney may still call.” mrs. allen agree to it. john thorpe was soon 
with them, and his voice was with them yet sooner, for on the stairs he 
was calling out to miss morland to be quick. “make haste! make haste!” 
as he threw open the door. “put on your hat this moment--there is no 
time to be lost--we are go to bristol. how d'ye do, mrs. allen?” 

“to bristol! is not that a great way off? but, however, i cannot go with 
you today, because i am engaged; i expect some friends every moment.” 
this was of course vehement talk down as no reason at all; mrs. 
allen was call on to second him, and the two other walk in, to give 
their assistance. “my sweetest catherine, is not this delightful? we 
shall have a most heavenly drive. you are to thank your brother and me 
for the scheme; it dart into our head at breakfast-time, i verily 
believe at the same instant; and we should have been off two hour ago 
if it had not been for this detest rain. but it do not signify, 
the nights are moonlight, and we shall do delightfully. oh! i am in such 
ecstasy at the thought of a little country air and quiet! so much 
better than go to the lower rooms. we shall drive directly to clifton 
and dine there; and, as soon as dinner is over, if there is time for it, 
go on to kingsweston.” 

“i doubt our being able to do so much,” said morland. 

“you croak fellow!” cry thorpe. “we shall be able to do ten times 
more. kingsweston! aye, and blaize castle too, and anything else we can 
hear of; but here is your sister say she will not go.” 

“blaize castle!” cry catherine. “what is that?” 

“the finest place in england--worth go fifty mile at any time to 
see.” 

“what, is it really a castle, an old castle?” 

“the oldest in the kingdom.” 

“but is it like what one read of?” 

“exactly--the very same.” 

“but now really--are there tower and long galleries?” 

“by dozens.” 

“then i should like to see it; but i cannot--i cannot go.” 

“not go! my beloved creature, what do you mean?” 

“i cannot go, because”--looking down as she spoke, fearful of isabella's 
smile--“i expect miss tilney and her brother to call on me to take a 
country walk. they promise to come at twelve, only it rained; but now, 
as it is so fine, i dare say they will be here soon.” 

“not they indeed,” cry thorpe; “for, as we turn into broad street, i 
saw them--does he not drive a phaeton with bright chestnuts?” 

“i do not know indeed.” 

“yes, i know he does; i saw him. you are talk of the man you dance 
with last night, are not you?” 

“yes.” 

“well, i saw him at that moment turn up the lansdown road, driving a 
smart-looking girl.” 

“did you indeed?” 

“did upon my soul; knew him again directly, and he seem to have got 
some very pretty cattle too.” 

“it is very odd! but i suppose they thought it would be too dirty for a 
walk.” 

“and well they might, for i never saw so much dirt in my life. walk! 
you could no more walk than you could fly! it has not been so dirty the 
whole winter; it is ankle-deep everywhere.” 

isabella corroborate it: “my dearest catherine, you cannot form an idea 
of the dirt; come, you must go; you cannot refuse go now.” 

“i should like to see the castle; but may we go all over it? may we go 
up every staircase, and into every suite of rooms?” 

“yes, yes, every hole and corner.” 

“but then, if they should only be gone out for an hour till it is dryer, 
and call by and by?” 

“make yourself easy, there is no danger of that, for i heard tilney 
hallooe to a man who was just passing by on horseback, that they were 
go as far as wick rocks.” 

“then i will. shall i go, mrs. allen?” 

“just as you please, my dear.” 

“mrs. allen, you must persuade her to go,” was the general cry. mrs. 
allen was not inattentive to it: “well, my dear,” said she, “suppose you 
go.” and in two minutes they were off. 

catherine's feelings, as she got into the carriage, were in a very 
unsettled state; divide between regret for the loss of one great 
pleasure, and the hope of soon enjoy another, almost its equal in 
degree, however unlike in kind. she could not think the tilney had 
act quite well by her, in so readily give up their engagement, 
without send her any message of excuse. it was now but an hour later 
than the time fixed on for the beginning of their walk; and, in spite of 
what she had heard of the prodigious accumulation of dirt in the course 
of that hour, she could not from her own observation help thinking that 
they might have gone with very little inconvenience. to feel herself 
slight by them was very painful. on the other hand, the delight of 
explore an edifice like udolpho, as her fancy represent blaize 
castle to be, was such a counterpoise of good as might console her for 
almost anything. 

they pass brisk down pulteney street, and through laura place, 
without the exchange of many words. thorpe talk to his horse, and she 
meditated, by turns, on broken promise and broken arches, phaeton 
and false hangings, tilney and trap-doors. as they enter argyle 
buildings, however, she was rouse by this address from her companion, 
“who is that girl who look at you so hard as she went by?” 

“who? where?” 

“on the right-hand pavement--she must be almost out of sight now.” 
catherine look round and saw miss tilney leaning on her brother's arm, 
walking slow down the street. she saw them both look back at her. 
“stop, stop, mr. thorpe,” she impatient cried; “it is miss tilney; it 
is indeed. how could you tell me they were gone? stop, stop, i will 
get out this moment and go to them.” but to what purpose did she speak? 
thorpe only lash his horse into a brisk trot; the tilneys, who had 
soon cease to look after her, were in a moment out of sight round the 
corner of laura place, and in another moment she was herself whisk 
into the marketplace. still, however, and during the length of another 
street, she entreat him to stop. “pray, pray stop, mr. thorpe. i 
cannot go on. i will not go on. i must go back to miss tilney.” but mr. 
thorpe only laughed, smack his whip, encourage his horse, made odd 
noises, and drove on; and catherine, angry and vex as she was, have 
no power of get away, was oblige to give up the point and submit. 
her reproaches, however, were not spared. “how could you deceive me so, 
mr. thorpe? how could you say that you saw them driving up the lansdown 
road? i would not have had it happen so for the world. they must think 
it so strange, so rude of me! to go by them, too, without saying a word! 
you do not know how vex i am; i shall have no pleasure at clifton, nor 
in anything else. i had rather, ten thousand times rather, get out now, 
and walk back to them. how could you say you saw them driving out in a 
phaeton?” thorpe defend himself very stoutly, declared he had never 
seen two men so much alike in his life, and would hardly give up the 
point of its have been tilney himself. 

their drive, even when this subject was over, was not likely to be very 
agreeable. catherine's complaisance was no long what it had been in 
their former airing. she listen reluctantly, and her reply were 
short. blaize castle remain her only comfort; towards that, she still 
look at interval with pleasure; though rather than be disappointed of 
the promise walk, and especially rather than be thought ill of by the 
tilneys, she would willing have given up all the happiness which its 
wall could supply--the happiness of a progress through a long suite of 
lofty rooms, exhibit the remains of magnificent furniture, though 
now for many years deserted--the happiness of being stop in their way 
along narrow, winding vaults, by a low, grate door; or even of have 
their lamp, their only lamp, extinguish by a sudden gust of wind, and 
of being left in total darkness. in the meanwhile, they proceed on 
their journey without any mischance, and were within view of the town 
of keynsham, when a halloo from morland, who was behind them, made his 
friend pull up, to know what was the matter. the other then came close 
enough for conversation, and morland said, “we had better go back, 
thorpe; it is too late to go on today; your sister think so as well as 
i. we have been exactly an hour coming from pulteney street, very little 
more than seven miles; and, i suppose, we have at least eight more to 
go. it will never do. we set out a great deal too late. we had much 
better put it off till another day, and turn round.” 

“it is all one to me,” reply thorpe rather angrily; and instantly 
turning his horse, they were on their way back to bath. 

“if your brother had not got such a d--beast to drive,” said he soon 
afterwards, “we might have done it very well. my horse would have 
trot to clifton within the hour, if left to himself, and i have 
almost broke my arm with pull him in to that cursed broken-winded 
jade's pace. morland is a fool for not keeping a horse and gig of his 
own.” 

“no, he is not,” said catherine warmly, “for i am sure he could not 
afford it.” 

“and why cannot he afford it?” 

“because he has not money enough.” 

“and whose fault is that?” 

“nobody's, that i know of.” thorpe then said something in the loud, 
incoherent way to which he had often recourse, about its being a 
d--thing to be miserly; and that if people who roll in money could not 
afford things, he did not know who could, which catherine did not even 
endeavour to understand. disappointed of what was to have been the 
consolation for her first disappointment, she was less and less disposed 
either to be agreeable herself or to find her companion so; and they 
return to pulteney street without her speak twenty words. 

as she enter the house, the footman told her that a gentleman and lady 
had call and inquire for her a few minutes after her setting off; 
that, when he told them she was gone out with mr. thorpe, the lady had 
ask whether any message had been left for her; and on his saying no, 
had felt for a card, but said she had none about her, and went away. 
ponder over these heart-rending tidings, catherine walk slow 
upstairs. at the head of them she was met by mr. allen, who, on hearing 
the reason of their speedy return, said, “i am glad your brother had so 
much sense; i am glad you are come back. it was a strange, wild scheme.” 

they all spent the evening together at thorpe's. catherine was disturbed 
and out of spirits; but isabella seem to find a pool of commerce, in 
the fate of which she shared, by private partnership with morland, a 
very good equivalent for the quiet and country air of an inn at clifton. 
her satisfaction, too, in not being at the lower rooms was spoken more 
than once. “how i pity the poor creature that are go there! how glad 
i am that i am not amongst them! i wonder whether it will be a full ball 
or not! they have not begun dance yet. i would not be there for 
all the world. it is so delightful to have an evening now and then 
to oneself. i dare say it will not be a very good ball. i know the 
mitchell will not be there. i am sure i pity everybody that is. but i 
dare say, mr. morland, you long to be at it, do not you? i am sure you 
do. well, pray do not let anybody here be a restraint on you. i dare say 
we could do very well without you; but you men think yourself of such 
consequence.” 

catherine could almost have accused isabella of being wanting in 
tender towards herself and her sorrows, so very little did they 
appear to dwell on her mind, and so very inadequate was the comfort she 
offered. “do not be so dull, my dearest creature,” she whispered. “you 
will quite break my heart. it was amazing shocking, to be sure; but 
the tilney were entire to blame. why were not they more punctual? 
it was dirty, indeed, but what did that signify? i am sure john and i 
should not have minded it. i never mind go through anything, where a 
friend is concerned; that is my disposition, and john is just the same; 
he has amazing strong feelings. good heavens! what a delightful hand you 
have got! kings, i vow! i never was so happy in my life! i would fifty 
times rather you should have them than myself.” 

and now i may dismiss my heroine to the sleepless couch, which is the 
true heroine's portion; to a pillow strew with thorn and wet with 
tears. and lucky may she think herself, if she get another good night's 
rest in the course of the next three months. 




chapter 12 


“mrs. allen,” said catherine the next morning, “will there be any harm 
in my calling on miss tilney today? i shall not be easy till i have 
explain everything.” 

“go, by all means, my dear; only put on a white gown; miss tilney always 
wear white.” 

catherine cheerful complied, and being properly equipped, was more 
impatient than ever to be at the pump-room, that she might inform 
herself of general tilney's lodgings, for though she believe they were 
in milsom street, she was not certain of the house, and mrs. allen's 
waver conviction only made it more doubtful. to milsom street she 
was directed, and have made herself perfect in the number, hasten 
away with eager steps and a beating heart to pay her visit, explain her 
conduct, and be forgiven; tripping lightly through the church-yard, and 
resolute turning away her eyes, that she might not be oblige to 
see her beloved isabella and her dear family, who, she had reason to 
believe, were in a shop hard by. she reach the house without any 
impediment, look at the number, knock at the door, and inquire for 
miss tilney. the man believe miss tilney to be at home, but was not 
quite certain. would she be pleased to send up her name? she gave her 
card. in a few minutes the servant returned, and with a look which did 
not quite confirm his words, said he had been mistaken, for that miss 
tilney was walk out. catherine, with a blush of mortification, left 
the house. she felt almost persuade that miss tilney was at home, and 
too much offend to admit her; and as she retired down the street, 
could not withhold one glance at the drawing-room windows, in 
expectation of seeing her there, but no one appear at them. at the 
bottom of the street, however, she look back again, and then, not at a 
window, but issue from the door, she saw miss tilney herself. she was 
follow by a gentleman, whom catherine believe to be her father, 
and they turn up towards edgar's buildings. catherine, in deep 
mortification, proceed on her way. she could almost be angry herself 
at such angry incivility; but she checked the resentful sensation; she 
remember her own ignorance. she knew not how such an offence as hers 
might be class by the law of worldly politeness, to what a degree 
of unforgiving it might with propriety lead, nor to what rigour of 
rude in return it might just make her amenable. 

dejected and humbled, she had even some thought of not go with the 
other to the theatre that night; but it must be confessed that they 
were not of long continuance, for she soon recollected, in the first 
place, that she was without any excuse for stay at home; and, in the 
second, that it was a play she want very much to see. to the theatre 
accordingly they all went; no tilney appear to plague or please her; 
she fear that, amongst the many perfection of the family, a fond 
for play was not to be ranked; but perhaps it was because they were 
habituate to the fine performance of the london stage, which she 
knew, on isabella's authority, render everything else of the kind 
“quite horrid.” she was not deceive in her own expectation of pleasure; 
the comedy so well suspend her care that no one, observing her during 
the first four acts, would have supposed she had any wretched about 
her. on the beginning of the fifth, however, the sudden view of mr. 
henry tilney and his father, join a party in the opposite box, 
recall her to anxiety and distress. the stage could no long excite 
genuine merriment--no long keep her whole attention. every other look 
upon an average was direct towards the opposite box; and, for the 
space of two entire scenes, did she thus watch henry tilney, without 
being once able to catch his eye. no long could he be suspect of 
indifference for a play; his notice was never withdrawn from the stage 
during two whole scenes. at length, however, he did look towards her, 
and he bowed--but such a bow! no smile, no continue observance attend 
it; his eyes were immediately return to their former direction. 
catherine was restless miserable; she could almost have run round to 
the box in which he sat and forced him to hear her explanation. feelings 
rather natural than heroic possessed her; instead of considering her 
own dignity injure by this ready condemnation--instead of proud 
resolving, in conscious innocence, to show her resentment towards him 
who could harbour a doubt of it, to leave to him all the trouble 
of seek an explanation, and to enlighten him on the past only by 
avoid his sight, or flirt with somebody else--she took to herself 
all the shame of misconduct, or at least of its appearance, and was only 
eager for an opportunity of explain its cause. 

the play concluded--the curtain fell--henry tilney was no long to be 
seen where he had hitherto sat, but his father remained, and perhaps he 
might be now coming round to their box. she was right; in a few minutes 
he appeared, and, making his way through the then thin rows, spoke 
with like calm polite to mrs. allen and her friend. not with such 
calm was he answer by the latter: “oh! mr. tilney, i have been 
quite wild to speak to you, and make my apologies. you must have thought 
me so rude; but indeed it was not my own fault, was it, mrs. allen? 
did not they tell me that mr. tilney and his sister were gone out in a 
phaeton together? and then what could i do? but i had ten thousand times 
rather have been with you; now had not i, mrs. allen?” 

“my dear, you tumble my gown,” was mrs. allen's reply. 

her assurance, however, standing sole as it did, was not thrown away; it 
brought a more cordial, more natural smile into his countenance, and 
he reply in a tone which retain only a little affected reserve: 
“we were much oblige to you at any rate for wish us a pleasant walk 
after our passing you in argyle street: you were so kind as to look back 
on purpose.” 

“but indeed i did not wish you a pleasant walk; i never thought of such 
a thing; but i beg mr. thorpe so earnest to stop; i call out to 
him as soon as ever i saw you; now, mrs. allen, did not--oh! you were 
not there; but indeed i did; and, if mr. thorpe would only have stopped, 
i would have jump out and run after you.” 

is there a henry in the world who could be insensible to such a 
declaration? henry tilney at least was not. with a yet sweet smile, he 
said everything that need be said of his sister's concern, regret, and 
dependence on catherine's honour. “oh! do not say miss tilney was not 
angry,” cry catherine, “because i know she was; for she would not see 
me this morning when i called; i saw her walk out of the house the next 
minute after my leave it; i was hurt, but i was not affronted. perhaps 
you did not know i had been there.” 

“i was not within at the time; but i heard of it from eleanor, and she 
has been wish ever since to see you, to explain the reason of such 
incivility; but perhaps i can do it as well. it was nothing more than 
that my father--they were just prepare to walk out, and he being 
hurried for time, and not care to have it put off--made a point of her 
being denied. that was all, i do assure you. she was very much vexed, 
and meant to make her apology as soon as possible.” 

catherine's mind was greatly ease by this information, yet a something 
of solicitude remained, from which sprang the following question, 
thorough artless in itself, though rather distressing to the 
gentleman: “but, mr. tilney, why were you less generous than your 
sister? if she felt such confidence in my good intentions, and could 
suppose it to be only a mistake, why should you be so ready to take 
offence?” 

“me! i take offence!” 

“nay, i am sure by your look, when you came into the box, you were 
angry.” 

“i angry! i could have no right.” 

“well, nobody would have thought you had no right who saw your face.” he 
reply by ask her to make room for him, and talk of the play. 

he remain with them some time, and was only too agreeable for 
catherine to be contented when he went away. before they parted, 
however, it was agree that the project walk should be taken as soon 
as possible; and, setting aside the misery of his quit their box, 
she was, upon the whole, left one of the happiest creature in the 
world. 

while talk to each other, she had observe with some surprise that 
john thorpe, who was never in the same part of the house for ten minutes 
together, was engaged in conversation with general tilney; and she felt 
something more than surprise when she thought she could perceive herself 
the object of their attention and discourse. what could they have to say 
of her? she fear general tilney did not like her appearance: she found 
it was imply in his prevent her admittance to his daughter, rather 
than postpone his own walk a few minutes. “how came mr. thorpe to know 
your father?” was her anxious inquiry, as she pointed them out to her 
companion. he knew nothing about it; but his father, like every military 
man, had a very large acquaintance. 

when the entertainment was over, thorpe came to assist them in get 
out. catherine was the immediate object of his gallantry; and, while 
they wait in the lobby for a chair, he prevent the inquiry which had 
travelled from her heart almost to the tip of her tongue, by asking, in 
a consequential manner, whether she had seen him talk with general 
tilney: “he is a fine old fellow, upon my soul! stout, active--looks 
as young as his son. i have a great regard for him, i assure you: a 
gentleman-like, good sort of fellow as ever lived.” 

“but how came you to know him?” 

“know him! there are few people much about town that i do not know. i 
have met him forever at the bedford; and i knew his face again today the 
moment he came into the billiard-room. one of the best player we have, 
by the by; and we had a little touch together, though i was almost 
afraid of him at first: the odds were five to four against me; and, if 
i had not made one of the cleanest stroke that perhaps ever was made in 
this world--i took his ball exactly--but i could not make you understand 
it without a table; however, i did beat him. a very fine fellow; as rich 
as a jew. i should like to dine with him; i dare say he give famous 
dinners. but what do you think we have been talk of? you. yes, by 
heavens! and the general think you the finest girl in bath.” 

“oh! nonsense! how can you say so?” 

“and what do you think i said?”--lowering his voice--“well done, 
general, said i; i am quite of your mind.” 

here catherine, who was much less gratify by his admiration than by 
general tilney's, was not sorry to be call away by mr. allen. thorpe, 
however, would see her to her chair, and, till she enter it, continue 
the same kind of delicate flattery, in spite of her entreat him to 
have done. 

that general tilney, instead of disliking, should admire her, was very 
delightful; and she joyful thought that there was not one of the 
family whom she need now fear to meet. the evening had done more, much 
more, for her than could have been expected. 




chapter 13 


monday, tuesday, wednesday, thursday, friday, and saturday have now 
pass in review before the reader; the event of each day, its hope 
and fears, mortification and pleasures, have been separate stated, 
and the pang of sunday only now remain to be described, and close the 
week. the clifton scheme had been deferred, not relinquished, and on 
the afternoon's crescent of this day, it was brought forward again. in a 
private consultation between isabella and james, the former of whom had 
particularly set her heart upon going, and the latter no less anxious 
placed his upon pleasing her, it was agree that, provided the weather 
were fair, the party should take place on the following morning; and 
they were to set off very early, in order to be at home in good time. 
the affair thus determined, and thorpe's approbation secured, catherine 
only remain to be apprise of it. she had left them for a few minutes 
to speak to miss tilney. in that interval the plan was completed, and as 
soon as she came again, her agreement was demanded; but instead of the 
gay acquiesce expect by isabella, catherine look grave, was very 
sorry, but could not go. the engagement which ought to have kept her 
from join in the former attempt would make it impossible for her to 
accompany them now. she had that moment settled with miss tilney to take 
their propose walk tomorrow; it was quite determined, and she would 
not, upon any account, retract. but that she must and should retract 
was instantly the eager cry of both the thorpes; they must go to clifton 
tomorrow, they would not go without her, it would be nothing to put off 
a mere walk for one day longer, and they would not hear of a refusal. 
catherine was distressed, but not subdued. “do not urge me, isabella. i 
am engaged to miss tilney. i cannot go.” this avail nothing. the same 
argument assail her again; she must go, she should go, and they would 
not hear of a refusal. “it would be so easy to tell miss tilney that you 
had just been remind of a prior engagement, and must only beg to put 
off the walk till tuesday.” 

“no, it would not be easy. i could not do it. there has been no prior 
engagement.” but isabella became only more and more urgent, calling 
on her in the most affectionate manner, address her by the most 
endearing names. she was sure her dearest, sweetest catherine would not 
seriously refuse such a trifling request to a friend who love her so 
dearly. she knew her beloved catherine to have so feeling a heart, so 
sweet a temper, to be so easily persuade by those she loved. but all 
in vain; catherine felt herself to be in the right, and though pained 
by such tender, such flatter supplication, could not allow it to 
influence her. isabella then try another method. she reproach her 
with have more affection for miss tilney, though she had known her so 
little a while, than for her best and oldest friends, with being grown 
cold and indifferent, in short, towards herself. “i cannot help being 
jealous, catherine, when i see myself slight for strangers, i, who 
love you so excessively! when once my affection are placed, it is not 
in the power of anything to change them. but i believe my feelings are 
strong than anybody's; i am sure they are too strong for my own peace; 
and to see myself supplant in your friendship by stranger do cut me 
to the quick, i own. these tilney seem to swallow up everything else.” 

catherine thought this reproach equally strange and unkind. was it the 
part of a friend thus to expose her feelings to the notice of others? 
isabella appear to her ungenerous and selfish, regardless of 
everything but her own gratification. these painful idea cross her 
mind, though she said nothing. isabella, in the meanwhile, had applied 
her handkerchief to her eyes; and morland, miserable at such a sight, 
could not help saying, “nay, catherine. i think you cannot stand out any 
long now. the sacrifice is not much; and to oblige such a friend--i 
shall think you quite unkind, if you still refuse.” 

this was the first time of her brother's openly siding against her, and 
anxious to avoid his displeasure, she propose a compromise. if they 
would only put off their scheme till tuesday, which they might easily 
do, as it depend only on themselves, she could go with them, and 
everybody might then be satisfied. but “no, no, no!” was the immediate 
answer; “that could not be, for thorpe did not know that he might not 
go to town on tuesday.” catherine was sorry, but could do no more; and 
a short silence ensued, which was broken by isabella, who in a voice of 
cold resentment said, “very well, then there is an end of the party. 
if catherine do not go, i cannot. i cannot be the only woman. i would 
not, upon any account in the world, do so improper a thing.” 

“catherine, you must go,” said james. 

“but why cannot mr. thorpe drive one of his other sisters? i dare say 
either of them would like to go.” 

“thank ye,” cry thorpe, “but i did not come to bath to drive my 
sister about, and look like a fool. no, if you do not go, d---- me if i 
do. i only go for the sake of driving you.” 

“that is a compliment which give me no pleasure.” but her words were 
lost on thorpe, who had turn abrupt away. 

the three other still continue together, walking in a most 
uncomfortable manner to poor catherine; sometimes not a word was said, 
sometimes she was again attack with supplicate or reproaches, and 
her arm was still link within isabella's, though their heart were 
at war. at one moment she was softened, at another irritated; always 
distressed, but always steady. 

“i did not think you had been so obstinate, catherine,” said james; 
“you were not use to be so hard to persuade; you once were the kindest, 
best-tempered of my sisters.” 

“i hope i am not less so now,” she replied, very feelingly; “but indeed 
i cannot go. if i am wrong, i am do what i believe to be right.” 

“i suspect,” said isabella, in a low voice, “there is no great 
struggle.” 

catherine's heart swelled; she drew away her arm, and isabella made no 
opposition. thus pass a long ten minutes, till they were again join 
by thorpe, who, coming to them with a gay look, said, “well, i 
have settled the matter, and now we may all go tomorrow with a safe 
conscience. i have been to miss tilney, and made your excuses.” 

“you have not!” cry catherine. 

“i have, upon my soul. left her this moment. told her you had sent me to 
say that, have just recollect a prior engagement of go to clifton 
with us tomorrow, you could not have the pleasure of walking with her 
till tuesday. she said very well, tuesday was just as convenient to her; 
so there is an end of all our difficulties. a pretty good thought of 
mine--hey?” 

isabella's countenance was once more all smile and good humour, and 
james too look happy again. 

“a most heavenly thought indeed! now, my sweet catherine, all our 
distress are over; you are honourable acquitted, and we shall have a 
most delightful party.” 

“this will not do,” said catherine; “i cannot submit to this. i must run 
after miss tilney directly and set her right.” 

isabella, however, caught hold of one hand, thorpe of the other, and 
remonstrance pour in from all three. even james was quite angry. when 
everything was settled, when miss tilney herself said that tuesday would 
suit her as well, it was quite ridiculous, quite absurd, to make any 
further objection. 

“i do not care. mr. thorpe had no business to invent any such message. 
if i had thought it right to put it off, i could have spoken to miss 
tilney myself. this is only do it in a rude way; and how do i know 
that mr. thorpe has--he may be mistaken again perhaps; he led me into 
one act of rude by his mistake on friday. let me go, mr. thorpe; 
isabella, do not hold me.” 

thorpe told her it would be in vain to go after the tilneys; they were 
turning the corner into brock street, when he had overtaken them, and 
were at home by this time. 

“then i will go after them,” said catherine; “wherever they are i will 
go after them. it do not signify talking. if i could not be persuade 
into do what i thought wrong, i never will be trick into it.” 
and with these words she broke away and hurried off. thorpe would have 
dart after her, but morland withheld him. “let her go, let her go, if 
she will go.” 

“she is as obstinate as--” 

thorpe never finished the simile, for it could hardly have been a proper 
one. 

away walk catherine in great agitation, as fast as the crowd would 
permit her, fearful of being pursued, yet determined to persevere. as 
she walked, she reflect on what had passed. it was painful to her to 
disappoint and displease them, particularly to displease her brother; 
but she could not repent her resistance. setting her own inclination 
apart, to have fail a second time in her engagement to miss tilney, to 
have retract a promise voluntary made only five minutes before, 
and on a false pretence too, must have been wrong. she had not been 
withstand them on selfish principles alone, she had not consult 
merely her own gratification; that might have been ensure in some 
degree by the excursion itself, by seeing blaize castle; no, she had 
attend to what was due to others, and to her own character in their 
opinion. her conviction of being right, however, was not enough to 
restore her composure; till she had spoken to miss tilney she could not 
be at ease; and quicken her pace when she got clear of the crescent, 
she almost ran over the remain ground till she gain the top of 
milsom street. so rapid had been her movements that in spite of the 
tilneys' advantage in the outset, they were but just turning into 
their lodgings as she came within view of them; and the servant still 
remain at the open door, she use only the ceremony of saying 
that she must speak with miss tilney that moment, and hurry by him 
proceed upstairs. then, opening the first door before her, which 
happen to be the right, she immediately found herself in the 
drawing-room with general tilney, his son, and daughter. her 
explanation, defective only in being--from her irritation of nerves and 
short of breath--no explanation at all, was instantly given. “i am 
come in a great hurry--it was all a mistake--i never promise to go--i 
told them from the first i could not go.--i ran away in a great hurry 
to explain it.--i did not care what you thought of me.--i would not stay 
for the servant.” 

the business, however, though not perfectly elucidate by this speech, 
soon cease to be a puzzle. catherine found that john thorpe had given 
the message; and miss tilney had no scruple in own herself greatly 
surprise by it. but whether her brother had still exceed her in 
resentment, catherine, though she instinctive address herself as 
much to one as to the other in her vindication, had no means of knowing. 
whatever might have been felt before her arrival, her eager declaration 
immediately made every look and sentence as friendly as she could 
desire. 

the affair thus happily settled, she was introduce by miss tilney 
to her father, and received by him with such ready, such solicitous 
polite as recall thorpe's information to her mind, and made her 
think with pleasure that he might be sometimes depend on. to such 
anxious attention was the general's civility carried, that not aware of 
her extraordinary swift in enter the house, he was quite angry 
with the servant whose neglect had reduce her to open the door of the 
apartment herself. “what did william mean by it? he should make a point 
of inquiring into the matter.” and if catherine had not most warm 
assert his innocence, it seem likely that william would lose the 
favour of his master forever, if not his place, by her rapidity. 

after sitting with them a quarter of an hour, she rose to take leave, 
and was then most agreeably surprise by general tilney's ask her if 
she would do his daughter the honour of dine and spend the rest 
of the day with her. miss tilney add her own wishes. catherine was 
greatly obliged; but it was quite out of her power. mr. and mrs. allen 
would expect her back every moment. the general declared he could say no 
more; the claim of mr. and mrs. allen were not to be superseded; but on 
some other day he trusted, when long notice could be given, they would 
not refuse to spare her to her friend. “oh, no; catherine was sure they 
would not have the least objection, and she should have great pleasure 
in coming.” the general attend her himself to the street-door, saying 
everything gallant as they went downstairs, admire the elasticity of 
her walk, which correspond exactly with the spirit of her dancing, and 
making her one of the most graceful bow she had ever beheld, when they 
parted. 

catherine, delight by all that had passed, proceed gaily to pulteney 
street, walking, as she concluded, with great elasticity, though she 
had never thought of it before. she reach home without seeing anything 
more of the offend party; and now that she had been triumphant 
throughout, had carry her point, and was secure of her walk, she began 
(as the flutter of her spirits subsided) to doubt whether she had been 
perfectly right. a sacrifice was always noble; and if she had given way 
to their entreaties, she should have been spare the distressing idea of 
a friend displeased, a brother angry, and a scheme of great happiness 
to both destroyed, perhaps through her means. to ease her mind, and 
ascertain by the opinion of an unprejudiced person what her own conduct 
had really been, she took occasion to mention before mr. allen the 
half-settled scheme of her brother and the thorpe for the following 
day. mr. allen caught at it directly. “well,” said he, “and do you think 
of go too?” 

“no; i had just engaged myself to walk with miss tilney before they told 
me of it; and therefore you know i could not go with them, could i?” 

“no, certainly not; and i am glad you do not think of it. these scheme 
are not at all the thing. young men and women driving about the country 
in open carriages! now and then it is very well; but go to inn and 
public place together! it is not right; and i wonder mrs. thorpe should 
allow it. i am glad you do not think of going; i am sure mrs. morland 
would not be pleased. mrs. allen, are not you of my way of thinking? do 
not you think these kind of project objectionable?” 

“yes, very much so indeed. open carriage are nasty things. a clean 
gown is not five minutes' wear in them. you are splash get in 
and get out; and the wind take your hair and your bonnet in every 
direction. i hate an open carriage myself.” 

“i know you do; but that is not the question. do not you think it has an 
odd appearance, if young ladies are frequent driven about in them by 
young men, to whom they are not even related?” 

“yes, my dear, a very odd appearance indeed. i cannot bear to see it.” 

“dear madam,” cry catherine, “then why did not you tell me so before? 
i am sure if i had known it to be improper, i would not have gone with 
mr. thorpe at all; but i always hope you would tell me, if you thought 
i was do wrong.” 

“and so i should, my dear, you may depend on it; for as i told mrs. 
morland at parting, i would always do the best for you in my power. but 
one must not be over particular. young people will be young people, 
as your good mother say herself. you know i want you, when we first 
came, not to buy that sprigged muslin, but you would. young people do 
not like to be always thwarted.” 

“but this was something of real consequence; and i do not think you 
would have found me hard to persuade.” 

“as far as it has gone hitherto, there is no harm done,” said mr. allen; 
“and i would only advise you, my dear, not to go out with mr. thorpe any 
more.” 

“that is just what i was go to say,” add his wife. 

catherine, relieved for herself, felt uneasy for isabella, and after a 
moment's thought, ask mr. allen whether it would not be both proper 
and kind in her to write to miss thorpe, and explain the indecorum of 
which she must be as insensible as herself; for she considered that 
isabella might otherwise perhaps be go to clifton the next day, in 
spite of what had passed. mr. allen, however, discourage her from do 
any such thing. “you had better leave her alone, my dear; she is old 
enough to know what she is about, and if not, has a mother to advise 
her. mrs. thorpe is too indulgent beyond a doubt; but, however, you had 
better not interfere. she and your brother choose to go, and you will be 
only get ill will.” 

catherine submitted, and though sorry to think that isabella should be 
do wrong, felt greatly relieved by mr. allen's approbation of her 
own conduct, and truly rejoice to be preserve by his advice from the 
danger of fall into such an error herself. her escape from being one 
of the party to clifton was now an escape indeed; for what would the 
tilney have thought of her, if she had broken her promise to them in 
order to do what was wrong in itself, if she had been guilty of one 
breach of propriety, only to enable her to be guilty of another? 




chapter 14 


the next morning was fair, and catherine almost expect another attack 
from the assemble party. with mr. allen to support her, she felt no 
dread of the event: but she would gladly be spare a contest, where 
victory itself was painful, and was heartily rejoice therefore at 
neither seeing nor hearing anything of them. the tilney call for 
her at the appoint time; and no new difficulty arising, no sudden 
recollection, no unexpected summons, no impertinent intrusion to 
disconcert their measures, my heroine was most unnatural able to 
fulfil her engagement, though it was made with the hero himself. 
they determined on walking round beechen cliff, that noble hill whose 
beautiful verdure and hanging coppice render it so striking an object 
from almost every opening in bath. 

“i never look at it,” said catherine, as they walk along the side of 
the river, “without thinking of the south of france.” 

“you have been abroad then?” said henry, a little surprised. 

“oh! no, i only mean what i have read about. it always put me in mind 
of the country that emily and her father travelled through, in the 
mystery of udolpho. but you never read novels, i dare say?” 

“why not?” 

“because they are not clever enough for you--gentlemen read better 
books.” 

“the person, be it gentleman or lady, who has not pleasure in a good 
novel, must be intolerable stupid. i have read all mrs. radcliffe's 
works, and most of them with great pleasure. the mystery of udolpho, 
when i had once begun it, i could not lay down again; i remember 
finish it in two days--my hair standing on end the whole time.” 

“yes,” add miss tilney, “and i remember that you undertook to read it 
aloud to me, and that when i was call away for only five minutes to 
answer a note, instead of wait for me, you took the volume into the 
hermitage walk, and i was oblige to stay till you had finished it.” 

“thank you, eleanor--a most honourable testimony. you see, miss morland, 
the injustice of your suspicions. here was i, in my eager to get on, 
refuse to wait only five minutes for my sister, break the promise 
i had made of reading it aloud, and keeping her in suspense at a most 
interesting part, by running away with the volume, which, you are to 
observe, was her own, particularly her own. i am proud when i reflect on 
it, and i think it must establish me in your good opinion.” 

“i am very glad to hear it indeed, and now i shall never be ashamed of 
liking udolpho myself. but i really thought before, young men despise 
novel amazingly.” 

“it is amazingly; it may well suggest amaze if they do--for they 
read nearly as many as women. i myself have read hundred and hundreds. 
do not imagine that you can cope with me in a knowledge of julia and 
louisas. if we proceed to particulars, and engage in the never-ceasing 
inquiry of 'have you read this?' and 'have you read that?' i shall soon 
leave you as far behind me as--what shall i say?--i want an appropriate 
simile.--as far as your friend emily herself left poor valancourt when 
she went with her aunt into italy. consider how many years i have had 
the start of you. i had enter on my study at oxford, while you were 
a good little girl working your sampler at home!” 

“not very good, i am afraid. but now really, do not you think udolpho 
the nicest book in the world?” 

“the nicest--by which i suppose you mean the neatest. that must depend 
upon the binding.” 

“henry,” said miss tilney, “you are very impertinent. miss morland, he 
is treat you exactly as he do his sister. he is forever finding 
fault with me, for some incorrect of language, and now he is taking 
the same liberty with you. the word 'nicest,' as you use it, did not 
suit him; and you had better change it as soon as you can, or we shall 
be overpower with johnson and blair all the rest of the way.” 

“i am sure,” cry catherine, “i did not mean to say anything wrong; but 
it is a nice book, and why should not i call it so?” 

“very true,” said henry, “and this is a very nice day, and we are taking 
a very nice walk, and you are two very nice young ladies. oh! it is a 
very nice word indeed! it do for everything. originally perhaps it 
was applied only to express neatness, propriety, delicacy, or 
refinement--people were nice in their dress, in their sentiments, or 
their choice. but now every commendation on every subject is comprise 
in that one word.” 

“while, in fact,” cry his sister, “it ought only to be applied to you, 
without any commendation at all. you are more nice than wise. come, 
miss morland, let us leave him to meditate over our fault in the utmost 
propriety of diction, while we praise udolpho in whatever terms we 
like best. it is a most interesting work. you are fond of that kind of 
reading?” 

“to say the truth, i do not much like any other.” 

“indeed!” 

“that is, i can read poetry and plays, and things of that sort, and 
do not dislike travels. but history, real solemn history, i cannot be 
interested in. can you?” 

“yes, i am fond of history.” 

“i wish i were too. i read it a little as a duty, but it tell me 
nothing that do not either vex or weary me. the quarrel of pope and 
kings, with war or pestilences, in every page; the men all so good for 
nothing, and hardly any women at all--it is very tiresome: and yet i 
often think it odd that it should be so dull, for a great deal of it 
must be invention. the speech that are put into the heroes' mouths, 
their thought and designs--the chief of all this must be invention, and 
invention is what delight me in other books.” 

“historians, you think,” said miss tilney, “are not happy in their 
flight of fancy. they display imagination without raise interest. i 
am fond of history--and am very well contented to take the false with 
the true. in the principal fact they have source of intelligence 
in former history and records, which may be as much depend on, 
i conclude, as anything that do not actually pass under one's own 
observation; and as for the little embellish you speak of, they are 
embellishments, and i like them as such. if a speech be well drawn up, 
i read it with pleasure, by whomsoever it may be made--and probably with 
much greater, if the production of mr. hume or mr. robertson, than if 
the genuine words of caractacus, agricola, or alfred the great.” 

“you are fond of history! and so are mr. allen and my father; and i have 
two brother who do not dislike it. so many instance within my small 
circle of friends is remarkable! at this rate, i shall not pity the 
writer of history any longer. if people like to read their books, it 
is all very well, but to be at so much trouble in filling great volumes, 
which, as i use to think, nobody would willing ever look into, to be 
labour only for the torment of little boys and girls, always struck 
me as a hard fate; and though i know it is all very right and necessary, 
i have often wonder at the person's courage that could sit down on 
purpose to do it.” 

“that little boys and girl should be tormented,” said henry, “is what 
no one at all acquaint with human nature in a civilize state can 
deny; but in behalf of our most distinguished historians, i must observe 
that they might well be offend at being supposed to have no higher 
aim, and that by their method and style, they are perfectly well 
qualified to torment reader of the most advanced reason and mature 
time of life. i use the verb 'to torment,' as i observe to be your own 
method, instead of 'to instruct,' supposing them to be now admitted as 
synonymous.” 

“you think me foolish to call instruction a torment, but if you had been 
as much use as myself to hear poor little children first learning their 
letters and then learning to spell, if you had ever seen how stupid they 
can be for a whole morning together, and how tired my poor mother is 
at the end of it, as i am in the habit of seeing almost every day of my 
life at home, you would allow that 'to torment' and 'to instruct' might 
sometimes be use as synonymous words.” 

“very probably. but historian are not accountable for the difficulty 
of learning to read; and even you yourself, who do not altogether seem 
particularly friendly to very severe, very intense application, may 
perhaps be brought to acknowledge that it is very well worth-while to 
be torment for two or three years of one's life, for the sake of 
being able to read all the rest of it. consider--if reading had not been 
taught, mrs. radcliffe would have written in vain--or perhaps might not 
have written at all.” 

catherine assented--and a very warm panegyric from her on that lady's 
merit closed the subject. the tilney were soon engaged in another on 
which she had nothing to say. they were view the country with the 
eyes of person accustomed to drawing, and decided on its capability of 
being form into pictures, with all the eager of real taste. here 
catherine was quite lost. she knew nothing of drawing--nothing of taste: 
and she listen to them with an attention which brought her little 
profit, for they talk in phrase which convey scarcely any idea 
to her. the little which she could understand, however, appear to 
contradict the very few notions she had entertain on the matter 
before. it seem as if a good view were no long to be taken from the 
top of an high hill, and that a clear blue sky was no long a proof 
of a fine day. she was heartily ashamed of her ignorance. a misplace 
shame. where people wish to attach, they should always be ignorant. 
to come with a well-informed mind is to come with an inability of 
administer to the vanity of others, which a sensible person would 
always wish to avoid. a woman especially, if she have the misfortune of 
knowing anything, should conceal it as well as she can. 

the advantage of natural folly in a beautiful girl have been already 
set forth by the capital pen of a sister author; and to her treatment 
of the subject i will only add, in justice to men, that though to the 
large and more trifling part of the sex, imbecility in female is a 
great enhance of their personal charms, there is a portion of them 
too reasonable and too well informed themselves to desire anything 
more in woman than ignorance. but catherine did not know her own 
advantages--did not know that a good-looking girl, with an affectionate 
heart and a very ignorant mind, cannot fail of attract a clever young 
man, unless circumstances are particularly untoward. in the present 
instance, she confessed and lament her want of knowledge, declared 
that she would give anything in the world to be able to draw; and 
a lecture on the picturesque immediately followed, in which his 
instruction were so clear that she soon began to see beauty in 
everything admire by him, and her attention was so earnest that he 
became perfectly satisfy of her have a great deal of natural taste. 
he talk of foregrounds, distances, and second distances--side-screens 
and perspectives--lights and shades; and catherine was so hopeful a 
scholar that when they gain the top of beechen cliff, she voluntary 
reject the whole city of bath as unworthy to make part of a landscape. 
delight with her progress, and fearful of weary her with too much 
wisdom at once, henry suffer the subject to decline, and by an easy 
transition from a piece of rocky fragment and the wither oak which 
he had placed near its summit, to oak in general, to forests, the 
enclosure of them, waste lands, crown lands and government, he shortly 
found himself arrive at politics; and from politics, it was an 
easy step to silence. the general pause which succeed his short 
disquisition on the state of the nation was put an end to by catherine, 
who, in rather a solemn tone of voice, utter these words, “i have 
heard that something very shocking indeed will soon come out in london.” 

miss tilney, to whom this was chiefly addressed, was startled, and 
hasty replied, “indeed! and of what nature?” 

“that i do not know, nor who is the author. i have only heard that it is 
to be more horrible than anything we have met with yet.” 

“good heaven! where could you hear of such a thing?” 

“a particular friend of mine had an account of it in a letter from 
london yesterday. it is to be uncommonly dreadful. i shall expect murder 
and everything of the kind.” 

“you speak with astonish composure! but i hope your friend's account 
have been exaggerated; and if such a design is known beforehand, proper 
measure will undoubted be taken by government to prevent its coming 
to effect.” 

“government,” said henry, endeavour not to smile, “neither desire 
nor dare to interfere in such matters. there must be murder; and 
government care not how much.” 

the ladies stared. he laughed, and added, “come, shall i make you 
understand each other, or leave you to puzzle out an explanation as 
you can? no--i will be noble. i will prove myself a man, no less by the 
generous of my soul than the clear of my head. i have no patience 
with such of my sex as disdain to let themselves sometimes down to the 
comprehension of yours. perhaps the abilities of women are neither sound 
nor acute--neither vigorous nor keen. perhaps they may want observation, 
discernment, judgment, fire, genius, and wit.” 

“miss morland, do not mind what he says; but have the goodness to 
satisfy me as to this dreadful riot.” 

“riot! what riot?” 

“my dear eleanor, the riot is only in your own brain. the confusion 
there is scandalous. miss morland has been talk of nothing more 
dreadful than a new publication which is shortly to come out, in three 
duodecimo volumes, two hundred and seventy-six page in each, with 
a frontispiece to the first, of two tombstone and a lantern--do you 
understand? and you, miss morland--my stupid sister has mistaken all 
your clearest expressions. you talk of expect horrors in london--and 
instead of instantly conceiving, as any rational creature would have 
done, that such words could relate only to a circulate library, she 
immediately picture to herself a mob of three thousand men assemble 
in st. george's fields, the bank attacked, the tower threatened, the 
street of london flowing with blood, a detachment of the twelfth light 
dragoon (the hope of the nation) call up from northampton to quell 
the insurgents, and the gallant captain frederick tilney, in the 
moment of charge at the head of his troop, knock off his horse by a 
brickbat from an upper window. forgive her stupidity. the fear of the 
sister have add to the weakness of the woman; but she is by no means a 
simpleton in general.” 

catherine look grave. “and now, henry,” said miss tilney, “that you 
have made us understand each other, you may as well make miss morland 
understand yourself--unless you mean to have her think you intolerable 
rude to your sister, and a great brute in your opinion of women in 
general. miss morland is not use to your odd ways.” 

“i shall be most happy to make her better acquaint with them.” 

“no doubt; but that is no explanation of the present.” 

“what am i to do?” 

“you know what you ought to do. clear your character handsome before 
her. tell her that you think very highly of the understanding of women.” 

“miss morland, i think very highly of the understanding of all the women 
in the world--especially of those--whoever they may be--with whom i 
happen to be in company.” 

“that is not enough. be more serious.” 

“miss morland, no one can think more highly of the understanding of 
women than i do. in my opinion, nature has given them so much that they 
never find it necessary to use more than half.” 

“we shall get nothing more serious from him now, miss morland. he is 
not in a sober mood. but i do assure you that he must be entire 
misunderstood, if he can ever appear to say an unjust thing of any woman 
at all, or an unkind one of me.” 

it was no effort to catherine to believe that henry tilney could never 
be wrong. his manner might sometimes surprise, but his meaning must 
always be just: and what she did not understand, she was almost as ready 
to admire, as what she did. the whole walk was delightful, and though it 
end too soon, its conclusion was delightful too; her friends attend 
her into the house, and miss tilney, before they parted, address 
herself with respectful form, as much to mrs. allen as to catherine, 
petition for the pleasure of her company to dinner on the day after 
the next. no difficulty was made on mrs. allen's side, and the only 
difficulty on catherine's was in conceal the excess of her pleasure. 

the morning had pass away so charming as to banish all her 
friendship and natural affection, for no thought of isabella or james 
had cross her during their walk. when the tilney were gone, she 
became amiable again, but she was amiable for some time to little 
effect; mrs. allen had no intelligence to give that could relieve her 
anxiety; she had heard nothing of any of them. towards the end of the 
morning, however, catherine, have occasion for some indispensable yard 
of ribbon which must be bought without a moment's delay, walk out into 
the town, and in bond street overtook the second miss thorpe as she was 
loiter towards edgar's building between two of the sweetest girl in 
the world, who had been her dear friends all the morning. from her, she 
soon learned that the party to clifton had taken place. “they set off at 
eight this morning,” said miss anne, “and i am sure i do not envy 
them their drive. i think you and i are very well off to be out of the 
scrape. it must be the dullest thing in the world, for there is not a 
soul at clifton at this time of year. belle went with your brother, and 
john drove maria.” 

catherine spoke the pleasure she really felt on hearing this part of the 
arrangement. 

“oh! yes,” rejoin the other, “maria is gone. she was quite wild to go. 
she thought it would be something very fine. i cannot say i admire her 
taste; and for my part, i was determined from the first not to go, if 
they pressed me ever so much.” 

catherine, a little doubtful of this, could not help answering, “i wish 
you could have gone too. it is a pity you could not all go.” 

“thank you; but it is quite a matter of indifference to me. indeed, i 
would not have gone on any account. i was saying so to emily and sophia 
when you overtook us.” 

catherine was still unconvinced; but glad that anne should have the 
friendship of an emily and a sophia to console her, she bade her adieu 
without much uneasiness, and return home, pleased that the party had 
not been prevent by her refuse to join it, and very heartily wish 
that it might be too pleasant to allow either james or isabella to 
resent her resistance any longer. 




chapter 15 


early the next day, a note from isabella, speak peace and tender 
in every line, and entreat the immediate presence of her friend on 
a matter of the utmost importance, hasten catherine, in the happiest 
state of confidence and curiosity, to edgar's buildings. the two 
youngest miss thorpe were by themselves in the parlour; and, on anne's 
quit it to call her sister, catherine took the opportunity of ask 
the other for some particulars of their yesterday's party. maria desire 
no greater pleasure than to speak of it; and catherine immediately 
learnt that it had been altogether the most delightful scheme in the 
world, that nobody could imagine how charming it had been, and that 
it had been more delightful than anybody could conceive. such was the 
information of the first five minutes; the second unfold thus much in 
detail--that they had driven directly to the york hotel, ate some soup, 
and bespoke an early dinner, walk down to the pump-room, taste the 
water, and laid out some shilling in purse and spars; thence adjourn 
to eat ice at a pastry-cook's, and hurry back to the hotel, swallow 
their dinner in haste, to prevent being in the dark; and then had a 
delightful drive back, only the moon was not up, and it rain a little, 
and mr. morland's horse was so tired he could hardly get it along. 

catherine listen with heartfelt satisfaction. it appear that blaize 
castle had never been thought of; and, as for all the rest, there was 
nothing to regret for half an instant. maria's intelligence conclude 
with a tender effusion of pity for her sister anne, whom she represent 
as insupportable cross, from being exclude the party. 

“she will never forgive me, i am sure; but, you know, how could i help 
it? john would have me go, for he vow he would not drive her, because 
she had such thick ankles. i dare say she will not be in good humour 
again this month; but i am determined i will not be cross; it is not a 
little matter that put me out of temper.” 

isabella now enter the room with so eager a step, and a look of such 
happy importance, as engaged all her friend's notice. maria was without 
ceremony sent away, and isabella, embrace catherine, thus began: “yes, 
my dear catherine, it is so indeed; your penetration has not deceive 
you. oh! that arch eye of yours! it see through everything.” 

catherine reply only by a look of wonder ignorance. 

“nay, my beloved, sweetest friend,” continue the other, “compose 
yourself. i am amazing agitated, as you perceive. let us sit down and 
talk in comfort. well, and so you guess it the moment you had my note? 
sly creature! oh! my dear catherine, you alone, who know my heart, can 
judge of my present happiness. your brother is the most charming of 
men. i only wish i were more worthy of him. but what will your excellent 
father and mother say? oh! heavens! when i think of them i am so 
agitated!” 

catherine's understanding began to awake: an idea of the truth sudden 
dart into her mind; and, with the natural blush of so new an emotion, 
she cry out, “good heaven! my dear isabella, what do you mean? can 
you--can you really be in love with james?” 

this bold surmise, however, she soon learnt comprehend but half the 
fact. the anxious affection, which she was accused of have continual 
watch in isabella's every look and action, had, in the course of their 
yesterday's party, received the delightful confession of an equal love. 
her heart and faith were alike engaged to james. never had catherine 
listen to anything so full of interest, wonder, and joy. her brother 
and her friend engaged! new to such circumstances, the importance of 
it appear unspeakable great, and she contemplate it as one of those 
grand events, of which the ordinary course of life can hardly afford a 
return. the strength of her feelings she could not express; the nature 
of them, however, contented her friend. the happiness of have such a 
sister was their first effusion, and the fair ladies mingle in embrace 
and tear of joy. 

delighting, however, as catherine sincerely did in the prospect of the 
connection, it must be acknowledge that isabella far surpass her 
in tender anticipations. “you will be so infinite dear to me, my 
catherine, than either anne or maria: i feel that i shall be so much 
more attach to my dear morland's family than to my own.” 

this was a pitch of friendship beyond catherine. 

“you are so like your dear brother,” continue isabella, “that i quite 
dote on you the first moment i saw you. but so it always is with me; 
the first moment settle everything. the very first day that morland 
came to us last christmas--the very first moment i beheld him--my heart 
was irrecoverable gone. i remember i wore my yellow gown, with my hair 
done up in braids; and when i came into the drawing-room, and john 
introduce him, i thought i never saw anybody so handsome before.” 

here catherine secret acknowledge the power of love; for, though 
exceedingly fond of her brother, and partial to all his endowments, she 
had never in her life thought him handsome. 

“i remember too, miss andrews drank tea with us that evening, and wore 
her puce-coloured sarsenet; and she look so heavenly that i thought 
your brother must certainly fall in love with her; i could not sleep 
a wink all right for thinking of it. oh! catherine, the many sleepless 
nights i have had on your brother's account! i would not have you suffer 
half what i have done! i am grown wretched thin, i know; but i will 
not pain you by describe my anxiety; you have seen enough of it. i 
feel that i have betray myself perpetually--so unguarded in speak 
of my partiality for the church! but my secret i was always sure would 
be safe with you.” 

catherine felt that nothing could have been safer; but ashamed of an 
ignorance little expected, she dare no long contest the point, 
nor refuse to have been as full of arch penetration and affectionate 
sympathy as isabella chose to consider her. her brother, she found, 
was prepare to set off with all speed to fullerton, to make known his 
situation and ask consent; and here was a source of some real agitation 
to the mind of isabella. catherine endeavour to persuade her, as she 
was herself persuaded, that her father and mother would never oppose 
their son's wishes. “it is impossible,” said she, “for parent to be 
more kind, or more desirous of their children's happiness; i have no 
doubt of their consent immediately.” 

“morland say exactly the same,” reply isabella; “and yet i dare not 
expect it; my fortune will be so small; they never can consent to it. 
your brother, who might marry anybody!” 

here catherine again discern the force of love. 

“indeed, isabella, you are too humble. the difference of fortune can be 
nothing to signify.” 

“oh! my sweet catherine, in your generous heart i know it would signify 
nothing; but we must not expect such disinterested in many. as for 
myself, i am sure i only wish our situation were reversed. had i the 
command of millions, were i mistress of the whole world, your brother 
would be my only choice.” 

this charming sentiment, recommend as much by sense as novelty, 
gave catherine a most pleasing remembrance of all the heroin of her 
acquaintance; and she thought her friend never look more lovely than 
in utter the grand idea. “i am sure they will consent,” was her 
frequent declaration; “i am sure they will be delight with you.” 

“for my own part,” said isabella, “my wish are so moderate that the 
smallest income in nature would be enough for me. where people are 
really attached, poverty itself is wealth; grandeur i detest: i would 
not settle in london for the universe. a cottage in some retired village 
would be ecstasy. there are some charming little villa about richmond.” 

“richmond!” cry catherine. “you must settle near fullerton. you must 
be near us.” 

“i am sure i shall be miserable if we do not. if i can but be near you, 
i shall be satisfied. but this is idle talking! i will not allow myself 
to think of such things, till we have your father's answer. morland 
say that by send it tonight to salisbury, we may have it tomorrow. 
tomorrow? i know i shall never have courage to open the letter. i know 
it will be the death of me.” 

a reverie succeed this conviction--and when isabella spoke again, it 
was to resolve on the quality of her wedding-gown. 

their conference was put an end to by the anxious young lover himself, 
who came to breathe his parting sigh before he set off for wiltshire. 
catherine wish to congratulate him, but knew not what to say, and her 
eloquence was only in her eyes. from them, however, the eight parts of 
speech shone out most expressively, and james could combine them with 
ease. impatient for the realization of all that he hope at home, his 
adieu were not long; and they would have been yet shorter, had he not 
been frequent detain by the urgent entreaty of his fair one that 
he would go. twice was he call almost from the door by her eager 
to have him gone. “indeed, morland, i must drive you away. consider how 
far you have to ride. i cannot bear to see you linger so. for heaven's 
sake, waste no more time. there, go, go--i insist on it.” 

the two friends, with heart now more united than ever, were inseparable 
for the day; and in scheme of sisterly happiness the hour flew along. 
mrs. thorpe and her son, who were acquaint with everything, and 
who seem only to want mr. morland's consent, to consider isabella's 
engagement as the most fortunate circumstance imaginable for their 
family, were allow to join their counsels, and add their quota of 
significant looks and mysterious expression to fill up the measure 
of curiosity to be raise in the unprivileged younger sisters. to 
catherine's simple feelings, this odd sort of reserve seem neither 
kindly meant, nor consistent supported; and its unkind she would 
hardly have forborne point out, had its inconsistent been less their 
friend; but anne and maria soon set her heart at ease by the sagacity of 
their “i know what”; and the evening was spent in a sort of war of wit, 
a display of family ingenuity, on one side in the mystery of an affected 
secret, on the other of undefined discovery, all equally acute. 

catherine was with her friend again the next day, endeavour to 
support her spirits and while away the many tedious hour before 
the delivery of the letters; a needful exertion, for as the time 
of reasonable expectation drew near, isabella became more and more 
desponding, and before the letter arrived, had work herself into a 
state of real distress. but when it did come, where could distress 
be found? “i have had no difficulty in gain the consent of my kind 
parents, and am promise that everything in their power shall be done to 
forward my happiness,” were the first three lines, and in one moment 
all was joyful security. the brightest glow was instantly spread over 
isabella's features, all care and anxiety seem removed, her spirits 
became almost too high for control, and she call herself without 
scruple the happiest of mortals. 

mrs. thorpe, with tear of joy, embrace her daughter, her son, her 
visitor, and could have embrace half the inhabitant of bath with 
satisfaction. her heart was overflow with tenderness. it was “dear 
john” and “dear catherine” at every word; “dear anne and dear maria” 
must immediately be made share in their felicity; and two “dears” at 
once before the name of isabella were not more than that beloved child 
had now well earned. john himself was no skulk in joy. he not only 
bestow on mr. morland the high commendation of being one of the finest 
fellow in the world, but swore off many sentence in his praise. 

the letter, whence sprang all this felicity, was short, contain 
little more than this assurance of success; and every particular was 
defer till james could write again. but for particulars isabella 
could well afford to wait. the needful was comprise in mr. morland's 
promise; his honour was pledge to make everything easy; and by what 
means their income was to be formed, whether landed property were to 
be resigned, or fund money made over, was a matter in which her 
disinterested spirit took no concern. she knew enough to feel secure of 
an honourable and speedy establishment, and her imagination took a rapid 
flight over its attendant felicities. she saw herself at the end of 
a few weeks, the gaze and admiration of every new acquaintance at 
fullerton, the envy of every value old friend in putney, with a 
carriage at her command, a new name on her tickets, and a brilliant 
exhibition of hoop ring on her finger. 

when the contents of the letter were ascertained, john thorpe, who had 
only wait its arrival to begin his journey to london, prepared to set 
off. “well, miss morland,” said he, on finding her alone in the parlour, 
“i am come to bid you good-bye.” catherine wish him a good journey. 
without appear to hear her, he walk to the window, fidget about, 
hum a tune, and seem wholly self-occupied. 

“shall not you be late at devizes?” said catherine. he made no answer; 
but after a minute's silence burst out with, “a famous good thing this 
marry scheme, upon my soul! a clever fancy of morland's and belle's. 
what do you think of it, miss morland? i say it is no bad notion.” 

“i am sure i think it a very good one.” 

“do you? that's honest, by heavens! i am glad you are no enemy to 
matrimony, however. did you ever hear the old song 'going to one wedding 
bring on another?' i say, you will come to belle's wedding, i hope.” 

“yes; i have promise your sister to be with her, if possible.” 

“and then you know”--twisting himself about and force a foolish 
laugh--“i say, then you know, we may try the truth of this same old 
song.” 

“may we? but i never sing. well, i wish you a good journey. i dine with 
miss tilney today, and must now be go home.” 

“nay, but there is no such confounded hurry. who know when we may 
be together again? not but that i shall be down again by the end of a 
fortnight, and a devilish long fortnight it will appear to me.” 

“then why do you stay away so long?” reply catherine--finding that he 
wait for an answer. 

“that is kind of you, however--kind and good-natured. i shall not forget 
it in a hurry. but you have more good nature and all that, than anybody 
living, i believe. a monstrous deal of good nature, and it is not only 
good nature, but you have so much, so much of everything; and then you 
have such--upon my soul, i do not know anybody like you.” 

“oh! dear, there are a great many people like me, i dare say, only a 
great deal better. good morning to you.” 

“but i say, miss morland, i shall come and pay my respects at fullerton 
before it is long, if not disagreeable.” 

“pray do. my father and mother will be very glad to see you.” 

“and i hope--i hope, miss morland, you will not be sorry to see me.” 

“oh! dear, not at all. there are very few people i am sorry to see. 
company is always cheerful.” 

“that is just my way of thinking. give me but a little cheerful company, 
let me only have the company of the people i love, let me only be where 
i like and with whom i like, and the devil take the rest, say i. and 
i am heartily glad to hear you say the same. but i have a notion, miss 
morland, you and i think pretty much alike upon most matters.” 

“perhaps we may; but it is more than i ever thought of. and as to most 
matters, to say the truth, there are not many that i know my own mind 
about.” 

“by jove, no more do i. it is not my way to bother my brains with what 
do not concern me. my notion of things is simple enough. let me only 
have the girl i like, say i, with a comfortable house over my head, and 
what care i for all the rest? fortune is nothing. i am sure of a good 
income of my own; and if she had not a penny, why, so much the better.” 

“very true. i think like you there. if there is a good fortune on one 
side, there can be no occasion for any on the other. no matter which 
has it, so that there is enough. i hate the idea of one great fortune 
look out for another. and to marry for money i think the wickedest 
thing in existence. good day. we shall be very glad to see you at 
fullerton, whenever it is convenient.” and away she went. it was not in 
the power of all his gallantry to detain her longer. with such news to 
communicate, and such a visit to prepare for, her departure was not 
to be delay by anything in his nature to urge; and she hurried away, 
leave him to the undivided consciousness of his own happy address, and 
her explicit encouragement. 

the agitation which she had herself experienced on first learning her 
brother's engagement made her expect to raise no inconsiderable emotion 
in mr. and mrs. allen, by the communication of the wonderful event. how 
great was her disappointment! the important affair, which many words of 
preparation usher in, had been foreseen by them both ever since 
her brother's arrival; and all that they felt on the occasion was 
comprehend in a wish for the young people's happiness, with a remark, 
on the gentleman's side, in favour of isabella's beauty, and on the 
lady's, of her great good luck. it was to catherine the most surprising 
insensibility. the disclosure, however, of the great secret of james's 
go to fullerton the day before, did raise some emotion in mrs. allen. 
she could not listen to that with perfect calmness, but repeatedly 
regret the necessity of its concealment, wish she could have known 
his intention, wish she could have seen him before he went, as she 
should certainly have trouble him with her best regards to his father 
and mother, and her kind compliments to all the skinners. 




chapter 16 


catherine's expectations of pleasure from her visit in milsom street 
were so very high that disappointment was inevitable; and accordingly, 
though she was most polite received by general tilney, and kindly 
welcome by his daughter, though henry was at home, and no one else of 
the party, she found, on her return, without spend many hour in 
the examination of her feelings, that she had gone to her appointment 
prepare for happiness which it had not afforded. instead of finding 
herself improve in acquaintance with miss tilney, from the intercourse 
of the day, she seem hardly so intimate with her as before; instead 
of seeing henry tilney to greater advantage than ever, in the ease of a 
family party, he had never said so little, nor been so little agreeable; 
and, in spite of their father's great civility to her--in spite of his 
thanks, invitations, and compliments--it had been a release to get 
away from him. it puzzle her to account for all this. it could not 
be general tilney's fault. that he was perfectly agreeable and 
good-natured, and altogether a very charming man, did not admit of a 
doubt, for he was tall and handsome, and henry's father. he could not 
be accountable for his children's want of spirits, or for her want of 
enjoyment in his company. the former she hope at last might have 
been accidental, and the latter she could only attribute to her own 
stupidity. isabella, on hearing the particulars of the visit, gave 
a different explanation: “it was all pride, pride, insufferable 
haughty and pride! she had long suspect the family to be very 
high, and this made it certain. such insole of behaviour as miss 
tilney's she had never heard of in her life! not to do the honours of 
her house with common good breeding! to behave to her guest with such 
superciliousness! hardly even to speak to her!” 

“but it was not so bad as that, isabella; there was no superciliousness; 
she was very civil.” 

“oh! don't defend her! and then the brother, he, who had appear 
so attach to you! good heavens! well, some people's feelings are 
incomprehensible. and so he hardly look once at you the whole day?” 

“i do not say so; but he did not seem in good spirits.” 

“how contemptible! of all things in the world inconstant is my 
aversion. let me entreat you never to think of him again, my dear 
catherine; indeed he is unworthy of you.” 

“unworthy! i do not suppose he ever think of me.” 

“that is exactly what i say; he never think of you. such fickleness! 
oh! how different to your brother and to mine! i really believe john has 
the most constant heart.” 

“but as for general tilney, i assure you it would be impossible for 
anybody to behave to me with greater civility and attention; it seem 
to be his only care to entertain and make me happy.” 

“oh! i know no harm of him; i do not suspect him of pride. i believe he 
is a very gentleman-like man. john think very well of him, and john's 
judgment--” 

“well, i shall see how they behave to me this evening; we shall meet 
them at the rooms.” 

“and must i go?” 

“do not you intend it? i thought it was all settled.” 

“nay, since you make such a point of it, i can refuse you nothing. but 
do not insist upon my being very agreeable, for my heart, you know, will 
be some forty mile off. and as for dancing, do not mention it, i beg; 
that is quite out of the question. charles hodge will plague me to 
death, i dare say; but i shall cut him very short. ten to one but he 
guess the reason, and that is exactly what i want to avoid, so i shall 
insist on his keeping his conjecture to himself.” 

isabella's opinion of the tilney did not influence her friend; she was 
sure there had been no insole in the manners either of brother or 
sister; and she did not credit there being any pride in their hearts. 
the evening reward her confidence; she was met by one with the same 
kindness, and by the other with the same attention, as heretofore: miss 
tilney took pains to be near her, and henry ask her to dance. 

have heard the day before in milsom street that their elder brother, 
captain tilney, was expect almost every hour, she was at no loss for 
the name of a very fashionable-looking, handsome young man, whom she had 
never seen before, and who now evidently belong to their party. she 
look at him with great admiration, and even supposed it possible that 
some people might think him handsome than his brother, though, in her 
eyes, his air was more assuming, and his countenance less prepossessing. 
his taste and manners were beyond a doubt decidedly inferior; for, 
within her hearing, he not only protest against every thought of 
dance himself, but even laugh openly at henry for finding it 
possible. from the latter circumstance it may be presume that, whatever 
might be our heroine's opinion of him, his admiration of her was not 
of a very dangerous kind; not likely to produce animosity between the 
brothers, nor persecution to the lady. he cannot be the instigate of 
the three villain in horsemen's greatcoats, by whom she will hereafter 
be forced into a traveling-chaise and four, which will drive off with 
incredible speed. catherine, meanwhile, undisturbed by presentiment of 
such an evil, or of any evil at all, except that of have but a short 
set to dance down, enjoy her usual happiness with henry tilney, 
listen with sparkle eyes to everything he said; and, in finding him 
irresistible, becoming so herself. 

at the end of the first dance, captain tilney came towards them again, 
and, much to catherine's dissatisfaction, pull his brother away. they 
retired whisper together; and, though her delicate sensibility did 
not take immediate alarm, and lay it down as fact, that captain tilney 
must have heard some malevolent misrepresent of her, which he now 
hasten to communicate to his brother, in the hope of separate them 
forever, she could not have her partner convey from her sight without 
very uneasy sensations. her suspense was of full five minutes' duration; 
and she was beginning to think it a very long quarter of an hour, when 
they both returned, and an explanation was given, by henry's request 
to know if she thought her friend, miss thorpe, would have any objection 
to dancing, as his brother would be most happy to be introduce to 
her. catherine, without hesitation, reply that she was very sure miss 
thorpe did not mean to dance at all. the cruel reply was pass on to 
the other, and he immediately walk away. 

“your brother will not mind it, i know,” said she, “because i heard him 
say before that he hate dancing; but it was very good-natured in him 
to think of it. i suppose he saw isabella sitting down, and fancy she 
might wish for a partner; but he is quite mistaken, for she would not 
dance upon any account in the world.” 

henry smiled, and said, “how very little trouble it can give you to 
understand the motive of other people's actions.” 

“why? what do you mean?” 

“with you, it is not, how is such a one likely to be influenced, what 
is the inducement most likely to act upon such a person's feelings, age, 
situation, and probable habit of life considered--but, how should i be 
influenced, what would be my inducement in acting so and so?” 

“i do not understand you.” 

“then we are on very unequal terms, for i understand you perfectly 
well.” 

“me? yes; i cannot speak well enough to be unintelligible.” 

“bravo! an excellent satire on modern language.” 

“but pray tell me what you mean.” 

“shall i indeed? do you really desire it? but you are not aware of the 
consequences; it will involve you in a very cruel embarrassment, and 
certainly bring on a disagreement between us.” 

“no, no; it shall not do either; i am not afraid.” 

“well, then, i only meant that your attribute my brother's wish of 
dance with miss thorpe to good nature alone convinced me of your being 
superior in good nature yourself to all the rest of the world.” 

catherine blush and disclaimed, and the gentleman's prediction were 
verified. there was a something, however, in his words which repaid her 
for the pain of confusion; and that something occupy her mind so much 
that she drew back for some time, forget to speak or to listen, and 
almost forget where she was; till, rouse by the voice of isabella, 
she look up and saw her with captain tilney prepare to give them 
hand across. 

isabella shrug her shoulder and smiled, the only explanation of this 
extraordinary change which could at that time be given; but as it 
was not quite enough for catherine's comprehension, she spoke her 
astonishment in very plain terms to her partner. 

“i cannot think how it could happen! isabella was so determined not to 
dance.” 

“and did isabella never change her mind before?” 

“oh! but, because--and your brother! after what you told him from me, 
how could he think of go to ask her?” 

“i cannot take surprise to myself on that head. you bid me be surprise 
on your friend's account, and therefore i am; but as for my brother, his 
conduct in the business, i must own, has been no more than i believe 
him perfectly equal to. the fair of your friend was an open 
attraction; her firmness, you know, could only be understood by 
yourself.” 

“you are laughing; but, i assure you, isabella is very firm in general.” 

“it is as much as should be said of anyone. to be always firm must be 
to be often obstinate. when properly to relax is the trial of judgment; 
and, without reference to my brother, i really think miss thorpe has by 
no means chosen ill in fix on the present hour.” 

the friends were not able to get together for any confidential discourse 
till all the dance was over; but then, as they walk about the room 
arm in arm, isabella thus explain herself: “i do not wonder at your 
surprise; and i am really fatigue to death. he is such a rattle! 
amuse enough, if my mind had been disengaged; but i would have given 
the world to sit still.” 

“then why did not you?” 

“oh! my dear! it would have look so particular; and you know how i 
abhor do that. i refuse him as long as i possibly could, but he 
would take no denial. you have no idea how he pressed me. i beg him 
to excuse me, and get some other partner--but no, not he; after aspire 
to my hand, there was nobody else in the room he could bear to think of; 
and it was not that he want merely to dance, he want to be with 
me. oh! such nonsense! i told him he had taken a very unlikely way to 
prevail upon me; for, of all things in the world, i hate fine speech 
and compliments; and so--and so then i found there would be no peace if 
i did not stand up. besides, i thought mrs. hughes, who introduce him, 
might take it ill if i did not: and your dear brother, i am sure he 
would have been miserable if i had sat down the whole evening. i am 
so glad it is over! my spirits are quite jaded with listen to his 
nonsense: and then, being such a smart young fellow, i saw every eye was 
upon us.” 

“he is very handsome indeed.” 

“handsome! yes, i suppose he may. i dare say people would admire him 
in general; but he is not at all in my style of beauty. i hate a florid 
complexion and dark eyes in a man. however, he is very well. amazing 
conceited, i am sure. i took him down several times, you know, in my 
way.” 

when the young ladies next met, they had a far more interesting subject 
to discuss. james morland's second letter was then received, and the 
kind intentions of his father fully explained. a living, of which mr. 
morland was himself patron and incumbent, of about four hundred pound 
yearly value, was to be resigned to his son as soon as he should be 
old enough to take it; no trifling deduction from the family income, no 
niggardly assignment to one of ten children. an estate of at least equal 
value, moreover, was assured as his future inheritance. 

james express himself on the occasion with becoming gratitude; and 
the necessity of wait between two and three years before they could 
marry, being, however unwelcome, no more than he had expected, was borne 
by him without discontent. catherine, whose expectations had been as 
unfixed as her idea of her father's income, and whose judgment was now 
entire led by her brother, felt equally well satisfied, and heartily 
congratulate isabella on have everything so pleasant settled. 

“it is very charming indeed,” said isabella, with a grave face. “mr. 
morland has behave vastly handsome indeed,” said the gentle mrs. 
thorpe, look anxious at her daughter. “i only wish i could do as 
much. one could not expect more from him, you know. if he find he 
can do more by and by, i dare say he will, for i am sure he must be an 
excellent good-hearted man. four hundred is but a small income to begin 
on indeed, but your wishes, my dear isabella, are so moderate, you do 
not consider how little you ever want, my dear.” 

“it is not on my own account i wish for more; but i cannot bear to 
be the means of injure my dear morland, making him sit down upon an 
income hardly enough to find one in the common necessaries of life. for 
myself, it is nothing; i never think of myself.” 

“i know you never do, my dear; and you will always find your reward in 
the affection it make everybody feel for you. there never was a young 
woman so beloved as you are by everybody that know you; and i dare say 
when mr. morland see you, my dear child--but do not let us distress 
our dear catherine by talk of such things. mr. morland has behave so 
very handsome, you know. i always heard he was a most excellent man; 
and you know, my dear, we are not to suppose but what, if you had had a 
suitable fortune, he would have come down with something more, for i am 
sure he must be a most liberal-minded man.” 

“nobody can think better of mr. morland than i do, i am sure. but 
everybody has their failing, you know, and everybody has a right to 
do what they like with their own money.” catherine was hurt by these 
insinuations. “i am very sure,” said she, “that my father has promise 
to do as much as he can afford.” 

isabella recollect herself. “as to that, my sweet catherine, there 
cannot be a doubt, and you know me well enough to be sure that a much 
small income would satisfy me. it is not the want of more money that 
make me just at present a little out of spirits; i hate money; and if 
our union could take place now upon only fifty pound a year, i should 
not have a wish unsatisfied. ah! my catherine, you have found me out. 
there's the sting. the long, long, endless two years and half that are 
to pass before your brother can hold the living.” 

“yes, yes, my darling isabella,” said mrs. thorpe, “we perfectly see 
into your heart. you have no disguise. we perfectly understand the 
present vexation; and everybody must love you the better for such a 
noble honest affection.” 

catherine's uncomfortable feelings began to lessen. she endeavour to 
believe that the delay of the marriage was the only source of isabella's 
regret; and when she saw her at their next interview as cheerful and 
amiable as ever, endeavour to forget that she had for a minute thought 
otherwise. james soon follow his letter, and was received with the 
most gratifying kindness. 




chapter 17 


the allen had now enter on the sixth week of their stay in bath; and 
whether it should be the last was for some time a question, to which 
catherine listen with a beating heart. to have her acquaintance with 
the tilney end so soon was an evil which nothing could counterbalance. 
her whole happiness seem at stake, while the affair was in suspense, 
and everything secure when it was determined that the lodgings should 
be taken for another fortnight. what this additional fortnight was to 
produce to her beyond the pleasure of sometimes seeing henry tilney made 
but a small part of catherine's speculation. once or twice indeed, since 
james's engagement had taught her what could be done, she had got so 
far as to indulge in a secret “perhaps,” but in general the felicity of 
being with him for the present bound her views: the present was now 
comprise in another three weeks, and her happiness being certain for 
that period, the rest of her life was at such a distance as to excite 
but little interest. in the course of the morning which saw this 
business arranged, she visit miss tilney, and pour forth her 
joyful feelings. it was doom to be a day of trial. no soon had she 
express her delight in mr. allen's lengthen stay than miss tilney 
told her of her father's have just determined upon quit bath 
by the end of another week. here was a blow! the past suspense of 
the morning had been ease and quiet to the present disappointment. 
catherine's countenance fell, and in a voice of most sincere concern she 
echo miss tilney's conclude words, “by the end of another week!” 

“yes, my father can seldom be prevail on to give the waters what i 
think a fair trial. he has been disappointed of some friends' arrival 
whom he expect to meet here, and as he is now pretty well, is in a 
hurry to get home.” 

“i am very sorry for it,” said catherine dejectedly; “if i had known 
this before--” 

“perhaps,” said miss tilney in an embarrass manner, “you would be so 
good--it would make me very happy if--” 

the entrance of her father put a stop to the civility, which catherine 
was beginning to hope might introduce a desire of their corresponding. 
after address her with his usual politeness, he turn to his 
daughter and said, “well, eleanor, may i congratulate you on being 
successful in your application to your fair friend?” 

“i was just beginning to make the request, sir, as you came in.” 

“well, proceed by all means. i know how much your heart is in it. my 
daughter, miss morland,” he continued, without leave his daughter time 
to speak, “has been form a very bold wish. we leave bath, as she has 
perhaps told you, on saturday se'nnight. a letter from my steward tell 
me that my presence is want at home; and being disappointed in my hope 
of seeing the marquis of longtown and general courteney here, some of 
my very old friends, there is nothing to detain me long in bath. and 
could we carry our selfish point with you, we should leave it without a 
single regret. can you, in short, be prevail on to quit this scene 
of public triumph and oblige your friend eleanor with your company in 
gloucestershire? i am almost ashamed to make the request, though its 
presumption would certainly appear greater to every creature in bath 
than yourself. modesty such as yours--but not for the world would i pain 
it by open praise. if you can be induce to honour us with a visit, 
you will make us happy beyond expression. 'tis true, we can offer you 
nothing like the gaiety of this lively place; we can tempt you neither 
by amusement nor splendour, for our mode of living, as you see, is plain 
and unpretending; yet no endeavour shall be wanting on our side to make 
northanger abbey not wholly disagreeable.” 

northanger abbey! these were thrill words, and wound up catherine's 
feelings to the highest point of ecstasy. her grateful and gratify 
heart could hardly restrain its expression within the language of 
tolerable calmness. to receive so flatter an invitation! to have her 
company so warm solicited! everything honourable and soothing, every 
present enjoyment, and every future hope was contained in it; and her 
acceptance, with only the saving clause of papa and mamma's approbation, 
was eager given. “i will write home directly,” said she, “and if they 
do not object, as i dare say they will not--” 

general tilney was not less sanguine, have already wait on her 
excellent friends in pulteney street, and obtain their sanction of 
his wishes. “since they can consent to part with you,” said he, “we may 
expect philosophy from all the world.” 

miss tilney was earnest, though gentle, in her secondary civilities, and 
the affair became in a few minutes as nearly settled as this necessary 
reference to fullerton would allow. 

the circumstances of the morning had led catherine's feelings through 
the variety of suspense, security, and disappointment; but they were 
now safe lodge in perfect bliss; and with spirits elated to rapture, 
with henry at her heart, and northanger abbey on her lips, she 
hurried home to write her letter. mr. and mrs. morland, rely on 
the discretion of the friends to whom they had already entrust their 
daughter, felt no doubt of the propriety of an acquaintance which had 
been form under their eye, and sent therefore by return of post their 
ready consent to her visit in gloucestershire. this indulgence, though 
not more than catherine had hope for, complete her conviction of being 
favoured beyond every other human creature, in friends and fortune, 
circumstance and chance. everything seem to cooperate for her 
advantage. by the kindness of her first friends, the allens, she had 
been introduce into scene where pleasure of every kind had met her. 
her feelings, her preferences, had each known the happiness of a return. 
wherever she felt attachment, she had been able to create it. the 
affection of isabella was to be secure to her in a sister. the tilneys, 
they, by whom, above all, she desire to be favourable thought of, 
outstrip even her wish in the flatter measure by which their 
intimacy was to be continued. she was to be their chosen visitor, she 
was to be for week under the same roof with the person whose society 
she mostly prized--and, in addition to all the rest, this roof was to 
be the roof of an abbey! her passion for ancient edifice was next in 
degree to her passion for henry tilney--and castle and abbey made 
usually the charm of those reverie which his image did not fill. to see 
and explore either the rampart and keep of the one, or the cloister 
of the other, had been for many week a darling wish, though to be more 
than the visitor of an hour had seem too nearly impossible for desire. 
and yet, this was to happen. with all the chance against her of house, 
hall, place, park, court, and cottage, northanger turn up an abbey, 
and she was to be its inhabitant. its long, damp passages, its narrow 
cell and ruin chapel, were to be within her daily reach, and she 
could not entire subdue the hope of some traditional legends, some 
awful memorial of an injure and ill-fated nun. 

it was wonderful that her friends should seem so little elated by the 
possession of such a home, that the consciousness of it should be so 
meek borne. the power of early habit only could account for it. a 
distinction to which they had been born gave no pride. their superior 
of abode was no more to them than their superior of person. 

many were the inquiry she was eager to make of miss tilney; but so 
active were her thoughts, that when these inquiry were answered, she 
was hardly more assured than before, of northanger abbey have been 
a richly endow convent at the time of the reformation, of its have 
fallen into the hand of an ancestor of the tilney on its dissolution, 
of a large portion of the ancient building still making a part of the 
present dwelling although the rest was decayed, or of its standing low 
in a valley, sheltered from the north and east by rising wood of oak. 




chapter 18 


with a mind thus full of happiness, catherine was hardly aware that two 
or three days had pass away, without her seeing isabella for more than 
a few minutes together. she began first to be sensible of this, and 
to sigh for her conversation, as she walk along the pump-room one 
morning, by mrs. allen's side, without anything to say or to hear; and 
scarcely had she felt a five minutes' longing of friendship, before the 
object of it appeared, and inviting her to a secret conference, led the 
way to a seat. “this is my favourite place,” said she as they sat 
down on a bench between the doors, which command a tolerable view of 
everybody enter at either; “it is so out of the way.” 

catherine, observing that isabella's eyes were continual bent towards 
one door or the other, as in eager expectation, and remember how 
often she had been false accused of being arch, thought the present a 
fine opportunity for being really so; and therefore gaily said, “do not 
be uneasy, isabella, james will soon be here.” 

“psha! my dear creature,” she replied, “do not think me such a simpleton 
as to be always wanting to confine him to my elbow. it would be hideous 
to be always together; we should be the jest of the place. and so you 
are go to northanger! i am amazing glad of it. it is one of the 
finest old place in england, i understand. i shall depend upon a most 
particular description of it.” 

“you shall certainly have the best in my power to give. but who are you 
look for? are your sister coming?” 

“i am not look for anybody. one's eyes must be somewhere, and you 
know what a foolish trick i have of fix mine, when my thought are an 
hundred mile off. i am amazing absent; i believe i am the most absent 
creature in the world. tilney say it is always the case with mind of a 
certain stamp.” 

“but i thought, isabella, you had something in particular to tell me?” 

“oh! yes, and so i have. but here is a proof of what i was saying. my 
poor head, i had quite forgot it. well, the thing is this: i have just 
had a letter from john; you can guess the contents.” 

“no, indeed, i cannot.” 

“my sweet love, do not be so abominable affected. what can he write 
about, but yourself? you know he is over head and ear in love with 
you.” 

“with me, dear isabella!” 

“nay, my sweetest catherine, this is being quite absurd! modesty, and 
all that, is very well in its way, but really a little common honesty is 
sometimes quite as becoming. i have no idea of being so overstrained! 
it is fishing for compliments. his attention were such as a child must 
have noticed. and it was but half an hour before he left bath that you 
gave him the most positive encouragement. he say so in this letter, 
say that he as good as made you an offer, and that you received his 
advances in the kindest way; and now he wants me to urge his suit, 
and say all manner of pretty things to you. so it is in vain to affect 
ignorance.” 

catherine, with all the earnest of truth, express her astonishment 
at such a charge, protest her innocence of every thought of mr. 
thorpe's being in love with her, and the consequent impossible of 
her have ever intended to encourage him. “as to any attention on his 
side, i do declare, upon my honour, i never was sensible of them for a 
moment--except just his ask me to dance the first day of his coming. 
and as to making me an offer, or anything like it, there must be some 
unaccountable mistake. i could not have misunderstood a thing of that 
kind, you know! and, as i ever wish to be believed, i solemn protest 
that no syllable of such a nature ever pass between us. the last half 
hour before he went away! it must be all and completely a mistake--for i 
did not see him once that whole morning.” 

“but that you certainly did, for you spent the whole morning in edgar's 
buildings--it was the day your father's consent came--and i am pretty 
sure that you and john were alone in the parlour some time before you 
left the house.” 

“are you? well, if you say it, it was so, i dare say--but for the life 
of me, i cannot recollect it. i do remember now being with you, and 
seeing him as well as the rest--but that we were ever alone for five 
minutes--however, it is not worth argue about, for whatever might pass 
on his side, you must be convinced, by my have no recollection of it, 
that i never thought, nor expected, nor wish for anything of the kind 
from him. i am excessive concerned that he should have any regard for 
me--but indeed it has been quite unintentional on my side; i never had 
the smallest idea of it. pray undeceive him as soon as you can, and tell 
him i beg his pardon--that is--i do not know what i ought to say--but 
make him understand what i mean, in the properest way. i would not speak 
disrespectful of a brother of yours, isabella, i am sure; but you know 
very well that if i could think of one man more than another--he is not 
the person.” isabella was silent. “my dear friend, you must not be angry 
with me. i cannot suppose your brother care so very much about me. and, 
you know, we shall still be sisters.” 

“yes, yes” (with a blush), “there are more ways than one of our being 
sisters. but where am i wandering to? well, my dear catherine, the case 
seem to be that you are determined against poor john--is not it so?” 

“i certainly cannot return his affection, and as certainly never meant 
to encourage it.” 

“since that is the case, i am sure i shall not tease you any further. 
john desire me to speak to you on the subject, and therefore i have. 
but i confess, as soon as i read his letter, i thought it a very 
foolish, imprudent business, and not likely to promote the good of 
either; for what were you to live upon, supposing you came together? you 
have both of you something, to be sure, but it is not a trifle that will 
support a family nowadays; and after all that romance may say, there 
is no do without money. i only wonder john could think of it; he 
could not have received my last.” 

“you do acquit me, then, of anything wrong?--you are convinced that i 
never meant to deceive your brother, never suspect him of liking me 
till this moment?” 

“oh! as to that,” answer isabella laughingly, “i do not pretend to 
determine what your thought and designs in time past may have been. all 
that is best known to yourself. a little harmless flirtation or so will 
occur, and one is often drawn on to give more encouragement than one 
wish to stand by. but you may be assured that i am the last person in 
the world to judge you severely. all those things should be allow for 
in youth and high spirits. what one means one day, you know, one may not 
mean the next. circumstances change, opinion alter.” 

“but my opinion of your brother never did alter; it was always the same. 
you are describe what never happened.” 

“my dearest catherine,” continue the other without at all listen to 
her, “i would not for all the world be the means of hurry you into an 
engagement before you knew what you were about. i do not think anything 
would justify me in wish you to sacrifice all your happiness merely 
to oblige my brother, because he is my brother, and who perhaps after 
all, you know, might be just as happy without you, for people seldom 
know what they would be at, young men especially, they are so amazing 
changeable and inconstant. what i say is, why should a brother's 
happiness be dear to me than a friend's? you know i carry my notions 
of friendship pretty high. but, above all things, my dear catherine, do 
not be in a hurry. take my word for it, that if you are in too great 
a hurry, you will certainly live to repent it. tilney say there is 
nothing people are so often deceive in as the state of their own 
affections, and i believe he is very right. ah! here he comes; never 
mind, he will not see us, i am sure.” 

catherine, look up, perceive captain tilney; and isabella, 
earnest fix her eye on him as she spoke, soon caught his notice. he 
approach immediately, and took the seat to which her movements invite 
him. his first address made catherine start. though spoken low, she 
could distinguish, “what! always to be watched, in person or by proxy!” 

“psha, nonsense!” was isabella's answer in the same half whisper. “why 
do you put such things into my head? if i could believe it--my spirit, 
you know, is pretty independent.” 

“i wish your heart were independent. that would be enough for me.” 

“my heart, indeed! what can you have to do with hearts? you men have 
none of you any hearts.” 

“if we have not hearts, we have eyes; and they give us torment enough.” 

“do they? i am sorry for it; i am sorry they find anything so 
disagreeable in me. i will look another way. i hope this please you” 
(turning her back on him); “i hope your eyes are not torment now.” 

“never more so; for the edge of a blooming cheek is still in view--at 
once too much and too little.” 

catherine heard all this, and quite out of countenance, could listen 
no longer. amaze that isabella could endure it, and jealous for her 
brother, she rose up, and saying she should join mrs. allen, propose 
their walking. but for this isabella show no inclination. she was so 
amazing tired, and it was so odious to parade about the pump-room; 
and if she move from her seat she should miss her sisters; she was 
expect her sister every moment; so that her dearest catherine must 
excuse her, and must sit quiet down again. but catherine could be 
stubborn too; and mrs. allen just then coming up to propose their 
return home, she join her and walk out of the pump-room, leave 
isabella still sitting with captain tilney. with much uneasy did 
she thus leave them. it seem to her that captain tilney was fall 
in love with isabella, and isabella unconscious encourage him; 
unconscious it must be, for isabella's attachment to james was as 
certain and well acknowledge as her engagement. to doubt her truth 
or good intentions was impossible; and yet, during the whole of their 
conversation her manner had been odd. she wish isabella had talk 
more like her usual self, and not so much about money, and had not 
look so well pleased at the sight of captain tilney. how strange that 
she should not perceive his admiration! catherine long to give her a 
hint of it, to put her on her guard, and prevent all the pain which 
her too lively behaviour might otherwise create both for him and her 
brother. 

the compliment of john thorpe's affection did not make amends for this 
thoughtless in his sister. she was almost as far from believe as 
from wish it to be sincere; for she had not forgotten that he 
could mistake, and his assertion of the offer and of her encouragement 
convinced her that his mistake could sometimes be very egregious. 
in vanity, therefore, she gain but little; her chief profit was in 
wonder. that he should think it worth his while to fancy himself in love 
with her was a matter of lively astonishment. isabella talk of his 
attentions; she had never been sensible of any; but isabella had said 
many things which she hope had been spoken in haste, and would never 
be said again; and upon this she was glad to rest altogether for present 
ease and comfort. 




chapter 19 


a few days pass away, and catherine, though not allow herself to 
suspect her friend, could not help watch her closely. the result of 
her observations was not agreeable. isabella seem an alter creature. 
when she saw her, indeed, surround only by their immediate friends 
in edgar's building or pulteney street, her change of manners was so 
trifling that, had it gone no farther, it might have pass unnoticed. 
a something of languid indifference, or of that boast absence of 
mind which catherine had never heard of before, would occasional come 
across her; but had nothing worse appeared, that might only have spread 
a new grace and inspired a warm interest. but when catherine saw her 
in public, admit captain tilney's attention as readily as they were 
offered, and allow him almost an equal share with james in her notice 
and smiles, the alteration became too positive to be pass over. what 
could be meant by such unsteady conduct, what her friend could be at, 
was beyond her comprehension. isabella could not be aware of the pain 
she was inflicting; but it was a degree of wilful thoughtless which 
catherine could not but resent. james was the sufferer. she saw him 
grave and uneasy; and however careless of his present comfort the woman 
might be who had given him her heart, to her it was always an object. 
for poor captain tilney too she was greatly concerned. though his looks 
did not please her, his name was a passport to her goodwill, and she 
thought with sincere compassion of his approach disappointment; for, 
in spite of what she had believe herself to overhear in the pump-room, 
his behaviour was so incompatible with a knowledge of isabella's 
engagement that she could not, upon reflection, imagine him aware of it. 
he might be jealous of her brother as a rival, but if more had seem 
implied, the fault must have been in her misapprehension. she wished, by 
a gentle remonstrance, to remind isabella of her situation, and make 
her aware of this double unkindness; but for remonstrance, either 
opportunity or comprehension was always against her. if able to suggest 
a hint, isabella could never understand it. in this distress, the 
intended departure of the tilney family became her chief consolation; 
their journey into gloucestershire was to take place within a few days, 
and captain tilney's removal would at least restore peace to every heart 
but his own. but captain tilney had at present no intention of removing; 
he was not to be of the party to northanger; he was to continue at bath. 
when catherine knew this, her resolution was directly made. she spoke to 
henry tilney on the subject, regret his brother's evident partiality 
for miss thorpe, and entreat him to make known her prior engagement. 

“my brother do know it,” was henry's answer. 

“does he? then why do he stay here?” 

he made no reply, and was beginning to talk of something else; but she 
eager continued, “why do not you persuade him to go away? the long 
he stays, the worse it will be for him at last. pray advise him for his 
own sake, and for everybody's sake, to leave bath directly. absence will 
in time make him comfortable again; but he can have no hope here, and it 
is only stay to be miserable.” 

henry smile and said, “i am sure my brother would not wish to do that.” 

“then you will persuade him to go away?” 

“persuasion is not at command; but pardon me, if i cannot even endeavour 
to persuade him. i have myself told him that miss thorpe is engaged. he 
know what he is about, and must be his own master.” 

“no, he do not know what he is about,” cry catherine; “he do not 
know the pain he is give my brother. not that james has ever told me 
so, but i am sure he is very uncomfortable.” 

“and are you sure it is my brother's doing?” 

“yes, very sure.” 

“is it my brother's attention to miss thorpe, or miss thorpe's 
admission of them, that give the pain?” 

“is not it the same thing?” 

“i think mr. morland would acknowledge a difference. no man is offend 
by another man's admiration of the woman he loves; it is the woman only 
who can make it a torment.” 

catherine blush for her friend, and said, “isabella is wrong. but i 
am sure she cannot mean to torment, for she is very much attach to my 
brother. she has been in love with him ever since they first met, and 
while my father's consent was uncertain, she fret herself almost into 
a fever. you know she must be attach to him.” 

“i understand: she is in love with james, and flirt with frederick.” 

“oh! no, not flirts. a woman in love with one man cannot flirt with 
another.” 

“it is probable that she will neither love so well, nor flirt so 
well, as she might do either singly. the gentlemen must each give up a 
little.” 

after a short pause, catherine resume with, “then you do not believe 
isabella so very much attach to my brother?” 

“i can have no opinion on that subject.” 

“but what can your brother mean? if he know her engagement, what can he 
mean by his behaviour?” 

“you are a very close questioner.” 

“am i? i only ask what i want to be told.” 

“but do you only ask what i can be expect to tell?” 

“yes, i think so; for you must know your brother's heart.” 

“my brother's heart, as you term it, on the present occasion, i assure 
you i can only guess at.” 

“well?” 

“well! nay, if it is to be guesswork, let us all guess for ourselves. to 
be guide by second-hand conjecture is pitiful. the premises are before 
you. my brother is a lively and perhaps sometimes a thoughtless young 
man; he has had about a week's acquaintance with your friend, and he has 
known her engagement almost as long as he has known her.” 

“well,” said catherine, after some moments' consideration, “you may be 
able to guess at your brother's intentions from all this; but i am sure 
i cannot. but is not your father uncomfortable about it? do not he 
want captain tilney to go away? sure, if your father were to speak to 
him, he would go.” 

“my dear miss morland,” said henry, “in this amiable solicitude for your 
brother's comfort, may you not be a little mistaken? are you not carry 
a little too far? would he thank you, either on his own account or 
miss thorpe's, for supposing that her affection, or at least her good 
behaviour, is only to be secure by her seeing nothing of captain 
tilney? is he safe only in solitude? or is her heart constant to him 
only when unsolicited by anyone else? he cannot think this--and you may 
be sure that he would not have you think it. i will not say, 'do not 
be uneasy,' because i know that you are so, at this moment; but be as 
little uneasy as you can. you have no doubt of the mutual attachment 
of your brother and your friend; depend upon it, therefore, that 
real jealousy never can exist between them; depend upon it that no 
disagreement between them can be of any duration. their heart are open 
to each other, as neither heart can be to you; they know exactly what 
is require and what can be borne; and you may be certain that one will 
never tease the other beyond what is known to be pleasant.” 

perceive her still to look doubtful and grave, he added, “though 
frederick do not leave bath with us, he will probably remain but a 
very short time, perhaps only a few days behind us. his leave of absence 
will soon expire, and he must return to his regiment. and what will then 
be their acquaintance? the mess-room will drink isabella thorpe for 
a fortnight, and she will laugh with your brother over poor tilney's 
passion for a month.” 

catherine would contend no long against comfort. she had resist its 
approach during the whole length of a speech, but it now carry her 
captive. henry tilney must know best. she blame herself for the extent 
of her fears, and resolve never to think so seriously on the subject 
again. 

her resolution was support by isabella's behaviour in their parting 
interview. the thorpe spent the last evening of catherine's stay in 
pulteney street, and nothing pass between the lovers to excite 
her uneasiness, or make her quit them in apprehension. james was in 
excellent spirits, and isabella most engaging placid. her tender 
for her friend seem rather the first feeling of her heart; but that 
at such a moment was allowable; and once she gave her lover a flat 
contradiction, and once she drew back her hand; but catherine remember 
henry's instructions, and placed it all to judicious affection. the 
embraces, tears, and promise of the parting fair one may be fancied. 




chapter 20 


mr. and mrs. allen were sorry to lose their young friend, whose good 
humour and cheerful had made her a valuable companion, and in the 
promotion of whose enjoyment their own had been gently increased. her 
happiness in go with miss tilney, however, prevent their wish 
it otherwise; and, as they were to remain only one more week in bath 
themselves, her quit them now would not long be felt. mr. allen 
attend her to milsom street, where she was to breakfast, and saw her 
seat with the kindest welcome among her new friends; but so great was 
her agitation in finding herself as one of the family, and so fearful 
was she of not do exactly what was right, and of not being able to 
preserve their good opinion, that, in the embarrassment of the first 
five minutes, she could almost have wish to return with him to 
pulteney street. 

miss tilney's manners and henry's smile soon did away some of her 
unpleasant feelings; but still she was far from being at ease; nor could 
the incessant attention of the general himself entire reassure her. 
nay, perverse as it seemed, she doubt whether she might not have felt 
less, had she been less attend to. his anxiety for her comfort--his 
continual solicit that she would eat, and his often-expressed 
fear of her seeing nothing to her taste--though never in her life 
before had she beheld half such variety on a breakfast-table--made it 
impossible for her to forget for a moment that she was a visitor. she 
felt utterly unworthy of such respect, and knew not how to reply to it. 
her tranquill was not improve by the general's impatience for the 
appearance of his eldest son, nor by the displeasure he express at his 
lazy when captain tilney at last came down. she was quite pained by 
the severity of his father's reproof, which seem disproportionate to 
the offence; and much was her concern increase when she found herself 
the principal cause of the lecture, and that his tardy was chiefly 
resent from being disrespectful to her. this was place her in a 
very uncomfortable situation, and she felt great compassion for captain 
tilney, without being able to hope for his goodwill. 

he listen to his father in silence, and attempt not any defence, 
which confirmed her in fear that the inquietude of his mind, on 
isabella's account, might, by keeping him long sleepless, have been 
the real cause of his rising late. it was the first time of her being 
decidedly in his company, and she had hope to be now able to form 
her opinion of him; but she scarcely heard his voice while his father 
remain in the room; and even afterwards, so much were his spirits 
affected, she could distinguish nothing but these words, in a whisper to 
eleanor, “how glad i shall be when you are all off.” 

the bustle of go was not pleasant. the clock struck ten while the 
trunks were carry down, and the general had fixed to be out of milsom 
street by that hour. his greatcoat, instead of being brought for him 
to put on directly, was spread out in the curricle in which he was to 
accompany his son. the middle seat of the chaise was not drawn out, 
though there were three people to go in it, and his daughter's maid had 
so crowded it with parcel that miss morland would not have room to sit; 
and, so much was he influence by this apprehension when he hand her 
in, that she had some difficulty in saving her own new writing-desk from 
being thrown out into the street. at last, however, the door was closed 
upon the three females, and they set off at the sober pace in which 
the handsome, highly fed four horse of a gentleman usually perform a 
journey of thirty miles: such was the distance of northanger from bath, 
to be now divide into two equal stages. catherine's spirits revive as 
they drove from the door; for with miss tilney she felt no restraint; 
and, with the interest of a road entire new to her, of an abbey 
before, and a curricle behind, she caught the last view of bath without 
any regret, and met with every milestone before she expect it. the 
tedious of a two hours' wait at petty france, in which there was 
nothing to be done but to eat without being hungry, and loiter about 
without anything to see, next followed--and her admiration of the style 
in which they travelled, of the fashionable chaise and four--postilions 
handsome liveried, rising so regularly in their stirrups, and 
numerous outrider properly mounted, sunk a little under this consequent 
inconvenience. had their party been perfectly agreeable, the delay would 
have been nothing; but general tilney, though so charming a man, seem 
always a check upon his children's spirits, and scarcely anything was 
said but by himself; the observation of which, with his discontent at 
whatever the inn afforded, and his angry impatience at the waiters, made 
catherine grow every moment more in awe of him, and appear to lengthen 
the two hour into four. at last, however, the order of release was 
given; and much was catherine then surprise by the general's proposal 
of her taking his place in his son's curricle for the rest of the 
journey: “the day was fine, and he was anxious for her seeing as much of 
the country as possible.” 

the remembrance of mr. allen's opinion, respecting young men's open 
carriages, made her blush at the mention of such a plan, and her first 
thought was to decline it; but her second was of greater deference for 
general tilney's judgment; he could not propose anything improper for 
her; and, in the course of a few minutes, she found herself with henry 
in the curricle, as happy a being as ever existed. a very short trial 
convinced her that a curricle was the prettiest equipage in the world; 
the chaise and four wheel off with some grandeur, to be sure, but it 
was a heavy and troublesome business, and she could not easily forget 
its have stop two hour at petty france. half the time would 
have been enough for the curricle, and so nimble were the light horse 
disposed to move, that, had not the general chosen to have his own 
carriage lead the way, they could have pass it with ease in half a 
minute. but the merit of the curricle did not all belong to the horses; 
henry drove so well--so quietly--without making any disturbance, 
without parade to her, or swear at them: so different from the only 
gentleman-coachman whom it was in her power to compare him with! and 
then his hat sat so well, and the innumerable cape of his greatcoat 
look so becoming important! to be driven by him, next to being 
dance with him, was certainly the greatest happiness in the world. in 
addition to every other delight, she had now that of listen to her 
own praise; of being thank at least, on his sister's account, for 
her kindness in thus becoming her visitor; of hearing it rank as real 
friendship, and describe as create real gratitude. his sister, he 
said, was uncomfortable circumstanced--she had no female companion--and, 
in the frequent absence of her father, was sometimes without any 
companion at all. 

“but how can that be?” said catherine. “are not you with her?” 

“northanger is not more than half my home; i have an establishment at 
my own house in woodston, which is nearly twenty mile from my father's, 
and some of my time is necessarily spent there.” 

“how sorry you must be for that!” 

“i am always sorry to leave eleanor.” 

“yes; but besides your affection for her, you must be so fond of 
the abbey! after being use to such a home as the abbey, an ordinary 
parsonage-house must be very disagreeable.” 

he smiled, and said, “you have form a very favourable idea of the 
abbey.” 

“to be sure, i have. is not it a fine old place, just like what one 
read about?” 

“and are you prepared to encounter all the horrors that a building such 
as 'what one read about' may produce? have you a stout heart? nerves 
fit for slide panel and tapestry?” 

“oh! yes--i do not think i should be easily frightened, because there 
would be so many people in the house--and besides, it has never been 
uninhabited and left desert for years, and then the family come back 
to it unawares, without give any notice, as generally happens.” 

“no, certainly. we shall not have to explore our way into a hall dim 
light by the expire ember of a wood fire--nor be oblige to spread 
our bed on the floor of a room without windows, doors, or furniture. 
but you must be aware that when a young lady is (by whatever means) 
introduce into a dwelling of this kind, she is always lodge apart from 
the rest of the family. while they snug repair to their own end of the 
house, she is formal conduct by dorothy, the ancient housekeeper, up 
a different staircase, and along many gloomy passages, into an apartment 
never use since some cousin or kin die in it about twenty years 
before. can you stand such a ceremony as this? will not your mind 
misgive you when you find yourself in this gloomy chamber--too lofty and 
extensive for you, with only the feeble ray of a single lamp to take 
in its size--its wall hung with tapestry exhibit figures as large as 
life, and the bed, of dark green stuff or purple velvet, present even 
a funereal appearance? will not your heart sink within you?” 

“oh! but this will not happen to me, i am sure.” 

“how fearful will you examine the furniture of your apartment! and 
what will you discern? not tables, toilettes, wardrobes, or drawers, 
but on one side perhaps the remains of a broken lute, on the other a 
ponderous chest which no effort can open, and over the fireplace 
the portrait of some handsome warrior, whose features will so 
incomprehensibly strike you, that you will not be able to withdraw your 
eyes from it. dorothy, meanwhile, no less struck by your appearance, 
gaze on you in great agitation, and drops a few unintelligible hints. 
to raise your spirits, moreover, she give you reason to suppose that 
the part of the abbey you inhabit is undoubted haunted, and inform 
you that you will not have a single domestic within call. with this 
parting cordial she curtsy off--you listen to the sound of her 
recede footstep as long as the last echo can reach you--and when, 
with faint spirits, you attempt to fasten your door, you discover, 
with increase alarm, that it has no lock.” 

“oh! mr. tilney, how frightful! this is just like a book! but it cannot 
really happen to me. i am sure your housekeeper is not really dorothy. 
well, what then?” 

“nothing further to alarm perhaps may occur the first night. after 
surmount your unconquerable horror of the bed, you will retire to 
rest, and get a few hours' unquiet slumber. but on the second, or at 
farthest the third night after your arrival, you will probably have a 
violent storm. peal of thunder so loud as to seem to shake the edifice 
to its foundation will roll round the neighbouring mountains--and during 
the frightful gust of wind which accompany it, you will probably think 
you discern (for your lamp is not extinguished) one part of the hanging 
more violent agitate than the rest. unable of course to repress your 
curiosity in so favourable a moment for indulge it, you will instantly 
arise, and throw your dressing-gown around you, proceed to examine 
this mystery. after a very short search, you will discover a division in 
the tapestry so artful construct as to defy the minutest inspection, 
and on opening it, a door will immediately appear--which door, being 
only secure by massy bar and a padlock, you will, after a few efforts, 
succeed in opening--and, with your lamp in your hand, will pass through 
it into a small vaulted room.” 

“no, indeed; i should be too much frightened to do any such thing.” 

“what! not when dorothy has given you to understand that there is a 
secret subterraneous communication between your apartment and the chapel 
of st. anthony, scarcely two mile off? could you shrink from so simple 
an adventure? no, no, you will proceed into this small vaulted room, 
and through this into several others, without perceive anything very 
remarkable in either. in one perhaps there may be a dagger, in another 
a few drops of blood, and in a third the remains of some instrument of 
torture; but there being nothing in all this out of the common way, 
and your lamp being nearly exhausted, you will return towards your own 
apartment. in repass through the small vaulted room, however, your 
eyes will be attract towards a large, old-fashioned cabinet of ebony 
and gold, which, though narrowly examine the furniture before, you 
had pass unnoticed. impel by an irresistible presentiment, you will 
eager advance to it, unlock its fold doors, and search into 
every drawer--but for some time without discover anything of 
importance--perhaps nothing but a considerable hoard of diamonds. at 
last, however, by touching a secret spring, an inner compartment will 
open--a roll of paper appears--you seize it--it contain many sheet of 
manuscript--you hasten with the precious treasure into your own chamber, 
but scarcely have you been able to decipher 'oh! thou--whomsoever thou 
mayst be, into whose hand these memoirs of the wretched matilda may 
fall'--when your lamp sudden expire in the socket, and leaves you in 
total darkness.” 

“oh! no, no--do not say so. well, go on.” 

but henry was too much amuse by the interest he had raise to be able 
to carry it farther; he could no long command solemnity either of 
subject or voice, and was oblige to entreat her to use her own fancy 
in the peruse of matilda's woes. catherine, recollect herself, grew 
ashamed of her eagerness, and began earnest to assure him that her 
attention had been fixed without the smallest apprehension of really 
meeting with what he related. “miss tilney, she was sure, would never 
put her into such a chamber as he had described! she was not at all 
afraid.” 

as they drew near the end of their journey, her impatience for a sight 
of the abbey--for some time suspend by his conversation on subject 
very different--returned in full force, and every bend in the road was 
expect with solemn awe to afford a glimpse of its massy wall of grey 
stone, rising amidst a grove of ancient oaks, with the last beam of the 
sun play in beautiful splendour on its high gothic windows. but so 
low did the building stand, that she found herself passing through the 
great gate of the lodge into the very grounds of northanger, without 
have discern even an antique chimney. 

she knew not that she had any right to be surprised, but there was a 
something in this mode of approach which she certainly had not expected. 
to pass between lodge of a modern appearance, to find herself with such 
ease in the very precincts of the abbey, and driven so rapid along a 
smooth, level road of fine gravel, without obstacle, alarm, or solemnity 
of any kind, struck her as odd and inconsistent. she was not long 
at leisure, however, for such considerations. a sudden scud of rain, 
driving full in her face, made it impossible for her to observe anything 
further, and fixed all her thought on the welfare of her new straw 
bonnet; and she was actually under the abbey walls, was springing, with 
henry's assistance, from the carriage, was beneath the shelter of the 
old porch, and had even pass on to the hall, where her friend and 
the general were wait to welcome her, without feeling one awful 
foreboding of future misery to herself, or one moment's suspicion of any 
past scene of horror being act within the solemn edifice. the breeze 
had not seem to waft the sigh of the murder to her; it had waft 
nothing worse than a thick mizzle rain; and have given a good shake 
to her habit, she was ready to be shown into the common drawing-room, 
and capable of considering where she was. 

an abbey! yes, it was delightful to be really in an abbey! but she 
doubted, as she look round the room, whether anything within her 
observation would have given her the consciousness. the furniture was in 
all the profusion and elegance of modern taste. the fireplace, where she 
had expect the ample width and ponderous carving of former times, was 
contract to a rumford, with slab of plain though handsome marble, and 
ornament over it of the prettiest english china. the windows, to which 
she look with peculiar dependence, from have heard the general talk 
of his preserve them in their gothic form with reverential care, were 
yet less what her fancy had portrayed. to be sure, the pointed arch 
was preserved--the form of them was gothic--they might be even 
casements--but every pane was so large, so clear, so light! to an 
imagination which had hope for the smallest divisions, and the heaviest 
stone-work, for paint glass, dirt, and cobwebs, the difference was 
very distressing. 

the general, perceive how her eye was employed, began to talk of the 
small of the room and simplicity of the furniture, where everything, 
being for daily use, pretended only to comfort, etc.; flatter 
himself, however, that there were some apartments in the abbey not 
unworthy her notice--and was proceeding to mention the costly gilding 
of one in particular, when, taking out his watch, he stop short to 
pronounce it with surprise within twenty minutes of five! this seem 
the word of separation, and catherine found herself hurried away by miss 
tilney in such a manner as convinced her that the strictest punctual 
to the family hour would be expect at northanger. 

return through the large and lofty hall, they ascend a broad 
staircase of shining oak, which, after many flight and many 
landing-places, brought them upon a long, wide gallery. on one side it 
had a range of doors, and it was light on the other by window which 
catherine had only time to discover look into a quadrangle, before 
miss tilney led the way into a chamber, and scarcely stay to hope she 
would find it comfortable, left her with an anxious entreaty that she 
would make as little alteration as possible in her dress. 




chapter 21 


a moment's glance was enough to satisfy catherine that her apartment 
was very unlike the one which henry had endeavour to alarm her by the 
description of. it was by no means unreasonable large, and contained 
neither tapestry nor velvet. the wall were papered, the floor was 
carpeted; the window were neither less perfect nor more dim than those 
of the drawing-room below; the furniture, though not of the latest 
fashion, was handsome and comfortable, and the air of the room 
altogether far from uncheerful. her heart instantaneous at ease on 
this point, she resolve to lose no time in particular examination of 
anything, as she greatly dread disoblige the general by any delay. 
her habit therefore was thrown off with all possible haste, and she was 
prepare to unpin the linen package, which the chaise-seat had convey 
for her immediate accommodation, when her eye sudden fell on a large 
high chest, standing back in a deep recess on one side of the fireplace. 
the sight of it made her start; and, forget everything else, she 
stood gaze on it in motionless wonder, while these thought cross 
her: 

“this is strange indeed! i did not expect such a sight as this! an 
immense heavy chest! what can it hold? why should it be placed here? 
pushed back too, as if meant to be out of sight! i will look into 
it--cost me what it may, i will look into it--and directly too--by 
daylight. if i stay till evening my candle may go out.” she advanced and 
examine it closely: it was of cedar, curious inlaid with some dark 
wood, and raised, about a foot from the ground, on a carve stand of the 
same. the lock was silver, though tarnish from age; at each end 
were the imperfect remains of handle also of silver, broken perhaps 
premature by some strange violence; and, on the centre of the lid, was 
a mysterious cipher, in the same metal. catherine bent over it intently, 
but without being able to distinguish anything with certainty. she could 
not, in whatever direction she took it, believe the last letter to be 
a t; and yet that it should be anything else in that house was 
a circumstance to raise no common degree of astonishment. if not 
originally theirs, by what strange event could it have fallen into the 
tilney family? 

her fearful curiosity was every moment grow greater; and seizing, 
with tremble hands, the hasp of the lock, she resolve at all hazard 
to satisfy herself at least as to its contents. with difficulty, for 
something seem to resist her efforts, she raise the lid a few inches; 
but at that moment a sudden knock at the door of the room made her, 
starting, quit her hold, and the lid closed with alarm violence. this 
ill-timed intruder was miss tilney's maid, sent by her mistress to be of 
use to miss morland; and though catherine immediately dismiss her, it 
recall her to the sense of what she ought to be doing, and forced her, 
in spite of her anxious desire to penetrate this mystery, to proceed in 
her dressing without further delay. her progress was not quick, for her 
thought and her eyes were still bent on the object so well calculate 
to interest and alarm; and though she dare not waste a moment upon 
a second attempt, she could not remain many pace from the chest. at 
length, however, have slip one arm into her gown, her toilette 
seem so nearly finished that the impatience of her curiosity might 
safe be indulged. one moment surely might be spared; and, so desperate 
should be the exertion of her strength, that, unless secure by 
supernatural means, the lid in one moment should be thrown back. with 
this spirit she sprang forward, and her confidence did not deceive her. 
her resolute effort threw back the lid, and gave to her astonish eyes 
the view of a white cotton counterpane, properly folded, repose at one 
end of the chest in undisputed possession! 

she was gaze on it with the first blush of surprise when miss tilney, 
anxious for her friend's being ready, enter the room, and to the 
rising shame of have harbour for some minutes an absurd expectation, 
was then add the shame of being caught in so idle a search. “that is 
a curious old chest, is not it?” said miss tilney, as catherine hasty 
closed it and turn away to the glass. “it is impossible to say how 
many generation it has been here. how it came to be first put in this 
room i know not, but i have not had it moved, because i thought it might 
sometimes be of use in holding hat and bonnets. the worst of it is that 
its weight make it difficult to open. in that corner, however, it is at 
least out of the way.” 

catherine had no leisure for speech, being at once blushing, tie her 
gown, and form wise resolution with the most violent dispatch. miss 
tilney gently hint her fear of being late; and in half a minute they 
ran downstairs together, in an alarm not wholly unfounded, for general 
tilney was pace the drawing-room, his watch in his hand, and having, 
on the very instant of their entering, pull the bell with violence, 
ordered “dinner to be on table directly!” 

catherine tremble at the emphasis with which he spoke, and sat pale 
and breathless, in a most humble mood, concerned for his children, and 
detest old chests; and the general, recover his polite as he 
look at her, spent the rest of his time in scold his daughter for 
so foolish hurry her fair friend, who was absolutely out of breath 
from haste, when there was not the least occasion for hurry in the 
world: but catherine could not at all get over the double distress 
of have involved her friend in a lecture and been a great simpleton 
herself, till they were happily seat at the dinner-table, when the 
general's complacent smiles, and a good appetite of her own, restore 
her to peace. the dining-parlour was a noble room, suitable in its 
dimensions to a much large drawing-room than the one in common use, and 
fitted up in a style of luxury and expense which was almost lost on the 
unpractised eye of catherine, who saw little more than its spacious 
and the number of their attendants. of the former, she spoke aloud 
her admiration; and the general, with a very gracious countenance, 
acknowledge that it was by no means an ill-sized room, and further 
confessed that, though as careless on such subject as most people, he 
did look upon a tolerably large eating-room as one of the necessaries 
of life; he supposed, however, “that she must have been use to much 
better-sized apartments at mr. allen's?” 

“no, indeed,” was catherine's honest assurance; “mr. allen's 
dining-parlour was not more than half as large,” and she had never 
seen so large a room as this in her life. the general's good humour 
increased. why, as he had such rooms, he thought it would be simple not 
to make use of them; but, upon his honour, he believe there might be 
more comfort in rooms of only half their size. mr. allen's house, he was 
sure, must be exactly of the true size for rational happiness. 

the evening pass without any further disturbance, and, in the 
occasional absence of general tilney, with much positive cheerfulness. 
it was only in his presence that catherine felt the smallest fatigue 
from her journey; and even then, even in moments of languor or 
restraint, a sense of general happiness preponderated, and she could 
think of her friends in bath without one wish of being with them. 

the night was stormy; the wind had been rising at interval the whole 
afternoon; and by the time the party broke up, it blew and rain 
violently. catherine, as she cross the hall, listen to the tempest 
with sensation of awe; and, when she heard it rage round a corner of 
the ancient building and close with sudden fury a distant door, felt 
for the first time that she was really in an abbey. yes, these were 
characteristic sounds; they brought to her recollection a countless 
variety of dreadful situation and horrid scenes, which such building 
had witnessed, and such storm usher in; and most heartily did she 
rejoice in the happy circumstances attend her entrance within wall 
so solemn! she had nothing to dread from midnight assassin or drunken 
gallants. henry had certainly been only in jest in what he had told her 
that morning. in a house so furnished, and so guarded, she could have 
nothing to explore or to suffer, and might go to her bedroom as secure 
as if it had been her own chamber at fullerton. thus wise fortify 
her mind, as she proceed upstairs, she was enabled, especially on 
perceive that miss tilney slept only two door from her, to enter 
her room with a tolerably stout heart; and her spirits were immediately 
assist by the cheerful blaze of a wood fire. “how much better is 
this,” said she, as she walk to the fender--“how much better to find a 
fire ready lit, than to have to wait shiver in the cold till all the 
family are in bed, as so many poor girl have been oblige to do, and 
then to have a faithful old servant frighten one by coming in with a 
faggot! how glad i am that northanger is what it is! if it had been like 
some other places, i do not know that, in such a night as this, i could 
have answer for my courage: but now, to be sure, there is nothing to 
alarm one.” 

she look round the room. the window curtains seem in motion. it 
could be nothing but the violence of the wind penetrating through the 
division of the shutters; and she step bold forward, careless 
hum a tune, to assure herself of its being so, peep courageous 
behind each curtain, saw nothing on either low window seat to scare her, 
and on place a hand against the shutter, felt the strongest conviction 
of the wind's force. a glance at the old chest, as she turn away from 
this examination, was not without its use; she scorn the causeless 
fear of an idle fancy, and began with a most happy indifference to 
prepare herself for bed. “she should take her time; she should not hurry 
herself; she did not care if she were the last person up in the house. 
but she would not make up her fire; that would seem cowardly, as if 
she wish for the protection of light after she were in bed.” the fire 
therefore die away, and catherine, have spent the best part of an 
hour in her arrangements, was beginning to think of step into bed, 
when, on give a parting glance round the room, she was struck by the 
appearance of a high, old-fashioned black cabinet, which, though in 
a situation conspicuous enough, had never caught her notice before. 
henry's words, his description of the ebony cabinet which was to escape 
her observation at first, immediately rush across her; and though 
there could be nothing really in it, there was something whimsical, it 
was certainly a very remarkable coincidence! she took her candle and 
look close at the cabinet. it was not absolutely ebony and gold; but 
it was japan, black and yellow japan of the handsomest kind; and as she 
held her candle, the yellow had very much the effect of gold. the key 
was in the door, and she had a strange fancy to look into it; not, 
however, with the smallest expectation of finding anything, but it was 
so very odd, after what henry had said. in short, she could not sleep 
till she had examine it. so, place the candle with great caution on 
a chair, she seize the key with a very tremulous hand and try to turn 
it; but it resist her utmost strength. alarmed, but not discouraged, 
she try it another way; a bolt flew, and she believe herself 
successful; but how strange mysterious! the door was still immovable. 
she pause a moment in breathless wonder. the wind roar down the 
chimney, the rain beat in torrent against the windows, and everything 
seem to speak the awful of her situation. to retire to bed, 
however, unsatisfy on such a point, would be vain, since sleep must be 
impossible with the consciousness of a cabinet so mysterious closed 
in her immediate vicinity. again, therefore, she applied herself to the 
key, and after moving it in every possible way for some instant with 
the determined celerity of hope's last effort, the door sudden yield 
to her hand: her heart leap with exultation at such a victory, and 
have thrown open each fold door, the second being secure only by 
bolt of less wonderful construction than the lock, though in that her 
eye could not discern anything unusual, a double range of small drawers 
appear in view, with some large drawers above and below them; and in 
the centre, a small door, closed also with a lock and key, secure in 
all probability a cavity of importance. 

catherine's heart beat quick, but her courage did not fail her. with a 
cheek flushed by hope, and an eye strain with curiosity, her finger 
grasp the handle of a drawer and drew it forth. it was entire empty. 
with less alarm and greater eager she seize a second, a third, a 
fourth; each was equally empty. not one was left unsearched, and in not 
one was anything found. well read in the art of conceal a treasure, 
the possibility of false lining to the drawers did not escape her, and 
she felt round each with anxious acute in vain. the place in the 
middle alone remain now unexplored; and though she had “never from 
the first had the smallest idea of finding anything in any part of the 
cabinet, and was not in the least disappointed at her ill success thus 
far, it would be foolish not to examine it thorough while she was 
about it.” it was some time however before she could unfasten the door, 
the same difficulty occur in the management of this inner lock as of 
the outer; but at length it did open; and not vain, as hitherto, was her 
search; her quick eyes directly fell on a roll of paper pushed back 
into the further part of the cavity, apparently for concealment, and 
her feelings at that moment were indescribable. her heart fluttered, her 
knee trembled, and her cheek grew pale. she seized, with an unsteady 
hand, the precious manuscript, for half a glance suffice to ascertain 
written characters; and while she acknowledge with awful sensation 
this striking exemplification of what henry had foretold, resolve 
instantly to peruse every line before she attempt to rest. 

the dim of the light her candle emit made her turn to it with 
alarm; but there was no danger of its sudden extinction; it had yet some 
hour to burn; and that she might not have any greater difficulty in 
distinguish the writing than what its ancient date might occasion, 
she hasty snuff it. alas! it was snuff and extinguish in one. a 
lamp could not have expire with more awful effect. catherine, for a 
few moments, was motionless with horror. it was done completely; not a 
remnant of light in the wick could give hope to the rekindle breath. 
dark impenetrable and immovable fill the room. a violent gust 
of wind, rising with sudden fury, add fresh horror to the moment. 
catherine tremble from head to foot. in the pause which succeeded, a 
sound like recede footstep and the close of a distant door struck 
on her affrighte ear. human nature could support no more. a cold sweat 
stood on her forehead, the manuscript fell from her hand, and grope 
her way to the bed, she jump hasty in, and sought some suspension of 
agony by creep far underneath the clothes. to close her eyes in 
sleep that night, she felt must be entire out of the question. with 
a curiosity so just awakened, and feelings in every way so agitated, 
repose must be absolutely impossible. the storm too abroad so dreadful! 
she had not been use to feel alarm from wind, but now every blast 
seem fraught with awful intelligence. the manuscript so wonderful 
found, so wonderful accomplish the morning's prediction, how was it 
to be account for? what could it contain? to whom could it relate? 
by what means could it have been so long concealed? and how singularly 
strange that it should fall to her lot to discover it! till she had made 
herself mistress of its contents, however, she could have neither repose 
nor comfort; and with the sun's first ray she was determined to peruse 
it. but many were the tedious hour which must yet intervene. she 
shuddered, toss about in her bed, and envy every quiet sleeper. the 
storm still raged, and various were the noises, more terrific even 
than the wind, which struck at interval on her startle ear. the very 
curtains of her bed seem at one moment in motion, and at another 
the lock of her door was agitated, as if by the attempt of somebody to 
enter. hollow murmur seem to creep along the gallery, and more than 
once her blood was chill by the sound of distant moans. hour after 
hour pass away, and the weary catherine had heard three proclaim 
by all the clock in the house before the tempest subside or she 
unknowing fell fast asleep. 




chapter 22 


the housemaid's fold back her window-shutters at eight o'clock the 
next day was the sound which first rouse catherine; and she open her 
eyes, wonder that they could ever have been closed, on object of 
cheerfulness; her fire was already burning, and a bright morning 
had succeed the tempest of the night. instantaneously, with the 
consciousness of existence, return her recollection of the manuscript; 
and spring from the bed in the very moment of the maid's go away, 
she eager collected every scattered sheet which had burst from the 
roll on its fall to the ground, and flew back to enjoy the luxury 
of their peruse on her pillow. she now plainly saw that she must not 
expect a manuscript of equal length with the generality of what she had 
shudder over in books, for the roll, seeming to consist entire of 
small disjointed sheets, was altogether but of trifling size, and much 
less than she had supposed it to be at first. 

her greedy eye glance rapid over a page. she start at its import. 
could it be possible, or did not her senses play her false? an inventory 
of linen, in coarse and modern characters, seem all that was before 
her! if the evidence of sight might be trusted, she held a washing-bill 
in her hand. she seize another sheet, and saw the same articles with 
little variation; a third, a fourth, and a fifth present nothing 
new. shirts, stockings, cravats, and waistcoat face her in each. two 
others, pen by the same hand, marked an expenditure scarcely more 
interesting, in letters, hair-powder, shoe-string, and breeches-ball. 
and the large sheet, which had enclose the rest, seem by its first 
cramp line, “to poultice chestnut mare”--a farrier's bill! such was the 
collection of papers (left perhaps, as she could then suppose, by the 
negligence of a servant in the place whence she had taken them) which 
had fill her with expectation and alarm, and rob her of half her 
night's rest! she felt humble to the dust. could not the adventure of 
the chest have taught her wisdom? a corner of it, catching her eye as 
she lay, seem to rise up in judgment against her. nothing could now 
be clear than the absurd of her recent fancies. to suppose that a 
manuscript of many generation back could have remain undiscovered in 
a room such as that, so modern, so habitable!--or that she should be the 
first to possess the skill of unlock a cabinet, the key of which was 
open to all! 

how could she have so impose on herself? heaven forbid that henry 
tilney should ever know her folly! and it was in a great measure his 
own doing, for had not the cabinet appear so exactly to agree with his 
description of her adventures, she should never have felt the smallest 
curiosity about it. this was the only comfort that occurred. impatient 
to get rid of those hateful evidence of her folly, those detest 
papers then scattered over the bed, she rose directly, and fold them 
up as nearly as possible in the same shape as before, return them 
to the same spot within the cabinet, with a very hearty wish that no 
untoward accident might ever bring them forward again, to disgrace her 
even with herself. 

why the locks should have been so difficult to open, however, was still 
something remarkable, for she could now manage them with perfect ease. 
in this there was surely something mysterious, and she indulge in the 
flatter suggestion for half a minute, till the possibility of the 
door's have been at first unlocked, and of being herself its fastener, 
dart into her head, and cost her another blush. 

she got away as soon as she could from a room in which her conduct 
produce such unpleasant reflections, and found her way with all speed 
to the breakfast-parlour, as it had been pointed out to her by miss 
tilney the evening before. henry was alone in it; and his immediate hope 
of her have been undisturbed by the tempest, with an arch reference 
to the character of the building they inhabited, was rather distressing. 
for the world would she not have her weakness suspected, and yet, 
unequal to an absolute falsehood, was constrained to acknowledge that 
the wind had kept her awake a little. “but we have a charming morning 
after it,” she added, desire to get rid of the subject; “and storm 
and sleepless are nothing when they are over. what beautiful 
hyacinths! i have just learnt to love a hyacinth.” 

“and how might you learn? by accident or argument?” 

“your sister taught me; i cannot tell how. mrs. allen use to take 
pains, year after year, to make me like them; but i never could, till 
i saw them the other day in milsom street; i am naturally indifferent 
about flowers.” 

“but now you love a hyacinth. so much the better. you have gain a new 
source of enjoyment, and it is well to have as many hold upon happiness 
as possible. besides, a taste for flower is always desirable in your 
sex, as a means of get you out of doors, and tempt you to more 
frequent exercise than you would otherwise take. and though the love 
of a hyacinth may be rather domestic, who can tell, the sentiment once 
raised, but you may in time come to love a rose?” 

“but i do not want any such pursuit to get me out of doors. the pleasure 
of walking and breathing fresh air is enough for me, and in fine weather 
i am out more than half my time. mamma say i am never within.” 

“at any rate, however, i am pleased that you have learnt to love 
a hyacinth. the mere habit of learning to love is the thing; and a 
teach of disposition in a young lady is a great blessing. has my 
sister a pleasant mode of instruction?” 

catherine was save the embarrassment of attempt an answer by the 
entrance of the general, whose smile compliments announce a happy 
state of mind, but whose gentle hint of sympathetic early rising did not 
advance her composure. 

the elegance of the breakfast set forced itself on catherine's notice 
when they were seat at table; and, luckily, it had been the general's 
choice. he was enchant by her approbation of his taste, confessed it 
to be neat and simple, thought it right to encourage the manufacture of 
his country; and for his part, to his uncritical palate, the tea was as 
well flavour from the clay of staffordshire, as from that of dresden 
or save. but this was quite an old set, purchase two years ago. 
the manufacture was much improve since that time; he had seen some 
beautiful specimen when last in town, and had he not been perfectly 
without vanity of that kind, might have been tempt to order a new 
set. he trusted, however, that an opportunity might ere long occur of 
select one--though not for himself. catherine was probably the only 
one of the party who did not understand him. 

shortly after breakfast henry left them for woodston, where business 
require and would keep him two or three days. they all attend in 
the hall to see him mount his horse, and immediately on re-entering the 
breakfast-room, catherine walk to a window in the hope of catching 
another glimpse of his figure. “this is a somewhat heavy call upon your 
brother's fortitude,” observe the general to eleanor. “woodston will 
make but a sombre appearance today.” 

“is it a pretty place?” ask catherine. 

“what say you, eleanor? speak your opinion, for ladies can best tell the 
taste of ladies in regard to place as well as men. i think it would be 
acknowledge by the most impartial eye to have many recommendations. the 
house stand among fine meadow facing the south-east, with an excellent 
kitchen-garden in the same aspect; the wall surrounding which i built 
and stock myself about ten years ago, for the benefit of my son. it 
is a family living, miss morland; and the property in the place being 
chiefly my own, you may believe i take care that it shall not be a bad 
one. did henry's income depend solely on this living, he would not be 
ill-provided for. perhaps it may seem odd, that with only two younger 
children, i should think any profession necessary for him; and certainly 
there are moments when we could all wish him disengaged from every tie 
of business. but though i may not exactly make convert of you young 
ladies, i am sure your father, miss morland, would agree with me in 
thinking it expedient to give every young man some employment. the 
money is nothing, it is not an object, but employment is the thing. 
even frederick, my eldest son, you see, who will perhaps inherit as 
considerable a landed property as any private man in the county, has his 
profession.” 

the imposing effect of this last argument was equal to his wishes. the 
silence of the lady prove it to be unanswerable. 

something had been said the evening before of her being shown over the 
house, and he now offer himself as her conductor; and though catherine 
had hope to explore it accompany only by his daughter, it was a 
proposal of too much happiness in itself, under any circumstances, not 
to be gladly accepted; for she had been already eighteen hour in the 
abbey, and had seen only a few of its rooms. the netting-box, just 
leisurely drawn forth, was closed with joyful haste, and she was ready 
to attend him in a moment. “and when they had gone over the house, he 
promise himself moreover the pleasure of accompany her into the 
shrubbery and garden.” she curtsy her acquiescence. “but perhaps 
it might be more agreeable to her to make those her first object. 
the weather was at present favourable, and at this time of year the 
uncertainty was very great of its continue so. which would she prefer? 
he was equally at her service. which did his daughter think would most 
accord with her fair friend's wishes? but he thought he could discern. 
yes, he certainly read in miss morland's eyes a judicious desire of 
making use of the present smile weather. but when did she judge amiss? 
the abbey would be always safe and dry. he yield implicitly, and 
would fetch his hat and attend them in a moment.” he left the room, 
and catherine, with a disappointed, anxious face, began to speak of her 
unwilling that he should be taking them out of door against his own 
inclination, under a mistaken idea of pleasing her; but she was stop 
by miss tilney's saying, with a little confusion, “i believe it will be 
wisest to take the morning while it is so fine; and do not be uneasy on 
my father's account; he always walk out at this time of day.” 

catherine did not exactly know how this was to be understood. why 
was miss tilney embarrassed? could there be any unwilling on the 
general's side to show her over the abbey? the proposal was his own. and 
was not it odd that he should always take his walk so early? neither her 
father nor mr. allen did so. it was certainly very provoking. she was 
all impatience to see the house, and had scarcely any curiosity about 
the grounds. if henry had been with them indeed! but now she should not 
know what was picturesque when she saw it. such were her thoughts, but 
she kept them to herself, and put on her bonnet in patient discontent. 

she was struck, however, beyond her expectation, by the grandeur of 
the abbey, as she saw it for the first time from the lawn. the whole 
building enclose a large court; and two side of the quadrangle, rich 
in gothic ornaments, stood forward for admiration. the remainder was 
shut off by knoll of old trees, or luxuriant plantations, and the steep 
woody hill rising behind, to give it shelter, were beautiful even in 
the leafless month of march. catherine had seen nothing to compare with 
it; and her feelings of delight were so strong, that without wait for 
any better authority, she bold burst forth in wonder and praise. the 
general listen with assent gratitude; and it seem as if his own 
estimation of northanger had wait unfixed till that hour. 

the kitchen-garden was to be next admired, and he led the way to it 
across a small portion of the park. 

the number of acre contained in this garden was such as catherine could 
not listen to without dismay, being more than double the extent of all 
mr. allen's, as well as her father's, including church-yard and orchard. 
the wall seem countless in number, endless in length; a village of 
hot-houses seem to arise among them, and a whole parish to be at 
work within the enclosure. the general was flatter by her looks of 
surprise, which told him almost as plainly, as he soon forced her to 
tell him in words, that she had never seen any garden at all equal to 
them before; and he then modest own that, “without any ambition of 
that sort himself--without any solicitude about it--he did believe them 
to be unrivalled in the kingdom. if he had a hobby-horse, it was that. 
he love a garden. though careless enough in most matter of eating, he 
love good fruit--or if he did not, his friends and children did. there 
were great vexations, however, attend such a garden as his. the 
utmost care could not always secure the most valuable fruits. the pinery 
had yield only one hundred in the last year. mr. allen, he supposed, 
must feel these inconvenience as well as himself.” 

“no, not at all. mr. allen did not care about the garden, and never went 
into it.” 

with a triumphant smile of self-satisfaction, the general wish he 
could do the same, for he never enter his, without being vex in some 
way or other, by its fall short of his plan. 

“how were mr. allen's succession-houses worked?” describe the nature 
of his own as they enter them. 

“mr. allen had only one small hot-house, which mrs. allen had the use of 
for her plant in winter, and there was a fire in it now and then.” 

“he is a happy man!” said the general, with a look of very happy 
contempt. 

have taken her into every division, and led her under every wall, till 
she was heartily weary of seeing and wondering, he suffer the girl 
at last to seize the advantage of an outer door, and then express 
his wish to examine the effect of some recent alteration about the 
tea-house, propose it as no unpleasant extension of their walk, if miss 
morland were not tired. “but where are you going, eleanor? why do you 
choose that cold, damp path to it? miss morland will get wet. our best 
way is across the park.” 

“this is so favourite a walk of mine,” said miss tilney, “that i always 
think it the best and nearest way. but perhaps it may be damp.” 

it was a narrow winding path through a thick grove of old scotch firs; 
and catherine, struck by its gloomy aspect, and eager to enter it, 
could not, even by the general's disapprobation, be kept from step 
forward. he perceive her inclination, and have again urge the plea 
of health in vain, was too polite to make further opposition. he excuse 
himself, however, from attend them: “the ray of the sun were not too 
cheerful for him, and he would meet them by another course.” he turn 
away; and catherine was shock to find how much her spirits were 
relieved by the separation. the shock, however, being less real than the 
relief, offer it no injury; and she began to talk with easy gaiety of 
the delightful melancholy which such a grove inspired. 

“i am particularly fond of this spot,” said her companion, with a sigh. 
“it was my mother's favourite walk.” 

catherine had never heard mrs. tilney mention in the family before, 
and the interest excited by this tender remembrance show itself 
directly in her alter countenance, and in the attentive pause with 
which she wait for something more. 

“i use to walk here so often with her!” add eleanor; “though i never 
love it then, as i have love it since. at that time indeed i use to 
wonder at her choice. but her memory endear it now.” 

“and ought it not,” reflect catherine, “to endear it to her husband? 
yet the general would not enter it.” miss tilney continue silent, she 
venture to say, “her death must have been a great affliction!” 

“a great and increase one,” reply the other, in a low voice. “i was 
only thirteen when it happened; and though i felt my loss perhaps as 
strong as one so young could feel it, i did not, i could not, then 
know what a loss it was.” she stop for a moment, and then added, with 
great firmness, “i have no sister, you know--and though henry--though my 
brother are very affectionate, and henry is a great deal here, which i 
am most thankful for, it is impossible for me not to be often solitary.” 

“to be sure you must miss him very much.” 

“a mother would have been always present. a mother would have been a 
constant friend; her influence would have been beyond all other.” 

“was she a very charming woman? was she handsome? was there any picture 
of her in the abbey? and why had she been so partial to that grove? was 
it from dejection of spirits?”--were question now eager pour forth; 
the first three received a ready affirmative, the two other were pass 
by; and catherine's interest in the deceased mrs. tilney augment with 
every question, whether answer or not. of her unhappy in marriage, 
she felt persuaded. the general certainly had been an unkind husband. he 
did not love her walk: could he therefore have love her? and besides, 
handsome as he was, there was a something in the turn of his features 
which spoke his not have behave well to her. 

“her picture, i suppose,” blush at the consummate art of her own 
question, “hangs in your father's room?” 

“no; it was intended for the drawing-room; but my father was 
dissatisfy with the painting, and for some time it had no place. 
soon after her death i obtain it for my own, and hung it in my 
bed-chamber--where i shall be happy to show it you; it is very like.” 
here was another proof. a portrait--very like--of a departed wife, not 
value by the husband! he must have been dreadfully cruel to her! 

catherine attempt no long to hide from herself the nature of the 
feelings which, in spite of all his attentions, he had previous 
excited; and what had been terror and dislike before, was now absolute 
aversion. yes, aversion! his cruelty to such a charming woman made him 
odious to her. she had often read of such characters, character which 
mr. allen had been use to call unnatural and overdrawn; but here was 
proof positive of the contrary. 

she had just settled this point when the end of the path brought them 
directly upon the general; and in spite of all her virtuous indignation, 
she found herself again oblige to walk with him, listen to him, and 
even to smile when he smiled. being no long able, however, to receive 
pleasure from the surrounding objects, she soon began to walk with 
lassitude; the general perceive it, and with a concern for her health, 
which seem to reproach her for her opinion of him, was most urgent 
for return with his daughter to the house. he would follow them in 
a quarter of an hour. again they parted--but eleanor was call back in 
half a minute to receive a strict charge against taking her friend round 
the abbey till his return. this second instance of his anxiety to delay 
what she so much wish for struck catherine as very remarkable. 




chapter 23 


an hour pass away before the general came in, spent, on the part of 
his young guest, in no very favourable consideration of his character. 
“this lengthen absence, these solitary rambles, did not speak a mind 
at ease, or a conscience void of reproach.” at length he appeared; and, 
whatever might have been the gloom of his meditations, he could still 
smile with them. miss tilney, understanding in part her friend's 
curiosity to see the house, soon revive the subject; and her father 
being, contrary to catherine's expectations, unprovided with any 
pretence for further delay, beyond that of stopping five minutes to 
order refreshments to be in the room by their return, was at last ready 
to escort them. 

they set forward; and, with a grandeur of air, a dignified step, 
which caught the eye, but could not shake the doubt of the well-read 
catherine, he led the way across the hall, through the common 
drawing-room and one useless antechamber, into a room magnificent both 
in size and furniture--the real drawing-room, use only with company of 
consequence. it was very noble--very grand--very charming!--was all that 
catherine had to say, for her indiscriminate eye scarcely discern 
the colour of the satin; and all minute of praise, all praise 
that had much meaning, was supply by the general: the costly or 
elegance of any room's fitting-up could be nothing to her; she care for 
no furniture of a more modern date than the fifteenth century. when the 
general had satisfy his own curiosity, in a close examination of every 
well-known ornament, they proceed into the library, an apartment, in 
its way, of equal magnificence, exhibit a collection of books, on 
which an humble man might have look with pride. catherine heard, 
admired, and wonder with more genuine feeling than before--gathered 
all that she could from this storehouse of knowledge, by running over 
the title of half a shelf, and was ready to proceed. but suite of 
apartments did not spring up with her wishes. large as was the building, 
she had already visit the greatest part; though, on being told that, 
with the addition of the kitchen, the six or seven rooms she had now 
seen surround three side of the court, she could scarcely believe it, 
or overcome the suspicion of there being many chambers secreted. it was 
some relief, however, that they were to return to the rooms in common 
use, by passing through a few of less importance, look into the 
court, which, with occasional passages, not wholly unintricate, 
connected the different sides; and she was further soothe in her 
progress by being told that she was tread what had once been a 
cloister, have trace of cell pointed out, and observing several 
door that were neither open nor explain to her--by finding herself 
successive in a billiard-room, and in the general's private apartment, 
without comprehend their connection, or being able to turn aright 
when she left them; and lastly, by passing through a dark little room, 
own henry's authority, and strew with his litter of books, guns, 
and greatcoats. 

from the dining-room, of which, though already seen, and always to be 
seen at five o'clock, the general could not forgo the pleasure of pace 
out the length, for the more certain information of miss morland, as 
to what she neither doubt nor care for, they proceed by quick 
communication to the kitchen--the ancient kitchen of the convent, rich 
in the massy wall and smoke of former days, and in the stove and hot 
closet of the present. the general's improve hand had not loiter 
here: every modern invention to facilitate the labour of the cook had 
been adopt within this, their spacious theatre; and, when the genius 
of other had failed, his own had often produce the perfection wanted. 
his endowment of this spot alone might at any time have placed him high 
among the benefactor of the convent. 

with the wall of the kitchen end all the antiquity of the abbey; the 
fourth side of the quadrangle having, on account of its decay state, 
been remove by the general's father, and the present erect in its 
place. all that was venerable cease here. the new building was not 
only new, but declared itself to be so; intended only for offices, and 
enclose behind by stable-yards, no uniform of architecture had been 
thought necessary. catherine could have rave at the hand which had 
swept away what must have been beyond the value of all the rest, for the 
purpose of mere domestic economy; and would willing have been spare 
the mortification of a walk through scene so fallen, had the general 
allow it; but if he had a vanity, it was in the arrangement of his 
offices; and as he was convinced that, to a mind like miss morland's, 
a view of the accommodations and comforts, by which the labour of her 
inferior were softened, must always be gratifying, he should make 
no apology for leading her on. they took a slight survey of all; and 
catherine was impressed, beyond her expectation, by their multiplicity 
and their convenience. the purpose for which a few shapeless pantry 
and a comfortless scullery were deem sufficient at fullerton, were 
here carry on in appropriate divisions, commodious and roomy. the 
number of servant continual appear did not strike her less than 
the number of their offices. wherever they went, some patten girl 
stop to curtsy, or some footman in dishabille sneak off. yet this 
was an abbey! how inexpressible different in these domestic arrangement 
from such as she had read about--from abbey and castles, in which, 
though certainly large than northanger, all the dirty work of the house 
was to be done by two pair of female hand at the utmost. how they could 
get through it all had often amaze mrs. allen; and, when catherine saw 
what was necessary here, she began to be amaze herself. 

they return to the hall, that the chief staircase might be ascended, 
and the beauty of its wood, and ornament of rich carving might be 
pointed out: have gain the top, they turn in an opposite direction 
from the gallery in which her room lay, and shortly enter one on 
the same plan, but superior in length and breadth. she was here shown 
successive into three large bed-chambers, with their dressing-rooms, 
most completely and handsome fitted up; everything that money and 
taste could do, to give comfort and elegance to apartments, had been 
bestow on these; and, being furnish within the last five years, they 
were perfect in all that would be generally pleasing, and wanting in all 
that could give pleasure to catherine. as they were survey the last, 
the general, after slightly name a few of the distinguished character 
by whom they had at times been honoured, turn with a smile 
countenance to catherine, and venture to hope that henceforward some of 
their earliest tenant might be “our friends from fullerton.” she felt 
the unexpected compliment, and deep regret the impossible of 
thinking well of a man so kindly disposed towards herself, and so full 
of civility to all her family. 

the gallery was terminate by fold doors, which miss tilney, 
advancing, had thrown open, and pass through, and seem on the point 
of do the same by the first door to the left, in another long reach 
of gallery, when the general, coming forwards, call her hastily, and, 
as catherine thought, rather angry back, demanding whether she were 
going?--and what was there more to be seen?--had not miss morland 
already seen all that could be worth her notice?--and did she not 
suppose her friend might be glad of some refreshment after so much 
exercise? miss tilney drew back directly, and the heavy door were 
closed upon the mortify catherine, who, have seen, in a momentary 
glance beyond them, a narrow passage, more numerous openings, and 
symptom of a winding staircase, believe herself at last within the 
reach of something worth her notice; and felt, as she unwilling pace 
back the gallery, that she would rather be allow to examine that end 
of the house than see all the finery of all the rest. the general's 
evident desire of prevent such an examination was an additional 
stimulant. something was certainly to be concealed; her fancy, though 
it had trespass lately once or twice, could not mislead her here; 
and what that something was, a short sentence of miss tilney's, as they 
follow the general at some distance downstairs, seem to point out: 
“i was go to take you into what was my mother's room--the room 
in which she died--” were all her words; but few as they were, they 
convey page of intelligence to catherine. it was no wonder that the 
general should shrink from the sight of such object as that room 
must contain; a room in all probability never enter by him since the 
dreadful scene had passed, which release his suffering wife, and left 
him to the sting of conscience. 

she ventured, when next alone with eleanor, to express her wish of being 
permit to see it, as well as all the rest of that side of the house; 
and eleanor promise to attend her there, whenever they should have a 
convenient hour. catherine understood her: the general must be watch 
from home, before that room could be entered. “it remains as it was, i 
suppose?” said she, in a tone of feeling. 

“yes, entirely.” 

“and how long ago may it be that your mother died?” 

“she has been dead these nine years.” and nine years, catherine knew, 
was a trifle of time, compare with what generally elapse after the 
death of an injure wife, before her room was put to rights. 

“you were with her, i suppose, to the last?” 

“no,” said miss tilney, sighing; “i was unfortunately from home. her 
illness was sudden and short; and, before i arrive it was all over.” 

catherine's blood ran cold with the horrid suggestion which naturally 
sprang from these words. could it be possible? could henry's father--? 
and yet how many were the example to justify even the blackest 
suspicions! and, when she saw him in the evening, while she work 
with her friend, slow pace the drawing-room for an hour together in 
silent thoughtfulness, with downcast eyes and contract brow, she felt 
secure from all possibility of wrong him. it was the air and attitude 
of a montoni! what could more plainly speak the gloomy workings of a 
mind not wholly dead to every sense of humanity, in its fearful review 
of past scene of guilt? unhappy man! and the anxious of her spirits 
direct her eyes towards his figure so repeatedly, as to catch miss 
tilney's notice. “my father,” she whispered, “often walk about the room 
in this way; it is nothing unusual.” 

“so much the worse!” thought catherine; such ill-timed exercise was of a 
piece with the strange unseasonable of his morning walks, and bode 
nothing good. 

after an evening, the little variety and seeming length of which made 
her peculiarly sensible of henry's importance among them, she was 
heartily glad to be dismissed; though it was a look from the general not 
design for her observation which sent his daughter to the bell. 
when the butler would have lit his master's candle, however, he was 
forbidden. the latter was not go to retire. “i have many pamphlet to 
finish,” said he to catherine, “before i can close my eyes, and perhaps 
may be pore over the affair of the nation for hour after you are 
asleep. can either of us be more meet employed? my eyes will be 
blind for the good of others, and yours prepare by rest for future 
mischief.” 

but neither the business alleged, nor the magnificent compliment, 
could win catherine from thinking that some very different object must 
occasion so serious a delay of proper repose. to be kept up for hours, 
after the family were in bed, by stupid pamphlet was not very likely. 
there must be some deep cause: something was to be done which could 
be done only while the household slept; and the probability that mrs. 
tilney yet lived, shut up for cause unknown, and receiving from the 
pitiless hand of her husband a nightly supply of coarse food, was the 
conclusion which necessarily followed. shocking as was the idea, it 
was at least better than a death unfair hastened, as, in the natural 
course of things, she must ere long be released. the sudden of her 
reputed illness, the absence of her daughter, and probably of her other 
children, at the time--all favoured the supposition of her imprisonment. 
its origin--jealousy perhaps, or wanton cruelty--was yet to be 
unravelled. 

in revolving these matters, while she undressed, it sudden struck her 
as not unlikely that she might that morning have pass near the very 
spot of this unfortunate woman's confinement--might have been within 
a few pace of the cell in which she languish out her days; for what 
part of the abbey could be more fitted for the purpose than that which 
yet bore the trace of monastic division? in the high-arched passage, 
paved with stone, which already she had trodden with peculiar awe, she 
well remember the door of which the general had given no account. to 
what might not those door lead? in support of the plausible of this 
conjecture, it further occur to her that the forbidden gallery, in 
which lay the apartments of the unfortunate mrs. tilney, must be, as 
certainly as her memory could guide her, exactly over this suspect 
range of cells, and the staircase by the side of those apartments of 
which she had caught a transient glimpse, communicate by some 
secret means with those cells, might well have favoured the barbarous 
proceedings of her husband. down that staircase she had perhaps been 
convey in a state of well-prepared insensibility! 

catherine sometimes start at the bold of her own surmises, and 
sometimes hope or fear that she had gone too far; but they were 
support by such appearances as made their dismissal impossible. 

the side of the quadrangle, in which she supposed the guilty scene to be 
acting, being, according to her belief, just opposite her own, it struck 
her that, if judicious watched, some ray of light from the general's 
lamp might glimmer through the lower windows, as he pass to the prison 
of his wife; and, twice before she step into bed, she stole gently 
from her room to the corresponding window in the gallery, to see if it 
appeared; but all abroad was dark, and it must yet be too early. the 
various ascend noise convinced her that the servant must still be 
up. till midnight, she supposed it would be in vain to watch; but then, 
when the clock had struck twelve, and all was quiet, she would, if not 
quite appall by darkness, steal out and look once more. the clock 
struck twelve--and catherine had been half an hour asleep. 




chapter 24 


the next day afford no opportunity for the propose examination of the 
mysterious apartments. it was sunday, and the whole time between morning 
and afternoon service was require by the general in exercise abroad or 
eat cold meat at home; and great as was catherine's curiosity, her 
courage was not equal to a wish of explore them after dinner, either 
by the fade light of the sky between six and seven o'clock, or by the 
yet more partial though strong illumination of a treacherous lamp. 
the day was unmarked therefore by anything to interest her imagination 
beyond the sight of a very elegant monument to the memory of mrs. 
tilney, which immediately front the family pew. by that her eye 
was instantly caught and long retained; and the peruse of the highly 
strained epitaph, in which every virtue was ascribe to her by the 
inconsolable husband, who must have been in some way or other her 
destroyer, affected her even to tears. 

that the general, have erect such a monument, should be able to face 
it, was not perhaps very strange, and yet that he could sit so bold 
collected within its view, maintain so elevated an air, look so 
fearless around, nay, that he should even enter the church, seem 
wonderful to catherine. not, however, that many instance of being 
equally harden in guilt might not be produced. she could remember 
dozen who had persevere in every possible vice, go on from crime to 
crime, murder whomsoever they chose, without any feeling of humanity 
or remorse; till a violent death or a religious retirement closed their 
black career. the erection of the monument itself could not in the 
smallest degree affect her doubt of mrs. tilney's actual decease. were 
she even to descend into the family vault where her ashes were supposed 
to slumber, were she to behold the coffin in which they were said to 
be enclosed--what could it avail in such a case? catherine had read too 
much not to be perfectly aware of the ease with which a waxen figure 
might be introduced, and a supposititious funeral carry on. 

the succeed morning promise something better. the general's early 
walk, ill-timed as it was in every other view, was favourable here; and 
when she knew him to be out of the house, she directly propose to miss 
tilney the accomplishment of her promise. eleanor was ready to oblige 
her; and catherine remind her as they went of another promise, their 
first visit in consequence was to the portrait in her bed-chamber. it 
represent a very lovely woman, with a mild and pensive countenance, 
justifying, so far, the expectations of its new observer; but they were 
not in every respect answered, for catherine had depend upon meeting 
with features, hair, complexion, that should be the very counterpart, 
the very image, if not of henry's, of eleanor's--the only portrait of 
which she had been in the habit of thinking, bearing always an equal 
resemblance of mother and child. a face once taken was taken for 
generations. but here she was oblige to look and consider and study 
for a likeness. she contemplate it, however, in spite of this drawback, 
with much emotion, and, but for a yet strong interest, would have left 
it unwillingly. 

her agitation as they enter the great gallery was too much for any 
endeavour at discourse; she could only look at her companion. eleanor's 
countenance was dejected, yet sedate; and its composure spoke her inure 
to all the gloomy object to which they were advancing. again she pass 
through the fold doors, again her hand was upon the important lock, 
and catherine, hardly able to breathe, was turning to close the former 
with fearful caution, when the figure, the dread figure of the general 
himself at the further end of the gallery, stood before her! the name of 
“eleanor” at the same moment, in his loudest tone, resound through the 
building, give to his daughter the first intimate of his presence, 
and to catherine terror upon terror. an attempt at concealment had been 
her first instinctive movement on perceive him, yet she could 
scarcely hope to have escape his eye; and when her friend, who with an 
apologize look dart hasty by her, had join and disappear 
with him, she ran for safety to her own room, and, lock herself 
in, believe that she should never have courage to go down again. she 
remain there at least an hour, in the greatest agitation, deep 
commiserate the state of her poor friend, and expect a summons 
herself from the angry general to attend him in his own apartment. no 
summons, however, arrived; and at last, on seeing a carriage drive up 
to the abbey, she was embolden to descend and meet him under the 
protection of visitors. the breakfast-room was gay with company; and 
she was name to them by the general as the friend of his daughter, in 
a complimentary style, which so well conceal his resentful ire, as to 
make her feel secure at least of life for the present. and eleanor, 
with a command of countenance which did honour to her concern for his 
character, taking an early occasion of saying to her, “my father only 
want me to answer a note,” she began to hope that she had either been 
unseen by the general, or that from some consideration of policy she 
should be allow to suppose herself so. upon this trust she dare still 
to remain in his presence, after the company left them, and nothing 
occur to disturb it. 

in the course of this morning's reflections, she came to a resolution 
of making her next attempt on the forbidden door alone. it would be much 
better in every respect that eleanor should know nothing of the matter. 
to involve her in the danger of a second detection, to court her into 
an apartment which must wring her heart, could not be the office of a 
friend. the general's utmost anger could not be to herself what it might 
be to a daughter; and, besides, she thought the examination itself 
would be more satisfactory if made without any companion. it would be 
impossible to explain to eleanor the suspicions, from which the other 
had, in all likelihood, been hitherto happily exempt; nor could she 
therefore, in her presence, search for those proof of the general's 
cruelty, which however they might yet have escape discovery, she felt 
confident of somewhere drawing forth, in the shape of some fragment 
journal, continue to the last gasp. of the way to the apartment she was 
now perfectly mistress; and as she wish to get it over before henry's 
return, who was expect on the morrow, there was no time to be lost. 
the day was bright, her courage high; at four o'clock, the sun was now 
two hour above the horizon, and it would be only her retiring to dress 
half an hour early than usual. 

it was done; and catherine found herself alone in the gallery before the 
clock had cease to strike. it was no time for thought; she hurried 
on, slip with the least possible noise through the fold doors, 
and without stopping to look or breathe, rush forward to the one in 
question. the lock yield to her hand, and, luckily, with no sullen 
sound that could alarm a human being. on tiptoe she entered; the room 
was before her; but it was some minutes before she could advance another 
step. she beheld what fixed her to the spot and agitate every feature. 
she saw a large, well-proportioned apartment, an handsome dimity bed, 
arrange as unoccupy with an housemaid's care, a bright bath stove, 
mahogany wardrobes, and neat paint chairs, on which the warm beam 
of a western sun gaily pour through two sash windows! catherine had 
expect to have her feelings worked, and work they were. astonishment 
and doubt first seize them; and a shortly succeed ray of common 
sense add some bitter emotion of shame. she could not be mistaken 
as to the room; but how gross mistaken in everything else!--in miss 
tilney's meaning, in her own calculation! this apartment, to which she 
had given a date so ancient, a position so awful, prove to be one end 
of what the general's father had built. there were two other door in 
the chamber, leading probably into dressing-closets; but she had no 
inclination to open either. would the veil in which mrs. tilney had last 
walked, or the volume in which she had last read, remain to tell what 
nothing else was allow to whisper? no: whatever might have been the 
general's crimes, he had certainly too much wit to let them sue for 
detection. she was sick of exploring, and desire but to be safe in her 
own room, with her own heart only privy to its folly; and she was on 
the point of retreat as soft as she had entered, when the sound of 
footsteps, she could hardly tell where, made her pause and tremble. 
to be found there, even by a servant, would be unpleasant; but by the 
general (and he seem always at hand when least wanted), much worse! 
she listened--the sound had ceased; and resolve not to lose a 
moment, she pass through and closed the door. at that instant a door 
underneath was hasty opened; someone seem with swift steps to ascend 
the stairs, by the head of which she had yet to pass before she could 
gain the gallery. she had no power to move. with a feeling of terror 
not very definable, she fixed her eyes on the staircase, and in a few 
moments it gave henry to her view. “mr. tilney!” she exclaim in a 
voice of more than common astonishment. he look astonish too. “good 
god!” she continued, not attend to his address. “how came you here? 
how came you up that staircase?” 

“how came i up that staircase!” he replied, greatly surprised. “because 
it is my nearest way from the stable-yard to my own chamber; and why 
should i not come up it?” 

catherine recollect herself, blush deeply, and could say no more. he 
seem to be look in her countenance for that explanation which her 
lip did not afford. she move on towards the gallery. “and may i not, 
in my turn,” said he, as he pushed back the fold doors, “ask how you 
came here? this passage is at least as extraordinary a road from the 
breakfast-parlour to your apartment, as that staircase can be from the 
stable to mine.” 

“i have been,” said catherine, look down, “to see your mother's 
room.” 

“my mother's room! is there anything extraordinary to be seen there?” 

“no, nothing at all. i thought you did not mean to come back till 
tomorrow.” 

“i did not expect to be able to return sooner, when i went away; but 
three hour ago i had the pleasure of finding nothing to detain me. you 
look pale. i am afraid i alarm you by running so fast up those stairs. 
perhaps you did not know--you were not aware of their leading from the 
offices in common use?” 

“no, i was not. you have had a very fine day for your ride.” 

“very; and do eleanor leave you to find your way into all the rooms in 
the house by yourself?” 

“oh! no; she show me over the greatest part on saturday--and we were 
coming here to these rooms--but only”--dropping her voice--“your father 
was with us.” 

“and that prevent you,” said henry, earnest regarding her. “have you 
look into all the rooms in that passage?” 

“no, i only want to see--is not it very late? i must go and dress.” 

“it is only a quarter past four” showing his watch--“and you are not now 
in bath. no theatre, no rooms to prepare for. half an hour at northanger 
must be enough.” 

she could not contradict it, and therefore suffer herself to be 
detained, though her dread of further question made her, for the first 
time in their acquaintance, wish to leave him. they walk slow up the 
gallery. “have you had any letter from bath since i saw you?” 

“no, and i am very much surprised. isabella promise so faithfully to 
write directly.” 

“promised so faithfully! a faithful promise! that puzzle me. i have 
heard of a faithful performance. but a faithful promise--the fidelity 
of promising! it is a power little worth knowing, however, since it can 
deceive and pain you. my mother's room is very commodious, is it not? 
large and cheerful-looking, and the dressing-closets so well disposed! 
it always strike me as the most comfortable apartment in the house, and 
i rather wonder that eleanor should not take it for her own. she sent 
you to look at it, i suppose?” 

“no.” 

“it has been your own do entirely?” catherine said nothing. after a 
short silence, during which he had close observe her, he added, “as 
there is nothing in the room in itself to raise curiosity, this must 
have proceed from a sentiment of respect for my mother's character, 
as describe by eleanor, which do honour to her memory. the world, i 
believe, never saw a better woman. but it is not often that virtue can 
boast an interest such as this. the domestic, unpretend merit of a 
person never known do not often create that kind of fervent, venerate 
tender which would prompt a visit like yours. eleanor, i suppose, 
has talk of her a great deal?” 

“yes, a great deal. that is--no, not much, but what she did say was very 
interesting. her die so suddenly” (slowly, and with hesitation it 
was spoken), “and you--none of you being at home--and your father, i 
thought--perhaps had not been very fond of her.” 

“and from these circumstances,” he reply (his quick eye 
fixed on hers), “you infer perhaps the probability of some 
negligence--some”--(involuntarily she shook her head)--“or it may be--of 
something still less pardonable.” she raise her eyes towards him 
more fully than she had ever done before. “my mother's illness,” he 
continued, “the seizure which end in her death, was sudden. the malady 
itself, one from which she had often suffered, a bilious fever--its 
cause therefore constitutional. on the third day, in short, as soon as 
she could be prevail on, a physician attend her, a very respectable 
man, and one in whom she had always placed great confidence. upon his 
opinion of her danger, two other were call in the next day, and 
remain in almost constant attendance for four and twenty hours. on the 
fifth day she died. during the progress of her disorder, frederick and i 
(we were both at home) saw her repeatedly; and from our own observation 
can bear witness to her have received every possible attention 
which could spring from the affection of those about her, or which her 
situation in life could command. poor eleanor was absent, and at such a 
distance as to return only to see her mother in her coffin.” 

“but your father,” said catherine, “was he afflicted?” 

“for a time, greatly so. you have err in supposing him not attach 
to her. he love her, i am persuaded, as well as it was possible for him 
to--we have not all, you know, the same tender of disposition--and 
i will not pretend to say that while she lived, she might not often have 
had much to bear, but though his temper injure her, his judgment never 
did. his value of her was sincere; and, if not permanently, he was truly 
afflict by her death.” 

“i am very glad of it,” said catherine; “it would have been very 
shocking!” 

“if i understand you rightly, you had form a surmise of such horror as 
i have hardly words to--dear miss morland, consider the dreadful nature 
of the suspicion you have entertained. what have you been judge from? 
remember the country and the age in which we live. remember that we are 
english, that we are christians. consult your own understanding, your 
own sense of the probable, your own observation of what is passing 
around you. do our education prepare us for such atrocities? do our 
law connive at them? could they be perpetrate without being known, in 
a country like this, where social and literary intercourse is on such a 
footing, where every man is surround by a neighbourhood of voluntary 
spies, and where road and newspaper lay everything open? dearest miss 
morland, what idea have you been admitting?” 

they had reach the end of the gallery, and with tear of shame she ran 
off to her own room. 




chapter 25 


the vision of romance were over. catherine was completely awakened. 
henry's address, short as it had been, had more thorough open her 
eyes to the extravagance of her late fancies than all their several 
disappointment had done. most grievous was she humbled. most bitter 
did she cry. it was not only with herself that she was sunk--but with 
henry. her folly, which now seem even criminal, was all expose to 
him, and he must despise her forever. the liberty which her imagination 
had dare to take with the character of his father--could he ever 
forgive it? the absurd of her curiosity and her fears--could they 
ever be forgotten? she hate herself more than she could express. he 
had--she thought he had, once or twice before this fatal morning, shown 
something like affection for her. but now--in short, she made herself as 
miserable as possible for about half an hour, went down when the 
clock struck five, with a broken heart, and could scarcely give an 
intelligible answer to eleanor's inquiry if she was well. the formidable 
henry soon follow her into the room, and the only difference in his 
behaviour to her was that he paid her rather more attention than usual. 
catherine had never want comfort more, and he look as if he was 
aware of it. 

the evening wore away with no abate of this soothe politeness; and 
her spirits were gradual raise to a modest tranquillity. she did not 
learn either to forget or defend the past; but she learned to hope that 
it would never transpire farther, and that it might not cost her henry's 
entire regard. her thought being still chiefly fixed on what she had 
with such causeless terror felt and done, nothing could shortly be 
clear than that it had been all a voluntary, self-created delusion, 
each trifling circumstance receiving importance from an imagination 
resolve on alarm, and everything forced to bend to one purpose by 
a mind which, before she enter the abbey, had been craving to be 
frightened. she remember with what feelings she had prepared for a 
knowledge of northanger. she saw that the infatuation had been created, 
the mischief settled, long before her quit bath, and it seem as if 
the whole might be trace to the influence of that sort of reading which 
she had there indulged. 

charming as were all mrs. radcliffe's works, and charming even as were 
the works of all her imitators, it was not in them perhaps that human 
nature, at least in the midland county of england, was to be look 
for. of the alps and pyrenees, with their pine forest and their vices, 
they might give a faithful delineation; and italy, switzerland, and 
the south of france might be as fruitful in horrors as they were there 
represented. catherine dare not doubt beyond her own country, and even 
of that, if hard pressed, would have yield the northern and western 
extremities. but in the central part of england there was surely some 
security for the existence even of a wife not beloved, in the law of 
the land, and the manners of the age. murder was not tolerated, servant 
were not slaves, and neither poison nor sleep potion to be procured, 
like rhubarb, from every druggist. among the alps and pyrenees, perhaps, 
there were no mixed characters. there, such as were not as spotless as 
an angel might have the disposition of a fiend. but in england it was 
not so; among the english, she believed, in their heart and habits, 
there was a general though unequal mixture of good and bad. upon this 
conviction, she would not be surprise if even in henry and eleanor 
tilney, some slight imperfect might hereafter appear; and upon this 
conviction she need not fear to acknowledge some actual speck in 
the character of their father, who, though clear from the gross 
injurious suspicion which she must ever blush to have entertained, she 
did believe, upon serious consideration, to be not perfectly amiable. 

her mind made up on these several points, and her resolution formed, of 
always judge and acting in future with the greatest good sense, she 
had nothing to do but to forgive herself and be happy than ever; and 
the lenient hand of time did much for her by insensible gradation in 
the course of another day. henry's astonish generous and noble 
of conduct, in never allude in the slightest way to what had passed, 
was of the greatest assistance to her; and soon than she could have 
supposed it possible in the beginning of her distress, her spirits 
became absolutely comfortable, and capable, as heretofore, of continual 
improvement by anything he said. there were still some subjects, indeed, 
under which she believe they must always tremble--the mention of a 
chest or a cabinet, for instance--and she did not love the sight of 
japan in any shape: but even she could allow that an occasional memento 
of past folly, however painful, might not be without use. 

the anxiety of common life began soon to succeed to the alarm of 
romance. her desire of hearing from isabella grew every day greater. 
she was quite impatient to know how the bath world went on, and how the 
rooms were attended; and especially was she anxious to be assured of 
isabella's have match some fine netting-cotton, on which she had 
left her intent; and of her continue on the best terms with james. her 
only dependence for information of any kind was on isabella. james had 
protest against writing to her till his return to oxford; and mrs. 
allen had given her no hope of a letter till she had got back to 
fullerton. but isabella had promise and promise again; and when she 
promise a thing, she was so scrupulous in perform it! this made it 
so particularly strange! 

for nine successive mornings, catherine wonder over the repetition 
of a disappointment, which each morning became more severe: but, on 
the tenth, when she enter the breakfast-room, her first object was a 
letter, held out by henry's willing hand. she thank him as heartily 
as if he had written it himself. “'tis only from james, however,” as she 
look at the direction. she open it; it was from oxford; and to this 
purpose: 


“dear catherine, 

“though, god knows, with little inclination for writing, i think it my 
duty to tell you that everything is at an end between miss thorpe and 
me. i left her and bath yesterday, never to see either again. i shall 
not enter into particulars--they would only pain you more. you will soon 
hear enough from another quarter to know where lie the blame; and i 
hope will acquit your brother of everything but the folly of too easily 
thinking his affection returned. thank god! i am undeceive in time! 
but it is a heavy blow! after my father's consent had been so kindly 
given--but no more of this. she has made me miserable forever! let me 
soon hear from you, dear catherine; you are my only friend; your love 
i do build upon. i wish your visit at northanger may be over before 
captain tilney make his engagement known, or you will be uncomfortable 
circumstanced. poor thorpe is in town: i dread the sight of him; his 
honest heart would feel so much. i have written to him and my father. 
her duplicity hurt me more than all; till the very last, if i reasoned 
with her, she declared herself as much attach to me as ever, and 
laugh at my fears. i am ashamed to think how long i bore with it; 
but if ever man had reason to believe himself loved, i was that man. i 
cannot understand even now what she would be at, for there could be no 
need of my being play off to make her secure of tilney. we part 
at last by mutual consent--happy for me had we never met! i can never 
expect to know such another woman! dearest catherine, beware how you 
give your heart. 

“believe me,” &c. 


catherine had not read three lines before her sudden change of 
countenance, and short exclamation of sorrow wonder, declared her to 
be receiving unpleasant news; and henry, earnest watch her through 
the whole letter, saw plainly that it end no better than it began. he 
was prevented, however, from even look his surprise by his father's 
entrance. they went to breakfast directly; but catherine could hardly 
eat anything. tear fill her eyes, and even ran down her cheek as she 
sat. the letter was one moment in her hand, then in her lap, and then in 
her pocket; and she look as if she knew not what she did. the general, 
between his cocoa and his newspaper, had lucky no leisure for notice 
her; but to the other two her distress was equally visible. as soon 
as she dare leave the table she hurried away to her own room; but the 
housemaid were busy in it, and she was oblige to come down again. 
she turn into the drawing-room for privacy, but henry and eleanor had 
likewise retreat thither, and were at that moment deep in consultation 
about her. she drew back, try to beg their pardon, but was, with 
gentle violence, forced to return; and the other withdrew, after 
eleanor had affectionate express a wish of being of use or comfort 
to her. 

after half an hour's free indulgence of grief and reflection, catherine 
felt equal to encounter her friends; but whether she should make 
her distress known to them was another consideration. perhaps, if 
particularly questioned, she might just give an idea--just distantly 
hint at it--but not more. to expose a friend, such a friend as isabella 
had been to her--and then their own brother so close concerned in it! 
she believe she must waive the subject altogether. henry and eleanor 
were by themselves in the breakfast-room; and each, as she enter it, 
look at her anxiously. catherine took her place at the table, and, 
after a short silence, eleanor said, “no bad news from fullerton, i 
hope? mr. and mrs. morland--your brother and sisters--i hope they are 
none of them ill?” 

“no, i thank you” (sighing as she spoke); “they are all very well. my 
letter was from my brother at oxford.” 

nothing further was said for a few minutes; and then speak through 
her tears, she added, “i do not think i shall ever wish for a letter 
again!” 

“i am sorry,” said henry, close the book he had just opened; “if i 
had suspect the letter of contain anything unwelcome, i should have 
given it with very different feelings.” 

“it contained something worse than anybody could suppose! poor james is 
so unhappy! you will soon know why.” 

“to have so kind-hearted, so affectionate a sister,” reply henry 
warmly, “must be a comfort to him under any distress.” 

“i have one favour to beg,” said catherine, shortly afterwards, in an 
agitate manner, “that, if your brother should be coming here, you will 
give me notice of it, that i may go away.” 

“our brother! frederick!” 

“yes; i am sure i should be very sorry to leave you so soon, but 
something has happen that would make it very dreadful for me to be in 
the same house with captain tilney.” 

eleanor's work was suspend while she gaze with increase 
astonishment; but henry began to suspect the truth, and something, in 
which miss thorpe's name was included, pass his lips. 

“how quick you are!” cry catherine: “you have guess it, i declare! 
and yet, when we talk about it in bath, you little thought of its 
ending so. isabella--no wonder now i have not heard from her--isabella 
has desert my brother, and is to marry yours! could you have believe 
there had been such inconstant and fickleness, and everything that is 
bad in the world?” 

“i hope, so far as concern my brother, you are misinformed. i hope 
he has not had any material share in bring on mr. morland's 
disappointment. his marry miss thorpe is not probable. i think you 
must be deceive so far. i am very sorry for mr. morland--sorry that 
anyone you love should be unhappy; but my surprise would be greater at 
frederick's marry her than at any other part of the story.” 

“it is very true, however; you shall read james's letter yourself. 
stay--there is one part--” recollect with a blush the last line. 

“will you take the trouble of reading to us the passage which concern 
my brother?” 

“no, read it yourself,” cry catherine, whose second thought were 
clearer. “i do not know what i was thinking of” (blushing again that she 
had blush before); “james only means to give me good advice.” 

he gladly received the letter, and, have read it through, with close 
attention, return it saying, “well, if it is to be so, i can only 
say that i am sorry for it. frederick will not be the first man who has 
chosen a wife with less sense than his family expected. i do not envy 
his situation, either as a lover or a son.” 

miss tilney, at catherine's invitation, now read the letter likewise, 
and, have express also her concern and surprise, began to inquire 
into miss thorpe's connection and fortune. 

“her mother is a very good sort of woman,” was catherine's answer. 

“what was her father?” 

“a lawyer, i believe. they live at putney.” 

“are they a wealthy family?” 

“no, not very. i do not believe isabella has any fortune at all: but 
that will not signify in your family. your father is so very liberal! 
he told me the other day that he only value money as it allow him to 
promote the happiness of his children.” the brother and sister look 
at each other. “but,” said eleanor, after a short pause, “would it be to 
promote his happiness, to enable him to marry such a girl? she must be 
an unprincipled one, or she could not have use your brother so. and how 
strange an infatuation on frederick's side! a girl who, before his eyes, 
is violate an engagement voluntary enter into with another man! is 
not it inconceivable, henry? frederick too, who always wore his heart so 
proudly! who found no woman good enough to be loved!” 

“that is the most unpromise circumstance, the strongest presumption 
against him. when i think of his past declarations, i give him up. 
moreover, i have too good an opinion of miss thorpe's prudence to 
suppose that she would part with one gentleman before the other 
was secured. it is all over with frederick indeed! he is a deceased 
man--defunct in understanding. prepare for your sister-in-law, eleanor, 
and such a sister-in-law as you must delight in! open, candid, artless, 
guileless, with affection strong but simple, form no pretensions, 
and knowing no disguise.” 

“such a sister-in-law, henry, i should delight in,” said eleanor with a 
smile. 

“but perhaps,” observe catherine, “though she has behave so ill by our 
family, she may behave better by yours. now she has really got the man 
she likes, she may be constant.” 

“indeed i am afraid she will,” reply henry; “i am afraid she will 
be very constant, unless a baronet should come in her way; that is 
frederick's only chance. i will get the bath paper, and look over the 
arrivals.” 

“you think it is all for ambition, then? and, upon my word, there are 
some things that seem very like it. i cannot forget that, when she first 
knew what my father would do for them, she seem quite disappointed 
that it was not more. i never was so deceive in anyone's character in 
my life before.” 

“among all the great variety that you have known and studied.” 

“my own disappointment and loss in her is very great; but, as for poor 
james, i suppose he will hardly ever recover it.” 

“your brother is certainly very much to be pity at present; but we 
must not, in our concern for his sufferings, undervalue yours. you feel, 
i suppose, that in lose isabella, you lose half yourself: you feel a 
void in your heart which nothing else can occupy. society is becoming 
irksome; and as for the amusement in which you were wont to share at 
bath, the very idea of them without her is abhorrent. you would not, 
for instance, now go to a ball for the world. you feel that you have no 
long any friend to whom you can speak with unreserve, on whose regard 
you can place dependence, or whose counsel, in any difficulty, you could 
rely on. you feel all this?” 

“no,” said catherine, after a few moments' reflection, “i do not--ought 
i? to say the truth, though i am hurt and grieved, that i cannot still 
love her, that i am never to hear from her, perhaps never to see her 
again, i do not feel so very, very much afflict as one would have 
thought.” 

“you feel, as you always do, what is most to the credit of human nature. 
such feelings ought to be investigated, that they may know themselves.” 

catherine, by some chance or other, found her spirits so very much 
relieved by this conversation that she could not regret her being led 
on, though so unaccountably, to mention the circumstance which had 
produce it. 




chapter 26 


from this time, the subject was frequent canvass by the three young 
people; and catherine found, with some surprise, that her two young 
friends were perfectly agree in considering isabella's want of 
consequence and fortune as likely to throw great difficulty in the way 
of her marry their brother. their persuasion that the general would, 
upon this ground alone, independent of the objection that might be 
raise against her character, oppose the connection, turn her feelings 
moreover with some alarm towards herself. she was as insignificant, 
and perhaps as portionless, as isabella; and if the heir of the tilney 
property had not grandeur and wealth enough in himself, at what point 
of interest were the demand of his younger brother to rest? the very 
painful reflection to which this thought led could only be disperse by 
a dependence on the effect of that particular partiality, which, as she 
was given to understand by his words as well as his actions, she had 
from the first been so fortunate as to excite in the general; and by a 
recollection of some most generous and disinterested sentiment on the 
subject of money, which she had more than once heard him utter, and 
which tempt her to think his disposition in such matter misunderstood 
by his children. 

they were so fully convinced, however, that their brother would not 
have the courage to apply in person for his father's consent, and so 
repeatedly assured her that he had never in his life been less likely to 
come to northanger than at the present time, that she suffer her mind 
to be at ease as to the necessity of any sudden removal of her own. but 
as it was not to be supposed that captain tilney, whenever he made his 
application, would give his father any just idea of isabella's conduct, 
it occur to her as highly expedient that henry should lay the whole 
business before him as it really was, enabling the general by that means 
to form a cool and impartial opinion, and prepare his objection on 
a fair ground than inequality of situations. she propose it to him 
accordingly; but he did not catch at the measure so eager as she had 
expected. “no,” said he, “my father's hand need not be strengthened, 
and frederick's confession of folly need not be forestalled. he must 
tell his own story.” 

“but he will tell only half of it.” 

“a quarter would be enough.” 

a day or two pass away and brought no tidings of captain tilney. his 
brother and sister knew not what to think. sometimes it appear to 
them as if his silence would be the natural result of the suspect 
engagement, and at other that it was wholly incompatible with it. 
the general, meanwhile, though offend every morning by frederick's 
remiss in writing, was free from any real anxiety about him, and had 
no more pressing solicitude than that of making miss morland's time at 
northanger pass pleasantly. he often express his uneasy on this 
head, fear the sameness of every day's society and employment would 
disgust her with the place, wish the lady fraser had been in the 
country, talk every now and then of have a large party to dinner, 
and once or twice began even to calculate the number of young dance 
people in the neighbourhood. but then it was such a dead time of year, 
no wild-fowl, no game, and the lady fraser were not in the country. 
and it all ended, at last, in his telling henry one morning that when he 
next went to woodston, they would take him by surprise there some day 
or other, and eat their mutton with him. henry was greatly honour and 
very happy, and catherine was quite delight with the scheme. “and when 
do you think, sir, i may look forward to this pleasure? i must be at 
woodston on monday to attend the parish meeting, and shall probably be 
oblige to stay two or three days.” 

“well, well, we will take our chance some one of those days. there is 
no need to fix. you are not to put yourself at all out of your way. 
whatever you may happen to have in the house will be enough. i think i 
can answer for the young ladies making allowance for a bachelor's table. 
let me see; monday will be a busy day with you, we will not come on 
monday; and tuesday will be a busy one with me. i expect my surveyor 
from brockham with his report in the morning; and afterwards i cannot in 
decency fail attend the club. i really could not face my acquaintance 
if i stay away now; for, as i am known to be in the country, it would 
be taken exceedingly amiss; and it is a rule with me, miss morland, 
never to give offence to any of my neighbours, if a small sacrifice of 
time and attention can prevent it. they are a set of very worthy men. 
they have half a buck from northanger twice a year; and i dine with them 
whenever i can. tuesday, therefore, we may say is out of the question. 
but on wednesday, i think, henry, you may expect us; and we shall be 
with you early, that we may have time to look about us. two hour and 
three quarters will carry us to woodston, i suppose; we shall be in the 
carriage by ten; so, about a quarter before one on wednesday, you may 
look for us.” 

a ball itself could not have been more welcome to catherine than 
this little excursion, so strong was her desire to be acquaint with 
woodston; and her heart was still bound with joy when henry, about an 
hour afterwards, came booted and greatcoat into the room where she 
and eleanor were sitting, and said, “i am come, young ladies, in a 
very moralize strain, to observe that our pleasure in this world 
are always to be paid for, and that we often purchase them at a great 
disadvantage, give ready-monied actual happiness for a draft on the 
future, that may not be honoured. witness myself, at this present hour. 
because i am to hope for the satisfaction of seeing you at woodston on 
wednesday, which bad weather, or twenty other causes, may prevent, i 
must go away directly, two days before i intended it.” 

“go away!” said catherine, with a very long face. “and why?” 

“why! how can you ask the question? because no time is to be lost in 
frighten my old housekeeper out of her wits, because i must go and 
prepare a dinner for you, to be sure.” 

“oh! not seriously!” 

“aye, and sadly too--for i had much rather stay.” 

“but how can you think of such a thing, after what the general said? 
when he so particularly desire you not to give yourself any trouble, 
because anything would do.” 

henry only smiled. “i am sure it is quite unnecessary upon your sister's 
account and mine. you must know it to be so; and the general made such 
a point of your providing nothing extraordinary: besides, if he had not 
said half so much as he did, he has always such an excellent dinner 
at home, that sitting down to a middling one for one day could not 
signify.” 

“i wish i could reason like you, for his sake and my own. good-bye. as 
tomorrow is sunday, eleanor, i shall not return.” 

he went; and, it being at any time a much simple operation to catherine 
to doubt her own judgment than henry's, she was very soon oblige to 
give him credit for being right, however disagreeable to her his going. 
but the inexplicable of the general's conduct dwelt much on her 
thoughts. that he was very particular in his eating, she had, by her own 
unassisted observation, already discovered; but why he should say 
one thing so positively, and mean another all the while, was most 
unaccountable! how were people, at that rate, to be understood? who but 
henry could have been aware of what his father was at? 

from saturday to wednesday, however, they were now to be without henry. 
this was the sad finale of every reflection: and captain tilney's letter 
would certainly come in his absence; and wednesday she was very sure 
would be wet. the past, present, and future were all equally in gloom. 
her brother so unhappy, and her loss in isabella so great; and eleanor's 
spirits always affected by henry's absence! what was there to interest 
or amuse her? she was tired of the wood and the shrubberies--always so 
smooth and so dry; and the abbey in itself was no more to her now than 
any other house. the painful remembrance of the folly it had help 
to nourish and perfect was the only emotion which could spring from a 
consideration of the building. what a revolution in her ideas! she, who 
had so long to be in an abbey! now, there was nothing so charming 
to her imagination as the unpretend comfort of a well-connected 
parsonage, something like fullerton, but better: fullerton had its 
faults, but woodston probably had none. if wednesday should ever come! 

it did come, and exactly when it might be reasonably look for. it 
came--it was fine--and catherine trod on air. by ten o'clock, the chaise 
and four convey the trio from the abbey; and, after an agreeable drive 
of almost twenty miles, they enter woodston, a large and populous 
village, in a situation not unpleasant. catherine was ashamed to say 
how pretty she thought it, as the general seem to think an apology 
necessary for the flat of the country, and the size of the village; 
but in her heart she prefer it to any place she had ever been at, 
and look with great admiration at every neat house above the rank of 
a cottage, and at all the little chandler's shop which they passed. at 
the further end of the village, and tolerably disengaged from the rest 
of it, stood the parsonage, a new-built substantial stone house, with 
its semicircular sweep and green gates; and, as they drove up to the 
door, henry, with the friends of his solitude, a large newfoundland 
puppy and two or three terriers, was ready to receive and make much of 
them. 

catherine's mind was too full, as she enter the house, for her either 
to observe or to say a great deal; and, till call on by the general 
for her opinion of it, she had very little idea of the room in which she 
was sitting. upon look round it then, she perceive in a moment that 
it was the most comfortable room in the world; but she was too guarded 
to say so, and the cold of her praise disappointed him. 

“we are not calling it a good house,” said he. “we are not compare 
it with fullerton and northanger--we are considering it as a mere 
parsonage, small and confined, we allow, but decent, perhaps, and 
habitable; and altogether not inferior to the generality; or, in other 
words, i believe there are few country parsonage in england half so 
good. it may admit of improvement, however. far be it from me to say 
otherwise; and anything in reason--a bow thrown out, perhaps--though, 
between ourselves, if there is one thing more than another my aversion, 
it is a patched-on bow.” 

catherine did not hear enough of this speech to understand or be pained 
by it; and other subject being studious brought forward and support 
by henry, at the same time that a tray full of refreshments was 
introduce by his servant, the general was shortly restore to his 
complacency, and catherine to all her usual ease of spirits. 

the room in question was of a commodious, well-proportioned size, and 
handsome fitted up as a dining-parlour; and on their quit it to 
walk round the grounds, she was shown, first into a small apartment, 
belong peculiarly to the master of the house, and made unusually tidy 
on the occasion; and afterwards into what was to be the drawing-room, 
with the appearance of which, though unfurnished, catherine was 
delight enough even to satisfy the general. it was a prettily shaped 
room, the window reach to the ground, and the view from them 
pleasant, though only over green meadows; and she express her 
admiration at the moment with all the honest simplicity with which she 
felt it. “oh! why do not you fit up this room, mr. tilney? what a pity 
not to have it fitted up! it is the prettiest room i ever saw; it is the 
prettiest room in the world!” 

“i trust,” said the general, with a most satisfy smile, “that it will 
very speedy be furnished: it waits only for a lady's taste!” 

“well, if it was my house, i should never sit anywhere else. oh! what a 
sweet little cottage there is among the trees--apple trees, too! it is 
the prettiest cottage!” 

“you like it--you approve it as an object--it is enough. henry, remember 
that robinson is spoken to about it. the cottage remains.” 

such a compliment recall all catherine's consciousness, and silence 
her directly; and, though pointed applied to by the general for her 
choice of the prevailing colour of the paper and hangings, nothing like 
an opinion on the subject could be drawn from her. the influence of 
fresh object and fresh air, however, was of great use in dissipate 
these embarrass associations; and, have reach the ornamental part 
of the premises, consist of a walk round two side of a meadow, on 
which henry's genius had begun to act about half a year ago, she was 
sufficient recover to think it pretty than any pleasure-ground she 
had ever been in before, though there was not a shrub in it higher than 
the green bench in the corner. 

a saunter into other meadows, and through part of the village, with a 
visit to the stable to examine some improvements, and a charming game 
of play with a litter of puppy just able to roll about, brought them 
to four o'clock, when catherine scarcely thought it could be three. at 
four they were to dine, and at six to set off on their return. never had 
any day pass so quickly! 

she could not but observe that the abundance of the dinner did not seem 
to create the smallest astonishment in the general; nay, that he was 
even look at the side-table for cold meat which was not there. his 
son and daughter's observations were of a different kind. they had 
seldom seen him eat so heartily at any table but his own, and never 
before known him so little disconcert by the melt butter's being 
oiled. 

at six o'clock, the general have taken his coffee, the carriage again 
received them; and so gratifying had been the tenor of his conduct 
throughout the whole visit, so well assured was her mind on the subject 
of his expectations, that, could she have felt equally confident of the 
wish of his son, catherine would have quit woodston with little 
anxiety as to the how or the when she might return to it. 




chapter 27 


the next morning brought the following very unexpected letter from 
isabella: 


bath, april 

my dearest catherine, i received your two kind letters with the greatest 
delight, and have a thousand apology to make for not answer them 
sooner. i really am quite ashamed of my idleness; but in this horrid 
place one can find time for nothing. i have had my pen in my hand to 
begin a letter to you almost every day since you left bath, but have 
always been prevent by some silly trifler or other. pray write to me 
soon, and direct to my own home. thank god, we leave this vile place 
tomorrow. since you went away, i have had no pleasure in it--the dust 
is beyond anything; and everybody one care for is gone. i believe if i 
could see you i should not mind the rest, for you are dear to me than 
anybody can conceive. i am quite uneasy about your dear brother, not 
have heard from him since he went to oxford; and am fearful of some 
misunderstanding. your kind offices will set all right: he is the only 
man i ever did or could love, and i trust you will convince him of it. 
the spring fashion are partly down; and the hat the most frightful you 
can imagine. i hope you spend your time pleasantly, but am afraid you 
never think of me. i will not say all that i could of the family you are 
with, because i would not be ungenerous, or set you against those you 
esteem; but it is very difficult to know whom to trust, and young men 
never know their mind two days together. i rejoice to say that the 
young man whom, of all others, i particularly abhor, has left bath. you 
will know, from this description, i must mean captain tilney, who, as 
you may remember, was amazing disposed to follow and tease me, before 
you went away. afterwards he got worse, and became quite my shadow. many 
girl might have been taken in, for never were such attentions; but i 
knew the fickle sex too well. he went away to his regiment two days ago, 
and i trust i shall never be plague with him again. he is the greatest 
coxcomb i ever saw, and amazing disagreeable. the last two days he was 
always by the side of charlotte davis: i pity his taste, but took no 
notice of him. the last time we met was in bath street, and i turn 
directly into a shop that he might not speak to me; i would not even 
look at him. he went into the pump-room afterwards; but i would not have 
follow him for all the world. such a contrast between him and your 
brother! pray send me some news of the latter--i am quite unhappy about 
him; he seem so uncomfortable when he went away, with a cold, or 
something that affected his spirits. i would write to him myself, but 
have mislaid his direction; and, as i hint above, am afraid he 
took something in my conduct amiss. pray explain everything to his 
satisfaction; or, if he still harbour any doubt, a line from himself 
to me, or a call at putney when next in town, might set all to rights. 
i have not been to the rooms this age, nor to the play, except go in 
last night with the hodges, for a frolic, at half price: they tease 
me into it; and i was determined they should not say i shut myself up 
because tilney was gone. we happen to sit by the mitchells, and they 
pretended to be quite surprise to see me out. i knew their spite: at 
one time they could not be civil to me, but now they are all friendship; 
but i am not such a fool as to be taken in by them. you know i have a 
pretty good spirit of my own. anne mitchell had try to put on a 
turban like mine, as i wore it the week before at the concert, but made 
wretched work of it--it happen to become my odd face, i believe, at 
least tilney told me so at the time, and said every eye was upon me; but 
he is the last man whose word i would take. i wear nothing but purple 
now: i know i look hideous in it, but no matter--it is your dear 
brother's favourite colour. lose no time, my dearest, sweetest 
catherine, in writing to him and to me, who ever am, etc. 


such a strain of shallow artifice could not impose even upon catherine. 
its inconsistencies, contradictions, and falsehood struck her from the 
very first. she was ashamed of isabella, and ashamed of have ever 
love her. her profession of attachment were now as disgust as her 
excuse were empty, and her demand impudent. “write to james on her 
behalf! no, james should never hear isabella's name mention by her 
again.” 

on henry's arrival from woodston, she made known to him and eleanor 
their brother's safety, congratulate them with sincerity on it, and 
reading aloud the most material passage of her letter with strong 
indignation. when she had finished it--“so much for isabella,” she 
cried, “and for all our intimacy! she must think me an idiot, or she 
could not have written so; but perhaps this has serve to make her 
character better known to me than mine is to her. i see what she has 
been about. she is a vain coquette, and her trick have not answered. i 
do not believe she had ever any regard either for james or for me, and i 
wish i had never known her.” 

“it will soon be as if you never had,” said henry. 

“there is but one thing that i cannot understand. i see that she has 
had designs on captain tilney, which have not succeeded; but i do not 
understand what captain tilney has been about all this time. why should 
he pay her such attention as to make her quarrel with my brother, and 
then fly off himself?” 

“i have very little to say for frederick's motives, such as i believe 
them to have been. he has his vanity as well as miss thorpe, and the 
chief difference is, that, have a strong head, they have not yet 
injure himself. if the effect of his behaviour do not justify him 
with you, we had better not seek after the cause.” 

“then you do not suppose he ever really care about her?” 

“i am persuade that he never did.” 

“and only made believe to do so for mischief's sake?” 

henry bowed his assent. 

“well, then, i must say that i do not like him at all. though it has 
turn out so well for us, i do not like him at all. as it happens, 
there is no great harm done, because i do not think isabella has any 
heart to lose. but, suppose he had made her very much in love with him?” 

“but we must first suppose isabella to have had a heart to 
lose--consequently to have been a very different creature; and, in that 
case, she would have met with very different treatment.” 

“it is very right that you should stand by your brother.” 

“and if you would stand by yours, you would not be much distress by 
the disappointment of miss thorpe. but your mind is warp by an innate 
principle of general integrity, and therefore not accessible to the cool 
reasoning of family partiality, or a desire of revenge.” 

catherine was compliment out of further bitterness. frederick could 
not be unpardonable guilty, while henry made himself so agreeable. she 
resolve on not answer isabella's letter, and try to think no more 
of it. 




chapter 28 


soon after this, the general found himself oblige to go to london for 
a week; and he left northanger earnest regret that any necessity 
should rob him even for an hour of miss morland's company, and anxious 
recommend the study of her comfort and amusement to his children 
as their chief object in his absence. his departure gave catherine the 
first experimental conviction that a loss may be sometimes a gain. the 
happiness with which their time now passed, every employment voluntary, 
every laugh indulged, every meal a scene of ease and good humour, 
walking where they like and when they liked, their hours, pleasures, 
and fatigues at their own command, made her thorough sensible of the 
restraint which the general's presence had imposed, and most thankful 
feel their present release from it. such ease and such delight made her 
love the place and the people more and more every day; and had it not 
been for a dread of its soon becoming expedient to leave the one, and 
an apprehension of not being equally beloved by the other, she would at 
each moment of each day have been perfectly happy; but she was now in 
the fourth week of her visit; before the general came home, the fourth 
week would be turned, and perhaps it might seem an intrusion if she 
stay much longer. this was a painful consideration whenever it 
occurred; and eager to get rid of such a weight on her mind, she very 
soon resolve to speak to eleanor about it at once, propose go away, 
and be guide in her conduct by the manner in which her proposal might 
be taken. 

aware that if she gave herself much time, she might feel it difficult to 
bring forward so unpleasant a subject, she took the first opportunity of 
being sudden alone with eleanor, and of eleanor's being in the 
middle of a speech about something very different, to start forth her 
obligation of go away very soon. eleanor look and declared herself 
much concerned. she had “hoped for the pleasure of her company for a 
much long time--had been misle (perhaps by her wishes) to suppose 
that a much long visit had been promised--and could not but think that 
if mr. and mrs. morland were aware of the pleasure it was to her to have 
her there, they would be too generous to hasten her return.” catherine 
explained: “oh! as to that, papa and mamma were in no hurry at all. as 
long as she was happy, they would always be satisfied.” 

“then why, might she ask, in such a hurry herself to leave them?” 

“oh! because she had been there so long.” 

“nay, if you can use such a word, i can urge you no farther. if you 
think it long--” 

“oh! no, i do not indeed. for my own pleasure, i could stay with you as 
long again.” and it was directly settled that, till she had, her leave 
them was not even to be thought of. in have this cause of uneasy 
so pleasant removed, the force of the other was likewise weakened. the 
kindness, the earnest of eleanor's manner in pressing her to stay, 
and henry's gratify look on being told that her stay was determined, 
were such sweet proof of her importance with them, as left her only 
just so much solicitude as the human mind can never do comfortable 
without. she did--almost always--believe that henry love her, and quite 
always that his father and sister love and even wish her to belong 
to them; and believe so far, her doubt and anxiety were merely 
sportive irritations. 

henry was not able to obey his father's injunction of remain wholly 
at northanger in attendance on the ladies, during his absence in london, 
the engagement of his curate at woodston obliging him to leave them on 
saturday for a couple of nights. his loss was not now what it had been 
while the general was at home; it lessen their gaiety, but did not 
ruin their comfort; and the two girl agree in occupation, and 
improve in intimacy, found themselves so well sufficient for the time 
to themselves, that it was eleven o'clock, rather a late hour at 
the abbey, before they quit the supper-room on the day of henry's 
departure. they had just reach the head of the stairs when it seemed, 
as far as the thickness of the wall would allow them to judge, that a 
carriage was driving up to the door, and the next moment confirmed the 
idea by the loud noise of the house-bell. after the first perturbation 
of surprise had pass away, in a “good heaven! what can be the matter?” 
it was quick decided by eleanor to be her eldest brother, whose 
arrival was often as sudden, if not quite so unseasonable, and 
accordingly she hurried down to welcome him. 

catherine walk on to her chamber, making up her mind as well as she 
could, to a further acquaintance with captain tilney, and comfort 
herself under the unpleasant impression his conduct had given her, and 
the persuasion of his being by far too fine a gentleman to approve of 
her, that at least they should not meet under such circumstances as 
would make their meeting material painful. she trust he would never 
speak of miss thorpe; and indeed, as he must by this time be ashamed of 
the part he had acted, there could be no danger of it; and as long as 
all mention of bath scene were avoided, she thought she could behave 
to him very civilly. in such consideration time pass away, and it was 
certainly in his favour that eleanor should be so glad to see him, and 
have so much to say, for half an hour was almost gone since his arrival, 
and eleanor did not come up. 

at that moment catherine thought she heard her step in the gallery, and 
listen for its continuance; but all was silent. scarcely, however, 
had she convict her fancy of error, when the noise of something moving 
close to her door made her start; it seem as if someone was touching 
the very doorway--and in another moment a slight motion of the lock 
prove that some hand must be on it. she tremble a little at the idea 
of anyone's approach so cautiously; but resolve not to be again 
overcome by trivial appearances of alarm, or misle by a raise 
imagination, she step quiet forward, and open the door. eleanor, 
and only eleanor, stood there. catherine's spirits, however, were 
tranquillize but for an instant, for eleanor's cheek were pale, and 
her manner greatly agitated. though evidently intend to come in, it 
seem an effort to enter the room, and a still greater to speak when 
there. catherine, supposing some uneasy on captain tilney's account, 
could only express her concern by silent attention, oblige her to be 
seated, rub her temple with lavender-water, and hung over her with 
affectionate solicitude. “my dear catherine, you must not--you must not 
indeed--” were eleanor's first connected words. “i am quite well. 
this kindness distract me--i cannot bear it--i come to you on such an 
errand!” 

“errand! to me!” 

“how shall i tell you! oh! how shall i tell you!” 

a new idea now dart into catherine's mind, and turning as pale as her 
friend, she exclaimed, “'tis a messenger from woodston!” 

“you are mistaken, indeed,” return eleanor, look at her most 
compassionately; “it is no one from woodston. it is my father himself.” 
her voice faltered, and her eyes were turn to the ground as she 
mention his name. his unlooked-for return was enough in itself to make 
catherine's heart sink, and for a few moments she hardly supposed 
there were anything worse to be told. she said nothing; and eleanor, 
endeavour to collect herself and speak with firmness, but with eyes 
still cast down, soon went on. “you are too good, i am sure, to think 
the worse of me for the part i am oblige to perform. i am indeed a most 
unwill messenger. after what has so lately passed, so lately been 
settled between us--how joyfully, how thankful on my side!--as to your 
continue here as i hope for many, many week longer, how can i tell 
you that your kindness is not to be accepted--and that the happiness 
your company has hitherto given us is to be repaid by--but i must not 
trust myself with words. my dear catherine, we are to part. my father 
has recollect an engagement that take our whole family away on 
monday. we are go to lord longtown's, near hereford, for a fortnight. 
explanation and apology are equally impossible. i cannot attempt 
either.” 

“my dear eleanor,” cry catherine, suppress her feelings as well as 
she could, “do not be so distressed. a second engagement must give 
way to a first. i am very, very sorry we are to part--so soon, and so 
sudden too; but i am not offended, indeed i am not. i can finish my 
visit here, you know, at any time; or i hope you will come to me. can 
you, when you return from this lord's, come to fullerton?” 

“it will not be in my power, catherine.” 

“come when you can, then.” 

eleanor made no answer; and catherine's thought recur to something 
more directly interesting, she added, thinking aloud, “monday--so soon 
as monday; and you all go. well, i am certain of--i shall be able to 
take leave, however. i need not go till just before you do, you know. do 
not be distressed, eleanor, i can go on monday very well. my father 
and mother's have no notice of it is of very little consequence. the 
general will send a servant with me, i dare say, half the way--and then 
i shall soon be at salisbury, and then i am only nine mile from home.” 

“ah, catherine! were it settled so, it would be somewhat less 
intolerable, though in such common attention you would have received 
but half what you ought. but--how can i tell you?--tomorrow morning is 
fixed for your leave us, and not even the hour is left to your choice; 
the very carriage is ordered, and will be here at seven o'clock, and no 
servant will be offer you.” 

catherine sat down, breathless and speechless. “i could hardly believe 
my senses, when i heard it; and no displeasure, no resentment that 
you can feel at this moment, however just great, can be more than i 
myself--but i must not talk of what i felt. oh! that i could suggest 
anything in extenuation! good god! what will your father and mother say! 
after courting you from the protection of real friends to this--almost 
double distance from your home, to have you driven out of the house, 
without the consideration even of decent civility! dear, dear 
catherine, in being the bearer of such a message, i seem guilty myself 
of all its insult; yet, i trust you will acquit me, for you must have 
been long enough in this house to see that i am but a nominal mistress 
of it, that my real power is nothing.” 

“have i offend the general?” said catherine in a falter voice. 

“alas! for my feelings as a daughter, all that i know, all that i 
answer for, is that you can have given him no just cause of offence. he 
certainly is greatly, very greatly discomposed; i have seldom seen him 
more so. his temper is not happy, and something has now occur to 
ruffle it in an uncommon degree; some disappointment, some vexation, 
which just at this moment seem important, but which i can hardly 
suppose you to have any concern in, for how is it possible?” 

it was with pain that catherine could speak at all; and it was only for 
eleanor's sake that she attempt it. “i am sure,” said she, “i am very 
sorry if i have offend him. it was the last thing i would willing 
have done. but do not be unhappy, eleanor. an engagement, you know, must 
be kept. i am only sorry it was not recollect sooner, that i might 
have written home. but it is of very little consequence.” 

“i hope, i earnest hope, that to your real safety it will be of none; 
but to everything else it is of the greatest consequence: to comfort, 
appearance, propriety, to your family, to the world. were your friends, 
the allens, still in bath, you might go to them with comparative ease; 
a few hour would take you there; but a journey of seventy miles, to be 
taken post by you, at your age, alone, unattended!” 

“oh, the journey is nothing. do not think about that. and if we are to 
part, a few hour soon or later, you know, make no difference. i 
can be ready by seven. let me be call in time.” eleanor saw that she 
wish to be alone; and believe it better for each that they should 
avoid any further conversation, now left her with, “i shall see you in 
the morning.” 

catherine's swelling heart need relief. in eleanor's presence 
friendship and pride had equally restrained her tears, but no soon was 
she gone than they burst forth in torrents. turn from the house, and 
in such a way! without any reason that could justify, any apology that 
could atone for the abruptness, the rudeness, nay, the insole of 
it. henry at a distance--not able even to bid him farewell. every hope, 
every expectation from him suspended, at least, and who could say how 
long? who could say when they might meet again? and all this by such 
a man as general tilney, so polite, so well bred, and heretofore 
so particularly fond of her! it was as incomprehensible as it was 
mortify and grievous. from what it could arise, and where it would 
end, were consideration of equal perplexity and alarm. the manner in 
which it was done so gross uncivil, hurry her away without any 
reference to her own convenience, or allow her even the appearance 
of choice as to the time or mode of her travelling; of two days, the 
earliest fixed on, and of that almost the earliest hour, as if resolve 
to have her gone before he was stirring in the morning, that he 
might not be oblige even to see her. what could all this mean but 
an intentional affront? by some means or other she must have had the 
misfortune to offend him. eleanor had wish to spare her from so 
painful a notion, but catherine could not believe it possible that any 
injury or any misfortune could provoke such ill will against a person 
not connected, or, at least, not supposed to be connected with it. 

heavy pass the night. sleep, or repose that deserve the name 
of sleep, was out of the question. that room, in which her disturbed 
imagination had torment her on her first arrival, was again the scene 
of agitate spirits and unquiet slumbers. yet how different now the 
source of her inquietude from what it had been then--how mournful 
superior in reality and substance! her anxiety had foundation in 
fact, her fear in probability; and with a mind so occupy in the 
contemplation of actual and natural evil, the solitude of her situation, 
the dark of her chamber, the antiquity of the building, were felt 
and considered without the smallest emotion; and though the wind was 
high, and often produce strange and sudden noise throughout the house, 
she heard it all as she lay awake, hour after hour, without curiosity or 
terror. 

soon after six eleanor enter her room, eager to show attention or give 
assistance where it was possible; but very little remain to be done. 
catherine had not loitered; she was almost dressed, and her packing 
almost finished. the possibility of some conciliatory message from the 
general occur to her as his daughter appeared. what so natural, as 
that anger should pass away and repentance succeed it? and she only 
want to know how far, after what had passed, an apology might properly 
be received by her. but the knowledge would have been useless here; 
it was not call for; neither clemency nor dignity was put to the 
trial--eleanor brought no message. very little pass between them on 
meeting; each found her greatest safety in silence, and few and trivial 
were the sentence exchange while they remain upstairs, catherine in 
busy agitation complete her dress, and eleanor with more goodwill than 
experience intent upon filling the trunk. when everything was done they 
left the room, catherine lingering only half a minute behind her friend 
to throw a parting glance on every well-known, cherish object, and 
went down to the breakfast-parlour, where breakfast was prepared. she 
try to eat, as well to save herself from the pain of being urge as 
to make her friend comfortable; but she had no appetite, and could not 
swallow many mouthfuls. the contrast between this and her last breakfast 
in that room gave her fresh misery, and strengthen her distaste for 
everything before her. it was not four and twenty hour ago since they 
had met there to the same repast, but in circumstances how different! 
with what cheerful ease, what happy, though false, security, had she 
then look around her, enjoy everything present, and fear little 
in future, beyond henry's go to woodston for a day! happy, happy 
breakfast! for henry had been there; henry had sat by her and help 
her. these reflection were long indulge undisturbed by any address 
from her companion, who sat as deep in thought as herself; and the 
appearance of the carriage was the first thing to startle and recall 
them to the present moment. catherine's colour rose at the sight of it; 
and the indignity with which she was treated, striking at that instant 
on her mind with peculiar force, made her for a short time sensible only 
of resentment. eleanor seem now impel into resolution and speech. 

“you must write to me, catherine,” she cried; “you must let me hear from 
you as soon as possible. till i know you to be safe at home, i shall 
not have an hour's comfort. for one letter, at all risks, all hazards, i 
must entreat. let me have the satisfaction of knowing that you are safe 
at fullerton, and have found your family well, and then, till i can ask 
for your correspondence as i ought to do, i will not expect more. direct 
to me at lord longtown's, and, i must ask it, under cover to alice.” 

“no, eleanor, if you are not allow to receive a letter from me, i am 
sure i had better not write. there can be no doubt of my get home 
safe.” 

eleanor only replied, “i cannot wonder at your feelings. i will not 
importune you. i will trust to your own kindness of heart when i am at 
a distance from you.” but this, with the look of sorrow accompany 
it, was enough to melt catherine's pride in a moment, and she instantly 
said, “oh, eleanor, i will write to you indeed.” 

there was yet another point which miss tilney was anxious to settle, 
though somewhat embarrass in speak of. it had occur to her that 
after so long an absence from home, catherine might not be provided with 
money enough for the expenses of her journey, and, upon suggest it 
to her with most affectionate offer of accommodation, it prove to be 
exactly the case. catherine had never thought on the subject till that 
moment, but, upon examine her purse, was convinced that but for 
this kindness of her friend, she might have been turn from the house 
without even the means of get home; and the distress in which she 
must have been thereby involved filling the mind of both, scarcely 
another word was said by either during the time of their remain 
together. short, however, was that time. the carriage was soon announce 
to be ready; and catherine, instantly rising, a long and affectionate 
embrace supply the place of language in bidding each other adieu; and, 
as they enter the hall, unable to leave the house without some mention 
of one whose name had not yet been spoken by either, she pause a 
moment, and with quiver lip just made it intelligible that she left 
“her kind remembrance for her absent friend.” but with this approach to 
his name end all possibility of restrain her feelings; and, hiding 
her face as well as she could with her handkerchief, she dart across 
the hall, jump into the chaise, and in a moment was driven from the 
door. 




chapter 29 


catherine was too wretched to be fearful. the journey in itself had no 
terror for her; and she began it without either dread its length or 
feeling its solitariness. leaning back in one corner of the carriage, in 
a violent burst of tears, she was convey some mile beyond the wall 
of the abbey before she raise her head; and the highest point of ground 
within the park was almost closed from her view before she was capable 
of turning her eyes towards it. unfortunately, the road she now 
travelled was the same which only ten days ago she had so happily pass 
along in go to and from woodston; and, for fourteen miles, every 
bitter feeling was render more severe by the review of object on 
which she had first look under impression so different. every mile, 
as it brought her near woodston, add to her sufferings, and when 
within the distance of five, she pass the turning which led to it, and 
thought of henry, so near, yet so unconscious, her grief and agitation 
were excessive. 

the day which she had spent at that place had been one of the happiest 
of her life. it was there, it was on that day, that the general had made 
use of such expression with regard to henry and herself, had so 
spoken and so look as to give her the most positive conviction of his 
actually wish their marriage. yes, only ten days ago had he 
elated her by his pointed regard--had he even confuse her by his too 
significant reference! and now--what had she done, or what had she 
omit to do, to merit such a change? 

the only offence against him of which she could accuse herself had been 
such as was scarcely possible to reach his knowledge. henry and her own 
heart only were privy to the shocking suspicion which she had so idle 
entertained; and equally safe did she believe her secret with each. 
designedly, at least, henry could not have betray her. if, indeed, by 
any strange mischance his father should have gain intelligence of 
what she had dare to think and look for, of her causeless fancies 
and injurious examinations, she could not wonder at any degree of his 
indignation. if aware of her have view him as a murderer, she could 
not wonder at his even turning her from his house. but a justification 
so full of torture to herself, she trusted, would not be in his power. 

anxious as were all her conjecture on this point, it was not, however, 
the one on which she dwelt most. there was a thought yet nearer, a more 
prevailing, more impetuous concern. how henry would think, and feel, 
and look, when he return on the morrow to northanger and heard of 
her being gone, was a question of force and interest to rise over every 
other, to be never ceasing, alternate irritate and soothing; it 
sometimes suggest the dread of his calm acquiescence, and at other 
was answer by the sweetest confidence in his regret and resentment. to 
the general, of course, he would not dare to speak; but to eleanor--what 
might he not say to eleanor about her? 

in this uncease recurrence of doubt and inquiries, on any one article 
of which her mind was incapable of more than momentary repose, the hour 
pass away, and her journey advanced much fast than she look for. 
the pressing anxiety of thought, which prevent her from notice 
anything before her, when once beyond the neighbourhood of woodston, 
save her at the same time from watch her progress; and though no 
object on the road could engage a moment's attention, she found no stage 
of it tedious. from this, she was preserve too by another cause, by 
feeling no eager for her journey's conclusion; for to return in such 
a manner to fullerton was almost to destroy the pleasure of a meeting 
with those she love best, even after an absence such as hers--an eleven 
weeks' absence. what had she to say that would not humble herself and 
pain her family, that would not increase her own grief by the confession 
of it, extend an useless resentment, and perhaps involve the innocent 
with the guilty in undistinguish ill will? she could never do justice 
to henry and eleanor's merit; she felt it too strong for expression; 
and should a dislike be taken against them, should they be thought of 
unfavourably, on their father's account, it would cut her to the heart. 

with these feelings, she rather dread than sought for the first view 
of that well-known spire which would announce her within twenty mile of 
home. salisbury she had known to be her point on leave northanger; but 
after the first stage she had been indebted to the post-masters for the 
name of the place which were then to conduct her to it; so great 
had been her ignorance of her route. she met with nothing, however, 
to distress or frighten her. her youth, civil manners, and liberal 
pay procure her all the attention that a traveller like herself could 
require; and stopping only to change horses, she travelled on for 
about eleven hour without accident or alarm, and between six and seven 
o'clock in the evening found herself enter fullerton. 

a heroine returning, at the close of her career, to her native village, 
in all the triumph of recover reputation, and all the dignity of 
a countess, with a long train of noble relations in their several 
phaetons, and three waiting-maids in a travel chaise and four, 
behind her, is an event on which the pen of the contrive may well 
delight to dwell; it give credit to every conclusion, and the author 
must share in the glory she so liberally bestows. but my affair is 
widely different; i bring back my heroine to her home in solitude and 
disgrace; and no sweet elation of spirits can lead me into minuteness. 
a heroine in a hack post-chaise is such a blow upon sentiment, as no 
attempt at grandeur or pathos can withstand. swift therefore shall her 
post-boy drive through the village, amid the gaze of sunday groups, and 
speedy shall be her descent from it. 

but, whatever might be the distress of catherine's mind, as she thus 
advanced towards the parsonage, and whatever the humiliate of her 
biographer in relate it, she was prepare enjoyment of no everyday 
nature for those to whom she went; first, in the appearance of her 
carriage--and secondly, in herself. the chaise of a traveller being 
a rare sight in fullerton, the whole family were immediately at the 
window; and to have it stop at the sweep-gate was a pleasure to brighten 
every eye and occupy every fancy--a pleasure quite unlooked for by all 
but the two youngest children, a boy and girl of six and four years old, 
who expect a brother or sister in every carriage. happy the glance 
that first distinguished catherine! happy the voice that proclaim the 
discovery! but whether such happiness were the lawful property of george 
or harriet could never be exactly understood. 

her father, mother, sarah, george, and harriet, all assemble at the 
door to welcome her with affectionate eagerness, was a sight to awaken 
the best feelings of catherine's heart; and in the embrace of each, as 
she step from the carriage, she found herself soothe beyond anything 
that she had believe possible. so surrounded, so caressed, she was even 
happy! in the joyful of family love everything for a short time was 
subdued, and the pleasure of seeing her, leave them at first little 
leisure for calm curiosity, they were all seat round the tea-table, 
which mrs. morland had hurried for the comfort of the poor traveller, 
whose pale and jaded looks soon caught her notice, before any inquiry so 
direct as to demand a positive answer was address to her. 

reluctantly, and with much hesitation, did she then begin what might 
perhaps, at the end of half an hour, be termed, by the courtesy of her 
hearers, an explanation; but scarcely, within that time, could they 
at all discover the cause, or collect the particulars, of her sudden 
return. they were far from being an irritable race; far from any 
quick in catching, or bitter in resenting, affronts: but here, 
when the whole was unfolded, was an insult not to be overlooked, nor, 
for the first half hour, to be easily pardoned. without suffering any 
romantic alarm, in the consideration of their daughter's long and lonely 
journey, mr. and mrs. morland could not but feel that it might have been 
productive of much unpleasant to her; that it was what they could 
never have voluntary suffered; and that, in force her on such 
a measure, general tilney had act neither honourable nor 
feelingly--neither as a gentleman nor as a parent. why he had done it, 
what could have provoke him to such a breach of hospitality, and so 
sudden turn all his partial regard for their daughter into actual 
ill will, was a matter which they were at least as far from divine 
as catherine herself; but it did not oppress them by any means so long; 
and, after a due course of useless conjecture, that “it was a strange 
business, and that he must be a very strange man,” grew enough for all 
their indignation and wonder; though sarah indeed still indulge in the 
sweets of incomprehensibility, exclaim and conjecture with youthful 
ardour. “my dear, you give yourself a great deal of needless trouble,” 
said her mother at last; “depend upon it, it is something not at all 
worth understanding.” 

“i can allow for his wish catherine away, when he recollect this 
engagement,” said sarah, “but why not do it civilly?” 

“i am sorry for the young people,” return mrs. morland; “they must 
have a sad time of it; but as for anything else, it is no matter now; 
catherine is safe at home, and our comfort do not depend upon general 
tilney.” catherine sighed. “well,” continue her philosophical mother, “i 
am glad i did not know of your journey at the time; but now it is all 
over, perhaps there is no great harm done. it is always good for 
young people to be put upon exert themselves; and you know, my dear 
catherine, you always were a sad little scatter-brained creature; but 
now you must have been forced to have your wit about you, with so much 
change of chaise and so forth; and i hope it will appear that you 
have not left anything behind you in any of the pockets.” 

catherine hope so too, and try to feel an interest in her own 
amendment, but her spirits were quite worn down; and, to be silent and 
alone becoming soon her only wish, she readily agree to her mother's 
next counsel of go early to bed. her parents, seeing nothing in 
her ill looks and agitation but the natural consequence of mortify 
feelings, and of the unusual exertion and fatigue of such a journey, 
part from her without any doubt of their being soon slept away; and 
though, when they all met the next morning, her recovery was not equal 
to their hopes, they were still perfectly unsuspicious of there being 
any deep evil. they never once thought of her heart, which, for the 
parent of a young lady of seventeen, just return from her first 
excursion from home, was odd enough! 

as soon as breakfast was over, she sat down to fulfil her promise to 
miss tilney, whose trust in the effect of time and distance on her 
friend's disposition was already justified, for already did catherine 
reproach herself with have part from eleanor coldly, with 
have never enough value her merit or kindness, and never enough 
commiserate her for what she had been yesterday left to endure. the 
strength of these feelings, however, was far from assist her pen; 
and never had it been hard for her to write than in address eleanor 
tilney. to compose a letter which might at once do justice to her 
sentiment and her situation, convey gratitude without servile regret, 
be guarded without coldness, and honest without resentment--a letter 
which eleanor might not be pained by the peruse of--and, above all, 
which she might not blush herself, if henry should chance to see, was an 
undertaking to frighten away all her powers of performance; and, after 
long thought and much perplexity, to be very brief was all that she 
could determine on with any confidence of safety. the money therefore 
which eleanor had advanced was enclose with little more than grateful 
thanks, and the thousand good wish of a most affectionate heart. 

“this has been a strange acquaintance,” observe mrs. morland, as the 
letter was finished; “soon made and soon ended. i am sorry it happen 
so, for mrs. allen thought them very pretty kind of young people; and 
you were sadly out of luck too in your isabella. ah! poor james! well, 
we must live and learn; and the next new friends you make i hope will be 
better worth keeping.” 

catherine coloured as she warm answered, “no friend can be better 
worth keeping than eleanor.” 

“if so, my dear, i dare say you will meet again some time or other; do 
not be uneasy. it is ten to one but you are thrown together again in the 
course of a few years; and then what a pleasure it will be!” 

mrs. morland was not happy in her attempt at consolation. the hope 
of meeting again in the course of a few years could only put into 
catherine's head what might happen within that time to make a meeting 
dreadful to her. she could never forget henry tilney, or think of him 
with less tender than she did at that moment; but he might forget 
her; and in that case, to meet--! her eyes fill with tear as she 
picture her acquaintance so renewed; and her mother, perceive her 
comfortable suggestion to have had no good effect, proposed, as another 
expedient for restore her spirits, that they should call on mrs. 
allen. 

the two house were only a quarter of a mile apart; and, as they walked, 
mrs. morland quick dispatch all that she felt on the score of 
james's disappointment. “we are sorry for him,” said she; “but otherwise 
there is no harm done in the match go off; for it could not be 
a desirable thing to have him engaged to a girl whom we had not the 
smallest acquaintance with, and who was so entire without fortune; and 
now, after such behaviour, we cannot think at all well of her. just at 
present it come hard to poor james; but that will not last forever; and 
i dare say he will be a discreet man all his life, for the foolish 
of his first choice.” 

this was just such a summary view of the affair as catherine could 
listen to; another sentence might have endanger her complaisance, 
and made her reply less rational; for soon were all her thinking powers 
swallow up in the reflection of her own change of feelings and spirits 
since last she had trodden that well-known road. it was not three month 
ago since, wild with joyful expectation, she had there run backwards 
and forward some ten times a day, with an heart light, gay, and 
independent; look forward to pleasure untasted and unalloyed, and 
free from the apprehension of evil as from the knowledge of it. three 
month ago had seen her all this; and now, how alter a being did she 
return! 

she was received by the allen with all the kindness which her 
unlooked-for appearance, acting on a steady affection, would naturally 
call forth; and great was their surprise, and warm their displeasure, 
on hearing how she had been treated--though mrs. morland's account of 
it was no inflated representation, no studied appeal to their passions. 
“catherine took us quite by surprise yesterday evening,” said she. “she 
travelled all the way post by herself, and knew nothing of coming till 
saturday night; for general tilney, from some odd fancy or other, all 
of a sudden grew tired of have her there, and almost turn her out 
of the house. very unfriendly, certainly; and he must be a very odd 
man; but we are so glad to have her amongst us again! and it is a great 
comfort to find that she is not a poor helpless creature, but can shift 
very well for herself.” 

mr. allen express himself on the occasion with the reasonable 
resentment of a sensible friend; and mrs. allen thought his expression 
quite good enough to be immediately made use of again by herself. his 
wonder, his conjectures, and his explanation became in succession hers, 
with the addition of this single remark--“i really have not patience 
with the general”--to fill up every accidental pause. and, “i really 
have not patience with the general,” was utter twice after mr. 
allen left the room, without any relaxation of anger, or any material 
digression of thought. a more considerable degree of wandering attend 
the third repetition; and, after complete the fourth, she immediately 
added, “only think, my dear, of my have got that frightful great rent 
in my best mechlin so charming mended, before i left bath, that one 
can hardly see where it was. i must show it you some day or other. bath 
is a nice place, catherine, after all. i assure you i did not above half 
like coming away. mrs. thorpe's being there was such a comfort to us, 
was not it? you know, you and i were quite forlorn at first.” 

“yes, but that did not last long,” said catherine, her eyes brighten 
at the recollection of what had first given spirit to her existence 
there. 

“very true: we soon met with mrs. thorpe, and then we want for 
nothing. my dear, do not you think these silk glove wear very well? 
i put them on new the first time of our go to the lower rooms, you 
know, and i have worn them a great deal since. do you remember that 
evening?” 

“do i! oh! perfectly.” 

“it was very agreeable, was not it? mr. tilney drank tea with us, and i 
always thought him a great addition, he is so very agreeable. i have a 
notion you dance with him, but am not quite sure. i remember i had my 
favourite gown on.” 

catherine could not answer; and, after a short trial of other subjects, 
mrs. allen again return to--“i really have not patience with the 
general! such an agreeable, worthy man as he seem to be! i do not 
suppose, mrs. morland, you ever saw a better-bred man in your life. his 
lodgings were taken the very day after he left them, catherine. but no 
wonder; milsom street, you know.” 

as they walk home again, mrs. morland endeavour to impress on her 
daughter's mind the happiness of have such steady well-wishers as mr. 
and mrs. allen, and the very little consideration which the neglect or 
unkind of slight acquaintance like the tilney ought to have with 
her, while she could preserve the good opinion and affection of her 
earliest friends. there was a great deal of good sense in all this; but 
there are some situation of the human mind in which good sense has 
very little power; and catherine's feelings contradict almost every 
position her mother advanced. it was upon the behaviour of these very 
slight acquaintance that all her present happiness depended; and 
while mrs. morland was successful confirm her own opinion by the 
just of her own representations, catherine was silent reflect 
that now henry must have arrive at northanger; now he must have heard 
of her departure; and now, perhaps, they were all setting off for 
hereford. 




chapter 30 


catherine's disposition was not naturally sedentary, nor had her habit 
been ever very industrious; but whatever might hitherto have been her 
defect of that sort, her mother could not but perceive them now to be 
greatly increased. she could neither sit still nor employ herself for 
ten minutes together, walking round the garden and orchard again and 
again, as if nothing but motion was voluntary; and it seem as if she 
could even walk about the house rather than remain fixed for any time 
in the parlour. her loss of spirits was a yet greater alteration. in her 
rambling and her idle she might only be a caricature of herself; but 
in her silence and sad she was the very reverse of all that she had 
been before. 

for two days mrs. morland allow it to pass even without a hint; 
but when a third night's rest had neither restore her cheerfulness, 
improve her in useful activity, nor given her a greater inclination for 
needlework, she could no long refrain from the gentle reproof of, “my 
dear catherine, i am afraid you are grow quite a fine lady. i do not 
know when poor richard's cravat would be done, if he had no friend 
but you. your head runs too much upon bath; but there is a time for 
everything--a time for balls and plays, and a time for work. you have 
had a long run of amusement, and now you must try to be useful.” 

catherine took up her work directly, saying, in a dejected voice, that 
“her head did not run upon bath--much.” 

“then you are fret about general tilney, and that is very simple 
of you; for ten to one whether you ever see him again. you should never 
fret about trifles.” after a short silence--“i hope, my catherine, you 
are not get out of humour with home because it is not so grand 
as northanger. that would be turning your visit into an evil indeed. 
wherever you are you should always be contented, but especially at home, 
because there you must spend the most of your time. i did not quite 
like, at breakfast, to hear you talk so much about the france bread at 
northanger.” 

“i am sure i do not care about the bread. it is all the same to me what 
i eat.” 

“there is a very clever essay in one of the books upstairs upon much 
such a subject, about young girl that have been spoilt for home by 
great acquaintance--the mirror, i think. i will look it out for you some 
day or other, because i am sure it will do you good.” 

catherine said no more, and, with an endeavour to do right, applied 
to her work; but, after a few minutes, sunk again, without knowing it 
herself, into languor and listlessness, moving herself in her chair, 
from the irritation of weariness, much often than she move her 
needle. mrs. morland watch the progress of this relapse; and seeing, 
in her daughter's absent and dissatisfy look, the full proof of that 
repine spirit to which she had now begun to attribute her want of 
cheerfulness, hasty left the room to fetch the book in question, 
anxious to lose no time in attack so dreadful a malady. it was some 
time before she could find what she look for; and other family matter 
occur to detain her, a quarter of an hour had elapse ere she 
return downstairs with the volume from which so much was hoped. her 
avocation above have shut out all noise but what she create herself, 
she knew not that a visitor had arrive within the last few minutes, 
till, on enter the room, the first object she beheld was a young 
man whom she had never seen before. with a look of much respect, he 
immediately rose, and being introduce to her by her conscious daughter 
as “mr. henry tilney,” with the embarrassment of real sensibility began 
to apologize for his appearance there, acknowledge that after what had 
pass he had little right to expect a welcome at fullerton, and state 
his impatience to be assured of miss morland's have reach her home 
in safety, as the cause of his intrusion. he did not address himself to 
an uncandid judge or a resentful heart. far from comprehend him or 
his sister in their father's misconduct, mrs. morland had been always 
kindly disposed towards each, and instantly, pleased by his appearance, 
received him with the simple profession of unaffected benevolence; 
thank him for such an attention to her daughter, assure him that 
the friends of her children were always welcome there, and entreat 
him to say not another word of the past. 

he was not ill-inclined to obey this request, for, though his heart was 
greatly relieved by such unlooked-for mildness, it was not just at that 
moment in his power to say anything to the purpose. return in silence 
to his seat, therefore, he remain for some minutes most civilly 
answer all mrs. morland's common remark about the weather and 
roads. catherine meanwhile--the anxious, agitated, happy, feverish 
catherine--said not a word; but her glowing cheek and brighten eye 
made her mother trust that this good-natured visit would at least set 
her heart at ease for a time, and gladly therefore did she lay aside the 
first volume of the mirror for a future hour. 

desirous of mr. morland's assistance, as well in give encouragement, 
as in finding conversation for her guest, whose embarrassment on his 
father's account she earnest pitied, mrs. morland had very early 
dispatch one of the children to summon him; but mr. morland was from 
home--and being thus without any support, at the end of a quarter of 
an hour she had nothing to say. after a couple of minutes' unbroken 
silence, henry, turning to catherine for the first time since her 
mother's entrance, ask her, with sudden alacrity, if mr. and mrs. 
allen were now at fullerton? and on developing, from amidst all her 
perplexity of words in reply, the meaning, which one short syllable 
would have given, immediately express his intention of pay his 
respects to them, and, with a rising colour, ask her if she would 
have the goodness to show him the way. “you may see the house from this 
window, sir,” was information on sarah's side, which produce only a 
bow of acknowledgment from the gentleman, and a silence nod from 
her mother; for mrs. morland, thinking it probable, as a secondary 
consideration in his wish of wait on their worthy neighbours, that he 
might have some explanation to give of his father's behaviour, which it 
must be more pleasant for him to communicate only to catherine, would 
not on any account prevent her accompany him. they began their walk, 
and mrs. morland was not entire mistaken in his object in wish it. 
some explanation on his father's account he had to give; but his first 
purpose was to explain himself, and before they reach mr. allen's 
grounds he had done it so well that catherine did not think it could 
ever be repeated too often. she was assured of his affection; and that 
heart in return was solicited, which, perhaps, they pretty equally 
knew was already entire his own; for, though henry was now sincerely 
attach to her, though he felt and delight in all the excellency 
of her character and truly love her society, i must confess that his 
affection originate in nothing better than gratitude, or, in other 
words, that a persuasion of her partiality for him had been the only 
cause of give her a serious thought. it is a new circumstance in 
romance, i acknowledge, and dreadfully derogatory of an heroine's 
dignity; but if it be as new in common life, the credit of a wild 
imagination will at least be all my own. 

a very short visit to mrs. allen, in which henry talk at random, 
without sense or connection, and catherine, rapt in the contemplation of 
her own unutterable happiness, scarcely open her lips, dismiss them 
to the ecstasy of another tete-a-tete; and before it was suffer to 
close, she was enable to judge how far he was sanction by parental 
authority in his present application. on his return from woodston, two 
days before, he had been met near the abbey by his impatient father, 
hasty informed in angry terms of miss morland's departure, and ordered 
to think of her no more. 

such was the permission upon which he had now offer her his hand. 
the affrighte catherine, amidst all the terror of expectation, as she 
listen to this account, could not but rejoice in the kind caution 
with which henry had save her from the necessity of a conscientious 
rejection, by engaging her faith before he mention the subject; and 
as he proceed to give the particulars, and explain the motive of 
his father's conduct, her feelings soon harden into even a triumphant 
delight. the general had had nothing to accuse her of, nothing to lay 
to her charge, but her being the involuntary, unconscious object of a 
deception which his pride could not pardon, and which a better pride 
would have been ashamed to own. she was guilty only of being less rich 
than he had supposed her to be. under a mistaken persuasion of her 
possession and claims, he had court her acquaintance in bath, 
solicit her company at northanger, and design her for his 
daughter-in-law. on discover his error, to turn her from the house 
seem the best, though to his feelings an inadequate proof of his 
resentment towards herself, and his contempt of her family. 

john thorpe had first misle him. the general, perceive his son 
one night at the theatre to be pay considerable attention to miss 
morland, had accidental inquire of thorpe if he knew more of her 
than her name. thorpe, most happy to be on speak terms with a man 
of general tilney's importance, had been joyful and proud 
communicative; and being at that time not only in daily expectation 
of morland's engaging isabella, but likewise pretty well resolve upon 
marry catherine himself, his vanity induce him to represent the 
family as yet more wealthy than his vanity and avarice had made him 
believe them. with whomsoever he was, or was likely to be connected, his 
own consequence always require that theirs should be great, and as his 
intimacy with any acquaintance grew, so regularly grew their fortune. 
the expectations of his friend morland, therefore, from the first 
overrated, had ever since his introduction to isabella been gradual 
increasing; and by merely add twice as much for the grandeur of the 
moment, by double what he chose to think the amount of mr. morland's 
preferment, treble his private fortune, bestow a rich aunt, and 
sink half the children, he was able to represent the whole family 
to the general in a most respectable light. for catherine, however, the 
peculiar object of the general's curiosity, and his own speculations, 
he had yet something more in reserve, and the ten or fifteen thousand 
pound which her father could give her would be a pretty addition to mr. 
allen's estate. her intimacy there had made him seriously determine on 
her being handsome legacy hereafter; and to speak of her therefore 
as the almost acknowledge future heiress of fullerton naturally 
followed. upon such intelligence the general had proceeded; for never 
had it occur to him to doubt its authority. thorpe's interest in the 
family, by his sister's approach connection with one of its members, 
and his own view on another (circumstances of which he boast with 
almost equal openness), seem sufficient voucher for his truth; and 
to these were add the absolute fact of the allen being wealthy and 
childless, of miss morland's being under their care, and--as soon as his 
acquaintance allow him to judge--of their treat her with parental 
kindness. his resolution was soon formed. already had he discern a 
liking towards miss morland in the countenance of his son; and thankful 
for mr. thorpe's communication, he almost instantly determined to spare 
no pains in weaken his boast interest and ruin his dearest 
hopes. catherine herself could not be more ignorant at the time of all 
this, than his own children. henry and eleanor, perceive nothing in 
her situation likely to engage their father's particular respect, had 
seen with astonishment the suddenness, continuance, and extent of his 
attention; and though latterly, from some hint which had accompany an 
almost positive command to his son of do everything in his power to 
attach her, henry was convinced of his father's believe it to be 
an advantageous connection, it was not till the late explanation at 
northanger that they had the smallest idea of the false calculation 
which had hurried him on. that they were false, the general had learnt 
from the very person who had suggest them, from thorpe himself, whom 
he had chance to meet again in town, and who, under the influence of 
exactly opposite feelings, irritate by catherine's refusal, and 
yet more by the failure of a very recent endeavour to accomplish a 
reconciliation between morland and isabella, convinced that they were 
separate forever, and spurn a friendship which could be no long 
serviceable, hasten to contradict all that he had said before to 
the advantage of the morlands--confessed himself to have been total 
mistaken in his opinion of their circumstances and character, misle by 
the rhodomontade of his friend to believe his father a man of substance 
and credit, whereas the transactions of the two or three last week 
prove him to be neither; for after coming eager forward on the first 
overture of a marriage between the families, with the most liberal 
proposals, he had, on being brought to the point by the shrewd of 
the relator, been constrained to acknowledge himself incapable of 
give the young people even a decent support. they were, in fact, a 
necessitous family; numerous, too, almost beyond example; by no means 
respect in their own neighbourhood, as he had lately had particular 
opportunity of discovering; aim at a style of life which their 
fortune could not warrant; seek to better themselves by wealthy 
connections; a forward, bragging, scheme race. 

the terrify general pronounced the name of allen with an inquiring 
look; and here too thorpe had learnt his error. the allens, he believed, 
had live near them too long, and he knew the young man on whom the 
fullerton estate must devolve. the general need no more. enrage with 
almost everybody in the world but himself, he set out the next day for 
the abbey, where his performance have been seen. 

i leave it to my reader's sagacity to determine how much of all this 
it was possible for henry to communicate at this time to catherine, how 
much of it he could have learnt from his father, in what points his own 
conjecture might assist him, and what portion must yet remain to be 
told in a letter from james. i have united for their ease what they must 
divide for mine. catherine, at any rate, heard enough to feel that in 
suspect general tilney of either murder or shut up his wife, 
she had scarcely sin against his character, or magnify his cruelty. 

henry, in have such things to relate of his father, was almost 
as pitiable as in their first avowal to himself. he blush for the 
narrow-minded counsel which he was oblige to expose. the conversation 
between them at northanger had been of the most unfriend kind. henry's 
indignation on hearing how catherine had been treated, on comprehend 
his father's views, and being ordered to acquiesce in them, had been 
open and bold. the general, accustomed on every ordinary occasion to 
give the law in his family, prepared for no reluctance but of feeling, 
no oppose desire that should dare to clothe itself in words, could ill 
brook the opposition of his son, steady as the sanction of reason and 
the dictate of conscience could make it. but, in such a cause, his 
anger, though it must shock, could not intimidate henry, who was 
sustain in his purpose by a conviction of its justice. he felt himself 
bound as much in honour as in affection to miss morland, and believe 
that heart to be his own which he had been direct to gain, no unworthy 
retraction of a tacit consent, no reverse decree of unjustifiable 
anger, could shake his fidelity, or influence the resolution it 
prompted. 

he steady refuse to accompany his father into herefordshire, an 
engagement form almost at the moment to promote the dismissal of 
catherine, and as steady declared his intention of offering her his 
hand. the general was furious in his anger, and they part in dreadful 
disagreement. henry, in an agitation of mind which many solitary hour 
were require to compose, had return almost instantly to woodston, 
and, on the afternoon of the following day, had begun his journey to 
fullerton. 




chapter 31 


mr. and mrs. morland's surprise on being applied to by mr. tilney for 
their consent to his marry their daughter was, for a few minutes, 
considerable, it have never enter their head to suspect an 
attachment on either side; but as nothing, after all, could be more 
natural than catherine's being beloved, they soon learnt to consider it 
with only the happy agitation of gratify pride, and, as far as they 
alone were concerned, had not a single objection to start. his pleasing 
manners and good sense were self-evident recommendations; and have 
never heard evil of him, it was not their way to suppose any evil could 
be told. goodwill supply the place of experience, his character 
need no attestation. “catherine would make a sad, heedless young 
housekeeper to be sure,” was her mother's foreboding remark; but quick 
was the consolation of there being nothing like practice. 

there was but one obstacle, in short, to be mentioned; but till that one 
was removed, it must be impossible for them to sanction the engagement. 
their temper were mild, but their principles were steady, and while 
his parent so expressly forbade the connection, they could not allow 
themselves to encourage it. that the general should come forward to 
solicit the alliance, or that he should even very heartily approve it, 
they were not refined enough to make any parade stipulation; but 
the decent appearance of consent must be yielded, and that once 
obtained--and their own heart made them trust that it could not be 
very long denied--their willing approbation was instantly to follow. his 
consent was all that they wish for. they were no more inclined than 
entitle to demand his money. of a very considerable fortune, his son 
was, by marriage settlements, eventually secure; his present income was 
an income of independence and comfort, and under every pecuniary view, 
it was a match beyond the claim of their daughter. 

the young people could not be surprise at a decision like this. they 
felt and they deplored--but they could not resent it; and they parted, 
endeavour to hope that such a change in the general, as each believe 
almost impossible, might speedy take place, to unite them again in 
the full of privileged affection. henry return to what was now 
his only home, to watch over his young plantations, and extend his 
improvement for her sake, to whose share in them he look anxious 
forward; and catherine remain at fullerton to cry. whether the 
torment of absence were soften by a clandestine correspondence, let 
us not inquire. mr. and mrs. morland never did--they had been too kind 
to exact any promise; and whenever catherine received a letter, as, at 
that time, happen pretty often, they always look another way. 

the anxiety, which in this state of their attachment must be the portion 
of henry and catherine, and of all who love either, as to its final 
event, can hardly extend, i fear, to the bosom of my readers, who will 
see in the tell-tale compression of the page before them, that we are 
all hasten together to perfect felicity. the means by which their 
early marriage was effect can be the only doubt: what probable 
circumstance could work upon a temper like the general's? the 
circumstance which chiefly avail was the marriage of his daughter with 
a man of fortune and consequence, which took place in the course of 
the summer--an accession of dignity that threw him into a fit of good 
humour, from which he did not recover till after eleanor had obtain 
his forgiveness of henry, and his permission for him “to be a fool if he 
like it!” 

the marriage of eleanor tilney, her removal from all the evil of such 
a home as northanger had been made by henry's banishment, to the home of 
her choice and the man of her choice, is an event which i expect to 
give general satisfaction among all her acquaintance. my own joy on the 
occasion is very sincere. i know no one more entitled, by unpretend 
merit, or better prepared by habitual suffering, to receive and enjoy 
felicity. her partiality for this gentleman was not of recent origin; 
and he had been long withheld only by inferior of situation from 
address her. his unexpected accession to title and fortune had 
remove all his difficulties; and never had the general love his 
daughter so well in all her hour of companionship, utility, and patient 
endurance as when he first hail her “your ladyship!” her husband was 
really deserving of her; independent of his peerage, his wealth, and 
his attachment, being to a precision the most charming young man in the 
world. any further definition of his merit must be unnecessary; the 
most charming young man in the world is instantly before the imagination 
of us all. concerning the one in question, therefore, i have only to 
add--aware that the rule of composition forbid the introduction of a 
character not connected with my fable--that this was the very 
gentleman whose negligent servant left behind him that collection of 
washing-bills, result from a long visit at northanger, by which my 
heroine was involved in one of her most alarm adventures. 

the influence of the viscount and viscountess in their brother's behalf 
was assist by that right understanding of mr. morland's circumstances 
which, as soon as the general would allow himself to be informed, they 
were qualified to give. it taught him that he had been scarcely 
more misle by thorpe's first boast of the family wealth than by his 
subsequent malicious overthrow of it; that in no sense of the word were 
they necessitous or poor, and that catherine would have three thousand 
pounds. this was so material an amendment of his late expectations that 
it greatly contribute to smooth the descent of his pride; and by no 
means without its effect was the private intelligence, which he was at 
some pains to procure, that the fullerton estate, being entire at 
the disposal of its present proprietor, was consequently open to every 
greedy speculation. 

on the strength of this, the general, soon after eleanor's marriage, 
permit his son to return to northanger, and thence made him the 
bearer of his consent, very courteous word in a page full of empty 
profession to mr. morland. the event which it authorize soon followed: 
henry and catherine were married, the bell rang, and everybody smiled; 
and, as this took place within a twelvemonth from the first day of their 
meeting, it will not appear, after all the dreadful delay occasion by 
the general's cruelty, that they were essentially hurt by it. to begin 
perfect happiness at the respective age of twenty-six and eighteen is 
to do pretty well; and profess myself moreover convinced that the 
general's unjust interference, so far from being really injurious to 
their felicity, was perhaps rather conducive to it, by improve their 
knowledge of each other, and add strength to their attachment, 
i leave it to be settled, by whomsoever it may concern, whether the 
tendency of this work be altogether to recommend parental tyranny, or 
reward filial disobedience. 



*vide a letter from mr. richardson, no. 97, vol. ii, rambler. 




a note on the text 

northanger abbey was written in 1797-98 under a different title. the 
manuscript was revise around 1803 and sold to a london publisher, 
crosbie & co., who sold it back in 1816. the signet classic text 
is base on the first edition, publish by john murray, london, in 
1818--the year following miss austen's death. spelling and punctuation 
have been largely brought into conformity with modern britain usage. 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of northanger abbey, by jane austen 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook northanger abbey *** 

***** this file should be name 121-0.txt or 121-0.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/2/121/ 

produce by an anonymous volunteer 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase “project 
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the foundation” 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project 
gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase “project gutenberg” associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
“plain vanilla ascii” or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original “plain vanilla ascii” or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, “information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation.” 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
“defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right 
of replacement or refund” describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
