the project gutenberg ebook of the king in yellow, by robert w. chambers 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the king in yellow 

author: robert w. chambers 

posting date: september 10, 2012 [ebook #8492] 
release date: july, 2005 
first posted: july 16, 2003 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the king in yellow *** 




produce by suzanne shell, beth trapaga, charles franks, 
and the online distribute proofread team 











the king in yellow 

by 

robert w. chambers 






original publication date: 1895 


the king in yellow 
is dedicated 
to 
my brother 

along the shore the cloud wave break, 
the twin sun sink behind the lake, 
the shadow lengthen 
in carcosa. 

strange is the night where black stars rise, 
and strange moon circle through the sky 
but stranger still is 
lost carcosa. 

song that the hyade shall sing, 
where flap the tatters of the king, 
must die unheard in 
dim carcosa. 

song of my soul, my voice is dead; 
die thou, unsung, as tear unshed 
shall dry and die in 
lost carcosa. 

cassilda's song in "the king in yellow," act i, scene 2. 




the repair of reputation 


i 

"ne raillon pas le fous; leur folie dure plus longtemp que 
la nôtre.... voila toute la différence." 
preface 
toward the end of the year 1920 the government of the united states had 
practically complete the programme, adopt during the last month of 
president winthrop's administration. the country was apparently tranquil. 
everybody know how the tariff and labour question were settled. the war 
with germany, incident on that country's seizure of the samoa islands, 
had left no visible scar upon the republic, and the temporary occupation 
of norfolk by the invade army had been forgotten in the joy over 
repeated naval victories, and the subsequent ridiculous plight of general 
von gartenlaube's forces in the state of new jersey. the cuba and 
hawaii investment had paid one hundred per cent and the territory of 
samoa was well worth its cost as a coal station. the country was in a 
superb state of defence. every coast city had been well supply with land 
fortifications; the army under the parental eye of the general staff, 
organized according to the prussian system, had been increase to 300,000 
men, with a territorial reserve of a million; and six magnificent 
squadron of cruiser and battle-ships patrol the six station of the 
navigable seas, leave a steam reserve ample fitted to control home 
waters. the gentlemen from the west had at last been constrained to 
acknowledge that a college for the training of diplomat was as necessary 
as law school are for the training of barristers; consequently we were no 
long represent abroad by incompetent patriots. the nation was 
prosperous; chicago, for a moment paralyze after a second great fire, had 
risen from its ruins, white and imperial, and more beautiful than the white 
city which had been built for its plaything in 1893. everywhere good 
architecture was replace bad, and even in new york, a sudden craving for 
decency had swept away a great portion of the existing horrors. street 
had been widened, properly paved and lighted, tree had been planted, 
square laid out, elevated structure demolish and underground road 
built to replace them. the new government building and barracks were fine 
bit of architecture, and the long system of stone quay which completely 
surround the island had been turn into park which prove a god-send 
to the population. the subsidize of the state theatre and state opera 
brought its own reward. the united states national academy of design was 
much like europe institution of the same kind. nobody envy the 
secretary of fine arts, either his cabinet position or his portfolio. the 
secretary of forestry and game preservation had a much easy time, thanks 
to the new system of national mount police. we had profit well by the 
latest treaty with france and england; the exclusion of foreign-born 
jew as a measure of self-preservation, the settlement of the new 
independent negro state of suanee, the check of immigration, the new 
law concerning naturalization, and the gradual centralize of power in 
the executive all contribute to national calm and prosperity. when the 
government solve the indian problem and squadron of indian cavalry 
scout in native costume were substitute for the pitiable organization 
tack on to the tail of skeleton regiment by a former secretary of 
war, the nation drew a long sigh of relief. when, after the colossal 
congress of religions, bigotry and intolerance were laid in their grave 
and kindness and charity began to draw war sect together, many 
thought the millennium had arrived, at least in the new world which after 
all is a world by itself. 

but self-preservation is the first law, and the united states had to look 
on in helpless sorrow as germany, italy, spain and belgium writhe in the 
throes of anarchy, while russia, watch from the caucasus, stoop and 
bound them one by one. 

in the city of new york the summer of 1899 was signalize by the 
dismantle of the elevated railroads. the summer of 1900 will live in 
the memory of new york people for many a cycle; the dodge statue was 
remove in that year. in the following winter began that agitation for 
the repeal of the law prohibit suicide which bore its final fruit in 
the month of april, 1920, when the first government lethal chamber was 
open on washington square. 

i had walk down that day from dr. archer's house on madison avenue, 
where i had been as a mere formality. ever since that fall from my horse, 
four years before, i had been trouble at times with pains in the back of 
my head and neck, but now for month they had been absent, and the doctor 
sent me away that day saying there was nothing more to be cure in me. it 
was hardly worth his fee to be told that; i knew it myself. still i did 
not grudge him the money. what i minded was the mistake which he made at 
first. when they picked me up from the pavement where i lay unconscious, 
and somebody had merciful sent a bullet through my horse's head, i was 
carry to dr. archer, and he, pronounce my brain affected, placed me 
in his private asylum where i was oblige to endure treatment for 
insanity. at last he decided that i was well, and i, knowing that my mind 
had always been as sound as his, if not sounder, "paid my tuition" as he 
joking call it, and left. i told him, smiling, that i would get even 
with him for his mistake, and he laugh heartily, and ask me to call 
once in a while. i did so, hope for a chance to even up accounts, but 
he gave me none, and i told him i would wait. 

the fall from my horse had fortunately left no evil results; on the 
contrary it had change my whole character for the better. from a lazy 
young man about town, i had become active, energetic, temperate, and 
above all--oh, above all else--ambitious. there was only one thing which 
trouble me, i laugh at my own uneasiness, and yet it trouble me. 

during my convalescence i had bought and read for the first time, _the 
king in yellow_. i remember after finish the first act that it 
occur to me that i had better stop. i start up and flung the book 
into the fireplace; the volume struck the barred grate and fell open on 
the hearth in the firelight. if i had not caught a glimpse of the opening 
words in the second act i should never have finished it, but as i stoop 
to pick it up, my eyes became rivet to the open page, and with a cry of 
terror, or perhaps it was of joy so poignant that i suffer in every 
nerve, i snatch the thing out of the coal and crept shake to my 
bedroom, where i read it and reread it, and wept and laugh and tremble 
with a horror which at times assail me yet. this is the thing that 
trouble me, for i cannot forget carcosa where black stars hang in the 
heavens; where the shadow of men's thought lengthen in the afternoon, 
when the twin sun sink into the lake of hali; and my mind will bear for 
ever the memory of the pallid mask. i pray god will curse the writer, as 
the writer has cursed the world with this beautiful, stupendous creation, 
terrible in its simplicity, irresistible in its truth--a world which now 
tremble before the king in yellow. when the france government seize the 
translate copy which had just arrive in paris, london, of course, 
became eager to read it. it is well known how the book spread like an 
infectious disease, from city to city, from continent to continent, 
barred out here, confiscate there, denounce by press and pulpit, 
censure even by the most advanced of literary anarchists. no definite 
principles had been violate in those wicked pages, no doctrine 
promulgated, no conviction outraged. it could not be judge by any known 
standard, yet, although it was acknowledge that the supreme note of art 
had been struck in _the king in yellow_, all felt that human nature 
could not bear the strain, nor thrive on words in which the essence of 
purest poison lurked. the very banal and innocence of the first act 
only allow the blow to fall afterward with more awful effect. 

it was, i remember, the 13th day of april, 1920, that the first 
government lethal chamber was establish on the south side of washington 
square, between wooster street and south fifth avenue. the block which 
had formerly consist of a lot of shabby old buildings, use as cafés 
and restaurant for foreigners, had been acquire by the government in 
the winter of 1898. the france and italy cafés and restaurant were 
torn down; the whole block was enclose by a gilded iron railing, and 
convert into a lovely garden with lawns, flower and fountains. in the 
centre of the garden stood a small, white building, severe classical in 
architecture, and surround by thicket of flowers. six ionic column 
support the roof, and the single door was of bronze. a splendid marble 
group of the "fates" stood before the door, the work of a young america 
sculptor, boris yvain, who had die in paris when only twenty-three years 
old. 

the inaugurate ceremony were in progress as i cross university 
place and enter the square. i thread my way through the silent throng 
of spectators, but was stop at fourth street by a cordon of police. a 
regiment of united states lancers were drawn up in a hollow square round 
the lethal chamber. on a raise tribune facing washington park stood the 
governor of new york, and behind him were group the mayor of new 
york and brooklyn, the inspector-general of police, the commandant of 
the state troops, colonel livingston, military aid to the president of the 
united states, general blount, commanding at governor's island, 
major-general hamilton, commanding the garrison of new york and brooklyn, 
admiral buffby of the fleet in the north river, surgeon-general 
lanceford, the staff of the national free hospital, senator wyse and 
franklin of new york, and the commissioner of public works. the tribune 
was surround by a squadron of hussar of the national guard. 

the governor was finish his reply to the short speech of the 
surgeon-general. i heard him say: "the law prohibit suicide and 
providing punishment for any attempt at self-destruction have been 
repealed. the government has seen fit to acknowledge the right of man to 
end an existence which may have become intolerable to him, through 
physical suffering or mental despair. it is believe that the community 
will be benefit by the removal of such people from their midst. since 
the passage of this law, the number of suicide in the united states has 
not increased. now the government has determined to establish a lethal 
chamber in every city, town and village in the country, it remains to be 
seen whether or not that class of human creature from whose despond 
ranks new victim of self-destruction fall daily will accept the relief 
thus provided." he paused, and turn to the white lethal chamber. the 
silence in the street was absolute. "there a painless death await him 
who can no long bear the sorrow of this life. if death is welcome let 
him seek it there." then quick turning to the military aid of the 
president's household, he said, "i declare the lethal chamber open," and 
again facing the vast crowd he cry in a clear voice: "citizens of new 
york and of the united states of america, through me the government 
declare the lethal chamber to be open." 

the solemn hush was broken by a sharp cry of command, the squadron of 
hussar file after the governor's carriage, the lancers wheel and 
form along fifth avenue to wait for the commandant of the garrison, and 
the mount police follow them. i left the crowd to gape and stare at 
the white marble death chamber, and, crossing south fifth avenue, walk 
along the western side of that thoroughfare to bleecker street. then i 
turn to the right and stop before a dingy shop which bore the sign: 

hawberk, armourer. 

i glance in at the doorway and saw hawberk busy in his little shop at 
the end of the hall. he look up, and catching sight of me cry in his 
deep, hearty voice, "come in, mr. castaigne!" constance, his daughter, 
rose to meet me as i cross the threshold, and held out her pretty 
hand, but i saw the blush of disappointment on her cheeks, and knew 
that it was another castaigne she had expected, my cousin louis. i 
smile at her confusion and compliment her on the banner she was 
embroider from a coloured plate. old hawberk sat riveting the worn 
greave of some ancient suit of armour, and the ting! ting! ting! of his 
little hammer sound pleasant in the quaint shop. presently he 
drop his hammer, and fuss about for a moment with a tiny wrench. 
the soft clash of the mail sent a thrill of pleasure through me. i 
love to hear the music of steel brush against steel, the mellow 
shock of the mallet on thigh pieces, and the jingle of chain armour. 
that was the only reason i went to see hawberk. he had never interested 
me personally, nor did constance, except for the fact of her being in 
love with louis. this did occupy my attention, and sometimes even kept 
me awake at night. but i knew in my heart that all would come right, 
and that i should arrange their future as i expect to arrange that of 
my kind doctor, john archer. however, i should never have trouble 
myself about visiting them just then, had it not been, as i say, that 
the music of the tinkle hammer had for me this strong fascination. i 
would sit for hours, listen and listening, and when a stray sunbeam 
struck the inlaid steel, the sensation it gave me was almost too keen 
to endure. my eyes would become fixed, dilate with a pleasure that 
stretch every nerve almost to breaking, until some movement of the 
old armourer cut off the ray of sunlight, then, still thrill 
secretly, i lean back and listen again to the sound of the 
polish rag, swish! swish! rubbing rust from the rivets. 

constance work with the embroidery over her knees, now and then pause 
to examine more close the pattern in the coloured plate from the 
metropolitan museum. 

"who is this for?" i asked. 

hawberk explained, that in addition to the treasure of armour in the 
metropolitan museum of which he had been appoint armourer, he also 
had charge of several collection belong to rich amateurs. this was the 
missing greave of a famous suit which a client of his had trace to a 
little shop in paris on the quai d'orsay. he, hawberk, had negotiate for 
and secure the greave, and now the suit was complete. he laid down his 
hammer and read me the history of the suit, trace since 1450 from owner 
to owner until it was acquire by thomas stainbridge. when his superb 
collection was sold, this client of hawberk's bought the suit, and since 
then the search for the missing greave had been pushed until it was, 
almost by accident, located in paris. 

"did you continue the search so persistent without any certainty of the 
greave being still in existence?" i demanded. 

"of course," he reply coolly. 

then for the first time i took a personal interest in hawberk. 

"it was worth something to you," i ventured. 

"no," he replied, laughing, "my pleasure in finding it was my reward." 

"have you no ambition to be rich?" i asked, smiling. 

"my one ambition is to be the best armourer in the world," he answer 
gravely. 

constance ask me if i had seen the ceremony at the lethal chamber. 
she herself had notice cavalry passing up broadway that morning, and had 
wish to see the inauguration, but her father want the banner 
finished, and she had stay at his request. 

"did you see your cousin, mr. castaigne, there?" she asked, with the 
slightest tremor of her soft eyelashes. 

"no," i reply carelessly. "louis' regiment is manoeuvre out in 
westchester county." i rose and picked up my hat and cane. 

"are you go upstairs to see the lunatic again?" laugh old hawberk. 
if hawberk knew how i loathe that word "lunatic," he would never use it 
in my presence. it rouse certain feelings within me which i do not care 
to explain. however, i answer him quietly: "i think i shall drop in and 
see mr. wilde for a moment or two." 

"poor fellow," said constance, with a shake of the head, "it must be hard 
to live alone year after year poor, cripple and almost demented. it is 
very good of you, mr. castaigne, to visit him as often as you do." 

"i think he is vicious," observe hawberk, beginning again with his 
hammer. i listen to the golden tinkle on the greave plates; when he had 
finished i replied: 

"no, he is not vicious, nor is he in the least demented. his mind is a 
wonder chamber, from which he can extract treasure that you and i would 
give years of our life to acquire."' 

hawberk laughed. 

i continue a little impatiently: "he know history as no one else could 
know it. nothing, however trivial, escape his search, and his memory is 
so absolute, so precise in details, that were it known in new york that 
such a man existed, the people could not honour him enough." 

"nonsense," mutter hawberk, searching on the floor for a fallen rivet. 

"is it nonsense," i asked, manage to suppress what i felt, "is it 
nonsense when he say that the tasset and cuissard of the enamel 
suit of armour commonly known as the 'prince's emblazoned' can be found 
among a mass of rusty theatrical properties, broken stove and 
ragpicker's refuse in a garret in pell street?" 

hawberk's hammer fell to the ground, but he picked it up and asked, with 
a great deal of calm, how i knew that the tasset and left cuissard were 
missing from the "prince's emblazoned." 

"i did not know until mr. wilde mention it to me the other day. he said 
they were in the garret of 998 pell street." 

"nonsense," he cried, but i notice his hand tremble under his leathern 
apron. 

"is this nonsense too?" i ask pleasantly, "is it nonsense when mr. 
wilde continual speak of you as the marquis of avonshire and of miss 
constance--" 

i did not finish, for constance had start to her feet with terror 
written on every feature. hawberk look at me and slow smooth his 
leathern apron. 

"that is impossible," he observed, "mr. wilde may know a great many 
things--" 

"about armour, for instance, and the 'prince's emblazoned,'" i 
interposed, smiling. 

"yes," he continued, slowly, "about armour also--may be--but he is wrong 
in regard to the marquis of avonshire, who, as you know, kill his 
wife's traduce years ago, and went to australia where he did not long 
survive his wife." 

"mr. wilde is wrong," murmur constance. her lip were blanched, but her 
voice was sweet and calm. 

"let us agree, if you please, that in this one circumstance mr. wilde is 
wrong," i said. 




ii 

i climb the three dilapidated flight of stairs, which i had so often 
climb before, and knock at a small door at the end of the corridor. 
mr. wilde open the door and i walk in. 

when he had double-locked the door and pushed a heavy chest against it, 
he came and sat down beside me, peer up into my face with his little 
light-coloured eyes. half a dozen new scratch cover his nose and 
cheeks, and the silver wire which support his artificial ear had 
become displaced. i thought i had never seen him so hideous 
fascinating. he had no ears. the artificial ones, which now stood out at 
an angle from the fine wire, were his one weakness. they were made of wax 
and paint a shell pink, but the rest of his face was yellow. he might 
better have revel in the luxury of some artificial finger for his 
left hand, which was absolutely fingerless, but it seem to cause him no 
inconvenience, and he was satisfy with his wax ears. he was very small, 
scarcely higher than a child of ten, but his arms were magnificent 
developed, and his thigh as thick as any athlete's. still, the most 
remarkable thing about mr. wilde was that a man of his marvellous 
intelligence and knowledge should have such a head. it was flat and 
pointed, like the head of many of those unfortunate whom people 
imprison in asylum for the weak-minded. many call him insane, but i 
knew him to be as sane as i was. 

i do not deny that he was eccentric; the mania he had for keeping that 
cat and tease her until she flew at his face like a demon, was 
certainly eccentric. i never could understand why he kept the creature, 
nor what pleasure he found in shut himself up in his room with this 
surly, vicious beast. i remember once, glancing up from the manuscript i 
was study by the light of some tallow dips, and seeing mr. wilde 
squat motionless on his high chair, his eyes fairly blazing with 
excitement, while the cat, which had risen from her place before the 
stove, came creep across the floor right at him. before i could move 
she flatten her belly to the ground, crouched, trembled, and sprang 
into his face. howling and foam they roll over and over on the 
floor, scratch and clawing, until the cat scream and flee under the 
cabinet, and mr. wilde turn over on his back, his limb contract and 
curling up like the leg of a die spider. he _was_ eccentric. 

mr. wilde had climb into his high chair, and, after study my face, 
picked up a dog's-eared ledger and open it. 

"henry b. matthews," he read, "book-keeper with whysot whysot and 
company, dealer in church ornaments. call april 3rd. reputation 
damage on the race-track. known as a welcher. reputation to be repair 
by august 1st. retainer five dollars." he turn the page and ran his 
fingerless knuckle down the closely-written columns. 

"p. greene dusenberry, minister of the gospel, fairbeach, new jersey. 
reputation damage in the bowery. to be repair as soon as possible. 
retainer $100." 

he cough and added, "called, april 6th." 

"then you are not in need of money, mr. wilde," i inquired. 

"listen," he cough again. 

"mrs. c. hamilton chester, of chester park, new york city. call april 
7th. reputation damage at dieppe, france. to be repair by october 1st 
retainer $500. 

"note.--c. hamilton chester, captain u.s.s. 'avalanche', ordered home 
from south sea squadron october 1st." 

"well," i said, "the profession of a repair of reputation is 
lucrative." 

his colourless eyes sought mine, "i only want to demonstrate that i 
was correct. you said it was impossible to succeed as a repair of 
reputations; that even if i did succeed in certain case it would cost 
me more than i would gain by it. to-day i have five hundred men in my 
employ, who are poorly paid, but who pursue the work with an enthusiasm 
which possibly may be born of fear. these men enter every shade and grade 
of society; some even are pillar of the most exclusive social temples; 
other are the prop and pride of the financial world; still others, hold 
undisputed sway among the 'fancy and the talent.' i choose them at my 
leisure from those who reply to my advertisements. it is easy enough, 
they are all cowards. i could treble the number in twenty days if i 
wished. so you see, those who have in their keeping the reputation of 
their fellow-citizens, i have in my pay." 

"they may turn on you," i suggested. 

he rub his thumb over his crop ears, and adjust the wax 
substitutes. "i think not," he murmur thoughtfully, "i seldom have to 
apply the whip, and then only once. besides they like their wages." 

"how do you apply the whip?" i demanded. 

his face for a moment was awful to look upon. his eyes dwindle to a pair 
of green sparks. 

"i invite them to come and have a little chat with me," he said in a soft 
voice. 

a knock at the door interrupt him, and his face resume its amiable 
expression. 

"who is it?" he inquired. 

"mr. steylette," was the answer. 

"come to-morrow," reply mr. wilde. 

"impossible," began the other, but was silence by a sort of bark from 
mr. wilde. 

"come to-morrow," he repeated. 

we heard somebody move away from the door and turn the corner by the 
stairway. 

"who is that?" i asked. 

"arnold steylette, owner and editor in chief of the great new york 
daily." 

he drum on the ledger with his fingerless hand adding: "i pay him very 
badly, but he think it a good bargain." 

"arnold steylette!" i repeated amazed. 

"yes," said mr. wilde, with a self-satisfied cough. 

the cat, which had enter the room as he spoke, hesitated, look up at 
him and snarled. he climb down from the chair and squat on the 
floor, took the creature into his arms and caress her. the cat cease 
snarl and presently began a loud purr which seem to increase in 
timbre as he stroke her. "where are the notes?" i asked. he pointed to 
the table, and for the hundredth time i picked up the bundle of 
manuscript entitled-- 

"the imperial dynasty of america." 

one by one i studied the well-worn pages, worn only by my own handling, 
and although i knew all by heart, from the beginning, "when from carcosa, 
the hyades, hastur, and aldebaran," to "castaigne, louis de calvados, 
born december 19th, 1877," i read it with an eager, rapt attention, 
pause to repeat parts of it aloud, and dwelling especially on "hildred 
de calvados, only son of hildre castaigne and edythe land castaigne, 
first in succession," etc., etc. 

when i finished, mr. wilde nod and coughed. 

"speaking of your legitimate ambition," he said, "how do constance and 
louis get along?" 

"she love him," i reply simply. 

the cat on his knee sudden turn and struck at his eyes, and he flung 
her off and climb on to the chair opposite me. 

"and dr. archer! but that's a matter you can settle any time you wish," 
he added. 

"yes," i replied, "dr. archer can wait, but it is time i saw my cousin 
louis." 

"it is time," he repeated. then he took another ledger from the table and 
ran over the leaves rapidly. "we are now in communication with ten 
thousand men," he muttered. "we can count on one hundred thousand within 
the first twenty-eight hours, and in forty-eight hour the state will 
rise _en masse_. the country follow the state, and the portion that 
will not, i mean california and the northwest, might better never have 
been inhabited. i shall not send them the yellow sign." 

the blood rush to my head, but i only answered, "a new broom sweep 
clean." 

"the ambition of caesar and of napoleon pale before that which could not 
rest until it had seize the mind of men and control even their 
unborn thoughts," said mr. wilde. 

"you are speak of the king in yellow," i groaned, with a shudder. 

"he is a king whom emperor have served." 

"i am content to serve him," i replied. 

mr. wilde sat rubbing his ear with his cripple hand. "perhaps constance 
do not love him," he suggested. 

i start to reply, but a sudden burst of military music from the street 
below drown my voice. the twentieth dragoon regiment, formerly in 
garrison at mount st. vincent, was return from the manoeuvre in 
westchester county, to its new barracks on east washington square. it was 
my cousin's regiment. they were a fine lot of fellows, in their pale 
blue, tight-fitting jackets, jaunty busby and white riding breeches with 
the double yellow stripe, into which their limb seem moulded. every 
other squadron was armed with lances, from the metal points of which 
flutter yellow and white pennons. the band passed, play the 
regimental march, then came the colonel and staff, the horse crowd 
and trampling, while their head bob in unison, and the pennon 
flutter from their lance points. the troopers, who rode with the 
beautiful english seat, look brown as berry from their bloodless 
campaign among the farm of westchester, and the music of their sabre 
against the stirrups, and the jingle of spur and carbine was delightful 
to me. i saw louis riding with his squadron. he was as handsome an 
officer as i have ever seen. mr. wilde, who had mount a chair by the 
window, saw him too, but said nothing. louis turn and look straight 
at hawberk's shop as he passed, and i could see the flush on his brown 
cheeks. i think constance must have been at the window. when the last 
trooper had clatter by, and the last pennon vanish into south fifth 
avenue, mr. wilde clamber out of his chair and drag the chest away 
from the door. 

"yes," he said, "it is time that you saw your cousin louis." 

he unlock the door and i picked up my hat and stick and step into 
the corridor. the stairs were dark. grope about, i set my foot on 
something soft, which snarl and spit, and i aim a murderous blow at 
the cat, but my cane shiver to splinter against the balustrade, and 
the beast scurry back into mr. wilde's room. 

passing hawberk's door again i saw him still at work on the armour, but 
i did not stop, and step out into bleecker street, i follow it to 
wooster, skirt the grounds of the lethal chamber, and crossing 
washington park went straight to my rooms in the benedick. here i lunch 
comfortably, read the _herald_ and the _meteor_, and finally went 
to the steel safe in my bedroom and set the time combination. the 
three and three-quarter minutes which it is necessary to wait, while the 
time lock is opening, are to me golden moments. from the instant i set 
the combination to the moment when i grasp the knob and swing back 
the solid steel doors, i live in an ecstasy of expectation. those moments 
must be like moments pass in paradise. i know what i am to find at 
the end of the time limit. i know what the massive safe hold secure for 
me, for me alone, and the exquisite pleasure of wait is hardly enhance 
when the safe open and i lift, from its velvet crown, a diadem of purest 
gold, blazing with diamonds. i do this every day, and yet the joy of 
wait and at last touching again the diadem, only seem to increase as 
the days pass. it is a diadem fit for a king among kings, an emperor 
among emperors. the king in yellow might scorn it, but it shall be worn 
by his royal servant. 

i held it in my arms until the alarm in the safe rang harshly, and then 
tenderly, proudly, i replace it and shut the steel doors. i walk 
slow back into my study, which face washington square, and lean on 
the window sill. the afternoon sun pour into my windows, and a gentle 
breeze stir the branch of the elm and maple in the park, now 
cover with bud and tender foliage. a flock of pigeon circle about 
the tower of the memorial church; sometimes alight on the purple tile 
roof, sometimes wheeling downward to the loto fountain in front of the 
marble arch. the garden were busy with the flower bed around the 
fountain, and the freshly turn earth smell sweet and spicy. a lawn 
mower, drawn by a fat white horse, clink across the green sward, and 
watering-carts pour shower of spray over the asphalt drives. around 
the statue of peter stuyvesant, which in 1897 had replace the 
monstrosity supposed to represent garibaldi, children play in the 
spring sunshine, and nurse girl wheel elaborate baby carriage with a 
reckless disregard for the pasty-faced occupants, which could probably be 
explain by the presence of half a dozen trim dragoon trooper languid 
loll on the benches. through the trees, the washington memorial arch 
glisten like silver in the sunshine, and beyond, on the eastern 
extremity of the square the grey stone barracks of the dragoons, and the 
white granite artillery stable were alive with colour and motion. 

i look at the lethal chamber on the corner of the square opposite. a 
few curious people still linger about the gilded iron railing, but 
inside the grounds the path were deserted. i watch the fountain 
ripple and sparkle; the sparrow had already found this new bathing nook, 
and the basin were cover with the dusty-feathered little things. two 
or three white peacock picked their way across the lawns, and a drab 
coloured pigeon sat so motionless on the arm of one of the "fates," that 
it seem to be a part of the sculpture stone. 

as i was turning careless away, a slight commotion in the group of 
curious loiter around the gate attract my attention. a young man 
had entered, and was advance with nervous stride along the gravel path 
which leads to the bronze door of the lethal chamber. he pause a moment 
before the "fates," and as he raise his head to those three mysterious 
faces, the pigeon rose from its sculpture perch, circle about for a 
moment and wheel to the east. the young man pressed his hand to his 
face, and then with an undefinable gesture sprang up the marble steps, 
the bronze door closed behind him, and half an hour later the loiter 
slouch away, and the frightened pigeon return to its perch in the 
arms of fate. 

i put on my hat and went out into the park for a little walk before 
dinner. as i cross the central driveway a group of officer passed, and 
one of them call out, "hello, hildred," and came back to shake hand 
with me. it was my cousin louis, who stood smile and tap his 
spur heel with his riding-whip. 

"just back from westchester," he said; "been do the bucolic; milk and 
curds, you know, dairy-maids in sunbonnets, who say 'haeow' and 'i don't 
think' when you tell them they are pretty. i'm nearly dead for a square 
meal at delmonico's. what's the news?" 

"there is none," i reply pleasantly. "i saw your regiment coming in this 
morning." 

"did you? i didn't see you. where were you?" 

"in mr. wilde's window." 

"oh, hell!" he began impatiently, "that man is stark mad! i don't 
understand why you--" 

he saw how annoy i felt by this outburst, and beg my pardon. 

"really, old chap," he said, "i don't mean to run down a man you like, 
but for the life of me i can't see what the deuce you find in common with 
mr. wilde. he's not well bred, to put it generously; he is hideous 
deformed; his head is the head of a criminal insane person. you know 
yourself he's been in an asylum--" 

"so have i," i interrupt calmly. 

louis look startle and confuse for a moment, but recover and 
slap me heartily on the shoulder. "you were completely cured," he 
began; but i stop him again. 

"i suppose you mean that i was simply acknowledge never to have been 
insane." 

"of course that--that's what i meant," he laughed. 

i dislike his laugh because i knew it was forced, but i nod gaily and 
ask him where he was going. louis look after his brother officer who 
had now almost reach broadway. 

"we had intended to sample a brunswick cocktail, but to tell you the 
truth i was anxious for an excuse to go and see hawberk instead. come 
along, i'll make you my excuse." 

we found old hawberk, neat attire in a fresh spring suit, standing at 
the door of his shop and sniff the air. 

"i had just decided to take constance for a little stroll before dinner," 
he reply to the impetuous volley of question from louis. "we thought 
of walking on the park terrace along the north river." 

at that moment constance appear and grew pale and rosy by turn as 
louis bent over her small glove fingers. i try to excuse myself, 
allege an engagement uptown, but louis and constance would not listen, 
and i saw i was expect to remain and engage old hawberk's attention. 
after all it would be just as well if i kept my eye on louis, i thought, 
and when they hail a spring street horse-car, i got in after them and 
took my seat beside the armourer. 

the beautiful line of park and granite terrace overlook the wharf 
along the north river, which were built in 1910 and finished in the 
autumn of 1917, had become one of the most popular promenade in the 
metropolis. they extend from the battery to 190th street, overlook 
the noble river and afford a fine view of the jersey shore and the 
highlands opposite. cafés and restaurant were scattered here and there 
among the trees, and twice a week military band from the garrison play 
in the kiosque on the parapets. 

we sat down in the sunshine on the bench at the foot of the equestrian 
statue of general sheridan. constance tip her sunshade to shield her 
eyes, and she and louis began a murmur conversation which was 
impossible to catch. old hawberk, leaning on his ivory head cane, 
light an excellent cigar, the mate to which i polite refused, and 
smile at vacancy. the sun hung low above the staten island woods, and 
the bay was dyed with golden hue reflect from the sun-warmed sail of 
the shipping in the harbour. 

brigs, schooners, yachts, clumsy ferry-boats, their deck swarm with 
people, railroad transport carry lines of brown, blue and white 
freight cars, stately sound steamers, déclassé tramp steamers, coasters, 
dredgers, scows, and everywhere pervade the entire bay impudent little 
tug puff and whistle officiously;--these were the craft which 
churn the sunlight waters as far as the eye could reach. in calm 
contrast to the hurry of sailing vessel and steamer a silent fleet of 
white warship lay motionless in midstream. 

constance's merry laugh arouse me from my reverie. 

"what _are_ you staring at?" she inquired. 

"nothing--the fleet," i smiled. 

then louis told us what the vessel were, point out each by its 
relative position to the old red fort on governor's island. 

"that little cigar shaped thing is a torpedo boat," he explained; "there 
are four more lie close together. they are the _tarpon_, the _falcon_, 
the _sea fox_, and the _octopus_. the gun-boats just above are the 
_princeton_, the _champlain_, the _still water_ and the _erie_. next to 
them lie the cruiser _faragut_ and _los angeles_, and above them the 
battle ship _california_, and _dakota_, and the _washington_ which is 
the flag ship. those two squatty look chunk of metal which are 
anchor there off castle william are the double turret monitor 
_terrible_ and _magnificent_; behind them lie the ram, _osceola_." 

constance look at him with deep approval in her beautiful eyes. "what 
load of things you know for a soldier," she said, and we all join in 
the laugh which followed. 

presently louis rose with a nod to us and offer his arm to constance, 
and they stroll away along the river wall. hawberk watch them for a 
moment and then turn to me. 

"mr. wilde was right," he said. "i have found the missing tasset and 
left cuissard of the 'prince's emblazoned,' in a vile old junk garret in 
pell street." 

"998?" i inquired, with a smile. 

"yes." 

"mr. wilde is a very intelligent man," i observed. 

"i want to give him the credit of this most important discovery," 
continue hawberk. "and i intend it shall be known that he is entitle 
to the fame of it." 

"he won't thank you for that," i answer sharply; "please say nothing 
about it." 

"do you know what it is worth?" said hawberk. 

"no, fifty dollars, perhaps." 

"it is value at five hundred, but the owner of the 'prince's emblazoned' 
will give two thousand dollar to the person who complete his suit; that 
reward also belong to mr. wilde." 

"he doesn't want it! he refuse it!" i answer angrily. "what do you 
know about mr. wilde? he doesn't need the money. he is rich--or will 
be--richer than any living man except myself. what will we care for money 
then--what will we care, he and i, when--when--" 

"when what?" demand hawberk, astonished. 

"you will see," i replied, on my guard again. 

he look at me narrowly, much as doctor archer use to, and i knew he 
thought i was mental unsound. perhaps it was fortunate for him that he 
did not use the word lunatic just then. 

"no," i reply to his unspoken thought, "i am not mental weak; my mind 
is as healthy as mr. wilde's. i do not care to explain just yet what i 
have on hand, but it is an investment which will pay more than mere gold, 
silver and precious stones. it will secure the happiness and prosperity 
of a continent--yes, a hemisphere!" 

"oh," said hawberk. 

"and eventually," i continue more quietly, "it will secure the happiness 
of the whole world." 

"and incidentally your own happiness and prosperity as well as mr. 
wilde's?" 

"exactly," i smiled. but i could have throttle him for taking that tone. 

he look at me in silence for a while and then said very gently, "why 
don't you give up your books and studies, mr. castaigne, and take a tramp 
among the mountain somewhere or other? you use to be fond of fishing. 
take a cast or two at the trout in the rangelys." 

"i don't care for fishing any more," i answered, without a shade of 
annoyance in my voice. 

"you use to be fond of everything," he continued; "athletics, yachting, 
shooting, riding--" 

"i have never care to ride since my fall," i said quietly. 

"ah, yes, your fall," he repeated, look away from me. 

i thought this nonsense had gone far enough, so i brought the 
conversation back to mr. wilde; but he was scan my face again in a 
manner highly offensive to me. 

"mr. wilde," he repeated, "do you know what he did this afternoon? he 
came downstairs and nail a sign over the hall door next to mine; it 
read: 

"mr. wilde, 
repair of reputations. 
third bell. 

"do you know what a repair of reputation can be?" 

"i do," i replied, suppress the rage within. 

"oh," he said again. 

louis and constance came strolling by and stop to ask if we would join 
them. hawberk look at his watch. at the same moment a puff of smoke 
shot from the casemate of castle william, and the boom of the sunset gun 
roll across the water and was re-echoed from the highlands opposite. 
the flag came running down from the flag-pole, the bugle sound on the 
white deck of the warships, and the first electric light sparkle out 
from the jersey shore. 

as i turn into the city with hawberk i heard constance murmur something 
to louis which i did not understand; but louis whisper "my darling," in 
reply; and again, walking ahead with hawberk through the square i heard a 
murmur of "sweetheart," and "my own constance," and i knew the time had 
nearly arrive when i should speak of important matter with my cousin 
louis. 




iii 

one morning early in may i stood before the steel safe in my bedroom, 
try on the golden jewelled crown. the diamond flash fire as i 
turn to the mirror, and the heavy beaten gold burn like a halo about 
my head. i remember camilla's agonized scream and the awful words 
echo through the dim street of carcosa. they were the last lines in 
the first act, and i dare not think of what followed--dared not, even 
in the spring sunshine, there in my own room, surround with familiar 
objects, reassure by the bustle from the street and the voice of the 
servant in the hallway outside. for those poison words had drop 
slow into my heart, as death-sweat drops upon a bed-sheet and is 
absorbed. trembling, i put the diadem from my head and wipe my forehead, 
but i thought of hastur and of my own rightful ambition, and i remember 
mr. wilde as i had last left him, his face all torn and bloody from the 
claw of that devil's creature, and what he said--ah, what he said. the 
alarm bell in the safe began to whirr harshly, and i knew my time was up; 
but i would not heed it, and replace the flash circlet upon my head 
i turn defiant to the mirror. i stood for a long time absorb in the 
change expression of my own eyes. the mirror reflect a face which was 
like my own, but whiter, and so thin that i hardly recognize it and all 
the time i kept repeating between my clench teeth, "the day has come! 
the day has come!" while the alarm in the safe whirr and clamoured, and 
the diamond sparkle and flame above my brow. i heard a door open but 
did not heed it. it was only when i saw two face in the mirror:--it was 
only when another face rose over my shoulder, and two other eyes met 
mine. i wheel like a flash and seize a long knife from my 
dressing-table, and my cousin sprang back very pale, crying: "hildred! 
for god's sake!" then as my hand fell, he said: "it is i, louis, don't 
you know me?" i stood silent. i could not have spoken for my life. he 
walk up to me and took the knife from my hand. 

"what is all this?" he inquired, in a gentle voice. "are you ill?" 

"no," i replied. but i doubt if he heard me. 

"come, come, old fellow," he cried, "take off that brass crown and toddle 
into the study. are you go to a masquerade? what's all this theatrical 
tinsel anyway?" 

i was glad he thought the crown was made of brass and paste, yet i didn't 
like him any the better for thinking so. i let him take it from my hand, 
knowing it was best to humour him. he toss the splendid diadem in the 
air, and catching it, turn to me smiling. 

"it's dear at fifty cents," he said. "what's it for?" 

i did not answer, but took the circlet from his hands, and place it in 
the safe shut the massive steel door. the alarm cease its infernal din 
at once. he watch me curiously, but did not seem to notice the sudden 
cease of the alarm. he did, however, speak of the safe as a biscuit 
box. fear lest he might examine the combination i led the way into my 
study. louis threw himself on the sofa and flick at flies with his 
eternal riding-whip. he wore his fatigue uniform with the braid jacket 
and jaunty cap, and i notice that his riding-boots were all splash 
with red mud. 

"where have you been?" i inquired. 

"jumping mud creek in jersey," he said. "i haven't had time to change 
yet; i was rather in a hurry to see you. haven't you got a glass of 
something? i'm dead tired; been in the saddle twenty-four hours." 

i gave him some brandy from my medicinal store, which he drank with a 
grimace. 

"damned bad stuff," he observed. "i'll give you an address where they 
sell brandy that is brandy." 

"it's good enough for my needs," i said indifferently. "i use it to rub 
my chest with." he stare and flick at another fly. 

"see here, old fellow," he began, "i've got something to suggest to you. 
it's four years now that you've shut yourself up here like an owl, never 
go anywhere, never taking any healthy exercise, never do a damn 
thing but pore over those books up there on the mantelpiece." 

he glance along the row of shelves. "napoleon, napoleon, napoleon!" he 
read. "for heaven's sake, have you nothing but napoleon there?" 

"i wish they were bound in gold," i said. "but wait, yes, there is 
another book, _the king in yellow_." i look him steady in the 
eye. 

"have you never read it?" i asked. 

"i? no, thank god! i don't want to be driven crazy." 

i saw he regret his speech as soon as he had utter it. there is only 
one word which i loathe more than i do lunatic and that word is crazy. 
but i control myself and ask him why he thought _the king in 
yellow_ dangerous. 

"oh, i don't know," he said, hastily. "i only remember the excitement it 
create and the denunciation from pulpit and press. i believe the author 
shot himself after bring forth this monstrosity, didn't he?" 

"i understand he is still alive," i answered. 

"that's probably true," he muttered; "bullets couldn't kill a fiend like 
that." 

"it is a book of great truths," i said. 

"yes," he replied, "of 'truths' which send men frantic and blast their 
lives. i don't care if the thing is, as they say, the very supreme 
essence of art. it's a crime to have written it, and i for one shall 
never open its pages." 

"is that what you have come to tell me?" i asked. 

"no," he said, "i came to tell you that i am go to be married." 

i believe for a moment my heart cease to beat, but i kept my eyes on his 
face. 

"yes," he continued, smile happily, "married to the sweetest girl on 
earth." 

"constance hawberk," i said mechanically. 

"how did you know?" he cried, astonished. "i didn't know it myself until 
that evening last april, when we stroll down to the embankment before 
dinner." 

"when is it to be?" i asked. 

"it was to have been next september, but an hour ago a despatch came 
order our regiment to the presidio, san francisco. we leave at noon 
to-morrow. to-morrow," he repeated. "just think, hildred, to-morrow i 
shall be the happiest fellow that ever drew breath in this jolly world, 
for constance will go with me." 

i offer him my hand in congratulation, and he seize and shook it like 
the good-natured fool he was--or pretended to be. 

"i am go to get my squadron as a wedding present," he rattle on. 
"captain and mrs. louis castaigne, eh, hildred?" 

then he told me where it was to be and who were to be there, and made me 
promise to come and be best man. i set my teeth and listen to his 
boyish chatter without showing what i felt, but-- 

i was get to the limit of my endurance, and when he jump up, and, 
switch his spur till they jingled, said he must go, i did not detain 
him. 

"there's one thing i want to ask of you," i said quietly. 

"out with it, it's promised," he laughed. 

"i want you to meet me for a quarter of an hour's talk to-night." 

"of course, if you wish," he said, somewhat puzzled. "where?" 

"anywhere, in the park there." 

"what time, hildred?" 

"midnight." 

"what in the name of--" he began, but checked himself and laughing 
assented. i watch him go down the stairs and hurry away, his sabre 
bang at every stride. he turn into bleecker street, and i knew he 
was go to see constance. i gave him ten minutes to disappear and then 
follow in his footsteps, taking with me the jewelled crown and the 
silken robe embroider with the yellow sign. when i turn into bleecker 
street, and enter the doorway which bore the sign-- 

mr. wilde, 
repair of reputations. 
third bell. 

i saw old hawberk moving about in his shop, and imagine i heard 
constance's voice in the parlour; but i avoid them both and hurried up 
the tremble stairway to mr. wilde's apartment. i knock and enter 
without ceremony. mr. wilde lay groan on the floor, his face cover 
with blood, his clothes torn to shreds. drops of blood were scattered 
about over the carpet, which had also been rip and fray in the 
evidently recent struggle. 

"it's that cursed cat," he said, cease his groans, and turning his 
colourless eyes to me; "she attack me while i was asleep. i believe she 
will kill me yet." 

this was too much, so i went into the kitchen, and, seize a hatchet 
from the pantry, start to find the infernal beast and settle her then 
and there. my search was fruitless, and after a while i gave it up and 
came back to find mr. wilde squat on his high chair by the table. he 
had wash his face and change his clothes. the great furrow which the 
cat's claw had plough up in his face he had fill with collodion, and 
a rag hid the wound in his throat. i told him i should kill the cat when 
i came across her, but he only shook his head and turn to the open 
ledger before him. he read name after name of the people who had come to 
him in regard to their reputation, and the sum he had amass were 
startling. 

"i put on the screw now and then," he explained. 

"one day or other some of these people will assassinate you," i insisted. 

"do you think so?" he said, rubbing his mutilate ears. 

it was useless to argue with him, so i took down the manuscript entitle 
imperial dynasty of america, for the last time i should ever take it down 
in mr. wilde's study. i read it through, thrill and tremble with 
pleasure. when i had finished mr. wilde took the manuscript and, turning 
to the dark passage which leads from his study to his bed-chamber, 
call out in a loud voice, "vance." then for the first time, i notice a 
man crouch there in the shadow. how i had overlook him during my 
search for the cat, i cannot imagine. 

"vance, come in," cry mr. wilde. 

the figure rose and crept towards us, and i shall never forget the face 
that he raise to mine, as the light from the window illuminate it. 

"vance, this is mr. castaigne," said mr. wilde. before he had finished 
speaking, the man threw himself on the ground before the table, crying 
and grasping, "oh, god! oh, my god! help me! forgive me! oh, mr. 
castaigne, keep that man away. you cannot, you cannot mean it! you are 
different--save me! i am broken down--i was in a madhouse and now--when 
all was coming right--when i had forgotten the king--the king in yellow 
and--but i shall go mad again--i shall go mad--" 

his voice die into a choke rattle, for mr. wilde had leapt on him and 
his right hand encircle the man's throat. when vance fell in a heap on 
the floor, mr. wilde clamber nimble into his chair again, and rubbing 
his mangle ear with the stump of his hand, turn to me and ask me 
for the ledger. i reach it down from the shelf and he open it. after 
a moment's searching among the beautiful written pages, he cough 
complacently, and pointed to the name vance. 

"vance," he read aloud, "osgood oswald vance." at the sound of his name, 
the man on the floor raise his head and turn a convulse face to mr. 
wilde. his eyes were inject with blood, his lip tumefied. "called 
april 28th," continue mr. wilde. "occupation, cashier in the seaforth 
national bank; has serve a term of forgery at sing sing, from whence he 
was transfer to the asylum for the criminal insane. pardon by the 
governor of new york, and discharge from the asylum, january 19, 1918. 
reputation damage at sheepshead bay. rumour that he lives beyond his 
income. reputation to be repair at once. retainer $1,500. 

"note.--has embezzle sum amount to $30,000 since march 20, 1919, 
excellent family, and secure present position through uncle's influence. 
father, president of seaforth bank." 

i look at the man on the floor. 

"get up, vance," said mr. wilde in a gentle voice. vance rose as if 
hypnotized. "he will do as we suggest now," observe mr. wilde, and 
opening the manuscript, he read the entire history of the imperial 
dynasty of america. then in a kind and soothe murmur he ran over the 
important points with vance, who stood like one stunned. his eyes were so 
blank and vacant that i imagine he had become half-witted, and remark 
it to mr. wilde who reply that it was of no consequence anyway. very 
patient we pointed out to vance what his share in the affair would be, 
and he seem to understand after a while. mr. wilde explain the 
manuscript, use several volumes on heraldry, to substantiate the result 
of his researches. he mention the establishment of the dynasty in 
carcosa, the lake which connected hastur, aldebaran and the mystery of 
the hyades. he spoke of cassilda and camilla, and sound the cloudy 
depths of demhe, and the lake of hali. "the scollop tatters of the king 
in yellow must hide yhtill forever," he muttered, but i do not believe 
vance heard him. then by degree he led vance along the ramification of 
the imperial family, to uoht and thale, from naotalba and phantom of 
truth, to aldones, and then toss aside his manuscript and notes, he 
began the wonderful story of the last king. fascinate and thrill i 
watch him. he threw up his head, his long arms were stretch out in a 
magnificent gesture of pride and power, and his eyes blaze deep in their 
socket like two emeralds. vance listen stupefied. as for me, when at 
last mr. wilde had finished, and point to me, cried, "the cousin of 
the king!" my head swam with excitement. 

control myself with a superhuman effort, i explain to vance why i 
alone was worthy of the crown and why my cousin must be exile or die. 
i made him understand that my cousin must never marry, even after 
renounce all his claims, and how that least of all he should marry the 
daughter of the marquis of avonshire and bring england into the question. 
i show him a list of thousand of name which mr. wilde had drawn up; 
every man whose name was there had received the yellow sign which no 
living human being dare disregard. the city, the state, the whole land, 
were ready to rise and tremble before the pallid mask. 

the time had come, the people should know the son of hastur, and the 
whole world bow to the black stars which hang in the sky over carcosa. 

vance lean on the table, his head bury in his hands. mr. wilde drew 
a rough sketch on the margin of yesterday's _herald_ with a bit of 
lead pencil. it was a plan of hawberk's rooms. then he wrote out the 
order and affix the seal, and shake like a palsied man i sign my 
first writ of execution with my name hildred-rex. 

mr. wilde clamber to the floor and unlock the cabinet, took a long 
square box from the first shelf. this he brought to the table and opened. 
a new knife lay in the tissue paper inside and i picked it up and hand 
it to vance, along with the order and the plan of hawberk's apartment. 
then mr. wilde told vance he could go; and he went, shamble like an 
outcast of the slums. 

i sat for a while watch the daylight fade behind the square tower of 
the judson memorial church, and finally, gathering up the manuscript and 
notes, took my hat and start for the door. 

mr. wilde watch me in silence. when i had step into the hall i 
look back. mr. wilde's small eyes were still fixed on me. behind him, 
the shadow gather in the fade light. then i closed the door behind 
me and went out into the darken streets. 

i had eaten nothing since breakfast, but i was not hungry. a wretched, 
half-starved creature, who stood look across the street at the lethal 
chamber, notice me and came up to tell me a tale of misery. i gave him 
money, i don't know why, and he went away without thank me. an 
hour later another outcast approach and whine his story. i had a blank 
bit of paper in my pocket, on which was trace the yellow sign, and i 
hand it to him. he look at it stupid for a moment, and then with an 
uncertain glance at me, fold it with what seem to me exaggerate care 
and placed it in his bosom. 

the electric lights were sparkle among the trees, and the new moon 
shone in the sky above the lethal chamber. it was tiresome wait in the 
square; i wander from the marble arch to the artillery stable and back 
again to the loto fountain. the flower and grass exhale a fragrance 
which trouble me. the jet of the fountain play in the moonlight, and 
the musical splash of fall drops remind me of the tinkle of chain 
mail in hawberk's shop. but it was not so fascinating, and the dull 
sparkle of the moonlight on the water brought no such sensation of 
exquisite pleasure, as when the sunshine play over the polish steel 
of a corselet on hawberk's knee. i watch the bats dart and turning 
above the water plant in the fountain basin, but their rapid, jerky 
flight set my nerves on edge, and i went away again to walk aimless to 
and fro among the trees. 

the artillery stable were dark, but in the cavalry barracks the 
officers' window were brilliant lighted, and the sallyport was 
constant fill with trooper in fatigue, carry straw and harness 
and basket fill with tin dishes. 

twice the mount sentry at the gate was change while i wander up and 
down the asphalt walk. i look at my watch. it was nearly time. the 
lights in the barracks went out one by one, the barred gate was closed, 
and every minute or two an officer pass in through the side wicket, 
leave a rattle of accoutrements and a jingle of spur on the night air. 
the square had become very silent. the last homeless loiter had been 
driven away by the grey-coated park policeman, the car track along 
wooster street were deserted, and the only sound which broke the 
still was the stamp of the sentry's horse and the ring of his 
sabre against the saddle pommel. in the barracks, the officers' quarters 
were still lighted, and military servant pass and repass before the 
bay windows. twelve o'clock sound from the new spire of st. francis 
xavier, and at the last stroke of the sad-toned bell a figure pass 
through the wicket beside the portcullis, return the salute of the 
sentry, and crossing the street enter the square and advanced toward 
the benedick apartment house. 

"louis," i called. 

the man pivot on his spur heel and came straight toward me. 

"is that you, hildred?" 

"yes, you are on time." 

i took his offer hand, and we stroll toward the lethal chamber. 

he rattle on about his wedding and the graces of constance, and their 
future prospects, calling my attention to his captain's shoulder-straps, 
and the triple gold arabesque on his sleeve and fatigue cap. i believe i 
listen as much to the music of his spur and sabre as i did to his 
boyish babble, and at last we stood under the elm on the fourth street 
corner of the square opposite the lethal chamber. then he laugh and 
ask me what i want with him. i motion him to a seat on a bench 
under the electric light, and sat down beside him. he look at me 
curiously, with that same searching glance which i hate and fear so in 
doctors. i felt the insult of his look, but he did not know it, and i 
careful conceal my feelings. 

"well, old chap," he inquired, "what can i do for you?" 

i drew from my pocket the manuscript and note of the imperial dynasty 
of america, and look him in the eye said: 

"i will tell you. on your word as a soldier, promise me to read this 
manuscript from beginning to end, without ask me a question. promise 
me to read these note in the same way, and promise me to listen to what 
i have to tell later." 

"i promise, if you wish it," he said pleasantly. "give me the paper, 
hildred." 

he began to read, raise his eyebrow with a puzzled, whimsical air, 
which made me tremble with suppress anger. as he advanced his, eyebrow 
contracted, and his lip seem to form the word "rubbish." 

then he look slightly bored, but apparently for my sake read, with an 
attempt at interest, which presently cease to be an effort he start 
when in the close written page he came to his own name, and when he 
came to mine he lower the paper, and look sharp at me for a moment 
but he kept his word, and resume his reading, and i let the half-formed 
question die on his lip unanswered. when he came to the end and read the 
signature of mr. wilde, he fold the paper careful and return it to 
me. i hand him the notes, and he settled back, push his fatigue cap 
up to his forehead, with a boyish gesture, which i remember so well in 
school. i watch his face as he read, and when he finished i took the 
note with the manuscript, and placed them in my pocket. then i unfold 
a scroll marked with the yellow sign. he saw the sign, but he did not 
seem to recognize it, and i call his attention to it somewhat sharply. 

"well," he said, "i see it. what is it?" 

"it is the yellow sign," i said angrily. 

"oh, that's it, is it?" said louis, in that flatter voice, which 
doctor archer use to employ with me, and would probably have employ 
again, had i not settled his affair for him. 

i kept my rage down and answer as steady as possible, "listen, you 
have engaged your word?" 

"i am listening, old chap," he reply soothingly. 

i began to speak very calmly. 

"dr. archer, have by some means become possessed of the secret of the 
imperial succession, attempt to deprive me of my right, allege that 
because of a fall from my horse four years ago, i had become mental 
deficient. he presume to place me under restraint in his own house in 
hope of either driving me insane or poison me. i have not forgotten 
it. i visit him last night and the interview was final." 

louis turn quite pale, but did not move. i resume triumphantly, "there 
are yet three people to be interview in the interests of mr. wilde and 
myself. they are my cousin louis, mr. hawberk, and his daughter 
constance." 

louis sprang to his feet and i arose also, and flung the paper marked 
with the yellow sign to the ground. 

"oh, i don't need that to tell you what i have to say," i cried, with a 
laugh of triumph. "you must renounce the crown to me, do you hear, to 
_me_." 

louis look at me with a startle air, but recover himself said 
kindly, "of course i renounce the--what is it i must renounce?" 

"the crown," i said angrily. 

"of course," he answered, "i renounce it. come, old chap, i'll walk back 
to your rooms with you." 

"don't try any of your doctor's trick on me," i cried, tremble with 
fury. "don't act as if you think i am insane." 

"what nonsense," he replied. "come, it's get late, hildred." 

"no," i shouted, "you must listen. you cannot marry, i forbid it. do you 
hear? i forbid it. you shall renounce the crown, and in reward i grant 
you exile, but if you refuse you shall die." 

he try to calm me, but i was rouse at last, and drawing my long knife 
barred his way. 

then i told him how they would find dr. archer in the cellar with his 
throat open, and i laugh in his face when i thought of vance and his 
knife, and the order sign by me. 

"ah, you are the king," i cried, "but i shall be king. who are you to 
keep me from empire over all the habitable earth! i was born the cousin 
of a king, but i shall be king!" 

louis stood white and rigid before me. sudden a man came running up 
fourth street, enter the gate of the lethal temple, traverse the path 
to the bronze door at full speed, and plunge into the death chamber 
with the cry of one demented, and i laugh until i wept tears, for i had 
recognize vance, and knew that hawberk and his daughter were no long 
in my way. 

"go," i cry to louis, "you have cease to be a menace. you will never 
marry constance now, and if you marry any one else in your exile, i will 
visit you as i did my doctor last night. mr. wilde take charge of you 
to-morrow." then i turn and dart into south fifth avenue, and with a 
cry of terror louis drop his belt and sabre and follow me like the 
wind. i heard him close behind me at the corner of bleecker street, and i 
dashed into the doorway under hawberk's sign. he cried, "halt, or i 
fire!" but when he saw that i flew up the stairs leave hawberk's shop 
below, he left me, and i heard him hammer and shouting at their door 
as though it were possible to arouse the dead. 

mr. wilde's door was open, and i enter crying, "it is done, it is done! 
let the nation rise and look upon their king!" but i could not find mr. 
wilde, so i went to the cabinet and took the splendid diadem from its 
case. then i drew on the white silk robe, embroider with the yellow 
sign, and placed the crown upon my head. at last i was king, king by my 
right in hastur, king because i knew the mystery of the hyades, and my 
mind had sound the depths of the lake of hali. i was king! the first 
grey pencil of dawn would raise a tempest which would shake two 
hemispheres. then as i stood, my every nerve pitch to the highest 
tension, faint with the joy and splendour of my thought, without, in the 
dark passage, a man groaned. 

i seize the tallow dip and sprang to the door. the cat pass me like a 
demon, and the tallow dip went out, but my long knife flew swift than 
she, and i heard her screech, and i knew that my knife had found her. for 
a moment i listen to her tumble and thumping about in the darkness, 
and then when her frenzy ceased, i light a lamp and raise it over my 
head. mr. wilde lay on the floor with his throat torn open. at first i 
thought he was dead, but as i looked, a green sparkle came into his 
sunken eyes, his mutilate hand trembled, and then a spasm stretch his 
mouth from ear to ear. for a moment my terror and despair gave place to 
hope, but as i bent over him his eyeball roll clean around in his 
head, and he died. then while i stood, transfix with rage and despair, 
seeing my crown, my empire, every hope and every ambition, my very life, 
lie prostrate there with the dead master, _they_ came, seize me 
from behind, and bound me until my vein stood out like cords, and my 
voice fail with the paroxysm of my frenzied screams. but i still 
raged, bleeding and infuriate among them, and more than one policeman 
felt my sharp teeth. then when i could no long move they came nearer; i 
saw old hawberk, and behind him my cousin louis' ghastly face, and 
farther away, in the corner, a woman, constance, weeping softly. 

"ah! i see it now!" i shrieked. "you have seize the throne and the 
empire. woe! woe to you who are crown with the crown of the king in 
yellow!" 


[editor's note.--mr. castaigne die yesterday in the asylum for criminal 
insane.] 




the mask 

camilla: you, sir, should unmask. 

stranger: indeed? 

cassilda: indeed it's time. we all have laid aside disguise but you. 

stranger: i wear no mask. 

camilla: (terrified, aside to cassilda.) no mask? no mask! 

_the king in yellow, act i, scene 2_. 


i 

although i knew nothing of chemistry, i listen fascinated. he picked up 
an easter lily which geneviève had brought that morning from notre dame, 
and drop it into the basin. instantly the liquid lost its crystalline 
clearness. for a second the lily was envelop in a milk-white foam, 
which disappeared, leave the fluid opalescent. change tint of orange 
and crimson play over the surface, and then what seem to be a ray of 
pure sunlight struck through from the bottom where the lily was resting. 
at the same instant he plunge his hand into the basin and drew out the 
flower. "there is no danger," he explained, "if you choose the right 
moment. that golden ray is the signal." 

he held the lily toward me, and i took it in my hand. it had turn to 
stone, to the purest marble. 

"you see," he said, "it is without a flaw. what sculptor could reproduce 
it?" 

the marble was white as snow, but in its depths the vein of the lily 
were tinge with palest azure, and a faint flush linger deep in its 
heart. 

"don't ask me the reason of that," he smiled, notice my wonder. "i have 
no idea why the vein and heart are tinted, but they always are. 
yesterday i try one of geneviève's gold-fish,--there it is." 

the fish look as if sculpture in marble. but if you held it to the 
light the stone was beautiful veined with a faint blue, and from 
somewhere within came a rosy light like the tint which slumber in an 
opal. i look into the basin. once more it seem fill with clearest 
crystal. 

"if i should touch it now?" i demanded. 

"i don't know," he replied, "but you had better not try." 

"there is one thing i'm curious about," i said, "and that is where the 
ray of sunlight came from." 

"it look like a sunbeam true enough," he said. "i don't know, it always 
come when i immerse any living thing. perhaps," he continued, smiling, 
"perhaps it is the vital spark of the creature escape to the source 
from whence it came." 

i saw he was mocking, and threaten him with a mahl-stick, but he only 
laugh and change the subject. 

"stay to lunch. geneviève will be here directly." 

"i saw her go to early mass," i said, "and she look as fresh and 
sweet as that lily--before you destroy it." 

"do you think i destroy it?" said boris gravely. 

"destroyed, preserved, how can we tell?" 

we sat in the corner of a studio near his unfinished group of the 
"fates." he lean back on the sofa, twirl a sculptor's chisel and 
squint at his work. 

"by the way," he said, "i have finished point up that old academic 
ariadne, and i suppose it will have to go to the salon. it's all i have 
ready this year, but after the success the 'madonna' brought me i feel 
ashamed to send a thing like that." 

the "madonna," an exquisite marble for which geneviève had sat, had been 
the sensation of last year's salon. i look at the ariadne. it was a 
magnificent piece of technical work, but i agree with boris that the 
world would expect something better of him than that. still, it was 
impossible now to think of finish in time for the salon that splendid 
terrible group half shroud in the marble behind me. the "fates" would 
have to wait. 

we were proud of boris yvain. we claim him and he claim us on the 
strength of his have been born in america, although his father was 
france and his mother was a russian. every one in the beaux arts call 
him boris. and yet there were only two of us whom he address in the 
same familiar way--jack scott and myself. 

perhaps my being in love with geneviève had something to do with his 
affection for me. not that it had ever been acknowledge between us. but 
after all was settled, and she had told me with tear in her eyes that it 
was boris whom she loved, i went over to his house and congratulate him. 
the perfect cordiality of that interview did not deceive either of us, i 
always believed, although to one at least it was a great comfort. i do 
not think he and geneviève ever spoke of the matter together, but boris 
knew. 

geneviève was lovely. the madonna-like purity of her face might have been 
inspired by the sanctus in gounod's mass. but i was always glad when she 
change that mood for what we call her "april manoeuvres." she was 
often as variable as an april day. in the morning grave, dignified and 
sweet, at noon laughing, capricious, at evening whatever one least 
expected. i prefer her so rather than in that madonna-like 
tranquill which stir the depths of my heart. i was dream of 
geneviève when he spoke again. 

"what do you think of my discovery, alec?" 

"i think it wonderful." 

"i shall make no use of it, you know, beyond satisfying my own curiosity 
so far as may be, and the secret will die with me." 

"it would be rather a blow to sculpture, would it not? we painter lose 
more than we ever gain by photography." 

boris nodded, play with the edge of the chisel. 

"this new vicious discovery would corrupt the world of art. no, i shall 
never confide the secret to any one," he said slowly. 

it would be hard to find any one less informed about such phenomena than 
myself; but of course i had heard of mineral spring so saturate with 
silica that the leaves and twig which fell into them were turn to 
stone after a time. i dim comprehend the process, how the silica 
replace the vegetable matter, atom by atom, and the result was a 
duplicate of the object in stone. this, i confess, had never interested 
me greatly, and as for the ancient fossil thus produced, they disgust 
me. boris, it appeared, feeling curiosity instead of repugnance, had 
investigate the subject, and had accidental stumble on a solution 
which, attack the immerse object with a ferocity unheard of, in a 
second did the work of years. this was all i could make out of the 
strange story he had just been telling me. he spoke again after a long 
silence. 

"i am almost frightened when i think what i have found. scientist would 
go mad over the discovery. it was so simple too; it discover itself. 
when i think of that formula, and that new element precipitate in 
metallic scales--" 

"what new element?" 

"oh, i haven't thought of name it, and i don't believe i ever shall. 
there are enough precious metal now in the world to cut throat over." 

i prick up my ears. "have you struck gold, boris?" 

"no, better;--but see here, alec!" he laughed, start up. "you and i 
have all we need in this world. ah! how sinister and covetous you look 
already!" i laugh too, and told him i was devour by the desire for 
gold, and we had better talk of something else; so when geneviève came in 
shortly after, we had turn our back on alchemy. 

geneviève was dress in silvery grey from head to foot. the light 
glint along the soft curve of her fair hair as she turn her cheek to 
boris; then she saw me and return my greeting. she had never before 
fail to blow me a kiss from the tip of her white fingers, and i 
prompt complain of the omission. she smile and held out her hand, 
which drop almost before it had touched mine; then she said, look 
at boris-- 

"you must ask alec to stay for luncheon." this also was something new. 
she had always ask me herself until to-day. 

"i did," said boris shortly. 

"and you said yes, i hope?" she turn to me with a charming conventional 
smile. i might have been an acquaintance of the day before yesterday. i 
made her a low bow. "j'avais bien l'honneur, madame," but refuse to 
take up our usual banter tone, she murmur a hospitable commonplace 
and disappeared. boris and i look at one another. 

"i had better go home, don't you think?" i asked. 

"hanged if i know," he reply frankly. 

while we were discuss the advisable of my departure geneviève 
reappear in the doorway without her bonnet. she was wonderful 
beautiful, but her colour was too deep and her lovely eyes were too 
bright. she came straight up to me and took my arm. 

"luncheon is ready. was i cross, alec? i thought i had a headache, but i 
haven't. come here, boris;" and she slip her other arm through his. 
"alec know that after you there is no one in the world whom i like as 
well as i like him, so if he sometimes feel snub it won't hurt him." 

"À la bonheur!" i cried, "who say there are no thunderstorm in april?" 

"are you ready?" chant boris. "aye ready;" and arm-in-arm we race into 
the dining-room, scandalize the servants. after all we were not so much 
to blame; geneviève was eighteen, boris was twenty-three, and i not quite 
twenty-one. 




ii 

some work that i was do about this time on the decoration for 
geneviève's boudoir kept me constant at the quaint little hotel in the 
rue sainte-cécile. boris and i in those days labour hard but as we 
pleased, which was fitfully, and we all three, with jack scott, idle a 
great deal together. 

one quiet afternoon i had been wandering alone over the house examine 
curios, pry into odd corners, bring out sweetmeat and cigar from 
strange hiding-places, and at last i stop in the bathing-room. boris, 
all over clay, stood there washing his hands. 

the room was built of rose-coloured marble excepting the floor, which was 
tessellated in rose and grey. in the centre was a square pool sunken 
below the surface of the floor; steps led down into it, sculpture 
pillar support a fresco ceiling. a delicious marble cupid appear 
to have just alight on his pedestal at the upper end of the room. the 
whole interior was boris' work and mine. boris, in his working-clothes of 
white canvas, scrape the trace of clay and red model wax from his 
handsome hands, and coquette over his shoulder with the cupid. 

"i see you," he insisted, "don't try to look the other way and pretend 
not to see me. you know who made you, little humbug!" 

it was always my rôle to interpret cupid's sentiment in these 
conversations, and when my turn came i respond in such a manner, that 
boris seize my arm and drag me toward the pool, declare he would 
duck me. next instant he drop my arm and turn pale. "good god!" he 
said, "i forgot the pool is full of the solution!" 

i shiver a little, and dry advise him to remember better where he 
had store the precious liquid. 

"in heaven's name, why do you keep a small lake of that gruesome stuff 
here of all places?" i asked. 

"i want to experiment on something large," he replied. 

"on me, for instance?" 

"ah! that came too close for jesting; but i do want to watch the action 
of that solution on a more highly organized living body; there is that 
big white rabbit," he said, following me into the studio. 

jack scott, wearing a paint-stained jacket, came wandering in, 
appropriate all the oriental sweetmeat he could lay his hand on, 
loot the cigarette case, and finally he and boris disappear together 
to visit the luxembourg gallery, where a new silver bronze by rodin and a 
landscape of monet's were claim the exclusive attention of artistic 
france. i went back to the studio, and resume my work. it was a 
renaissance screen, which boris want me to paint for geneviève's 
boudoir. but the small boy who was unwilling dawdle through a series 
of pose for it, to-day refuse all bribe to be good. he never rest an 
instant in the same position, and inside of five minutes i had as many 
different outline of the little beggar. 

"are you posing, or are you execute a song and dance, my friend?" i 
inquired. 

"whichever monsieur pleases," he replied, with an angel smile. 

of course i dismiss him for the day, and of course i paid him for the 
full time, that being the way we spoil our models. 

after the young imp had gone, i made a few perfunctory daub at my work, 
but was so thorough out of humour, that it took me the rest of the 
afternoon to undo the damage i had done, so at last i scrape my palette, 
stuck my brush in a bowl of black soap, and stroll into the 
smoking-room. i really believe that, excepting geneviève's apartments, no 
room in the house was so free from the perfume of tobacco as this one. it 
was a queer chaos of odds and ends, hung with threadbare tapestry. a 
sweet-toned old spinet in good repair stood by the window. there were 
stand of weapons, some old and dull, other bright and modern, festoon 
of indian and turkey armour over the mantel, two or three good pictures, 
and a pipe-rack. it was here that we use to come for new sensation in 
smoking. i doubt if any type of pipe ever exist which was not 
represent in that rack. when we had select one, we immediately 
carry it somewhere else and smoke it; for the place was, on the whole, 
more gloomy and less inviting than any in the house. but this afternoon, 
the twilight was very soothing, the rug and skin on the floor look 
brown and soft and drowsy; the big couch was pile with cushions--i found 
my pipe and curl up there for an unaccustomed smoke in the 
smoking-room. i had chosen one with a long flexible stem, and lighting it 
fell to dreaming. after a while it went out, but i did not stir. i 
dream on and presently fell asleep. 

i awoke to the saddest music i had ever heard. the room was quite dark, i 
had no idea what time it was. a ray of moonlight silver one edge of the 
old spinet, and the polish wood seem to exhale the sound as perfume 
float above a box of sandalwood. some one rose in the darkness, and came 
away weeping quietly, and i was fool enough to cry out "geneviève!" 

she drop at my voice, and, i had time to curse myself while i made a 
light and try to raise her from the floor. she shrank away with a 
murmur of pain. she was very quiet, and ask for boris. i carry her to 
the divan, and went to look for him, but he was not in the house, and the 
servant were gone to bed. perplexed and anxious, i hurried back to 
geneviève. she lay where i had left her, look very white. 

"i can't find boris nor any of the servants," i said. 

"i know," she answer faintly, "boris has gone to ept with mr. scott. i 
did not remember when i sent you for him just now." 

"but he can't get back in that case before to-morrow afternoon, and--are 
you hurt? did i frighten you into falling? what an awful fool i am, but i 
was only half awake." 

"boris thought you had gone home before dinner. do please excuse us for 
letting you stay here all this time." 

"i have had a long nap," i laughed, "so sound that i did not know whether 
i was still asleep or not when i found myself staring at a figure that 
was moving toward me, and call out your name. have you been try the 
old spinet? you must have play very softly." 

i would tell a thousand more lie worse than that one to see the look of 
relief that came into her face. she smile adorably, and said in her 
natural voice: "alec, i trip on that wolf's head, and i think my ankle 
is sprained. please call marie, and then go home." 

i did as she bade me, and left her there when the maid came in. 




iii 

at noon next day when i called, i found boris walking restless about 
his studio. 

"geneviève is asleep just now," he told me, "the sprain is nothing, but 
why should she have such a high fever? the doctor can't account for it; 
or else he will not," he muttered. 

"geneviève has a fever?" i asked. 

"i should say so, and has actually been a little light-headed at 
interval all night. the idea! gay little geneviève, without a care in 
the world,--and she keeps saying her heart's broken, and she wants to 
die!" 

my own heart stood still. 

boris lean against the door of his studio, look down, his hand in 
his pockets, his kind, keen eyes clouded, a new line of trouble drawn 
"over the mouth's good mark, that made the smile." the maid had orders to 
summon him the instant geneviève open her eyes. we wait and waited, 
and boris, grow restless, wander about, fuss with model wax 
and red clay. sudden he start for the next room. "come and see my 
rose-coloured bath full of death!" he cried. 

"is it death?" i asked, to humour his mood. 

"you are not prepared to call it life, i suppose," he answered. as he 
spoke he pluck a solitary goldfish squirm and twist out of its 
globe. "we'll send this one after the other--wherever that is," he said. 
there was feverish excitement in his voice. a dull weight of fever lay on 
my limb and on my brain as i follow him to the fair crystal pool with 
its pink-tinted sides; and he drop the creature in. falling, its 
scale flash with a hot orange gleam in its angry twist and 
contortions; the moment it struck the liquid it became rigid and sank 
heavy to the bottom. then came the milky foam, the splendid hue 
radiate on the surface and then the shaft of pure serene light broke 
through from seemingly infinite depths. boris plunge in his hand and 
drew out an exquisite marble thing, blue-veined, rose-tinted, and 
glisten with opalescent drops. 

"child's play," he muttered, and look wearily, longing at me,--as if 
i could answer such questions! but jack scott came in and enter into 
the "game," as he call it, with ardour. nothing would do but to try the 
experiment on the white rabbit then and there. i was willing that boris 
should find distraction from his cares, but i hate to see the life go 
out of a warm, living creature and i decline to be present. pick up a 
book at random, i sat down in the studio to read. alas! i had found 
_the king in yellow_. after a few moments, which seem ages, i was 
putt it away with a nervous shudder, when boris and jack came in 
bring their marble rabbit. at the same time the bell rang above, and a 
cry came from the sick-room. boris was gone like a flash, and the next 
moment he called, "jack, run for the doctor; bring him back with you. 
alec, come here." 

i went and stood at her door. a frightened maid came out in haste and ran 
away to fetch some remedy. geneviève, sitting bolt upright, with crimson 
cheek and glittering eyes, babble incessant and resist boris' 
gentle restraint. he call me to help. at my first touch she sigh and 
sank back, close her eyes, and then--then--as we still bent above her, 
she open them again, look straight into boris' face--poor 
fever-crazed girl!--and told her secret. at the same instant our three 
lives turn into new channels; the bond that held us so long together 
snap for ever and a new bond was forge in its place, for she had 
spoken my name, and as the fever torture her, her heart pour out its 
load of hidden sorrow. amaze and dumb i bowed my head, while my face 
burn like a live coal, and the blood surge in my ears, stupefy me 
with its clamour. incapable of movement, incapable of speech, i listen 
to her feverish words in an agony of shame and sorrow. i could not 
silence her, i could not look at boris. then i felt an arm upon my 
shoulder, and boris turn a bloodless face to mine. 

"it is not your fault, alec; don't grieve so if she love you--" but he 
could not finish; and as the doctor step swift into the room, 
saying--"ah, the fever!" i seize jack scott and hurried him to the 
street, saying, "boris would rather be alone." we cross the street to 
our own apartments, and that night, seeing i was go to be ill too, he 
went for the doctor again. the last thing i recollect with any 
distinct was hearing jack say, "for heaven's sake, doctor, what ail 
him, to wear a face like that?" and i thought of _the king in 
yellow_ and the pallid mask. 

i was very ill, for the strain of two years which i had endure since 
that fatal may morning when geneviève murmured, "i love you, but i think 
i love boris best," told on me at last. i had never imagine that it 
could become more than i could endure. outwardly tranquil, i had deceive 
myself. although the inward battle rage night after night, and i, lie 
alone in my room, cursed myself for rebellious thought unloyal to boris 
and unworthy of geneviève, the morning always brought relief, and i 
return to geneviève and to my dear boris with a heart wash clean by 
the tempest of the night. 

never in word or deed or thought while with them had i betray my sorrow 
even to myself. 

the mask of self-deception was no long a mask for me, it was a part of 
me. night lift it, lay bare the stifle truth below; but there was 
no one to see except myself, and when the day broke the mask fell back 
again of its own accord. these thought pass through my trouble mind 
as i lay sick, but they were hopeless entangle with vision of white 
creatures, heavy as stone, crawl about in boris' basin,--of the wolf's 
head on the rug, foam and snap at geneviève, who lay smile 
beside it. i thought, too, of the king in yellow wrap in the fantastic 
colours of his tattered mantle, and that bitter cry of cassilda, "not 
upon us, oh king, not upon us!" feverishly i struggle to put it from me, 
but i saw the lake of hali, thin and blank, without a ripple or wind to 
stir it, and i saw the tower of carcosa behind the moon. aldebaran, the 
hyades, alar, hastur, glide through the cloud-rifts which flutter and 
flap as they pass like the scollop tatters of the king in yellow. 
among all these, one sane thought persisted. it never wavered, no matter 
what else was go on in my disorder mind, that my chief reason for 
existing was to meet some requirement of boris and geneviève. what this 
obligation was, its nature, was never clear; sometimes it seem to be 
protection, sometimes support, through a great crisis. whatever it seem 
to be for the time, its weight rest only on me, and i was never so ill 
or so weak that i did not respond with my whole soul. there were always 
crowd of face about me, mostly strange, but a few i recognized, boris 
among them. afterward they told me that this could not have been, but i 
know that once at least he bent over me. it was only a touch, a faint 
echo of his voice, then the cloud settled back on my senses, and i lost 
him, but he _did_ stand there and bend over me _once_ at least. 

at last, one morning i awoke to find the sunlight fall across my bed, 
and jack scott reading beside me. i had not strength enough to speak 
aloud, neither could i think, much less remember, but i could smile 
feebly, as jack's eye met mine, and when he jump up and ask eager 
if i want anything, i could whisper, "yes--boris." jack move to the 
head of my bed, and lean down to arrange my pillow: i did not see his 
face, but he answer heartily, "you must wait, alec; you are too weak to 
see even boris." 

i wait and i grew strong; in a few days i was able to see whom i would, 
but meanwhile i had thought and remembered. from the moment when all the 
past grew clear again in my mind, i never doubt what i should do when 
the time came, and i felt sure that boris would have resolve upon the 
same course so far as he was concerned; as for what pertain to me 
alone, i knew he would see that also as i did. i no long ask for any 
one. i never inquire why no message came from them; why during the week 
i lay there, wait and grow stronger, i never heard their name 
spoken. preoccupied with my own searching for the right way, and with my 
feeble but determined fight against despair, i simply acquiesce in 
jack's reticence, taking for grant that he was afraid to speak of them, 
lest i should turn unruly and insist on seeing them. meanwhile i said 
over and over to myself, how would it be when life began again for us 
all? we would take up our relations exactly as they were before geneviève 
fell ill. boris and i would look into each other's eyes, and there would 
be neither rancour nor cowardice nor mistrust in that glance. i would be 
with them again for a little while in the dear intimacy of their home, 
and then, without pretext or explanation, i would disappear from their 
lives for ever. boris would know; geneviève--the only comfort was that 
she would never know. it seemed, as i thought it over, that i had found 
the meaning of that sense of obligation which had persist all through 
my delirium, and the only possible answer to it. so, when i was quite 
ready, i beckon jack to me one day, and said-- 

"jack, i want boris at once; and take my dearest greeting to 
geneviève...." 

when at last he made me understand that they were both dead, i fell into 
a wild rage that tore all my little convalescent strength to atoms. i 
rave and cursed myself into a relapse, from which i crawl forth some 
week afterward a boy of twenty-one who believe that his youth was gone 
for ever. i seem to be past the capability of further suffering, and 
one day when jack hand me a letter and the key to boris' house, i took 
them without a tremor and ask him to tell me all. it was cruel of me to 
ask him, but there was no help for it, and he lean weary on his thin 
hands, to reopen the wound which could never entire heal. he began very 
quietly-- 

"alec, unless you have a clue that i know nothing about, you will not be 
able to explain any more than i what has happened. i suspect that you 
would rather not hear these details, but you must learn them, else i 
would spare you the relation. god know i wish i could be spare the 
telling. i shall use few words. 

"that day when i left you in the doctor's care and came back to boris, i 
found him working on the 'fates.' geneviève, he said, was sleep under 
the influence of drugs. she had been quite out of her mind, he said. he 
kept on working, not talk any more, and i watch him. before long, i 
saw that the third figure of the group--the one look straight ahead, 
out over the world--bore his face; not as you ever saw it, but as it 
look then and to the end. this is one thing for which i should like to 
find an explanation, but i never shall. 

"well, he work and i watch him in silence, and we went on that way 
until nearly midnight. then we heard the door open and shut sharply, and 
a swift rush in the next room. boris sprang through the doorway and i 
followed; but we were too late. she lay at the bottom of the pool, her 
hand across her breast. then boris shot himself through the heart." jack 
stop speaking, drops of sweat stood under his eyes, and his thin 
cheek twitched. "i carry boris to his room. then i went back and let 
that hellish fluid out of the pool, and turning on all the water, wash 
the marble clean of every drop. when at length i dare descend the steps, 
i found her lie there as white as snow. at last, when i had decided 
what was best to do, i went into the laboratory, and first empty the 
solution in the basin into the waste-pipe; then i pour the contents of 
every jar and bottle after it. there was wood in the fire-place, so i 
built a fire, and break the locks of boris' cabinet i burnt every 
paper, notebook and letter that i found there. with a mallet from the 
studio i smashed to pieces all the empty bottles, then load them into 
a coal-scuttle, i carry them to the cellar and threw them over the 
red-hot bed of the furnace. six times i made the journey, and at last, 
not a vestige remain of anything which might again aid in seek for 
the formula which boris had found. then at last i dare call the doctor. 
he is a good man, and together we struggle to keep it from the public. 
without him i never could have succeeded. at last we got the servant 
paid and sent away into the country, where old rosy keeps them quiet 
with stone of boris' and geneviève's travels in distant lands, from 
whence they will not return for years. we bury boris in the little 
cemetery of sèvres. the doctor is a good creature, and know when to pity 
a man who can bear no more. he gave his certificate of heart disease and 
ask no question of me." 

then, lift his head from his hands, he said, "open the letter, alec; 
it is for us both." 

i tore it open. it was boris' will dated a year before. he left 
everything to geneviève, and in case of her die childless, i was to 
take control of the house in the rue sainte-cécile, and jack scott the 
management at ept. on our death the property revert to his mother's 
family in russia, with the exception of the sculpture marbles execute 
by himself. these he left to me. 

the page blur under our eyes, and jack got up and walk to the 
window. presently he return and sat down again. i dread to hear what 
he was go to say, but he spoke with the same simplicity and 
gentleness. 

"geneviève lie before the madonna in the marble room. the madonna bends 
tender above her, and geneviève smile back into that calm face that 
never would have been except for her." 

his voice broke, but he grasp my hand, saying, "courage, alec." next 
morning he left for ept to fulfil his trust. 




iv 

the same evening i took the key and went into the house i had known so 
well. everything was in order, but the silence was terrible. though i 
went twice to the door of the marble room, i could not force myself to 
enter. it was beyond my strength. i went into the smoking-room and sat 
down before the spinet. a small lace handkerchief lay on the keys, and i 
turn away, choking. it was plain i could not stay, so i lock every 
door, every window, and the three front and back gates, and went away. 
next morning alcide packed my valise, and leave him in charge of my 
apartments i took the orient express for constantinople. during the two 
years that i wander through the east, at first, in our letters, we 
never mention geneviève and boris, but gradual their name crept in. 
i recollect particularly a passage in one of jack's letters reply to 
one of mine-- 

"what you tell me of seeing boris bend over you while you lay ill, and 
feeling his touch on your face, and hearing his voice, of course trouble 
me. this that you describe must have happen a fortnight after he died. 
i say to myself that you were dreaming, that it was part of your 
delirium, but the explanation do not satisfy me, nor would it you." 

toward the end of the second year a letter came from jack to me in india 
so unlike anything that i had ever known of him that i decided to return 
at once to paris. he wrote: "i am well, and sell all my pictures as 
artist do who have no need of money. i have not a care of my own, but i 
am more restless than if i had. i am unable to shake off a strange 
anxiety about you. it is not apprehension, it is rather a breathless 
expectancy--of what, god knows! i can only say it is wearing me out. 
nights i dream always of you and boris. i can never recall anything 
afterward, but i wake in the morning with my heart beating, and all day 
the excitement increase until i fall asleep at night to recall the same 
experience. i am quite exhaust by it, and have determined to break up 
this morbid condition. i must see you. shall i go to bombay, or will you 
come to paris?" 

i telegraph him to expect me by the next steamer. 

when we met i thought he had change very little; i, he insisted, look 
in splendid health. it was good to hear his voice again, and as we sat 
and chat about what life still held for us, we felt that it was 
pleasant to be alive in the bright spring weather. 

we stay in paris together a week, and then i went for a week to ept 
with him, but first of all we went to the cemetery at sèvres, where boris 
lay. 

"shall we place the 'fates' in the little grove above him?" jack asked, 
and i answered-- 

"i think only the 'madonna' should watch over boris' grave." but jack was 
none the better for my home-coming. the dream of which he could not 
retain even the least definite outline continued, and he said that at 
times the sense of breathless expectancy was suffocating. 

"you see i do you harm and not good," i said. "try a change without me." 
so he start alone for a ramble among the channel islands, and i went 
back to paris. i had not yet enter boris' house, now mine, since my 
return, but i knew it must be done. it had been kept in order by jack; 
there were servant there, so i gave up my own apartment and went there 
to live. instead of the agitation i had feared, i found myself able to 
paint there tranquilly. i visit all the rooms--all but one. i could not 
bring myself to enter the marble room where geneviève lay, and yet i felt 
the longing grow daily to look upon her face, to kneel beside her. 

one april afternoon, i lay dream in the smoking-room, just as i had 
lain two years before, and mechanical i look among the tawny eastern 
rug for the wolf-skin. at last i distinguished the pointed ear and flat 
cruel head, and i thought of my dream where i saw geneviève lie beside 
it. the helmet still hung against the threadbare tapestry, among them 
the old spain more which i remember geneviève had once put on when 
we were amuse ourselves with the ancient bit of mail. i turn my eyes 
to the spinet; every yellow key seem eloquent of her caress hand, 
and i rose, drawn by the strength of my life's passion to the seal door 
of the marble room. the heavy door swung inward under my tremble 
hands. sunlight pour through the window, tip with gold the wings of 
cupid, and linger like a nimbus over the brow of the madonna. her 
tender face bent in compassion over a marble form so exquisite pure 
that i knelt and sign myself. geneviève lay in the shadow under the 
madonna, and yet, through her white arms, i saw the pale azure vein, and 
beneath her soft clasp hand the fold of her dress were tinge with 
rose, as if from some faint warm light within her breast. 

bending, with a break heart, i touched the marble drapery with my 
lips, then crept back into the silent house. 

a maid came and brought me a letter, and i sat down in the little 
conservatory to read it; but as i was about to break the seal, seeing the 
girl lingering, i ask her what she wanted. 

she stammer something about a white rabbit that had been caught in the 
house, and ask what should be done with it i told her to let it loose 
in the wall garden behind the house, and open my letter. it was from 
jack, but so incoherent that i thought he must have lost his reason. it 
was nothing but a series of prayer to me not to leave the house until he 
could get back; he could not tell me why, there were the dreams, he 
said--he could explain nothing, but he was sure that i must not leave the 
house in the rue sainte-cécile. 

as i finished reading i raise my eyes and saw the same maid-servant 
standing in the doorway holding a glass dish in which two gold-fish were 
swimming: "put them back into the tank and tell me what you mean by 
interrupt me," i said. 

with a half-suppressed whimper she empty water and fish into an 
aquarium at the end of the conservatory, and turning to me ask my 
permission to leave my service. she said people were play trick on 
her, evidently with a design of get her into trouble; the marble 
rabbit had been stolen and a live one had been brought into the house; 
the two beautiful marble fish were gone, and she had just found those 
common live things flop on the dining-room floor. i reassure her and 
sent her away, saying i would look about myself. i went into the studio; 
there was nothing there but my canvas and some casts, except the marble 
of the easter lily. i saw it on a table across the room. then i strode 
angry over to it. but the flower i lift from the table was fresh and 
fragile and fill the air with perfume. 

then sudden i comprehended, and sprang through the hall-way to the 
marble room. the door flew open, the sunlight stream into my face, and 
through it, in a heavenly glory, the madonna smiled, as geneviève lift 
her flushed face from her marble couch and open her sleepy eyes. 




in the court of the dragon 


"oh, thou who burn'st in heart for those who burn 
in hell, whose fire thyself shall feed in turn; 
how long be crying--'mercy on them.' god! 
why, who art thou to teach and he to learn?" 

in the church of st. barnabé vespers were over; the clergy left the 
altar; the little choir-boys flock across the chancel and settled in 
the stalls. a suisse in rich uniform march down the south aisle, 
sound his staff at every fourth step on the stone pavement; behind him 
came that eloquent preach and good man, monseigneur c----. 

my chair was near the chancel rail, i now turn toward the west end of 
the church. the other people between the altar and the pulpit turn too. 
there was a little scrape and rustling while the congregation seat 
itself again; the preach mount the pulpit stairs, and the organ 
voluntary ceased. 

i had always found the organ-playing at st. barnabé highly interesting. 
learned and scientific it was, too much so for my small knowledge, but 
express a vivid if cold intelligence. moreover, it possessed the 
france quality of taste: taste reign supreme, self-controlled, 
dignified and reticent. 

to-day, however, from the first chord i had felt a change for the worse, 
a sinister change. during vespers it had been chiefly the chancel organ 
which support the beautiful choir, but now and again, quite wanton as 
it seemed, from the west gallery where the great organ stands, a heavy 
hand had struck across the church at the serene peace of those clear 
voices. it was something more than harsh and dissonant, and it betray 
no lack of skill. as it recur again and again, it set me thinking of 
what my architect's books say about the custom in early times to 
consecrate the choir as soon as it was built, and that the nave, being 
finished sometimes half a century later, often did not get any blessing 
at all: i wonder idle if that had been the case at st. barnabé, and 
whether something not usually supposed to be at home in a christian 
church might have enter undetected and taken possession of the west 
gallery. i had read of such things happening, too, but not in works on 
architecture. 

then i remember that st. barnabé was not much more than a hundred years 
old, and smile at the incongruous association of mediaeval superstition 
with that cheerful little piece of eighteenth-century rococo. 

but now vespers were over, and there should have follow a few quiet 
chords, fit to accompany meditation, while we wait for the sermon. 
instead of that, the discord at the lower end of the church broke out 
with the departure of the clergy, as if now nothing could control it. 

i belong to those children of an old and simple generation who do not 
love to seek for psychological subtlety in art; and i have ever refuse 
to find in music anything more than melody and harmony, but i felt that 
in the labyrinth of sound now issue from that instrument there was 
something being hunted. up and down the pedal chase him, while the 
manual blare approval. poor devil! whoever he was, there seem small 
hope of escape! 

my nervous annoyance change to anger. who was do this? how dare he 
play like that in the midst of divine service? i glance at the people 
near me: not one appear to be in the least disturbed. the placid brow 
of the kneel nuns, still turn towards the altar, lost none of their 
devout abstraction under the pale shadow of their white head-dress. the 
fashionable lady beside me was look expectant at monseigneur c----. 
for all her face betrayed, the organ might have been singing an ave 
maria. 

but now, at last, the preach had made the sign of the cross, and 
command silence. i turn to him gladly. thus far i had not found the 
rest i had count on when i enter st. barnabé that afternoon. 

i was worn out by three nights of physical suffering and mental trouble: 
the last had been the worst, and it was an exhaust body, and a mind 
benumbed and yet acute sensitive, which i had brought to my favourite 
church for healing. for i had been reading _the king in yellow_. 

"the sun ariseth; they gather themselves together and lay them down in 
their dens." monseigneur c---- deliver his text in a calm voice, 
glancing quiet over the congregation. my eyes turned, i knew not why, 
toward the lower end of the church. the organist was coming from behind 
his pipes, and passing along the gallery on his way out, i saw him 
disappear by a small door that leads to some stairs which descend 
directly to the street. he was a slender man, and his face was as white 
as his coat was black. "good riddance!" i thought, "with your wicked 
music! i hope your assistant will play the close voluntary." 

with a feeling of relief--with a deep, calm feeling of relief, i turn 
back to the mild face in the pulpit and settled myself to listen. here, 
at last, was the ease of mind i long for. 

"my children," said the preacher, "one truth the human soul find hardest 
of all to learn: that it has nothing to fear. it can never be made to see 
that nothing can really harm it." 

"curious doctrine!" i thought, "for a catholic priest. let us see how he 
will reconcile that with the fathers." 

"nothing can really harm the soul," he went on, in, his coolest, clearest 
tones, "because----" 

but i never heard the rest; my eye left his face, i knew not for what 
reason, and sought the lower end of the church. the same man was coming 
out from behind the organ, and was passing along the gallery _the same 
way_. but there had not been time for him to return, and if he had 
returned, i must have seen him. i felt a faint chill, and my heart sank; 
and yet, his go and coming were no affair of mine. i look at him: i 
could not look away from his black figure and his white face. when he was 
exactly opposite to me, he turn and sent across the church straight 
into my eyes, a look of hate, intense and deadly: i have never seen any 
other like it; would to god i might never see it again! then he 
disappear by the same door through which i had watch him depart less 
than sixty seconds before. 

i sat and try to collect my thoughts. my first sensation was like that 
of a very young child badly hurt, when it catch its breath before 
crying out. 

to sudden find myself the object of such hatred was exquisite 
painful: and this man was an utter stranger. why should he hate me 
so?--me, whom he had never seen before? for the moment all other 
sensation was merge in this one pang: even fear was subordinate to 
grief, and for that moment i never doubted; but in the next i began to 
reason, and a sense of the incongruous came to my aid. 

as i have said, st. barnabé is a modern church. it is small and well 
lighted; one see all over it almost at a glance. the organ gallery get 
a strong white light from a row of long window in the clerestory, which 
have not even coloured glass. 

the pulpit being in the middle of the church, it follow that, when i 
was turn toward it, whatever move at the west end could not fail to 
attract my eye. when the organist pass it was no wonder that i saw him: 
i had simply miscalculate the interval between his first and his second 
passing. he had come in that last time by the other side-door. as for the 
look which had so upset me, there had been no such thing, and i was a 
nervous fool. 

i look about. this was a likely place to harbour supernatural horrors! 
that clear-cut, reasonable face of monseigneur c----, his collected 
manner and easy, graceful gestures, were they not just a little 
discourage to the notion of a gruesome mystery? i glance above his 
head, and almost laughed. that flyaway lady support one corner of the 
pulpit canopy, which look like a fringe damask table-cloth in a high 
wind, at the first attempt of a basilisk to pose up there in the organ 
loft, she would point her gold trumpet at him, and puff him out of 
existence! i laugh to myself over this conceit, which, at the time, i 
thought very amusing, and sat and chaff myself and everything else, 
from the old harpy outside the railing, who had made me pay ten centime 
for my chair, before she would let me in (she was more like a basilisk, i 
told myself, than was my organist with the anaemic complexion): from that 
grim old dame, to, yes, alas! monseigneur c---- himself. for all 
devout had fled. i had never yet done such a thing in my life, but 
now i felt a desire to mock. 

as for the sermon, i could not hear a word of it for the jingle in my 
ear of 

"the skirt of st. paul has reached. 
have preach us those six lent lectures, 
more unctuous than ever he preached," 

keeping time to the most fantastic and irreverent thoughts. 

it was no use to sit there any longer: i must get out of door and shake 
myself free from this hateful mood. i knew the rude i was committing, 
but still i rose and left the church. 

a spring sun was shining on the rue st. honoré, as i ran down the church 
steps. on one corner stood a barrow full of yellow jonquils, pale violet 
from the riviera, dark russia violets, and white roman hyacinth in a 
golden cloud of mimosa. the street was full of sunday pleasure-seekers. i 
swung my cane and laugh with the rest. some one overtook and pass me. 
he never turned, but there was the same deadly malignity in his white 
profile that there had been in his eyes. i watch him as long as i could 
see him. his lithe back express the same menace; every step that 
carry him away from me seem to bear him on some errand connected with 
my destruction. 

i was creep along, my feet almost refuse to move. there began to 
dawn in me a sense of responsibility for something long forgotten. it 
began to seem as if i deserve that which he threatened: it reach a 
long way back--a long, long way back. it had lain dormant all these 
years: it was there, though, and presently it would rise and confront me. 
but i would try to escape; and i stumble as best i could into the rue de 
rivoli, across the place de la concorde and on to the quai. i look with 
sick eyes upon the sun, shining through the white foam of the fountain, 
pour over the back of the dusky bronze river-gods, on the far-away 
arc, a structure of amethyst mist, on the countless vista of grey stem 
and bare branch faint green. then i saw him again coming down one of 
the chestnut alley of the cour la reine. 

i left the river-side, plunge blind across to the champ elysées and 
turn toward the arc. the setting sun was send its ray along the 
green sward of the rond-point: in the full glow he sat on a bench, 
children and young mother all about him. he was nothing but a sunday 
lounger, like the others, like myself. i said the words almost aloud, and 
all the while i gaze on the malignant hatred of his face. but he was not 
look at me. i crept past and drag my leaden feet up the avenue. i 
knew that every time i met him brought him near to the accomplishment 
of his purpose and my fate. and still i try to save myself. 

the last ray of sunset were pour through the great arc. i pass 
under it, and met him face to face. i had left him far down the champ 
elysées, and yet he came in with a stream of people who were return 
from the boi de boulogne. he came so close that he brush me. his 
slender frame felt like iron inside its loose black covering. he show 
no sign of haste, nor of fatigue, nor of any human feeling. his whole 
being express one thing: the will, and the power to work me evil. 

in anguish i watch him where he went down the broad crowded avenue, 
that was all flash with wheels and the trappings of horse and the 
helmet of the garde republicaine. 

he was soon lost to sight; then i turn and fled. into the bois, and far 
out beyond it--i know not where i went, but after a long while as it 
seem to me, night had fallen, and i found myself sitting at a table 
before a small café. i had wander back into the bois. it was hour now 
since i had seen him. physical fatigue and mental suffering had left me 
no power to think or feel. i was tired, so tired! i long to hide away 
in my own den. i resolve to go home. but that was a long way off. 

i live in the court of the dragon, a narrow passage that leads from the 
rue de renne to the rue du dragon. 

it is an "impasse"; traverse only for foot passengers. over the 
entrance on the rue de renne is a balcony, support by an iron dragon. 
within the court tall old house rise on either side, and close the end 
that give on the two streets. huge gates, swung back during the day into 
the wall of the deep archways, close this court, after midnight, and one 
must enter then by ring at certain small door on the side. the sunken 
pavement collect unsavoury pools. steep stairway pitch down to door 
that open on the court. the ground floor are occupy by shop of 
second-hand dealers, and by iron workers. all day long the place ring 
with the clink of hammer and the clang of metal bars. 

unsavoury as it is below, there is cheerfulness, and comfort, and hard, 
honest work above. 

five flight up are the atelier of architect and painters, and the 
hiding-places of middle-aged student like myself who want to live alone. 
when i first came here to live i was young, and not alone. 

i had to walk a while before any conveyance appeared, but at last, when i 
had almost reach the arc de triomphe again, an empty cab came along and 
i took it. 

from the arc to the rue de renne is a drive of more than half an hour, 
especially when one is convey by a tired cab horse that has been at the 
mercy of sunday fete-makers. 

there had been time before i pass under the dragon's wings to meet my 
enemy over and over again, but i never saw him once, and now refuge was 
close at hand. 

before the wide gateway a small mob of children were playing. our 
concierge and his wife walk among them, with their black poodle, 
keeping order; some couple were waltz on the side-walk. i return 
their greeting and hurried in. 

all the inhabitant of the court had troop out into the street. the 
place was quite deserted, light by a few lantern hung high up, in 
which the gas burn dimly. 

my apartment was at the top of a house, halfway down the court, reach 
by a staircase that descended almost into the street, with only a bit of 
passage-way intervening, i set my foot on the threshold of the open door, 
the friendly old ruinous stairs rose before me, leading up to rest and 
shelter. look back over my right shoulder, i saw _him,_ ten pace 
off. he must have enter the court with me. 

he was coming straight on, neither slowly, nor swiftly, but straight on 
to me. and now he was look at me. for the first time since our eyes 
encounter across the church they met now again, and i knew that the 
time had come. 

retreat backward, down the court, i face him. i meant to escape by 
the entrance on the rue du dragon. his eyes told me that i never should 
escape. 

it seem age while we were going, i retreating, he advancing, down the 
court in perfect silence; but at last i felt the shadow of the archway, 
and the next step brought me within it. i had meant to turn here and 
spring through into the street. but the shadow was not that of an 
archway; it was that of a vault. the great door on the rue du dragon 
were closed. i felt this by the black which surround me, and at the 
same instant i read it in his face. how his face gleam in the darkness, 
drawing swift nearer! the deep vaults, the huge closed doors, their 
cold iron clamp were all on his side. the thing which he had threaten 
had arrived: it gather and bore down on me from the fathomless shadows; 
the point from which it would strike was his infernal eyes. hopeless, i 
set my back against the barred door and defy him. 


there was a scrape of chair on the stone floor, and a rustling as the 
congregation rose. i could hear the suisse's staff in the south aisle, 
preceding monseigneur c---- to the sacristy. 

the kneel nuns, rouse from their devout abstraction, made their 
reverence and went away. the fashionable lady, my neighbour, rose also, 
with graceful reserve. as she departed her glance just flit over my 
face in disapproval. 

half dead, or so it seem to me, yet intense alive to every trifle, i 
sat among the leisurely moving crowd, then rose too and went toward the 
door. 

i had slept through the sermon. had i slept through the sermon? i look 
up and saw him passing along the gallery to his place. only his side i 
saw; the thin bent arm in its black covering look like one of those 
devilish, nameless instrument which lie in the disused torture-chambers 
of mediaeval castles. 

but i had escape him, though his eyes had said i should not. _had_ 
i escape him? that which gave him the power over me came back out of 
oblivion, where i had hope to keep it. for i knew him now. death and the 
awful abode of lost souls, whither my weakness long ago had sent 
him--they had change him for every other eye, but not for mine. i had 
recognize him almost from the first; i had never doubt what he was 
come to do; and now i knew while my body sat safe in the cheerful little 
church, he had been hunting my soul in the court of the dragon. 

i crept to the door: the organ broke out overhead with a blare. a 
dazzle light fill the church, blot the altar from my eyes. the 
people fade away, the arches, the vaulted roof vanished. i raise my 
sear eyes to the fathomless glare, and i saw the black stars hanging in 
the heavens: and the wet wind from the lake of hali chill my face. 

and now, far away, over league of toss cloud-waves, i saw the moon 
dripping with spray; and beyond, the tower of carcosa rose behind the 
moon. 

death and the awful abode of lost souls, whither my weakness long ago had 
sent him, had change him for every other eye but mine. and now i heard 
_his voice_, rising, swelling, thundering through the flare light, 
and as i fell, the radiance increasing, increasing, pour over me in 
wave of flame. then i sank into the depths, and i heard the king in 
yellow whisper to my soul: "it is a fearful thing to fall into the 
hand of the living god!" 




the yellow sign 

"let the red dawn surmise 
what we shall do, 
when this blue starlight die 
and all is through." 


i 

there are so many things which are impossible to explain! why should 
certain chord in music make me think of the brown and golden tint of 
autumn foliage? why should the mass of sainte cécile bend my thought 
wandering among cavern whose wall blaze with ragged masses of virgin 
silver? what was it in the roar and turmoil of broadway at six o'clock 
that flash before my eyes the picture of a still breton forest where 
sunlight filter through spring foliage and sylvia bent, half curiously, 
half tenderly, over a small green lizard, murmuring: "to think that this 
also is a little ward of god!" 

when i first saw the watchman his back was toward me. i look at him 
indifferent until he went into the church. i paid no more attention to 
him than i had to any other man who lounge through washington square 
that morning, and when i shut my window and turn back into my studio i 
had forgotten him. late in the afternoon, the day being warm, i raise 
the window again and lean out to get a sniff of air. a man was standing 
in the courtyard of the church, and i notice him again with as little 
interest as i had that morning. i look across the square to where the 
fountain was play and then, with my mind fill with vague impression 
of trees, asphalt drives, and the moving group of nursemaid and 
holiday-makers, i start to walk back to my easel. as i turned, my 
listless glance included the man below in the churchyard. his face was 
toward me now, and with a perfectly involuntary movement i bent to see 
it. at the same moment he raise his head and look at me. instantly i 
thought of a coffin-worm. whatever it was about the man that repel me 
i did not know, but the impression of a plump white grave-worm was so 
intense and nauseate that i must have shown it in my expression, for he 
turn his puffy face away with a movement which made me think of a 
disturbed grub in a chestnut. 

i went back to my easel and motion the model to resume her pose. after 
working a while i was satisfy that i was spoil what i had done as 
rapid as possible, and i took up a palette knife and scrape the colour 
out again. the flesh tone were sallow and unhealthy, and i did not 
understand how i could have paint such sickly colour into a study which 
before that had glow with healthy tones. 

i look at tessie. she had not changed, and the clear flush of health 
dyed her neck and cheek as i frowned. 

"is it something i've done?" she said. 

"no,--i've made a mess of this arm, and for the life of me i can't see 
how i came to paint such mud as that into the canvas," i replied. 

"don't i pose well?" she insisted. 

"of course, perfectly." 

"then it's not my fault?" 

"no. it's my own." 

"i am very sorry," she said. 

i told her she could rest while i applied rag and turpentine to the 
plague spot on my canvas, and she went off to smoke a cigarette and look 
over the illustration in the _courrier français_. 

i did not know whether it was something in the turpentine or a defect in 
the canvas, but the more i scrub the more that gangrene seem to 
spread. i work like a beaver to get it out, and yet the disease 
appear to creep from limb to limb of the study before me. alarmed, i 
strove to arrest it, but now the colour on the breast change and the 
whole figure seem to absorb the infection as a sponge soak up water. 
vigorous i ply palette-knife, turpentine, and scraper, thinking all 
the time what a _séance_ i should hold with duval who had sold me 
the canvas; but soon i notice that it was not the canvas which was 
defective nor yet the colours of edward. "it must be the turpentine," i 
thought angrily, "or else my eyes have become so blur and confuse by 
the afternoon light that i can't see straight." i call tessie, the 
model. she came and lean over my chair blow ring of smoke into the 
air. 

"what _have_ you been do to it?" she exclaim 

"nothing," i growled, "it must be this turpentine!" 

"what a horrible colour it is now," she continued. "do you think my flesh 
resemble green cheese?" 

"no, i don't," i said angrily; "did you ever know me to paint like that 
before?" 

"no, indeed!" 

"well, then!" 

"it must be the turpentine, or something," she admitted. 

she slip on a japan robe and walk to the window. i scrape and 
rub until i was tired, and finally picked up my brush and hurl 
them through the canvas with a forcible expression, the tone alone of 
which reach tessie's ears. 

nevertheless she prompt began: "that's it! swear and act silly and ruin 
your brushes! you have been three week on that study, and now look! 
what's the good of rip the canvas? what creature artist are!" 

i felt about as much ashamed as i usually did after such an outbreak, and 
i turn the ruin canvas to the wall. tessie help me clean my 
brushes, and then dance away to dress. from the screen she regale me 
with bit of advice concerning whole or partial loss of temper, until, 
thinking, perhaps, i had been torment sufficiently, she came out to 
implore me to button her waist where she could not reach it on the 
shoulder. 

"everything went wrong from the time you came back from the window and 
talk about that horrid-looking man you saw in the churchyard," she 
announced. 

"yes, he probably bewitch the picture," i said, yawning. i look at my 
watch. 

"it's after six, i know," said tessie, adjust her hat before the 
mirror. 

"yes," i replied, "i didn't mean to keep you so long." i lean out of 
the window but recoil with disgust, for the young man with the pasty 
face stood below in the churchyard. tessie saw my gesture of disapproval 
and lean from the window. 

"is that the man you don't like?" she whispered. 

i nodded. 

"i can't see his face, but he do look fat and soft. someway or other," 
she continued, turning to look at me, "he remind me of a dream,--an 
awful dream i once had. or," she mused, look down at her shapely 
shoes, "was it a dream after all?" 

"how should i know?" i smiled. 

tessie smile in reply. 

"you were in it," she said, "so perhaps you might know something about 
it." 

"tessie! tessie!" i protested, "don't you dare flatter by saying that you 
dream about me!" 

"but i did," she insisted; "shall i tell you about it?" 

"go ahead," i replied, lighting a cigarette. 

tessie lean back on the open window-sill and began very seriously. 

"one night last winter i was lie in bed thinking about nothing at all 
in particular. i had been pose for you and i was tired out, yet it 
seem impossible for me to sleep. i heard the bell in the city ring 
ten, eleven, and midnight. i must have fallen asleep about midnight 
because i don't remember hearing the bell after that. it seem to me 
that i had scarcely closed my eyes when i dream that something impel 
me to go to the window. i rose, and raise the sash lean out. 
twenty-fifth street was desert as far as i could see. i began to be 
afraid; everything outside seem so--so black and uncomfortable. then 
the sound of wheels in the distance came to my ears, and it seem to me 
as though that was what i must wait for. very slow the wheels 
approached, and, finally, i could make out a vehicle moving along the 
street. it came near and nearer, and when it pass beneath my window i 
saw it was a hearse. then, as i tremble with fear, the driver turn and 
look straight at me. when i awoke i was standing by the open window 
shiver with cold, but the black-plumed hearse and the driver were 
gone. i dream this dream again in march last, and again awoke beside 
the open window. last night the dream came again. you remember how it was 
raining; when i awoke, standing at the open window, my night-dress was 
soaked." 

"but where did i come into the dream?" i asked. 

"you--you were in the coffin; but you were not dead." 

"in the coffin?" 

"yes." 

"how did you know? could you see me?" 

"no; i only knew you were there." 

"had you been eat welsh rarebits, or lobster salad?" i began, 
laughing, but the girl interrupt me with a frightened cry. 

"hello! what's up?" i said, as she shrank into the embrasure by the 
window. 

"the--the man below in the churchyard;--he drove the hearse." 

"nonsense," i said, but tessie's eyes were wide with terror. i went to 
the window and look out. the man was gone. "come, tessie," i urged, 
"don't be foolish. you have pose too long; you are nervous." 

"do you think i could forget that face?" she murmured. "three times i saw 
the hearse pass below my window, and every time the driver turn and 
look up at me. oh, his face was so white and--and soft? it look 
dead--it look as if it had been dead a long time." 

i induce the girl to sit down and swallow a glass of marsala. then i sat 
down beside her, and try to give her some advice. 

"look here, tessie," i said, "you go to the country for a week or two, 
and you'll have no more dream about hearses. you pose all day, and when 
night come your nerves are upset. you can't keep this up. then again, 
instead of go to bed when your day's work is done, you run off to 
picnic at sulzer's park, or go to the eldorado or coney island, and when 
you come down here next morning you are fagged out. there was no real 
hearse. there was a soft-shell crab dream." 

she smile faintly. 

"what about the man in the churchyard?" 

"oh, he's only an ordinary unhealthy, everyday creature." 

"as true as my name is tessie reardon, i swear to you, mr. scott, that 
the face of the man below in the churchyard is the face of the man who 
drove the hearse!" 

"what of it?" i said. "it's an honest trade." 

"then you think i _did_ see the hearse?" 

"oh," i said diplomatically, "if you really did, it might not be unlikely 
that the man below drove it. there is nothing in that." 

tessie rose, unroll her scent handkerchief, and taking a bit of gum 
from a knot in the hem, placed it in her mouth. then drawing on her 
glove she offer me her hand, with a frank, "good-night, mr. scott," 
and walk out. 




ii 

the next morning, thomas, the bell-boy, brought me the _herald_ and 
a bit of news. the church next door had been sold. i thank heaven for 
it, not that being a catholic i had any repugnance for the congregation 
next door, but because my nerves were shatter by a blatant exhorter, 
whose every word echo through the aisle of the church as if it had been 
my own rooms, and who insist on his r's with a nasal persistence which 
revolt my every instinct. then, too, there was a fiend in human shape, 
an organist, who reel off some of the grand old hymn with an 
interpretation of his own, and i long for the blood of a creature who 
could play the doxology with an amendment of minor chord which one hear 
only in a quartet of very young undergraduates. i believe the minister 
was a good man, but when he bellowed: "and the lorrrrd said unto moses, 
the lorrrd is a man of war; the lorrrd is his name. my wrath shall wax 
hot and i will kill you with the sworrrrd!" i wonder how many century 
of purgatory it would take to atone for such a sin. 

"who bought the property?" i ask thomas. 

"nobody that i knows, sir. they do say the gent wot own this 'ere 
'amilton flat was lookin' at it. 'e might be a bildin' more studios." 

i walk to the window. the young man with the unhealthy face stood by 
the churchyard gate, and at the mere sight of him the same overwhelming 
repugnance took possession of me. 

"by the way, thomas," i said, "who is that fellow down there?" 

thomas sniffed. "that there worm, sir? 'es night-watchman of the church, 
sir. 'e maike me tired a-sittin' out all night on them steps and lookin' 
at you insultin' like. i'd a punch 'is 'ed, sir--beg pardon, sir--" 

"go on, thomas." 

"one night a comin' 'ome with arry, the other english boy, i see 'im a 
sittin' there on them steps. we 'ad mol and jen with us, sir, the two 
girl on the tray service, an' 'e looks so insultin' at us that i up and 
sez: 'wat you look hat, you fat slug?'--beg pardon, sir, but that's 
'ow i sez, sir. then 'e don't say nothin' and i sez: 'come out and i'll 
punch that puddin' 'ed.' then i hopen the gate an' go in, but 'e don't 
say nothin', only looks insultin' like. then i 'its 'im one, but, ugh! 
'is 'ed was that cold and mushy it ud sicken you to touch 'im." 

"what did he do then?" i ask curiously. 

"'im? nawthin'." 

"and you, thomas?" 

the young fellow flushed with embarrassment and smile uneasily. 

"mr. scott, sir, i ain't no coward, an' i can't make it out at all why i 
run. i was in the 5th lawncers, sir, bugle at tel-el-kebir, an' was shot 
by the wells." 

"you don't mean to say you ran away?" 

"yes, sir; i run." 

"why?" 

"that's just what i want to know, sir. i grab mol an' run, an' the 
rest was as frightened as i." 

"but what were they frightened at?" 

thomas refuse to answer for a while, but now my curiosity was arouse 
about the repulsive young man below and i pressed him. three years' 
sojourn in america had not only modify thomas' cockney dialect but had 
given him the american's fear of ridicule. 

"you won't believe me, mr. scott, sir?" 

"yes, i will." 

"you will lawf at me, sir?" 

"nonsense!" 

he hesitated. "well, sir, it's gawd's truth that when i 'it 'im 'e 
grab me wrists, sir, and when i twist 'is soft, mushy fist one of 
'is finger come off in me 'and." 

the utter loathing and horror of thomas' face must have been reflect in 
my own, for he added: 

"it's orful, an' now when i see 'im i just go away. 'e maike me hill." 

when thomas had gone i went to the window. the man stood beside the 
church-railing with both hand on the gate, but i hasty retreat to my 
easel again, sicken and horrified, for i saw that the middle finger of 
his right hand was missing. 

at nine o'clock tessie appear and vanish behind the screen with a 
merry "good morning, mr. scott." when she had reappear and taken her 
pose upon the model-stand i start a new canvas, much to her delight. 
she remain silent as long as i was on the drawing, but as soon as the 
scrape of the charcoal cease and i took up my fixative she began to 
chatter. 

"oh, i had such a lovely time last night. we went to tony pastor's." 

"who are 'we'?" i demanded. 

"oh, maggie, you know, mr. whyte's model, and pinkie mccormick--we call 
her pinkie because she's got that beautiful red hair you artist like so 
much--and lizzie burke." 

i sent a shower of spray from the fixative over the canvas, and said: 
"well, go on." 

"we saw kelly and baby barnes the skirt-dancer and--and all the rest. i 
made a mash." 

"then you have gone back on me, tessie?" 

she laugh and shook her head. 

"he's lizzie burke's brother, ed. he's a perfect gen'l'man." 

i felt constrained to give her some parental advice concerning mashing, 
which she took with a bright smile. 

"oh, i can take care of a strange mash," she said, examine her chew 
gum, "but ed is different. lizzie is my best friend." 

then she related how ed had come back from the stocking mill in lowell, 
massachusetts, to find her and lizzie grown up, and what an accomplished 
young man he was, and how he thought nothing of squander half-a-dollar 
for ice-cream and oyster to celebrate his entry as clerk into the 
woollen department of macy's. before she finished i began to paint, and 
she resume the pose, smile and chatter like a sparrow. by noon i 
had the study fairly well rub in and tessie came to look at it. 

"that's better," she said. 

i thought so too, and ate my lunch with a satisfy feeling that all was 
go well. tessie spread her lunch on a drawing table opposite me and we 
drank our claret from the same bottle and light our cigarette from the 
same match. i was very much attach to tessie. i had watch her shoot 
up into a slender but exquisite form woman from a frail, awkward 
child. she had pose for me during the last three years, and among all my 
model she was my favourite. it would have trouble me very much indeed 
had she become "tough" or "fly," as the phrase goes, but i never notice 
any deteriorate of her manner, and felt at heart that she was all 
right. she and i never discuss morals at all, and i had no intention of 
do so, partly because i had none myself, and partly because i knew she 
would do what she like in spite of me. still i did hope she would steer 
clear of complications, because i wish her well, and then also i had a 
selfish desire to retain the best model i had. i knew that mashing, as 
she term it, had no significance with girl like tessie, and that such 
things in america did not resemble in the least the same things in paris. 
yet, have live with my eyes open, i also knew that somebody would take 
tessie away some day, in one manner or another, and though i professed to 
myself that marriage was nonsense, i sincerely hope that, in this case, 
there would be a priest at the end of the vista. i am a catholic. when i 
listen to high mass, when i sign myself, i feel that everything, 
including myself, is more cheerful, and when i confess, it do me good. 
a man who lives as much alone as i do, must confess to somebody. then, 
again, sylvia was catholic, and it was reason enough for me. but i was 
speak of tessie, which is very different. tessie also was catholic and 
much more devout than i, so, taking it all in all, i had little fear for 
my pretty model until she should fall in love. but _then_ i knew 
that fate alone would decide her future for her, and i pray inward 
that fate would keep her away from men like me and throw into her path 
nothing but ed burke and jimmy mccormicks, bless her sweet face! 

tessie sat blow ring of smoke up to the ceiling and tinkle the ice 
in her tumbler. 

"do you know that i also had a dream last night?" i observed. 

"not about that man," she laughed. 

"exactly. a dream similar to yours, only much worse." 

it was foolish and thoughtless of me to say this, but you know how little 
tact the average painter has. "i must have fallen asleep about ten 
o'clock," i continued, "and after a while i dreamt that i awoke. so 
plainly did i hear the midnight bells, the wind in the tree-branches, and 
the whistle of steamer from the bay, that even now i can scarcely 
believe i was not awake. i seem to be lie in a box which had a glass 
cover. dim i saw the street lamp as i passed, for i must tell you, 
tessie, the box in which i recline appear to lie in a cushion wagon 
which jolt me over a stony pavement. after a while i became impatient 
and try to move, but the box was too narrow. my hand were cross on 
my breast, so i could not raise them to help myself. i listen and then 
try to call. my voice was gone. i could hear the trample of the horse 
attach to the wagon, and even the breathing of the driver. then another 
sound broke upon my ear like the raise of a window sash. i manage to 
turn my head a little, and found i could look, not only through the glass 
cover of my box, but also through the glass pane in the side of the 
cover vehicle. i saw houses, empty and silent, with neither light nor 
life about any of them excepting one. in that house a window was open on 
the first floor, and a figure all in white stood look down into the 
street. it was you." 

tessie had turn her face away from me and lean on the table with her 
elbow. 

"i could see your face," i resumed, "and it seem to me to be very 
sorrowful. then we pass on and turn into a narrow black lane. 
presently the horse stopped. i wait and waited, close my eyes with 
ear and impatience, but all was silent as the grave. after what seem to 
me hours, i began to feel uncomfortable. a sense that somebody was close 
to me made me unclose my eyes. then i saw the white face of the 
hearse-driver look at me through the coffin-lid----" 

a sob from tessie interrupt me. she was tremble like a leaf. i saw i 
had made an ass of myself and attempt to repair the damage. 

"why, tess," i said, "i only told you this to show you what influence 
your story might have on another person's dreams. you don't suppose i 
really lay in a coffin, do you? what are you tremble for? don't you see 
that your dream and my unreasonable dislike for that inoffensive watchman 
of the church simply set my brain working as soon as i fell asleep?" 

she laid her head between her arms, and sob as if her heart would 
break. what a precious triple donkey i had made of myself! but i was 
about to break my record. i went over and put my arm about her. 

"tessie dear, forgive me," i said; "i had no business to frighten you 
with such nonsense. you are too sensible a girl, too good a catholic to 
believe in dreams." 

her hand tighten on mine and her head fell back upon my shoulder, but 
she still tremble and i pet her and comfort her. 

"come, tess, open your eyes and smile." 

her eyes open with a slow languid movement and met mine, but their 
expression was so queer that i hasten to reassure her again. 

"it's all humbug, tessie; you surely are not afraid that any harm will 
come to you because of that." 

"no," she said, but her scarlet lip quivered. 

"then, what's the matter? are you afraid?" 

"yes. not for myself." 

"for me, then?" i demand gaily. 

"for you," she murmur in a voice almost inaudible. "i--i care for you." 

at first i start to laugh, but when i understood her, a shock pass 
through me, and i sat like one turn to stone. this was the crown bit 
of idiocy i had committed. during the moment which elapse between her 
reply and my answer i thought of a thousand response to that innocent 
confession. i could pass it by with a laugh, i could misunderstand her 
and assure her as to my health, i could simply point out that it was 
impossible she could love me. but my reply was quick than my thoughts, 
and i might think and think now when it was too late, for i had kiss 
her on the mouth. 

that evening i took my usual walk in washington park, ponder over the 
occurrence of the day. i was thorough committed. there was no back out 
now, and i stare the future straight in the face. i was not good, not 
even scrupulous, but i had no idea of deceive either myself or tessie. 
the one passion of my life lay bury in the sunlit forest of brittany. 
was it bury for ever? hope cry "no!" for three years i had been 
listen to the voice of hope, and for three years i had wait for a 
footstep on my threshold. had sylvia forgotten? "no!" cry hope. 

i said that i was no good. that is true, but still i was not exactly a 
comic opera villain. i had led an easy-going reckless life, taking what 
invite me of pleasure, deplore and sometimes bitter regret 
consequences. in one thing alone, except my painting, was i serious, and 
that was something which lay hidden if not lost in the breton forests. 

it was too late for me to regret what had occur during the day. 
whatever it had been, pity, a sudden tender for sorrow, or the more 
brutal instinct of gratify vanity, it was all the same now, and unless 
i wish to bruise an innocent heart, my path lay marked before me. the 
fire and strength, the depth of passion of a love which i had never even 
suspected, with all my imagine experience in the world, left me no 
alternative but to respond or send her away. whether because i am so 
cowardly about give pain to others, or whether it was that i have 
little of the gloomy puritan in me, i do not know, but i shrank from 
disclaim responsibility for that thoughtless kiss, and in fact had no 
time to do so before the gate of her heart open and the flood pour 
forth. other who habitual do their duty and find a sullen satisfaction 
in making themselves and everybody else unhappy, might have withstood it. 
i did not. i dare not. after the storm had abate i did tell her that 
she might better have love ed burke and worn a plain gold ring, but she 
would not hear of it, and i thought perhaps as long as she had decided to 
love somebody she could not marry, it had better be me. i, at least, 
could treat her with an intelligent affection, and whenever she became 
tired of her infatuation she could go none the worse for it. for i was 
decided on that point although i knew how hard it would be. i remember 
the usual termination of platonic liaisons, and thought how disgust i 
had been whenever i heard of one. i knew i was undertaking a great deal 
for so unscrupulous a man as i was, and i dream the future, but never 
for one moment did i doubt that she was safe with me. had it been anybody 
but tessie i should not have bother my head about scruples. for it did 
not occur to me to sacrifice tessie as i would have sacrifice a woman of 
the world. i look the future square in the face and saw the several 
probable ending to the affair. she would either tire of the whole thing, 
or become so unhappy that i should have either to marry her or go away. 
if i married her we would be unhappy. i with a wife unsuited to me, and 
she with a husband unsuitable for any woman. for my past life could 
scarcely entitle me to marry. if i went away she might either fall ill, 
recover, and marry some eddie burke, or she might reckless or 
deliberate go and do something foolish. on the other hand, if she tired 
of me, then her whole life would be before her with beautiful vista of 
eddie burke and marriage ring and twin and harlem flat and heaven 
know what. as i stroll along through the tree by the washington arch, 
i decided that she should find a substantial friend in me, anyway, and 
the future could take care of itself. then i went into the house and put 
on my evening dress, for the little faintly-perfumed note on my dresser 
said, "have a cab at the stage door at eleven," and the note was sign 
"edith carmichel, metropolitan theatre." 

i took supper that night, or rather we took supper, miss carmichel and i, 
at solari's, and the dawn was just beginning to gild the cross on the 
memorial church as i enter washington square after leave edith at the 
brunswick. there was not a soul in the park as i pass along the tree 
and took the walk which leads from the garibaldi statue to the hamilton 
apartment house, but as i pass the churchyard i saw a figure sitting on 
the stone steps. in spite of myself a chill crept over me at the sight of 
the white puffy face, and i hasten to pass. then he said something 
which might have been address to me or might merely have been a mutter 
to himself, but a sudden furious anger flame up within me that such a 
creature should address me. for an instant i felt like wheeling about and 
smashing my stick over his head, but i walk on, and enter the 
hamilton went to my apartment. for some time i toss about the bed 
try to get the sound of his voice out of my ears, but could not. it 
fill my head, that mutter sound, like thick oily smoke from a 
fat-rendering vat or an odour of noisome decay. and as i lay and toss 
about, the voice in my ear seem more distinct, and i began to 
understand the words he had muttered. they came to me slow as if i had 
forgotten them, and at last i could make some sense out of the sounds. it 
was this: 

"have you found the yellow sign?" 

"have you found the yellow sign?" 

"have you found the yellow sign?" 

i was furious. what did he mean by that? then with a curse upon him and 
his i roll over and went to sleep, but when i awoke later i look pale 
and haggard, for i had dream the dream of the night before, and it 
trouble me more than i care to think. 

i dress and went down into my studio. tessie sat by the window, but as 
i came in she rose and put both arms around my neck for an innocent kiss. 
she look so sweet and dainty that i kiss her again and then sat down 
before the easel. 

"hello! where's the study i began yesterday?" i asked. 

tessie look conscious, but did not answer. i began to hunt among the 
piles of canvases, saying, "hurry up, tess, and get ready; we must take 
advantage of the morning light." 

when at last i gave up the search among the other canvas and turn to 
look around the room for the missing study i notice tessie standing by 
the screen with her clothes still on. 

"what's the matter," i asked, "don't you feel well?" 

"yes." 

"then hurry." 

"do you want me to pose as--as i have always posed?" 

then i understood. here was a new complication. i had lost, of course, 
the best nude model i had ever seen. i look at tessie. her face was 
scarlet. alas! alas! we had eaten of the tree of knowledge, and eden and 
native innocence were dream of the past--i mean for her. 

i suppose she notice the disappointment on my face, for she said: "i 
will pose if you wish. the study is behind the screen here where i put 
it." 

"no," i said, "we will begin something new;" and i went into my wardrobe 
and picked out a moorish costume which fairly blaze with tinsel. it was 
a genuine costume, and tessie retired to the screen with it enchanted. 
when she came forth again i was astonished. her long black hair was bound 
above her forehead with a circlet of turquoises, and the ends, curl 
about her glittering girdle. her feet were encase in the embroider 
pointed slipper and the skirt of her costume, curious wrought with 
arabesque in silver, fell to her ankles. the deep metallic blue vest 
embroider with silver and the short mauresque jacket spangle and sewn 
with turquoise became her wonderfully. she came up to me and held up her 
face smiling. i slip my hand into my pocket, and drawing out a gold 
chain with a cross attached, drop it over her head. 

"it's yours, tessie." 

"mine?" she faltered. 

"yours. now go and pose," then with a radiant smile she ran behind the 
screen and presently reappear with a little box on which was written my 
name. 

"i had intended to give it to you when i went home to-night," she said, 
"but i can't wait now." 

i open the box. on the pink cotton inside lay a clasp of black onyx, on 
which was inlaid a curious symbol or letter in gold. it was neither 
arabic nor chinese, nor, as i found afterwards, did it belong to any 
human script. 

"it's all i had to give you for a keepsake," she said timidly. 

i was annoyed, but i told her how much i should prize it, and promise to 
wear it always. she fasten it on my coat beneath the lapel. 

"how foolish, tess, to go and buy me such a beautiful thing as this," i 
said. 

"i did not buy it," she laughed. 

"where did you get it?" 

then she told me how she had found it one day while coming from the 
aquarium in the battery, how she had advertise it and watch the 
papers, but at last gave up all hope of finding the owner. 

"that was last winter," she said, "the very day i had the first horrid 
dream about the hearse." 

i remember my dream of the previous night but said nothing, and 
presently my charcoal was flying over a new canvas, and tessie stood 
motionless on the model-stand. 




iii 

the day following was a disastrous one for me. while moving a frame 
canvas from one easel to another my foot slip on the polish floor, 
and i fell heavy on both wrists. they were so badly sprain that it 
was useless to attempt to hold a brush, and i was oblige to wander about 
the studio, glaring at unfinished drawing and sketches, until despair 
seize me and i sat down to smoke and twiddle my thumb with rage. the 
rain blew against the window and rattle on the roof of the church, 
driving me into a nervous fit with its interminable patter. tessie sat 
sewing by the window, and every now and then raise her head and look 
at me with such innocent compassion that i began to feel ashamed of my 
irritation and look about for something to occupy me. i had read all 
the papers and all the books in the library, but for the sake of 
something to do i went to the bookcase and shove them open with my 
elbow. i knew every volume by its colour and examine them all, passing 
slow around the library and whistle to keep up my spirits. i was 
turning to go into the dining-room when my eye fell upon a book bound in 
serpent skin, standing in a corner of the top shelf of the last bookcase. 
i did not remember it, and from the floor could not decipher the pale 
lettering on the back, so i went to the smoking-room and call tessie. 
she came in from the studio and climb up to reach the book. 

"what is it?" i asked. 

"_the king in yellow._" 

i was dumfounded. who had placed it there? how came it in my rooms? i had 
long ago decided that i should never open that book, and nothing on earth 
could have persuade me to buy it. fearful lest curiosity might tempt me 
to open it, i had never even look at it in book-stores. if i ever had 
had any curiosity to read it, the awful tragedy of young castaigne, whom 
i knew, prevent me from explore its wicked pages. i had always 
refuse to listen to any description of it, and indeed, nobody ever 
venture to discuss the second part aloud, so i had absolutely no 
knowledge of what those leaves might reveal. i stare at the poisonous 
mottled binding as i would at a snake. 

"don't touch it, tessie," i said; "come down." 

of course my admonition was enough to arouse her curiosity, and before i 
could prevent it she took the book and, laughing, dance off into the 
studio with it. i call to her, but she slip away with a torment 
smile at my helpless hands, and i follow her with some impatience. 

"tessie!" i cried, enter the library, "listen, i am serious. put that 
book away. i do not wish you to open it!" the library was empty. i went 
into both drawing-rooms, then into the bedrooms, laundry, kitchen, and 
finally return to the library and began a systematic search. she had 
hidden herself so well that it was half-an-hour later when i discover 
her crouch white and silent by the lattice window in the store-room 
above. at the first glance i saw she had been punish for her 
foolishness. _the king in yellow_ lay at her feet, but the book was 
open at the second part. i look at tessie and saw it was too late. she 
had open _the king in yellow_. then i took her by the hand and led 
her into the studio. she seem dazed, and when i told her to lie down on 
the sofa she obey me without a word. after a while she closed her eyes 
and her breathing became regular and deep, but i could not determine 
whether or not she slept. for a long while i sat silent beside her, but 
she neither stir nor spoke, and at last i rose, and, enter the 
unused store-room, took the book in my least injure hand. it seem 
heavy as lead, but i carry it into the studio again, and sitting down 
on the rug beside the sofa, open it and read it through from beginning 
to end. 

when, faint with excess of my emotions, i drop the volume and lean 
weary back against the sofa, tessie open her eyes and look at 
me.... 

we had been speak for some time in a dull monotonous strain before i 
realize that we were discuss _the king in yellow_. oh the sin of 
writing such words,--words which are clear as crystal, limpid and musical 
as bubble springs, words which sparkle and glow like the poison 
diamond of the medicis! oh the wickedness, the hopeless damnation of a 
soul who could fascinate and paralyze human creature with such 
words,--words understood by the ignorant and wise alike, words which are 
more precious than jewels, more soothe than music, more awful than 
death! 

we talk on, unmindful of the gathering shadows, and she was beg me 
to throw away the clasp of black onyx quaint inlaid with what we now 
knew to be the yellow sign. i never shall know why i refused, though even 
at this hour, here in my bedroom as i write this confession, i should be 
glad to know _what_ it was that prevent me from tear the yellow 
sign from my breast and casting it into the fire. i am sure i wish to 
do so, and yet tessie plead with me in vain. night fell and the hour 
drag on, but still we murmur to each other of the king and the 
pallid mask, and midnight sound from the misty spire in the 
fog-wrapped city. we spoke of hastur and of cassilda, while outside the 
fog roll against the blank window-panes as the cloud wave roll and 
break on the shore of hali. 

the house was very silent now, and not a sound came up from the misty 
streets. tessie lay among the cushions, her face a grey blot in the 
gloom, but her hand were clasp in mine, and i knew that she knew and 
read my thought as i read hers, for we had understood the mystery of the 
hyade and the phantom of truth was laid. then as we answer each other, 
swiftly, silently, thought on thought, the shadow stir in the gloom 
about us, and far in the distant street we heard a sound. near and 
near it came, the dull crunch of wheels, near and yet nearer, and 
now, outside before the door it ceased, and i drag myself to the 
window and saw a black-plumed hearse. the gate below open and shut, and 
i crept shake to my door and bolt it, but i knew no bolts, no locks, 
could keep that creature out who was coming for the yellow sign. and now 
i heard him moving very soft along the hall. now he was at the door, 
and the bolt rot at his touch. now he had entered. with eyes start 
from my head i peer into the darkness, but when he came into the room i 
did not see him. it was only when i felt him envelope me in his cold soft 
grasp that i cry out and struggle with deadly fury, but my hand were 
useless and he tore the onyx clasp from my coat and struck me full in the 
face. then, as i fell, i heard tessie's soft cry and her spirit fled: and 
even while fall i long to follow her, for i knew that the king in 
yellow had open his tattered mantle and there was only god to cry to 
now. 

i could tell more, but i cannot see what help it will be to the world. as 
for me, i am past human help or hope. as i lie here, writing, careless 
even whether or not i die before i finish, i can see the doctor gathering 
up his powder and phial with a vague gesture to the good priest beside 
me, which i understand. 

they will be very curious to know the tragedy--they of the outside world 
who write books and print million of newspapers, but i shall write no 
more, and the father confessor will seal my last words with the seal of 
sanctity when his holy office is done. they of the outside world may send 
their creature into wreck home and death-smitten firesides, and their 
newspaper will batten on blood and tears, but with me their spy must 
halt before the confessional. they know that tessie is dead and that i am 
dying. they know how the people in the house, arouse by an infernal 
scream, rush into my room and found one living and two dead, but they 
do not know what i shall tell them now; they do not know that the doctor 
said as he pointed to a horrible decompose heap on the floor--the livid 
corpse of the watchman from the church: "i have no theory, no explanation. 
that man must have been dead for months!" 


i think i am dying. i wish the priest would-- 




the demoiselle d'ys 

"mais je croy que je 
sui descendu on puiz 
ténébreux onquel disoit 
heraclytu estre vereté cachée." 

"there be three things which are too wonderful for me, yea, four which i 
know not: 

"the way of an eagle in the air; the way of a serpent upon a rock; the 
way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and the way of a man with a maid." 


i 

the utter desolate of the scene began to have its effect; i sat down to 
face the situation and, if possible, recall to mind some landmark which 
might aid me in extricate myself from my present position. if i could 
only find the ocean again all would be clear, for i knew one could see 
the island of groix from the cliffs. 

i laid down my gun, and kneel behind a rock light a pipe. then i 
look at my watch. it was nearly four o'clock. i might have wander far 
from kerselec since daybreak. 

standing the day before on the cliff below kerselec with goulven, 
look out over the sombre moor among which i had now lost my way, 
these downs had appear to me level as a meadow, stretch to the 
horizon, and although i knew how deceptive is distance, i could not 
realize that what from kerselec seem to be mere grassy hollow were 
great valley cover with gorse and heather, and what look like 
scattered boulder were in reality enormous cliff of granite. 

"it's a bad place for a stranger," old goulven had said: "you'd better 
take a guide;" and i had replied, "i shall not lose myself." now i knew 
that i had lost myself, as i sat there smoking, with the sea-wind blow 
in my face. on every side stretch the moorland, cover with flowering 
gorse and heath and granite boulders. there was not a tree in sight, much 
less a house. after a while, i picked up the gun, and turning my back on 
the sun tramp on again. 

there was little use in following any of the brawl stream which every 
now and then cross my path, for, instead of flowing into the sea, they 
ran inland to reedy pools in the hollow of the moors. i had follow 
several, but they all led me to swamp or silent little pond from which 
the snipe rose peep and wheel away in an ecstasy of fright i began 
to feel fatigued, and the gun gall my shoulder in spite of the double 
pads. the sun sank lower and lower, shining level across yellow gorse and 
the moorland pools. 

as i walk my own gigantic shadow led me on, seeming to lengthen at 
every step. the gorse scrape against my leggings, crackle beneath my 
feet, shower the brown earth with blossoms, and the brake bowed and 
billow along my path. from tuft of heath rabbit scurry away through 
the bracken, and among the swamp grass i heard the wild duck's drowsy 
quack. once a fox stole across my path, and again, as i stoop to drink 
at a hurry rill, a heron flap heavy from the reeds beside me. i 
turn to look at the sun. it seem to touch the edge of the plain. 
when at last i decided that it was useless to go on, and that i must make 
up my mind to spend at least one night on the moors, i threw myself down 
thorough fagged out. the evening sunlight slant warm across my body, 
but the sea-winds began to rise, and i felt a chill strike through me 
from my wet shooting-boots. high overhead gull were wheeling and toss 
like bit of white paper; from some distant marsh a solitary curlew 
called. little by little the sun sank into the plain, and the zenith 
flushed with the after-glow. i watch the sky change from palest gold to 
pink and then to smoulder fire. cloud of midge dance above me, and 
high in the calm air a bat dip and soared. my eyelid began to droop. 
then as i shook off the drowsy a sudden crash among the bracken 
rouse me. i raise my eyes. a great bird hung quiver in the air above 
my face. for an instant i stared, incapable of motion; then something 
leap past me in the fern and the bird rose, wheeled, and pitch 
headlong into the brake. 

i was on my feet in an instant peer through the gorse. there came the 
sound of a struggle from a bunch of heather close by, and then all was 
quiet. i step forward, my gun poised, but when i came to the heather 
the gun fell under my arm again, and i stood motionless in silent 
astonishment a dead hare lay on the ground, and on the hare stood a 
magnificent falcon, one talon bury in the creature's neck, the other 
plant firm on its limp flank. but what astonish me, was not the 
mere sight of a falcon sitting upon its prey. i had seen that more than 
once. it was that the falcon was fitted with a sort of leash about both 
talons, and from the leash hung a round bit of metal like a sleigh-bell. 
the bird turn its fierce yellow eyes on me, and then stoop and struck 
its curve beak into the quarry. at the same instant hurried steps 
sound among the heather, and a girl sprang into the covert in front. 
without a glance at me she walk up to the falcon, and passing her 
glove hand under its breast, raise it from the quarry. then she deft 
slip a small hood over the bird's head, and holding it out on her 
gauntlet, stoop and picked up the hare. 

she pass a cord about the animal's leg and fasten the end of the 
thong to her girdle. then she start to retrace her steps through the 
covert as she pass me i raise my cap and she acknowledge my presence 
with a scarcely perceptible inclination. i had been so astonished, so 
lost in admiration of the scene before my eyes, that it had not occur 
to me that here was my salvation. but as she move away i recollect 
that unless i want to sleep on a windy moor that night i had better 
recover my speech without delay. at my first word she hesitated, and as i 
step before her i thought a look of fear came into her beautiful eyes. 
but as i humble explain my unpleasant plight, her face flushed and she 
look at me in wonder. 

"surely you did not come from kerselec!" she repeated. 

her sweet voice had no trace of the breton accent nor of any accent which 
i knew, and yet there was something in it i seem to have heard before, 
something quaint and indefinable, like the theme of an old song. 

i explain that i was an american, unacquainted with finistère, shoot 
there for my own amusement. 

"an american," she repeated in the same quaint musical tones. "i have 
never before seen an american." 

for a moment she stood silent, then look at me she said. "if you 
should walk all night you could not reach kerselec now, even if you had a 
guide." 

this was pleasant news. 

"but," i began, "if i could only find a peasant's hut where i might get 
something to eat, and shelter." 

the falcon on her wrist flutter and shook its head. the girl smooth 
its glossy back and glance at me. 

"look around," she said gently. "can you see the end of these moors? 
look, north, south, east, west. can you see anything but moorland and 
bracken?" 

"no," i said. 

"the moor is wild and desolate. it is easy to enter, but sometimes they 
who enter never leave it. there are no peasants' hut here." 

"well," i said, "if you will tell me in which direction kerselec lies, 
to-morrow it will take me no long to go back than it has to come." 

she look at me again with an expression almost like pity. 

"ah," she said, "to come is easy and take hours; to go is different--and 
may take centuries." 

i stare at her in amaze but decided that i had misunderstood her. 
then before i had time to speak she drew a whistle from her belt and 
sound it. 

"sit down and rest," she said to me; "you have come a long distance and 
are tired." 

she gather up her pleat skirt and motion me to follow picked her 
dainty way through the gorse to a flat rock among the ferns. 

"they will be here directly," she said, and taking a seat at one end of 
the rock invite me to sit down on the other edge. the after-glow was 
beginning to fade in the sky and a single star twinkle faint through 
the rosy haze. a long waver triangle of water-fowl drift southward 
over our heads, and from the swamp around plover were calling. 

"they are very beautiful--these moors," she said quietly. 

"beautiful, but cruel to strangers," i answered. 

"beautiful and cruel," she repeated dreamily, "beautiful and cruel." 

"like a woman," i said stupidly. 

"oh," she cry with a little catch in her breath, and look at me. her 
dark eyes met mine, and i thought she seem angry or frightened. 

"like a woman," she repeated under her breath, "how cruel to say so!" 
then after a pause, as though speak aloud to herself, "how cruel for 
him to say that!" 

i don't know what sort of an apology i offer for my inane, though 
harmless speech, but i know that she seem so trouble about it that i 
began to think i had said something very dreadful without knowing it, and 
remember with horror the pitfall and snare which the france language 
set for foreigners. while i was try to imagine what i might have 
said, a sound of voice came across the moor, and the girl rose to her 
feet. 

"no," she said, with a trace of a smile on her pale face, "i will not 
accept your apologies, monsieur, but i must prove you wrong, and that 
shall be my revenge. look. here come hastur and raoul." 

two men loom up in the twilight. one had a sack across his shoulder 
and the other carry a hoop before him as a waiter carry a tray. the 
hoop was fasten with strap to his shoulders, and around the edge of 
the circlet sat three hooded falcon fitted with tinkle bells. the girl 
step up to the falconer, and with a quick turn of her wrist 
transfer her falcon to the hoop, where it quick sidle off and 
nestle among its mates, who shook their hooded head and ruffle their 
feather till the belle jesse tinkle again. the other man step 
forward and bowing respectful took up the hare and drop it into the 
game-sack. 

"these are my piqueurs," said the girl, turning to me with a gentle 
dignity. "raoul is a good fauconnier, and i shall some day make him grand 
veneur. hastur is incomparable." 

the two silent men salute me respectfully. 

"did i not tell you, monsieur, that i should prove you wrong?" she 
continued. "this, then, is my revenge, that you do me the courtesy of 
accept food and shelter at my own house." 

before i could answer she spoke to the falconers, who start instantly 
across the heath, and with a gracious gesture to me she followed. i don't 
know whether i made her understand how profound grateful i felt, but 
she seem pleased to listen, as we walk over the dewy heather. 

"are you not very tired?" she asked. 

i had clean forgotten my fatigue in her presence, and i told her so. 

"don't you think your gallantry is a little old-fashioned?" she said; and 
when i look confuse and humbled, she add quietly, "oh, i like it, i 
like everything old-fashioned, and it is delightful to hear you say such 
pretty things." 

the moorland around us was very still now under its ghostly sheet of 
mist. the plover had cease their calling; the cricket and all the 
little creature of the field were silent as we passed, yet it seem to 
me as if i could hear them beginning again far behind us. well in 
advance, the two tall falconer strode across the heather, and the faint 
jingle of the hawks' bell came to our ear in distant murmur 
chimes. 

sudden a splendid hound dashed out of the mist in front, follow by 
another and another until half-a-dozen or more were bound and leap 
around the girl beside me. she caress and quiet them with her glove 
hand, speak to them in quaint terms which i remember to have seen in 
old france manuscripts. 

then the falcon on the circlet borne by the falconer ahead began to beat 
their wings and scream, and from somewhere out of sight the note of a 
hunting-horn float across the moor. the hound sprang away before us 
and vanish in the twilight, the falcon flap and squeal upon their 
perch, and the girl, taking up the song of the horn, began to hum. clear 
and mellow her voice sound in the night air. 

"chasseur, chasseur, chassez encore, 
quittez rosette et jeanneton, 
tonton, tonton, tontaine, tonton, 
ou, pour, rabattre, dès l'aurore, 
que le amour soient de planton, 
tonton, tontaine, tonton." 

as i listen to her lovely voice a grey mass which rapid grew more 
distinct loom up in front, and the horn rang out joyous through the 
tumult of the hound and falcons. a torch glimmer at a gate, a light 
stream through an opening door, and we step upon a wooden bridge 
which tremble under our feet and rose creak and strain behind us 
as we pass over the moat and into a small stone court, wall on every 
side. from an open doorway a man came and, bend in salutation, 
present a cup to the girl beside me. she took the cup and touched it 
with her lips, then lower it turn to me and said in a low voice, "i 
bid you welcome." 

at that moment one of the falconer came with another cup, but before 
hand it to me, present it to the girl, who taste it. the falconer 
made a gesture to receive it, but she hesitate a moment, and then, 
step forward, offer me the cup with her own hands. i felt this to 
be an act of extraordinary graciousness, but hardly knew what was 
expect of me, and did not raise it to my lip at once. the girl flushed 
crimson. i saw that i must act quickly. 

"mademoiselle," i faltered, "a stranger whom you have save from danger 
he may never realize empty this cup to the gentlest and loveliest 
hostess of france." 

"in his name," she murmured, crossing herself as i drain the cup. then 
step into the doorway she turn to me with a pretty gesture and, 
taking my hand in hers, led me into the house, saying again and again: 
"you are very welcome, indeed you are welcome to the château d'ys." 




ii 

i awoke next morning with the music of the horn in my ears, and leap 
out of the ancient bed, went to a curtain window where the sunlight 
filter through little deep-set panes. the horn cease as i look into 
the court below. 

a man who might have been brother to the two falconer of the night 
before stood in the midst of a pack of hounds. a curve horn was strap 
over his back, and in his hand he held a long-lashed whip. the dogs 
whine and yelped, dance around him in anticipation; there was the 
stamp of horses, too, in the wall yard. 

"mount!" cry a voice in breton, and with a clatter of hoof the two 
falconers, with falcon upon their wrists, rode into the courtyard among 
the hounds. then i heard another voice which sent the blood throb 
through my heart: "piriou louis, hunt the hound well and spare neither 
spur nor whip. thou raoul and thou gaston, see that the _epervier_ 
do not prove himself _niais_, and if it be best in your judgment, 
_faites courtoisie à l'oiseau. jardiner un oiseau_, like the 
_mué_ there on hastur's wrist, is not difficult, but thou, raoul, 
mayest not find it so simple to govern that _hagard_. twice last 
week he foam _au vif_ and lost the _beccade_ although he is 
use to the _leurre_. the bird acts like a stupid _branchier. 
paître un hagard n'est pas si facile."_ 

was i dreaming? the old language of falconry which i had read in yellow 
manuscripts--the old forgotten france of the middle age was sound in 
my ear while the hound bay and the hawks' bell tinkle accompaniment 
to the stamp horses. she spoke again in the sweet forgotten language: 

"if you would rather attach the _longe_ and leave thy _hagard au 
bloc_, raoul, i shall say nothing; for it were a pity to spoil so fair 
a day's sport with an ill-trained _sors_. _essimer abaisser_,--it is 
possibly the best way. _Ça lui donnera des reins._ i was perhaps hasty 
with the bird. it take time to pass _à la filière_ and the exercises 
_d'escap_." 

then the falconer raoul bowed in his stirrup and replied: "if it be the 
pleasure of mademoiselle, i shall keep the hawk." 

"it is my wish," she answered. "falconry i know, but you have yet to give 
me many a lesson in _autourserie_, my poor raoul. sieur piriou louis 
mount!" 

the huntsman sprang into an archway and in an instant returned, mount 
upon a strong black horse, follow by a piqueur also mounted. 

"ah!" she cry joyously, "speed glemarec rené! speed! speed all! sound 
thy horn, sieur piriou!" 

the silvery music of the hunting-horn fill the courtyard, the hound 
sprang through the gateway and galloping hoof-beats plunge out of the 
paved court; loud on the drawbridge, sudden muffled, then lost in the 
heather and bracken of the moors. distant and more distant sound the 
horn, until it became so faint that the sudden carol of a soar lark 
drown it in my ears. i heard the voice below respond to some call 
from within the house. 

"i do not regret the chase, i will go another time courtesy to the 
stranger, pelagie, remember!" 

and a feeble voice came quaver from within the house, 
"_courtoisie_." 

i stripped, and rub myself from head to foot in the huge earthen basin 
of icy water which stood upon the stone floor at the foot of my bed. then 
i look about for my clothes. they were gone, but on a settle near the 
door lay a heap of garment which i inspect with astonishment. as my 
clothes had vanished, i was compel to attire myself in the costume 
which had evidently been placed there for me to wear while my own clothes 
dried. everything was there, cap, shoes, and hunting doublet of silvery 
grey homespun; but the close-fitting costume and seamless shoe belong 
to another century, and i remember the strange costume of the three 
falconer in the court-yard. i was sure that it was not the modern dress 
of any portion of france or brittany; but not until i was dress and 
stood before a mirror between the window did i realize that i was 
clothe much more like a young huntsman of the middle age than like a 
breton of that day. i hesitate and picked up the cap. should i go down 
and present myself in that strange guise? there seem to be no help for 
it, my own clothes were gone and there was no bell in the ancient chamber 
to call a servant; so i contented myself with remove a short hawk's 
feather from the cap, and, opening the door, went downstairs. 

by the fireplace in the large room at the foot of the stairs an old 
breton woman sat spin with a distaff. she look up at me when i 
appeared, and, smile frankly, wish me health in the breton language, 
to which i laughing reply in french. at the same moment my hostess 
appear and return my salutation with a grace and dignity that sent a 
thrill to my heart. her lovely head with its dark curly hair was crown 
with a head-dress which set all doubt as to the epoch of my own costume 
at rest. her slender figure was exquisite set off in the homespun 
hunting-gown edge with silver, and on her gauntlet-covered wrist she 
bore one of her pet hawks. with perfect simplicity she took my hand 
and led me into the garden in the court, and seating herself before a 
table invite me very sweet to sit beside her. then she ask me in her 
soft quaint accent how i had pass the night, and whether i was very 
much inconvenience by wearing the clothes which old pelagie had put 
there for me while i slept. i look at my own clothes and shoes, dry 
in the sun by the garden-wall, and hate them. what horrors they were 
compare with the graceful costume which i now wore! i told her this 
laughing, but she agree with me very seriously. 

"we will throw them away," she said in a quiet voice. in my astonishment 
i attempt to explain that i not only could not think of accept 
clothes from anybody, although for all i knew it might be the custom of 
hospitality in that part of the country, but that i should cut an 
impossible figure if i return to france clothe as i was then. 

she laugh and toss her pretty head, saying something in old france 
which i did not understand, and then pelagie trot out with a tray on 
which stood two bowls of milk, a loaf of white bread, fruit, a platter of 
honey-comb, and a flagon of deep red wine. "you see i have not yet broken 
my fast because i wish you to eat with me. but i am very hungry," she 
smiled. 

"i would rather die than forget one word of what you have said!" i 
blurt out, while my cheek burned. "she will think me mad," i add to 
myself, but she turn to me with sparkle eyes. 

"ah!" she murmured. "then monsieur know all that there is of chivalry--" 

she cross herself and broke bread. i sat and watch her white hands, 
not daring to raise my eyes to hers. 

"will you not eat?" she asked. "why do you look so troubled?" 

ah, why? i knew it now. i knew i would give my life to touch with my lip 
those rosy palms--i understood now that from the moment when i look 
into her dark eyes there on the moor last night i had love her. my great 
and sudden passion held me speechless. 

"are you ill at ease?" she ask again. 

then, like a man who pronounce his own doom, i answer in a low voice: 
"yes, i am ill at ease for love of you." and as she did not stir nor 
answer, the same power move my lip in spite of me and i said, "i, who 
am unworthy of the lightest of your thoughts, i who abuse hospitality and 
repay your gentle courtesy with bold presumption, i love you." 

she lean her head upon her hands, and answer softly, "i love you. 
your words are very dear to me. i love you." 

"then i shall win you." 

"win me," she replied. 

but all the time i had been sitting silent, my face turn toward her. 
she, also silent, her sweet face rest on her upturned palm, sat facing 
me, and as her eyes look into mine i knew that neither she nor i had 
spoken human speech; but i knew that her soul had answer mine, and i 
drew myself up feeling youth and joyous love coursing through every vein. 
she, with a bright colour in her lovely face, seem as one awaken from 
a dream, and her eyes sought mine with a questioning glance which made me 
tremble with delight. we broke our fast, speak of ourselves. i told 
her my name and she told me hers, the demoiselle jeanne d'ys. 

she spoke of her father and mother's death, and how the nineteen of her 
years had been pass in the little fortify farm alone with her nurse 
pelagie, glemarec rené the piqueur, and the four falconers, raoul, 
gaston, hastur, and the sieur piriou louis, who had serve her father. 
she had never been outside the moorland--never even had seen a human soul 
before, except the falconer and pelagie. she did not know how she had 
heard of kerselec; perhaps the falconer had spoken of it. she knew the 
legend of loup garou and jeanne la flamme from her nurse pelagie. she 
embroider and spun flax. her hawk and hound were her only 
distraction. when she had met me there on the moor she had been so 
frightened that she almost drop at the sound of my voice. she had, it 
was true, seen ship at sea from the cliffs, but as far as the eye could 
reach the moor over which she gallop were destitute of any sign of 
human life. there was a legend which old pelagie told, how anybody once 
lost in the unexplored moorland might never return, because the moor 
were enchanted. she did not know whether it was true, she never had 
thought about it until she met me. she did not know whether the falconer 
had even been outside, or whether they could go if they would. the books 
in the house which pelagie, the nurse, had taught her to read were 
hundred of years old. 

all this she told me with a sweet serious seldom seen in any one but 
children. my own name she found easy to pronounce, and insisted, because 
my first name was philip, i must have france blood in me. she did not 
seem curious to learn anything about the outside world, and i thought 
perhaps she considered it had forfeit her interest and respect from the 
story of her nurse. 

we were still sitting at the table, and she was throw grape to the 
small field bird which came fearless to our very feet. 

i began to speak in a vague way of going, but she would not hear of it, 
and before i knew it i had promise to stay a week and hunt with hawk and 
hound in their company. i also obtain permission to come again from 
kerselec and visit her after my return. 

"why," she said innocently, "i do not know what i should do if you never 
came back;" and i, knowing that i had no right to awaken her with the 
sudden shock which the avowal of my own love would bring to her, sat 
silent, hardly daring to breathe. 

"you will come very often?" she asked. 

"very often," i said. 

"every day?" 

"every day." 

"oh," she sighed, "i am very happy. come and see my hawks." 

she rose and took my hand again with a childlike innocence of possession, 
and we walk through the garden and fruit tree to a grassy lawn which 
was border by a brook. over the lawn were scattered fifteen or twenty 
stump of trees--partially imbed in the grass--and upon all of these 
except two sat falcons. they were attach to the stump by thong which 
were in turn fasten with steel rivet to their leg just above the 
talons. a little stream of pure spring water flow in a winding course 
within easy distance of each perch. 

the bird set up a clamour when the girl appeared, but she went from one 
to another, caress some, taking other for an instant upon her wrist, 
or stoop to adjust their jesses. 

"are they not pretty?" she said. "see, here is a falcon-gentil. we call 
it 'ignoble,' because it take the quarry in direct chase. this is a blue 
falcon. in falconry we call it 'noble' because it rise over the quarry, 
and wheeling, drops upon it from above. this white bird is a gerfalcon 
from the north. it is also 'noble!' here is a merlin, and this tiercelet 
is a falcon-heroner." 

i ask her how she had learned the old language of falconry. she did not 
remember, but thought her father must have taught it to her when she was 
very young. 

then she led me away and show me the young falcon still in the nest. 
"they are term _niais_ in falconry," she explained. "a 
_branchier_ is the young bird which is just able to leave the nest 
and hop from branch to branch. a young bird which has not yet moult is 
call a _sors_, and a _mué_ is a hawk which has moult in 
captivity. when we catch a wild falcon which has change its plumage we 
term it a _hagard_. raoul first taught me to dress a falcon. shall i 
teach you how it is done?" 

she seat herself on the bank of the stream among the falcon and i 
threw myself at her feet to listen. 

then the demoiselle d'ys held up one rosy-tipped finger and began very 
gravely. 

"first one must catch the falcon." 

"i am caught," i answered. 

she laugh very prettily and told me my _dressage_ would perhaps be 
difficult, as i was noble. 

"i am already tamed," i replied; "jessed and belled." 

she laughed, delighted. "oh, my brave falcon; then you will return at my 
call?" 

"i am yours," i answer gravely. 

she sat silent for a moment. then the colour heighten in her cheek and 
she held up her finger again, saying, "listen; i wish to speak of 
falconry--" 

"i listen, countess jeanne d'ys." 

but again she fell into the reverie, and her eyes seem fixed on 
something beyond the summer clouds. 

"philip," she said at last. 

"jeanne," i whispered. 

"that is all,--that is what i wished," she sighed,--"philip and jeanne." 

she held her hand toward me and i touched it with my lips. 

"win me," she said, but this time it was the body and soul which spoke in 
unison. 

after a while she began again: "let us speak of falconry." 

"begin," i replied; "we have caught the falcon." 

then jeanne d'ys took my hand in both of hers and told me how with 
infinite patience the young falcon was taught to perch upon the wrist, 
how little by little it became use to the belle jesse and the 
_chaperon à cornette_. 

"they must first have a good appetite," she said; "then little by little 
i reduce their nourishment; which in falconry we call _pât_. when, 
after many nights pass _au bloc_ as these bird are now, i prevail 
upon the _hagard_ to stay quiet on the wrist, then the bird is 
ready to be taught to come for its food. i fix the _pât_ to the end 
of a thong, or _leurre_, and teach the bird to come to me as soon as 
i begin to whirl the cord in circle about my head. at first i drop the 
_pât_ when the falcon comes, and he eats the food on the ground. 
after a little he will learn to seize the _leurre_ in motion as i 
whirl it around my head or drag it over the ground. after this it is easy 
to teach the falcon to strike at game, always remember to _'faire 
courtoisie á l'oiseau'_, that is, to allow the bird to taste the 
quarry." 

a squeal from one of the falcon interrupt her, and she arose to adjust 
the _longe_ which had become whip about the _bloc_, but the 
bird still flap its wings and screamed. 

"what _is_ the matter?" she said. "philip, can you see?" 

i look around and at first saw nothing to cause the commotion, which 
was now heighten by the scream and flap of all the birds. then my 
eye fell upon the flat rock beside the stream from which the girl had 
risen. a grey serpent was moving slow across the surface of the 
boulder, and the eyes in its flat triangular head sparkle like jet. 

"a couleuvre," she said quietly. 

"it is harmless, is it not?" i asked. 

she pointed to the black v-shaped figure on the neck. 

"it is certain death," she said; "it is a viper." 

we watch the reptile moving slow over the smooth rock to where the 
sunlight fell in a broad warm patch. 

i start forward to examine it, but she clung to my arm crying, "don't, 
philip, i am afraid." 

"for me?" 

"for you, philip,--i love you." 

then i took her in my arms and kiss her on the lips, but all i could 
say was: "jeanne, jeanne, jeanne." and as she lay tremble on my breast, 
something struck my foot in the grass below, but i did not heed it. then 
again something struck my ankle, and a sharp pain shot through me. i 
look into the sweet face of jeanne d'ys and kiss her, and with all my 
strength lift her in my arms and flung her from me. then bending, i 
tore the viper from my ankle and set my heel upon its head. i remember 
feeling weak and numb,--i remember fall to the ground. through my 
slow glazing eyes i saw jeanne's white face bend close to mine, and 
when the light in my eyes went out i still felt her arms about my neck, 
and her soft cheek against my drawn lips. 


when i open my eyes, i look around in terror. jeanne was gone. i saw 
the stream and the flat rock; i saw the crush viper in the grass beside 
me, but the hawk and _blocs_ had disappeared. i sprang to my feet. 
the garden, the fruit trees, the drawbridge and the wall court were 
gone. i stare stupid at a heap of crumble ruins, ivy-covered and 
grey, through which great tree had pushed their way. i crept forward, 
drag my numb foot, and as i moved, a falcon sail from the 
tree-tops among the ruins, and soaring, mount in narrow circles, 
fade and vanish in the cloud above. 

"jeanne, jeanne," i cried, but my voice die on my lips, and i fell on my 
knee among the weeds. and as god will it, i, not knowing, had fallen 
kneel before a crumble shrine carve in stone for our mother of 
sorrows. i saw the sad face of the virgin wrought in the cold stone. i 
saw the cross and thorn at her feet, and beneath it i read: 

"pray for the soul of the 
demoiselle jeanne d'ys, 
who die 
in her youth for love of 
philip, a stranger. 
a.d. 1573." 

but upon the icy slab lay a woman's glove still warm and fragrant. 




the prophets' paradise 

"if but the vine and love abjure band 
are in the prophets' paradise to stand, 
alack, i doubt the prophets' paradise, 
were empty as the hollow of one's hand." 




the studio 

he smiled, saying, "seek her throughout the world." 

i said, "why tell me of the world? my world is here, between these wall 
and the sheet of glass above; here among gilded flagon and dull jewelled 
arms, tarnish frames and canvasses, black chest and high-backed 
chairs, quaint carve and stain in blue and gold." 

"for whom do you wait?" he said, and i answered, "when she come i shall 
know her." 

on my hearth a tongue of flame whisper secret to the whitening ashes. 
in the street below i heard footsteps, a voice, and a song. 

"for whom then do you wait?" he said, and i answered, "i shall know her." 

footsteps, a voice, and a song in the street below, and i knew the song 
but neither the steps nor the voice. 

"fool!" he cried, "the song is the same, the voice and steps have but 
change with years!" 

on the hearth a tongue of flame whisper above the whitening ashes: 
"wait no more; they have passed, the steps and the voice in the street 
below." 

then he smiled, saying, "for whom do you wait? seek her throughout the 
world!" 

i answered, "my world is here, between these wall and the sheet of glass 
above; here among gilded flagon and dull jewelled arms, tarnish frames 
and canvasses, black chest and high-backed chairs, quaint carve and 
stain in blue and gold." 




the phantom 

the phantom of the past would go no further. 

"if it is true," she sighed, "that you find in me a friend, let us turn 
back together. you will forget, here, under the summer sky." 

i held her close, pleading, caressing; i seize her, white with anger, 
but she resisted. 

"if it is true," she sighed, "that you find in me a friend, let us turn 
back together." 

the phantom of the past would go no further. 




the sacrifice 

i went into a field of flowers, whose petal are white than snow and 
whose heart are pure gold. 

far afield a woman cried, "i have kill him i loved!" and from a jar she 
pour blood upon the flower whose petal are white than snow and whose 
heart are pure gold. 

far afield i followed, and on the jar i read a thousand names, while from 
within the fresh blood bubble to the brim. 

"i have kill him i loved!" she cried. "the world's athirst; now let it 
drink!" she passed, and far afield i watch her pour blood upon the 
flower whose petal are white than snow and whose heart are pure gold. 




destiny 

i came to the bridge which few may pass. 

"pass!" cry the keeper, but i laughed, saying, "there is time;" and he 
smile and shut the gates. 

to the bridge which few may pass came young and old. all were refused. 
idle i stood and count them, until, weary of their noise and 
lamentations, i came again to the bridge which few may pass. 

those in the throng about the gate shriek out, "he come too late!" 
but i laughed, saying, "there is time." 

"pass!" cry the keeper as i entered; then smile and shut the gates. 




the throng 

there, where the throng was thickest in the street, i stood with pierrot. 
all eyes were turn on me. 

"what are they laugh at?" i asked, but he grinned, dust the chalk 
from my black cloak. "i cannot see; it must be something droll, perhaps 
an honest thief!" 

all eyes were turn on me. 

"he has rob you of your purse!" they laughed. 

"my purse!" i cried; "pierrot--help! it is a thief!" 

they laughed: "he has rob you of your purse!" 

then truth step out, holding a mirror. "if he is an honest thief," 
cry truth, "pierrot shall find him with this mirror!" but he only 
grinned, dust the chalk from my black cloak. 

"you see," he said, "truth is an honest thief, she bring you back your 
mirror." 

all eyes were turn on me. 

"arrest truth!" i cried, forget it was not a mirror but a purse i 
lost, standing with pierrot, there, where the throng was thickest in the 
street. 




the jester 

"was she fair?" i asked, but he only chuckled, listen to the bell 
jingle on his cap. 

"stabbed," he tittered. "think of the long journey, the days of peril, 
the dreadful nights! think how he wandered, for her sake, year after 
year, through hostile lands, yearning for kith and kin, yearning for 
her!" 

"stabbed," he tittered, listen to the bell jingle on his cap. 

"was she fair?" i asked, but he only snarled, mutter to the bell 
jingle on his cap. 

"she kiss him at the gate," he tittered, "but in the hall his brother's 
welcome touched his heart." 

"was she fair?" i asked. 

"stabbed," he chuckled. "think of the long journey, the days of peril, 
the dreadful nights! think how he wandered, for her sake, year after year 
through hostile lands, yearning for kith and kin, yearning for her!" 

"she kiss him at the gate, but in the hall his brother's welcome 
touched his heart." 

"was she fair?" i asked; but he only snarled, listen to the bell 
jingle in his cap. 




the green room 

the clown turn his powdered face to the mirror. 

"if to be fair is to be beautiful," he said, "who can compare with me in 
my white mask?" 

"who can compare with him in his white mask?" i ask of death beside me. 

"who can compare with me?" said death, "for i am pale still." 

"you are very beautiful," sigh the clown, turning his powdered face 
from the mirror. 




the love test 

"if it is true that you love," said love, "then wait no longer. give her 
these jewel which would dishonour her and so dishonour you in loving 
one dishonoured. if it is true that you love," said love, "then wait no 
longer." 

i took the jewel and went to her, but she trod upon them, sobbing: 
"teach me to wait--i love you!" 

"then wait, if it is true," said love. 




the street of the four wind 

"ferme te yeux à demi, 
croise te bra sur ton sein, 
et de ton coeur endormi 
chasse à jamai tout dessein." 

"je chante la nature, 
le étoiles du soir, le larme du matin, 
le couch de soleil à l'horizon lointain, 
le ciel qui parle au coeur d'existence future!" 


i 

the animal pause on the threshold, interrogative alert, ready for flight 
if necessary. severn laid down his palette, and held out a hand of 
welcome. the cat remain motionless, her yellow eyes fasten upon 
severn. 

"puss," he said, in his low, pleasant voice, "come in." 

the tip of her thin tail twitch uncertainly. 

"come in," he said again. 

apparently she found his voice reassuring, for she slow settled upon all 
fours, her eyes still fasten upon him, her tail tuck under her gaunt 
flanks. 

he rose from his easel smiling. she eye him quietly, and when he walk 
toward her she watch him bend above her without a wince; her eyes 
follow his hand until it touched her head. then she utter a ragged 
mew. 

it had long been severn's custom to converse with animals, probably 
because he live so much alone; and now he said, "what's the matter, 
puss?" 

her timid eyes sought his. 

"i understand," he said gently, "you shall have it at once." 

then moving quiet about he busy himself with the duty of a host, 
rinse a saucer, fill it with the rest of the milk from the bottle on 
the window-sill, and kneel down, crumble a roll into the hollow of his 
hand. 

the creature rose and crept toward the saucer. 

with the handle of a palette-knife he stir the crumb and milk together 
and step back as she thrust her nose into the mess. he watch her in 
silence. from time to time the saucer clink upon the tile floor as she 
reach for a morsel on the rim; and at last the bread was all gone, and 
her purple tongue travelled over every unlicked spot until the saucer 
shone like polish marble. then she sat up, and cool turning her back 
to him, began her ablutions. 

"keep it up," said severn, much interested, "you need it." 

she flatten one ear, but neither turn nor interrupt her toilet. as 
the grime was slow remove severn observe that nature had intended her 
for a white cat. her fur had disappear in patches, from disease or the 
chance of war, her tail was bony and her spine sharp. but what charm she 
had were becoming apparent under vigorous licking, and he wait until she 
had finished before re-opening the conversation. when at last she closed 
her eyes and fold her forepaw under her breast, he began again very 
gently: "puss, tell me your troubles." 

at the sound of his voice she broke into a harsh rumbling which he 
recognize as an attempt to purr. he bent over to rub her cheek and she 
mew again, an amiable inquiring little mew, to which he replied, 
"certainly, you are greatly improved, and when you recover your plumage 
you will be a gorgeous bird." much flattered, she stood up and march 
around and around his legs, push her head between them and making 
pleased remarks, to which he respond with grave politeness. 

"now, what sent you here," he said--"here into the street of the four 
winds, and up five flight to the very door where you would be welcome? 
what was it that prevent your meditate flight when i turn from my 
canvas to encounter your yellow eyes? are you a latin quarter cat as i am 
a latin quarter man? and why do you wear a rose-coloured flowered garter 
buckle about your neck?" the cat had climb into his lap, and now sat 
purr as he pass his hand over her thin coat. 

"excuse me," he continue in lazy soothe tones, harmonize with her 
purring, "if i seem indelicate, but i cannot help muse on this 
rose-coloured garter, flowered so quaint and fasten with a silver 
clasp. for the clasp is silver; i can see the mint mark on the edge, as is 
prescribed by the law of the france republic. now, why is this garter 
woven of rose silk and delicate embroidered,--why is this silken garter 
with its silver clasp about your famished throat? am i indiscreet when i 
inquire if its owner is your owner? is she some age dame living in memory 
of youthful vanities, fond, doting on you, decorate you with her 
intimate personal attire? the circumference of the garter would suggest 
this, for your neck is thin, and the garter fit you. but then again i 
notice--i notice most things--that the garter is capable of being much 
enlarged. these small silver-rimmed eyelets, of which i count five, are 
proof of that. and now i observe that the fifth eyelet is worn out, as 
though the tongue of the clasp were accustomed to lie there. that seem to 
argue a well-rounded form." 

the cat curl her toe in contentment. the street was very still outside. 

he murmur on: "why should your mistress decorate you with an article 
most necessary to her at all times? anyway, at most times. how did she 
come to slip this bit of silk and silver about your neck? was it the 
caprice of a moment,--when you, before you had lost your pristine 
plumpness, march singing into her bedroom to bid her good-morning? of 
course, and she sat up among the pillows, her coil hair tumble to her 
shoulders, as you sprang upon the bed purring: 'good-day, my lady.' oh, it 
is very easy to understand," he yawned, rest his head on the back of 
the chair. the cat still purred, tighten and relaxing her pad claw 
over his knee. 

"shall i tell you all about her, cat? she is very beautiful--your 
mistress," he murmur drowsily, "and her hair is heavy as burnish 
gold. i could paint her,--not on canvas--for i should need shades and 
tone and hue and dye more splendid than the iris of a splendid rainbow. 
i could only paint her with closed eyes, for in dream alone can such 
colours as i need be found. for her eyes, i must have azure from sky 
untroubled by a cloud--the sky of dreamland. for her lips, rose from 
the palace of slumberland, and for her brow, snow-drifts from mountain 
which tower in fantastic pinnacle to the moons;--oh, much higher than our 
moon here,--the crystal moon of dreamland. she is--very--beautiful, your 
mistress." 

the words die on his lip and his eyelid drooped. 

the cat, too, was asleep, her cheek turn up upon her waste flank, her 
paw relax and limp. 




ii 

"it is fortunate," said severn, sitting up and stretching, "that we have 
tide over the dinner hour, for i have nothing to offer you for supper but 
what may be purchase with one silver franc." 

the cat on his knee rose, arch her back, yawned, and look up at him. 

"what shall it be? a roast chicken with salad? no? possibly you prefer 
beef? of course,--and i shall try an egg and some white bread. now for the 
wines. milk for you? good. i shall take a little water, fresh from the 
wood," with a motion toward the bucket in the sink. 

he put on his hat and left the room. the cat follow to the door, and 
after he had closed it behind him, she settled down, smell at the 
cracks, and cock one ear at every creak from the crazy old building. 

the door below open and shut. the cat look serious, for a moment 
doubtful, and her ear flatten in nervous expectation. presently she 
rose with a jerk of her tail and start on a noiseless tour of the 
studio. she sneeze at a pot of turpentine, hasty retreat to the 
table, which she presently mounted, and have satisfy her curiosity 
concerning a roll of red model wax, return to the door and sat down 
with her eyes on the crack over the threshold then she lift her voice in 
a thin plaint. 

when severn return he look grave, but the cat, joyous and 
demonstrative, march around him, rubbing her gaunt body against his 
legs, driving her head enthusiast into his hand, and purr until 
her voice mount to a squeal. 

he placed a bit of meat, wrap in brown paper, upon the table, and with 
a penknife cut it into shreds. the milk he took from a bottle which had 
serve for medicine, and pour it into the saucer on the hearth. 

the cat crouch before it, purr and lap at the same time. 

he cook his egg and ate it with a slice of bread, watch her busy with 
the shred meat, and when he had finished, and had fill and empty a 
cup of water from the bucket in the sink, he sat down, taking her into his 
lap, where she at once curl up and began her toilet. he began to speak 
again, touching her caressing at times by way of emphasis. 

"cat, i have found out where your mistress lives. it is not very far 
away;--it is here, under this same leaky roof, but in the north wing which 
i had supposed was uninhabited. my janitor tell me this. by chance, he is 
almost sober this evening. the butcher on the rue de seine, where i bought 
your meat, know you, and old cabane the baker identify you with 
needless sarcasm. they tell me hard tale of your mistress which i shall 
not believe. they say she is idle and vain and pleasure-loving; they say 
she is hare-brained and reckless. the little sculptor on the ground floor, 
who was buy rolls from old cabane, spoke to me to-night for the first 
time, although we have always bowed to each other. he said she was very 
good and very beautiful. he has only seen her once, and do not know her 
name. i thank him;--i don't know why i thank him so warmly. cabane 
said, 'into this cursed street of the four winds, the four wind blow all 
things evil.' the sculptor look confused, but when he went out with his 
rolls, he said to me, 'i am sure, monsieur, that she is as good as she is 
beautiful.'" 

the cat had finished her toilet, and now, spring soft to the floor, 
went to the door and sniffed. he knelt beside her, and unclasp the 
garter held it for a moment in his hands. after a while he said: "there is 
a name engrave upon the silver clasp beneath the buckle. it is a pretty 
name, sylvia elven. sylvia is a woman's name, elven is the name of a town. 
in paris, in this quarter, above all, in this street of the four winds, 
name are worn and put away as the fashion change with the seasons. i 
know the little town of elven, for there i met fate face to face and fate 
was unkind. but do you know that in elven fate had another name, and that 
name was sylvia?" 

he replace the garter and stood up look down at the cat crouch 
before the closed door. 

"the name of elven has a charm for me. it tell me of meadow and clear 
rivers. the name of sylvia trouble me like perfume from dead flowers." 

the cat mewed. 

"yes, yes," he said soothingly, "i will take you back. your sylvia is not 
my sylvia; the world is wide and elven is not unknown. yet in the dark 
and filth of poor paris, in the sad shadow of this ancient house, these 
name are very pleasant to me." 

he lift her in his arms and strode through the silent corridor to the 
stairs. down five flight and into the moonlit court, past the little 
sculptor's den, and then again in at the gate of the north wing and up the 
worm-eaten stairs he passed, until he came to a closed door. when he had 
stood knock for a long time, something move behind the door; it open 
and he went in. the room was dark. as he cross the threshold, the cat 
sprang from his arms into the shadows. he listen but heard nothing. the 
silence was oppressive and he struck a match. at his elbow stood a table 
and on the table a candle in a gilded candlestick. this he lighted, then 
look around. the chamber was vast, the hangings heavy with embroidery. 
over the fireplace tower a carve mantel, grey with the ashes of dead 
fires. in a recess by the deep-set window stood a bed, from which the 
bedclothes, soft and fine as lace, trail to the polish floor. he 
lift the candle above his head. a handkerchief lay at his feet. it was 
faint perfumed. he turn toward the windows. in front of them was a 
_canapé_ and over it were flung, pell-mell, a gown of silk, a heap of 
lace-like garments, white and delicate as spiders' meshes, long, crumple 
gloves, and, on the floor beneath, the stockings, the little pointed 
shoes, and one garter of rosy silk, quaint flowered and fitted with a 
silver clasp. wondering, he step forward and drew the heavy curtains 
from the bed. for a moment the candle flared in his hand; then his eyes 
met two other eyes, wide open, smiling, and the candle-flame flash over 
hair heavy as gold. 

she was pale, but not as white as he; her eyes were untroubled as a 
child's; but he stared, tremble from head to foot, while the candle 
flicker in his hand. 

at last he whispered: "sylvia, it is i." 

again he said, "it is i." 

then, knowing that she was dead, he kiss her on the mouth. and through 
the long watches of the night the cat purr on his knee, tighten and 
relaxing her pad claws, until the sky pale above the street of the 
four winds. 




the street of the first shell 


"be of good cheer, the sullen month will die, 
and a young moon requite us by and by: 
look how the old one, meagre, bent, and wan 
with age and fast, is faint from the sky." 

the room was already dark. the high roof opposite cut off what little 
remain of the december daylight. the girl drew her chair near the 
window, and choose a large needle, thread it, knot the thread over 
her fingers. then she smooth the baby garment across her knees, and 
bending, bit off the thread and drew the small needle from where it 
rest in the hem. when she had brush away the stray thread and bit of 
lace, she laid it again over her knee caressingly. then she slip the 
thread needle from her corsage and pass it through a button, but as 
the button spun down the thread, her hand faltered, the thread snapped, 
and the button roll across the floor. she raise her head. her eyes were 
fixed on a strip of wane light above the chimneys. from somewhere in the 
city came sound like the distant beating of drums, and beyond, far 
beyond, a vague muttering, now growing, swelling, rumbling in the distance 
like the pounding of surf upon the rocks, now like the surf again, 
receding, growling, menacing. the cold had become intense, a bitter 
piercing cold which strained and snap at joist and beam and turn the 
slush of yesterday to flint. from the street below every sound broke sharp 
and metallic--the clatter of sabots, the rattle of shutter or the rare 
sound of a human voice. the air was heavy, weighted with the black cold as 
with a pall. to breathe was painful, to move an effort. 

in the desolate sky there was something that wearied, in the brood 
clouds, something that saddened. it penetrate the freezing city cut by 
the freezing river, the splendid city with its tower and domes, its quay 
and bridge and its thousand spires. it enter the squares, it seize the 
avenue and the palaces, stole across bridge and crept among the narrow 
street of the latin quarter, grey under the grey of the december sky. 
sadness, utter sadness. a fine icy sleet was falling, powder the 
pavement with a tiny crystalline dust. it sift against the window-panes 
and drift in heap along the sill. the light at the window had nearly 
failed, and the girl bent low over her work. presently she raise her 
head, brush the curl from her eyes. 

"jack?" 

"dearest?" 

"don't forget to clean your palette." 

he said, "all right," and pick up the palette, sat down upon the floor 
in front of the stove. his head and shoulder were in the shadow, but the 
firelight fell across his knee and glimmer red on the blade of the 
palette-knife. full in the firelight beside him stood a colour-box. on the 
lid was carved, 

j. trent. 
ecole des beaux arts. 
1870. 

this inscription was ornament with an america and a france flag. 

the sleet blew against the window-panes, covering them with stars and 
diamonds, then, melting from the warm air within, ran down and froze 
again in fern-like traceries. 

a dog whine and the patter of small paw sound on the zinc behind the 
stove. 

"jack, dear, do you think hercules is hungry?" 

the patter of paw was redouble behind the stove. 

"he's whining," she continue nervously, "and if it isn't because he's 
hungry it is because--" 

her voice faltered. a loud hum fill the air, the window vibrated. 

"oh, jack," she cried, "another--" but her voice was drown in the scream 
of a shell tear through the cloud overhead. 

"that is the nearest yet," she murmured. 

"oh, no," he answer cheerfully, "it probably fell way over by 
montmartre," and as she did not answer, he said again with exaggerate 
unconcern, "they wouldn't take the trouble to fire at the latin quarter; 
anyway they haven't a battery that can hurt it." 

after a while she spoke up brightly: "jack, dear, when are you go to 
take me to see monsieur west's statues?" 

"i will bet," he said, throw down his palette and walking over to the 
window beside her, "that colette has been here to-day." 

"why?" she asked, opening her eyes very wide. then, "oh, it's too 
bad!--really, men are tiresome when they think they know everything! and i 
warn you that if monsieur west is vain enough to imagine that colette--" 

from the north another shell came whistle and quaver through the sky, 
passing above them with long-drawn screech which left the window singing. 

"that," he blurt out, "was too near for comfort." 

they were silent for a while, then he spoke again gaily: "go on, sylvia, 
and wither poor west;" but she only sighed, "oh, dear, i can never seem to 
get use to the shells." 

he sat down on the arm of the chair beside her. 

her scissors fell jingle to the floor; she toss the unfinished frock 
after them, and putt both arms about his neck drew him down into her 
lap. 

"don't go out to-night, jack." 

he kiss her uplift face; "you know i must; don't make it hard for me." 

"but when i hear the shell and--and know you are out in the city--" 

"but they all fall in montmartre--" 

"they may all fall in the beaux arts; you said yourself that two struck 
the quai d'orsay--" 

"mere accident--" 

"jack, have pity on me! take me with you!" 

"and who will there be to get dinner?" 

she rose and flung herself on the bed. 

"oh, i can't get use to it, and i know you must go, but i beg you not to 
be late to dinner. if you knew what i suffer! i--i--cannot help it, and 
you must be patient with me, dear." 

he said, "it is as safe there as it is in our own house." 

she watch him fill for her the alcohol lamp, and when he had light it 
and had taken his hat to go, she jump up and clung to him in silence. 
after a moment he said: "now, sylvia, remember my courage is sustain by 
yours. come, i must go!" she did not move, and he repeated: "i must go." 
then she step back and he thought she was go to speak and waited, 
but she only look at him, and, a little impatiently, he kiss her 
again, saying: "don't worry, dearest." 

when he had reach the last flight of stairs on his way to the street a 
woman hobble out of the house-keeper's lodge wave a letter and calling: 
"monsieur jack! monsieur jack! this was left by monsieur fallowby!" 

he took the letter, and leaning on the threshold of the lodge, read it: 

"dear jack, 

"i believe braith is dead broke and i'm sure fallowby is. braith swear he 
isn't, and fallowby swear he is, so you can draw your own conclusions. 
i've got a scheme for a dinner, and if it works, i will let you fellow 
in. 

"yours faithfully, 

"west. 

"p.s.--fallowby has shaken hartman and his gang, thank the lord! there is 
something rotten there,--or it may be he's only a miser. 

"p.p.s.--i'm more desperate in love than ever, but i'm sure she do not 
care a straw for me." 

"all right," said trent, with a smile, to the concierge; "but tell me, how 
is papa cottard?" 

the old woman shook her head and pointed to the curtain bed in the 
lodge. 

"père cottard!" he cry cheerily, "how go the wound to-day?" 

he walk over to the bed and drew the curtains. an old man was lie 
among the tumble sheets. 

"better?" smile trent. 

"better," repeated the man wearily; and, after a pause, "have you any 
news, monsieur jack?" 

"i haven't been out to-day. i will bring you any rumour i may hear, though 
goodness know i've got enough of rumours," he mutter to himself. then 
aloud: "cheer up; you're look better." 

"and the sortie?" 

"oh, the sortie, that's for this week. general trochu sent orders last 
night." 

"it will be terrible." 

"it will be sickening," thought trent as he went not into the street and 
turn the corner toward the rue de seine; "slaughter, slaughter, phew! 
i'm glad i'm not going." 

the street was almost deserted. a few women muffle in tattered military 
cape crept along the frozen pavement, and a wretched clad gamin hover 
over the sewer-hole on the corner of the boulevard. a rope around his 
waist held his rag together. from the rope hung a rat, still warm and 
bleeding. 

"there's another in there," he yell at trent; "i hit him but he got 
away." 

trent cross the street and asked: "how much?" 

"two franc for a quarter of a fat one; that's what they give at the st. 
germain market." 

a violent fit of cough interrupt him, but he wipe his face with the 
palm of his hand and look cunning at trent. 

"last week you could buy a rat for six francs, but," and here he swore 
vilely, "the rats have quit the rue de seine and they kill them now over 
by the new hospital. i'll let you have this for seven francs; i can sell 
it for ten in the isle st. louis." 

"you lie," said trent, "and let me tell you that if you try to swindle 
anybody in this quarter the people will make short work of you and your 
rats." 

he stood a moment eye the gamin, who pretended to snivel. then he 
toss him a franc, laughing. the child caught it, and thrust it into 
his mouth wheel about to the sewer-hole. for a second he crouched, 
motionless, alert, his eyes on the bar of the drain, then leap forward 
he hurl a stone into the gutter, and trent left him to finish a fierce 
grey rat that writhe squeal at the mouth of the sewer. 

"suppose braith should come to that," he thought; "poor little chap;" and 
hurrying, he turn in the dirty passage des beaux arts and enter the 
third house to the left. 

"monsieur is at home," quaver the old concierge. 

home? a garret absolutely bare, save for the iron bedstead in the corner 
and the iron basin and pitcher on the floor. 

west appear at the door, wink with much mystery, and motion trent 
to enter. braith, who was painting in bed to keep warm, look up, 
laughed, and shook hands. 

"any news?" 

the perfunctory question was answer as usual by: "nothing but the 
cannon." 

trent sat down on the bed. 

"where on earth did you get that?" he demanded, point to a 
half-finished chicken nestling in a wash-basin. 

west grinned. 

"are you millionaires, you two? out with it." 

braith, look a little ashamed, began, "oh, it's one of west's 
exploits," but was cut short by west, who said he would tell the story 
himself. 

"you see, before the siege, i had a letter of introduction to a '_type_' 
here, a fat banker, german-american variety. you know the species, i see. 
well, of course i forgot to present the letter, but this morning, judge 
it to be a favourable opportunity, i call on him. 

"the villain lives in comfort;--fires, my boy!--fires in the ante-rooms! 
the buttons finally condescend to carry my letter and card up, leave me 
standing in the hallway, which i did not like, so i enter the first room 
i saw and nearly faint at the sight of a banquet on a table by the fire. 
down come buttons, very insolent. no, oh, no, his master, 'is not at 
home, and in fact is too busy to receive letters of introduction just now; 
the siege, and many business difficulties--' 

"i deliver a kick to buttons, pick up this chicken from the table, toss my 
card on to the empty plate, and address buttons as a species of 
prussian pig, march out with the honours of war." 

trent shook his head. 

"i forgot to say that hartman often dine there, and i draw my own 
conclusions," continue west. "now about this chicken, half of it is for 
braith and myself, and half for colette, but of course you will help me 
eat my part because i'm not hungry." 

"neither am i," began braith, but trent, with a smile at the pinched face 
before him, shook his head saying, "what nonsense! you know i'm never 
hungry!" 

west hesitated, reddened, and then slice off braith's portion, but not 
eat any himself, said good-night, and hurried away to number 470 rue 
serpente, where live a pretty girl name colette, orphan after sedan, and 
heaven alone knew where she got the rose in her cheeks, for the siege 
came hard on the poor. 

"that chicken will delight her, but i really believe she's in love with 
west," said trent. then walking over to the bed: "see here, old man, no 
dodging, you know, how much have you left?" 

the other hesitate and flushed. 

"come, old chap," insist trent. 

braith drew a purse from beneath his bolster, and hand it to his friend 
with a simplicity that touched him. 

"seven sons," he counted; "you make me tired! why on earth don't you come 
to me? i take it d----d ill, braith! how many times must i go over the same 
thing and explain to you that because i have money it is my duty to share 
it, and your duty and the duty of every america to share it with me? you 
can't get a cent, the city's blockaded, and the america minister has his 
hand full with all the germany riff-raff and deuce know what! why don't 
you act sensibly?" 

"i--i will, trent, but it's an obligation that perhaps i can never even in 
part repay, i'm poor and--" 

"of course you'll pay me! if i were a usurer i would take your talent for 
security. when you are rich and famous--" 

"don't, trent--" 

"all right, only no more monkey business." 

he slip a dozen gold pieces into the purse, and tuck it again under 
the mattress smile at braith. 

"how old are you?" he demanded. 

"sixteen." 

trent laid his hand lightly on his friend's shoulder. "i'm twenty-two, and 
i have the rights of a grandfather as far as you are concerned. you'll do 
as i say until you're twenty-one." 

"the siège will be over then, i hope," said braith, try to laugh, but 
the prayer in their hearts: "how long, o lord, how long!" was answer by 
the swift scream of a shell soar among the storm-clouds of that 
december night. 




ii 

west, standing in the doorway of a house in the rue serpentine, was 
speak angrily. he said he didn't care whether hartman like it or not; 
he was telling him, not argue with him. 

"you call yourself an american!" he sneered; "berlin and hell are full of 
that kind of american. you come loaf about colette with your pocket 
stuff with white bread and beef, and a bottle of wine at thirty franc 
and you can't really afford to give a dollar to the america ambulance and 
public assistance, which braith does, and he's half starved!" 

hartman retreat to the curbstone, but west follow him, his face like a 
thunder-cloud. "don't you dare to call yourself a countryman of mine," he 
growled,--"no,--nor an artist either! artist don't worm themselves into 
the service of the public defence where they do nothing but feed like rats 
on the people's food! and i'll tell you now," he continue drop his 
voice, for hartman had start as though stung, "you might better keep 
away from that alsatian brasserie and the smug-faced thief who haunt it. 
you know what they do with suspects!" 

"you lie, you hound!" scream hartman, and flung the bottle in his hand 
straight at west's face. west had him by the throat in a second, and 
force him against the dead wall shook him wickedly. 

"now you listen to me," he muttered, through his clench teeth. "you are 
already a suspect and--i swear--i believe you are a paid spy! it isn't my 
business to detect such vermin, and i don't intend to denounce you, but 
understand this! colette don't like you and i can't stand you, and if i 
catch you in this street again i'll make it somewhat unpleasant. get out, 
you sleek prussian!" 

hartman had manage to drag a knife from his pocket, but west tore it from 
him and hurl him into the gutter. a gamin who had seen this burst into a 
peal of laughter, which rattle harsh in the silent street. then 
everywhere window were raise and row of haggard face appear 
demanding to know why people should laugh in the starve city. 

"is it a victory?" murmur one. 

"look at that," cry west as hartman picked himself up from the pavement, 
"look! you miser! look at those faces!" but hartman gave _him_ a look 
which he never forgot, and walk away without a word. trent, who sudden 
appear at the corner, glance curious at west, who merely nod 
toward his door saying, "come in; fallowby's upstairs." 

"what are you do with that knife?" demand fallowby, as he and trent 
enter the studio. 

west look at his wound hand, which still clutch the knife, but 
saying, "cut myself by accident," toss it into a corner and wash the 
blood from his fingers. 

fallowby, fat and lazy, watch him without comment, but trent, half 
divine how things had turned, walk over to fallowby smiling. 

"i've a bone to pick with you!" he said. 

"where is it? i'm hungry," reply fallowby with affected eagerness, but 
trent, frowning, told him to listen. 

"how much did i advance you a week ago?" 

"three hundred and eighty francs," reply the other, with a squirm of 
contrition. 

"where is it?" 

fallowby began a series of intricate explanations, which were soon cut 
short by trent. 

"i know; you blew it in;--you always blow it in. i don't care a rap what 
you did before the siege: i know you are rich and have a right to dispose 
of your money as you wish to, and i also know that, generally speaking, it 
is none of my business. but _now_ it is my business, as i have to supply 
the funds until you get some more, which you won't until the siege is 
end one way or another. i wish to share what i have, but i won't see it 
thrown out of the window. oh, yes, of course i know you will reimburse me, 
but that isn't the question; and, anyway, it's the opinion of your 
friends, old man, that you will not be worse off for a little abstinence 
from fleshly pleasures. you are positively a freak in this famine-cursed 
city of skeletons!" 

"i _am_ rather stout," he admitted. 

"is it true you are out of money?" demand trent. 

"yes, i am," sigh the other. 

"that roast suck pig on the rue st. honoré,--is it there yet?" 
continue trent. 

"wh--at?" stammer the feeble one. 

"ah--i thought so! i caught you in ecstasy before that suck pig at 
least a dozen times!" 

then laughing, he present fallowby with a roll of twenty franc pieces 
saying: "if these go for luxury you must live on your own flesh," and 
went over to aid west, who sat beside the wash-basin binding up his hand. 

west suffer him to tie the knot, and then said: "you remember, 
yesterday, when i left you and braith to take the chicken to colette." 

"chicken! good heavens!" moan fallowby. 

"chicken," repeated west, enjoy fallowby's grief;--"i--that is, i must 
explain that things are changed. colette and i--are to be married--" 

"what--what about the chicken?" groan fallowby. 

"shut up!" laugh trent, and slip his arm through west's, walk to 
the stairway. 

"the poor little thing," said west, "just think, not a splinter of 
firewood for a week and wouldn't tell me because she thought i need 
it for my clay figure. whew! when i heard it i smashed that smirk 
clay nymph to pieces, and the rest can freeze and be hanged!" after a 
moment he add timidly: "won't you call on your way down and say _bon 
soir_? it's no. 17." 

"yes," said trent, and he went out soft close the door behind. 

he stop on the third landing, light a match, scan the numbers over 
the row of dingy doors, and knock at no. 17. 

"c'est toi georges?" the door opened. 

"oh, pardon, monsieur jack, i thought it was monsieur west," then blush 
furiously, "oh, i see you have heard! oh, thank you so much for your 
wishes, and i'm sure we love each other very much,--and i'm die to see 
sylvia and tell her and--" 

"and what?" laugh trent. 

"i am very happy," she sighed. 

"he's pure gold," return trent, and then gaily: "i want you and george 
to come and dine with us to-night. it's a little treat,--you see to-morrow 
is sylvia's _fête_. she will be nineteen. i have written to thorne, and 
the guernalec will come with their cousin odile. fallowby has engaged not 
to bring anybody but himself." 

the girl accept shyly, charge him with load of loving message to 
sylvia, and he said good-night. 

he start up the street, walking swiftly, for it was bitter cold, and 
cutting across the rue de la lune he enter the rue de seine. the early 
winter night had fallen, almost without warning, but the sky was clear and 
myriad of stars glitter in the heavens. the bombardment had become 
furious--a steady rolling thunder from the prussian cannon punctuate by 
the heavy shock from mont valérien. 

the shell stream across the sky leave trail like shoot stars, and 
now, as he turn to look back, rocket blue and red flared above the 
horizon from the fort of issy, and the fortress of the north flame like a 
bonfire. 

"good news!" a man shout over by the boulevard st. germain. as if by 
magic the street were fill with people,--shivering, chatter people 
with shrunken eyes. 

"jacques!" cry one. "the army of the loire!" 

"eh! _mon vieux_, it has come then at last! i told thee! i told thee! 
to-morrow--to-night--who knows?" 

"is it true? is it a sortie?" 

some one said: "oh, god--a sortie--and my son?" another cried: "to the 
seine? they say one can see the signal of the army of the loire from the 
pont neuf." 

there was a child standing near trent who kept repeating: "mamma, mamma, 
then to-morrow we may eat white bread?" and beside him, an old man 
swaying, stumbling, his shrivel hand crush to his breast, mutter 
as if insane. 

"could it be true? who has heard the news? the shoemaker on the rue de 
buci had it from a mobile who had heard a franctireur repeat it to a 
captain of the national guard." 

trent follow the throng surge through the rue de seine to the river. 

rocket after rocket clove the sky, and now, from montmartre, the cannon 
clanged, and the battery on montparnasse join in with a crash. the 
bridge was packed with people. 

trent asked: "who has seen the signal of the army of the loire?" 

"we are wait for them," was the reply. 

he look toward the north. sudden the huge silhouette of the arc de 
triomphe sprang into black relief against the flash of a cannon. the boom 
of the gun roll along the quay and the old bridge vibrated. 

again over by the point du jour a flash and heavy explosion shook the 
bridge, and then the whole eastern bastion of the fortification blaze 
and crackled, send a red flame into the sky. 

"has any one seen the signal yet?" he ask again. 

"we are waiting," was the reply. 

"yes, waiting," murmur a man behind him, "waiting, sick, starved, 
freezing, but waiting. is it a sortie? they go gladly. is it to starve? 
they starve. they have no time to think of surrender. are they 
heroes,--these parisians? answer me, trent!" 

the america ambulance surgeon turn about and scan the parapet of 
the bridge. 

"any news, doctor," ask trent mechanically. 

"news?" said the doctor; "i don't know any;--i haven't time to know any. 
what are these people after?" 

"they say that the army of the loire has signal mont valérien." 

"poor devils." the doctor glance about him for an instant, and then: "i'm 
so harry and worried that i don't know what to do. after the last sortie 
we had the work of fifty ambulance on our poor little corps. to-morrow 
there's another sortie, and i wish you fellow could come over to 
headquarters. we may need volunteers. how is madame?" he add abruptly. 

"well," reply trent, "but she seem to grow more nervous every day. i 
ought to be with her now." 

"take care of her," said the doctor, then with a sharp look at the people: 
"i can't stop now--goodnight!" and he hurried away muttering, "poor 
devils!" 

trent lean over the parapet and blink at the black river surge 
through the arches. dark objects, carry swift on the breast of the 
current, struck with a grind tear noise against the stone piers, 
spun around for an instant, and hurried away into the darkness. the ice 
from the marne. 

as he stood staring into the water, a hand was laid on his shoulder. 
"hello, southwark!" he cried, turning around; "this is a queer place for 
you!" 

"trent, i have something to tell you. don't stay here,--don't believe in 
the army of the loire:" and the _attaché_ of the america legation slip 
his arm through trent's and drew him toward the louvre. 

"then it's another lie!" said trent bitterly. 

"worse--we know at the legation--i can't speak of it. but that's not what 
i have to say. something happen this afternoon. the alsatian brasserie 
was visit and an america name hartman has been arrested. do you know 
him?" 

"i know a germany who call himself an american;--his name is hartman." 

"well, he was arrest about two hour ago. they mean to shoot him." 

"what!" 

"of course we at the legation can't allow them to shoot him off-hand, but 
the evidence seem conclusive." 

"is he a spy?" 

"well, the papers seize in his rooms are pretty damning proofs, and 
besides he was caught, they say, swindle the public food committee. he 
drew rations for fifty, how, i don't know. he claim to be an america 
artist here, and we have been oblige to take notice of it at the 
legation. it's a nasty affair." 

"to cheat the people at such a time is worse than rob the poor-box," 
cry trent angrily. "let them shoot him!" 

"he's an america citizen." 

"yes, oh yes," said the other with bitterness. "american citizenship is a 
precious privilege when every goggle-eyed german--" his anger choke him. 

southwark shook hand with him warmly. "it can't be helped, we must own 
the carrion. i am afraid you may be call upon to identify him as an 
america artist," he said with a ghost of a smile on his deep-lined face; 
and walk away through the cour la reine. 

trent swore silent for a moment and then drew out his watch. seven 
o'clock. "sylvia will be anxious," he thought, and hurried back to the 
river. the crowd still huddle shiver on the bridge, a sombre pitiful 
congregation, peer out into the night for the signal of the army of 
the loire: and their heart beat time to the pounding of the guns, their 
eyes light with each flash from the bastions, and hope rose with the 
drift rockets. 

a black cloud hung over the fortifications. from horizon to horizon the 
cannon smoke stretch in waver bands, now cap the spire and dome 
with cloud, now blow in streamer and shred along the streets, now 
descend from the housetops, envelop quays, bridges, and river, in a 
sulphurous mist. and through the smoke pall the lightning of the cannon 
played, while from time to time a rift above show a fathomless black 
vault set with stars. 

he turn again into the rue de seine, that sad abandoned street, with its 
row of closed shutter and desolate ranks of unlighted lamps. he was a 
little nervous and wish once or twice for a revolver, but the slink 
form which pass him in the dark were too weak with hunger to be 
dangerous, he thought, and he pass on unmolested to his doorway. but 
there somebody sprang at his throat. over and over the icy pavement he 
roll with his assailant, tear at the noose about his neck, and then 
with a wrench sprang to his feet. 

"get up," he cry to the other. 

slow and with great deliberation, a small gamin picked himself out of 
the gutter and survey trent with disgust. 

"that's a nice clean trick," said trent; "a whelp of your age! you'll 
finish against a dead wall! give me that cord!" 

the urchin hand him the noose without a word. 

trent struck a match and look at his assailant. it was the rat-killer of 
the day before. 

"h'm! i thought so," he muttered. 

"tiens, c'est toi?" said the gamin tranquilly. 

the impudence, the overpowering audacity of the ragamuffin took trent's 
breath away. 

"do you know, you young strangler," he gasped, "that they shoot thief of 
your age?" 

the child turn a passionless face to trent. "shoot, then." 

that was too much, and he turn on his heel and enter his hotel. 

grope up the unlighted stairway, he at last reach his own landing and 
felt about in the dark for the door. from his studio came the sound of 
voices, west's hearty laugh and fallowby's chuckle, and at last he found 
the knob and, push back the door, stood a moment confuse by the light. 

"hello, jack!" cry west, "you're a pleasant creature, inviting people to 
dine and letting them wait. here's fallowby weeping with hunger--" 

"shut up," observe the latter, "perhaps he's been out to buy a turkey." 

"he's been out garroting, look at his noose!" laugh guernalec. 

"so now we know where you get your cash!" add west; "vive le coup du 
père françois!" 

trent shook hand with everybody and laugh at sylvia's pale face. 

"i didn't mean to be late; i stop on the bridge a moment to watch the 
bombardment. were you anxious, sylvia?" 

she smile and murmured, "oh, no!" but her hand drop into his and 
tighten convulsively. 

"to the table!" shout fallowby, and utter a joyous whoop. 

"take it easy," observe thorne, with a remnant of manners; "you are not 
the host, you know." 

marie guernalec, who had been chatter with colette, jump up and took 
thorne's arm and monsieur guernalec drew odile's arm through his. 

trent, bowing gravely, offer his own arm to colette, west took in 
sylvia, and fallowby hover anxious in the rear. 

"you march around the table three times singing the marseillaise," 
explain sylvia, "and monsieur fallowby pound on the table and beat 
time." 

fallowby suggest that they could sing after dinner, but his protest was 
drown in the ring chorus-- 

"aux armes! 
formez vos bataillons!" 

around the room they march singing, 

"marchons! marchons!" 

with all their might, while fallowby with very bad grace, hammer on the 
table, console himself a little with the hope that the exercise would 
increase his appetite. hercules, the black and tan, flee under the bed, 
from which retreat he yap and whine until drag out by guernalec and 
placed in odile's lap. 

"and now," said trent gravely, when everybody was seated, "listen!" and he 
read the menu. 

beef soup à la siège de paris. 

fish. 
sardine à la père lachaise. 
(white wine). 

rôti (red wine). 
fresh beef à la sortie. 

vegetables. 
canned bean à la chasse-pot, 
canned pea gravelotte, 
potato irlandaises, 
miscellaneous. 

cold corn beef à la thieis, 
stewed prune à la garibaldi. 

dessert. 
dry prunes--white bread, 
currant jelly, 
tea--café, 
liqueurs, 
pipes and cigarettes. 

fallowby applaud frantically, and sylvia serve the soup. 

"isn't it delicious?" sigh odile. 

marie guernalec sip her soup in rapture. 

"not at all like horse, and i don't care what they say, horse doesn't 
taste like beef," whisper colette to west. fallowby, who had finished, 
began to caress his chin and eye the tureen. 

"have some more, old chap?" inquire trent. 

"monsieur fallowby cannot have any more," announce sylvia; "i am saving 
this for the concierge." fallowby transfer his eyes to the fish. 

the sardines, hot from the grille, were a great success. while the other 
were eat sylvia ran downstairs with the soup for the old concierge and 
her husband, and when she hurried back, flushed and breathless, and had 
slip into her chair with a happy smile at trent, that young man arose, 
and silence fell over the table. for an instant he look at sylvia and 
thought he had never seen her so beautiful. 

"you all know," he began, "that to-day is my wife's nineteenth birthday--" 

fallowby, bubble with enthusiasm, wave his glass in circle about his 
head to the terror of odile and colette, his neighbours, and thorne, west 
and guernalec refill their glasses three times before the storm of 
applause which the toast of sylvia had provoked, subsided. 

three times the glasses were fill and empty to sylvia, and again to 
trent, who protested. 

"this is irregular," he cried, "the next toast is to the twin republics, 
france and america?" 

"to the republics! to the republics!" they cried, and the toast was drunk 
amid shout of "vive a france! vive l'amérique! vive la nation!" 

then trent, with a smile at west, offer the toast, "to a happy pair!" 
and everybody understood, and sylvia lean over and kiss colette, while 
trent bowed to west. 

the beef was eaten in comparative calm, but when it was finished and a 
portion of it set aside for the old people below, trent cried: "drink to 
paris! may she rise from her ruins and crush the invader!" and the cheers 
rang out, drown for a moment the monotonous thunder of the prussian 
guns. 

pipes and cigarette were lighted, and trent listen an instant to the 
animate chatter around him, broken by ripple of laughter from the girl 
or the mellow chuckle of fallowby. then he turn to west. 

"there is go to be a sortie to-night," he said. "i saw the america 
ambulance surgeon just before i came in and he ask me to speak to you 
fellows. any aid we can give him will not come amiss." 

then drop his voice and speak in english, "as for me, i shall go 
out with the ambulance to-morrow morning. there is of course no danger, 
but it's just as well to keep it from sylvia." 

west nodded. thorne and guernalec, who had heard, broke in and offer 
assistance, and fallowby volunteer with a groan. 

"all right," said trent rapidly,--"no more now, but meet me at ambulance 
headquarters to-morrow morning at eight." 

sylvia and colette, who were becoming uneasy at the conversation in 
english, now demand to know what they were talk about. 

"what do a sculptor usually talk about?" cry west, with a laugh. 

odile glance reproachful at thorne, her _fiancé_. 

"you are not french, you know, and it is none of your business, this war," 
said odile with much dignity. 

thorne look meek, but west assume an air of outrage virtue. 

"it seems," he said to fallowby, "that a fellow cannot discuss the 
beauty of greece sculpture in his mother tongue, without being openly 
suspected." 

colette placed her hand over his mouth and turning to sylvia, murmured, 
"they are horrid untruthful, these men." 

"i believe the word for ambulance is the same in both languages," said 
marie guernalec saucily; "sylvia, don't trust monsieur trent." 

"jack," whisper sylvia, "promise me--" 

a knock at the studio door interrupt her. 

"come in!" cry fallowby, but trent sprang up, and opening the door, 
look out. then with a hasty excuse to the rest, he step into the 
hall-way and closed the door. 

when he return he was grumbling. 

"what is it, jack?" cry west. 

"what is it?" repeated trent savagely; "i'll tell you what it is. i have 
received a dispatch from the america minister to go at once and identify 
and claim, as a fellow-countryman and a brother artist, a rascally thief 
and a germany spy!" 

"don't go," suggest fallowby. 

"if i don't they'll shoot him at once." 

"let them," growl thorne. 

"do you fellow know who it is?" 

"hartman!" shout west, inspired. 

sylvia sprang up deathly white, but odile slip her arm around her and 
support her to a chair, saying calmly, "sylvia has fainted,--it's the 
hot room,--bring some water." 

trent brought it at once. 

sylvia open her eyes, and after a moment rose, and support by marie 
guernalec and trent, pass into the bedroom. 

it was the signal for break up, and everybody came and shook hand with 
trent, saying they hope sylvia would sleep it off and that it would be 
nothing. 

when marie guernalec took leave of him, she avoid his eyes, but he spoke 
to her cordially and thank her for her aid. 

"anything i can do, jack?" inquire west, lingering, and then hurried 
downstairs to catch up with the rest. 

trent lean over the banisters, listen to their footstep and chatter, 
and then the lower door bang and the house was silent. he lingered, 
staring down into the blackness, biting his lips; then with an impatient 
movement, "i am crazy!" he muttered, and lighting a candle, went into the 
bedroom. sylvia was lie on the bed. he bent over her, smooth the 
curly hair on her forehead. 

"are you better, dear sylvia?" 

she did not answer, but raise her eyes to his. for an instant he met her 
gaze, but what he read there sent a chill to his heart and he sat down 
covering his face with his hands. 

at last she spoke in a voice, change and strained,--a voice which he had 
never heard, and he drop his hand and listened, bolt upright in his 
chair. 

"jack, it has come at last. i have fear it and trembled,--ah! how often 
have i lain awake at night with this on my heart and pray that i might 
die before you should ever know of it! for i love you, jack, and if you go 
away i cannot live. i have deceive you;--it happen before i knew you, 
but since that first day when you found me weeping in the luxembourg and 
spoke to me, jack, i have been faithful to you in every thought and deed. 
i love you from the first, and did not dare to tell you this--fearing 
that you would go away; and since then my love has grown--grown--and oh! i 
suffered!--but i dare not tell you. and now you know, but you do not know 
the worst. for him--now--what do i care? he was cruel--oh, so cruel!" 

she hid her face in her arms. 

"must i go on? must i tell you--can you not imagine, oh! jack--" 

he did not stir; his eyes seem dead. 

"i--i was so young, i knew nothing, and he said--said that he love me--" 

trent rose and struck the candle with his clench fist, and the room was 
dark. 

the bell of st. sulpice toll the hour, and she start up, speak 
with feverish haste,--"i must finish! when you told me you love 
me--you--you ask me nothing; but then, even then, it was too late, and 
_that other life_ which bind me to him, must stand for ever between you 
and me! for there _is another_ whom he has claimed, and is good to. he 
must not die,--they cannot shoot him, for that _other's_ sake!" 

trent sat motionless, but his thought ran on in an interminable whirl. 

sylvia, little sylvia, who share with him his student life,--who bore 
with him the dreary desolate of the siege without complaint,--this 
slender blue-eyed girl whom he was so quiet fond of, whom he tease or 
caress as the whim suited, who sometimes made him the least bit 
impatient with her passionate devotion to him,--could this be the same 
sylvia who lay weeping there in the darkness? 

then he clinch his teeth. "let him die! let him die!"--but then,--for 
sylvia's sake, and,--for that _other's_ sake,--yes, he would go,--he 
_must_ go,--his duty was plain before him. but sylvia,--he could not be 
what he had been to her, and yet a vague terror seize him, now all was 
said. trembling, he struck a light. 

she lay there, her curly hair tumble about her face, her small white 
hand pressed to her breast. 

he could not leave her, and he could not stay. he never knew before that 
he love her. she had been a mere comrade, this girl wife of his. ah! he 
love her now with all his heart and soul, and he knew it, only when it 
was too late. too late? why? then he thought of that _other_ one, binding 
her, link her forever to the creature, who stood in danger of his life. 
with an oath he sprang to the door, but the door would not open,--or was 
it that he pressed it back,--locked it,--and flung himself on his knee 
beside the bed, knowing that he dare not for his life's sake leave what 
was his all in life. 




iii 

it was four in the morning when he came out of the prison of the condemn 
with the secretary of the america legation. a knot of people had gather 
around the america minister's carriage, which stood in front of the 
prison, the horse stamp and paw in the icy street, the coachman 
huddle on the box, wrap in furs. southwark help the secretary into 
the carriage, and shook hand with trent, thank him for coming. 

"how the scoundrel did stare," he said; "your evidence was worse than a 
kick, but it save his skin for the moment at least,--and prevent 
complications." 

the secretary sighed. "we have done our part. now let them prove him a spy 
and we wash our hand of him. jump in, captain! come along, trent!" 

"i have a word to say to captain southwark, i won't detain him," said 
trent hastily, and drop his voice, "southwark, help _me_ now. you know 
the story from the blackguard. you know the--the child is at his rooms. 
get it, and take it to my own apartment, and if he is shot, i will provide 
a home for it." 

"i understand," said the captain gravely. 

"will you do this at once?" 

"at once," he replied. 

their hand met in a warm clasp, and then captain southwark climb into 
the carriage, motion trent to follow; but he shook his head saying, 
"good-bye!" and the carriage roll away. 

he watch the carriage to the end of the street, then start toward his 
own quarter, but after a step or two hesitated, stopped, and finally 
turn away in the opposite direction. something--perhaps it was the sight 
of the prisoner he had so recently confront nauseate him. he felt the 
need of solitude and quiet to collect his thoughts. the event of the 
evening had shaken him terribly, but he would walk it off, forget, bury 
everything, and then go back to sylvia. he start on swiftly, and for a 
time the bitter thought seem to fade, but when he pause at last, 
breathless, under the arc de triomphe, the bitter and the wretched 
of the whole thing--yes, of his whole misspent life came back with a pang. 
then the face of the prisoner, stamp with the horrible grimace of fear, 
grew in the shadow before his eyes. 

sick at heart he wander up and down under the great arc, strive to 
occupy his mind, peer up at the sculpture cornice to read the name 
of the hero and battle which he knew were engrave there, but always 
the ashen face of hartman follow him, grin with terror!--or was it 
terror?--was it not triumph?--at the thought he leap like a man who 
feel a knife at his throat, but after a savage tramp around the square, 
came back again and sat down to battle with his misery. 

the air was cold, but his cheek were burning with angry shame. shame? 
why? was it because he had married a girl whom chance had made a mother? 
_did_ he love her? was this miserable bohemian existence, then, his end 
and aim in life? he turn his eyes upon the secret of his heart, and 
read an evil story,--the story of the past, and he cover his face for 
shame, while, keeping time to the dull pain throb in his head, his 
heart beat out the story for the future. shame and disgrace. 

rouse at last from a lethargy which had begun to numb the bitter of 
his thoughts, he raise his head and look about. a sudden fog had 
settled in the streets; the arch of the arc were choke with it. he 
would go home. a great horror of being alone seize him. _but he was not 
alone._ the fog was people with phantoms. all around him in the mist they 
moved, drift through the arch in lengthen lines, and vanished, 
while from the fog other rose up, swept past and were engulfed. he was 
not alone, for even at his side they crowded, touched him, swarm before 
him, beside him, behind him, pressed him back, seized, and bore him with 
them through the mist. down a dim avenue, through lane and alley white 
with fog, they moved, and if they spoke their voice were dull as the 
vapour which shroud them. at last in front, a bank of masonry and earth 
cut by a massive iron barred gate tower up in the fog. slow and more 
slow they glided, shoulder to shoulder and thigh to thigh. then all 
movement ceased. a sudden breeze stir the fog. it waver and eddied. 
object became more distinct. a pallor crept above the horizon, touching 
the edge of the watery clouds, and drew dull sparks from a thousand 
bayonets. bayonets--they were everywhere, cleave the fog or flowing 
beneath it in river of steel. high on the wall of masonry and earth a 
great gun loomed, and around it figures move in silhouettes. below, a 
broad torrent of bayonet swept through the iron barred gateway, out into 
the shadowy plain. it became lighter. face grew more distinct among the 
march masses and he recognize one. 

"you, philippe!" 

the figure turn its head. 

trent cried, "is there room for me?" but the other only wave his arm in a 
vague adieu and was gone with the rest. presently the cavalry began to 
pass, squadron on squadron, crowd out into the darkness; then many 
cannon, then an ambulance, then again the endless lines of bayonets. 
beside him a cuirassier sat on his steam horse, and in front, among a 
group of mount officer he saw a general, with the astrakan collar of 
his dolman turn up about his bloodless face. 

some women were weeping near him and one was struggle to force a loaf of 
black bread into a soldier's haversack. the soldier try to aid her, but 
the sack was fastened, and his rifle bother him, so trent held it, while 
the woman unbuttoned the sack and forced in the bread, now all wet with 
her tears. the rifle was not heavy. trent found it wonderful manageable. 
was the bayonet sharp? he try it. then a sudden longing, a fierce, 
imperative desire took possession of him. 

"_chouette!_" cry a gamin, clinging to the barred gate, "_encore toi mon 
vieux_?" 

trent look up, and the rat-killer laugh in his face. but when the 
soldier had taken the rifle again, and thank him, ran hard to catch his 
battalion, he plunge into the throng about the gateway. 

"are you going?" he cry to a marine who sat in the gutter bandage his 
foot. 

"yes." 

then a girl--a mere child--caught him by the hand and led him into the 
café which face the gate. the room was crowded with soldiers, some, white 
and silent, sitting on the floor, other groan on the leather-covered 
settees. the air was sour and suffocating. 

"choose!" said the girl with a little gesture of pity; "they can't go!" 

in a heap of clothing on the floor he found a capote and képi. 

she help him buckle his knapsack, cartridge-box, and belt, and show 
him how to load the chasse-pot rifle, holding it on her knees. 

when he thank her she start to her feet. 

"you are a foreigner!" 

"american," he said, moving toward the door, but the child barred his way. 

"i am a bretonne. my father is up there with the cannon of the marine. he 
will shoot you if you are a spy." 

they face each other for a moment. then sighing, he bent over and kiss 
the child. "pray for france, little one," he murmured, and she repeated 
with a pale smile: "for france and you, beau monsieur." 

he ran across the street and through the gateway. once outside, he edge 
into line and shoulder his way along the road. a corporal passed, look 
at him, repassed, and finally call an officer. "you belong to the 60th," 
growl the corporal look at the number on his képi. 

"we have no use for franc-tireurs," add the officer, catching sight of 
his black trousers. 

"i wish to volunteer in place of a comrade," said trent, and the officer 
shrug his shoulder and pass on. 

nobody paid much attention to him, one or two merely glancing at his 
trousers. the road was deep with slush and mud-ploughed and torn by wheels 
and hoofs. a soldier in front of him wrench his foot in an icy rut and 
drag himself to the edge of the embankment groaning. the plain on 
either side of them was grey with melting snow. here and there behind 
dismantle hedge-rows stood wagons, bearing white flag with red crosses. 
sometimes the driver was a priest in rusty hat and gown, sometimes a 
cripple mobile. once they pass a wagon driven by a sister of charity. 
silent empty house with great rent in their walls, and every window 
blank, huddle along the road. further on, within the zone of danger, 
nothing of human habitation remain except here and there a pile of 
frozen brick or a blacken cellar choke with snow. 

for some time trent had been annoy by the man behind him, who kept 
tread on his heels. convinced at last that it was intentional, he 
turn to remonstrate and found himself face to face with a fellow-student 
from the beaux arts. trent stared. 

"i thought you were in the hospital!" 

the other shook his head, point to his bandage jaw. 

"i see, you can't speak. can i do anything?" 

the wound man rummage in his haversack and produce a crust of black 
bread. 

"he can't eat it, his jaw is smashed, and he wants you to chew it for 
him," said the soldier next to him. 

trent took the crust, and grind it in his teeth morsel by morsel, 
pass it back to the starve man. 

from time to time mount orderly sped to the front, covering them with 
slush. it was a chilly, silent march through sodden meadow wreathe in 
fog. along the railroad embankment across the ditch, another column move 
parallel to their own. trent watch it, a sombre mass, now distinct, now 
vague, now blot out in a puff of fog. once for half-an-hour he lost it, 
but when again it came into view, he notice a thin line detach itself 
from the flank, and, belly in the middle, swing rapid to the west. at 
the same moment a prolonged crackling broke out in the fog in front. other 
lines began to slough off from the column, swinging east and west, and the 
crackling became continuous. a battery pass at full gallop, and he drew 
back with his comrade to give it way. it went into action a little to the 
right of his battalion, and as the shot from the first rifle piece boom 
through the mist, the cannon from the fortification open with a mighty 
roar. an officer gallop by shouting something which trent did not catch, 
but he saw the ranks in front sudden part company with his own, and 
disappear in the twilight. more officer rode up and stood beside him 
peer into the fog. away in front the crackling had become one prolonged 
crash. it was dreary waiting. trent chew some bread for the man behind, 
who try to swallow it, and after a while shook his head, motion trent 
to eat the rest himself. a corporal offer him a little brandy and he 
drank it, but when he turn around to return the flask, the corporal was 
lie on the ground. alarmed, he look at the soldier next to him, who 
shrug his shoulder and open his mouth to speak, but something struck 
him and he roll over and over into the ditch below. at that moment the 
horse of one of the officer gave a bound and back into the battalion, 
lashing out with his heels. one man was ridden down; another was kick in 
the chest and hurl through the ranks. the officer sank his spur into 
the horse and forced him to the front again, where he stood trembling. the 
cannonade seem to draw nearer. a staff-officer, riding slow up and 
down the battalion sudden collapse in his saddle and clung to his 
horse's mane. one of his boots dangled, crimson and dripping, from the 
stirrup. then out of the mist in front men came running. the roads, the 
fields, the ditch were full of them, and many of them fell. for an 
instant he imagine he saw horsemen riding about like ghost in the 
vapours beyond, and a man behind him cursed horribly, declare he too had 
seen them, and that they were uhlans; but the battalion stood inactive, 
and the mist fell again over the meadows. 

the colonel sat heavy upon his horse, his bullet-shaped head bury in 
the astrakan collar of his dolman, his fat leg stick straight out in 
the stirrups. 

the bugle cluster about him with bugle poised, and behind him a 
staff-officer in a pale blue jacket smoke a cigarette and chat with a 
captain of hussars. from the road in front came the sound of furious 
galloping and an orderly rein up beside the colonel, who motion him to 
the rear without turning his head. then on the left a confuse murmur 
arose which end in a shout. a hussar pass like the wind, follow by 
another and another, and then squadron after squadron whirl by them into 
the sheet mists. at that instant the colonel rear in his saddle, the 
bugle clanged, and the whole battalion scramble down the embankment, 
over the ditch and start across the soggy meadow. almost at once trent 
lost his cap. something snatch it from his head, he thought it was a 
tree branch. a good many of his comrade roll over in the slush and ice, 
and he imagine that they had slipped. one pitch right across his path 
and he stop to help him up, but the man scream when he touched him 
and an officer shouted, "forward! forward!" so he ran on again. it was a 
long jog through the mist, and he was often oblige to shift his rifle. 
when at last they lay pant behind the railroad embankment, he look 
about him. he had felt the need of action, of a desperate physical 
struggle, of killing and crushing. he had been seize with a desire to 
fling himself among masses and tear right and left. he long to fire, to 
use the thin sharp bayonet on his chassepot. he had not expect this. he 
wish to become exhausted, to struggle and cut until incapable of lift 
his arm. then he had intended to go home. he heard a man say that half the 
battalion had gone down in the charge, and he saw another examine a 
corpse under the embankment. the body, still warm, was clothe in a 
strange uniform, but even when he notice the spike helmet lie a few 
inch further away, he did not realize what had happened. 

the colonel sat on his horse a few feet to the left, his eyes sparkle 
under the crimson képi. trent heard him reply to an officer: "i can hold 
it, but another charge, and i won't have enough men left to sound a 
bugle." 

"were the prussian here?" trent ask of a soldier who sat wipe the 
blood trickle from his hair. 

"yes. the hussar clean them out. we caught their cross fire." 

"we are support a battery on the embankment," said another. 

then the battalion crawl over the embankment and move along the lines 
of twist rails. trent roll up his trousers and tuck them into his 
woollen socks: but they halt again, and some of the men sat down on the 
dismantle railroad track. trent look for his wound comrade from the 
beaux arts. he was standing in his place, very pale. the cannonade had 
become terrific. for a moment the mist lifted. he caught a glimpse of the 
first battalion motionless on the railroad track in front, of regiment on 
either flank, and then, as the fog settled again, the drum beat and the 
music of the bugle began away on the extreme left. a restless movement 
pass among the troops, the colonel threw up his arm, the drum rolled, 
and the battalion move off through the fog. they were near the front now 
for the battalion was fire as it advanced. ambulance gallop along the 
base of the embankment to the rear, and the hussar pass and repass 
like phantoms. they were in the front at last, for all about them was 
movement and turmoil, while from the fog, close at hand, came cries and 
groan and crashing volleys. shell fell everywhere, burst along the 
embankment, splash them with frozen slush. trent was frightened. he 
began to dread the unknown, which lay there crackling and flaming in 
obscurity. the shock of the cannon sicken him. he could even see the fog 
light up with a dull orange as the thunder shook the earth. it was near, 
he felt certain, for the colonel shout "forward!" and the first 
battalion was hasten into it. he felt its breath, he trembled, but 
hurried on. a fearful discharge in front terrify him. somewhere in the 
fog men were cheering, and the colonel's horse, stream with blood 
plunge about in the smoke. 

another blast and shock, right in his face, almost stun him, and he 
faltered. all the men to the right were down. his head swam; the fog and 
smoke stupefy him. he put out his hand for a support and caught 
something. it was the wheel of a gun-carriage, and a man sprang from 
behind it, aim a blow at his head with a rammer, but stumble back 
shriek with a bayonet through his neck, and trent knew that he had 
killed. mechanical he stoop to pick up his rifle, but the bayonet was 
still in the man, who lay, beating with red hand against the sod. it 
sicken him and he lean on the cannon. men were fight all around him 
now, and the air was foul with smoke and sweat. somebody seize him from 
behind and another in front, but other in turn seize them or struck them 
solid blows. the click! click! click! of bayonet infuriate him, and he 
grasp the ram and struck out blind until it was shiver to pieces. 

a man threw his arm around his neck and bore him to the ground, but he 
throttle him and raise himself on his knees. he saw a comrade seize the 
cannon, and fall across it with his skull crush in; he saw the colonel 
tumble clean out of his saddle into the mud; then consciousness fled. 

when he came to himself, he was lie on the embankment among the twist 
rails. on every side huddle men who cry out and cursed and flee away 
into the fog, and he stagger to his feet and follow them. once he 
stop to help a comrade with a bandage jaw, who could not speak but 
clung to his arm for a time and then fell dead in the freezing mire; and 
again he aid another, who groaned: "trent, c'est moi--philippe," until a 
sudden volley in the midst relieved him of his charge. 

an icy wind swept down from the heights, cutting the fog into shreds. for 
an instant, with an evil leer the sun peer through the naked wood of 
vincennes, sank like a blood-clot in the battery smoke, lower, lower, into 
the blood-soaked plain. 




iv 

when midnight sound from the belfry of st. sulpice the gate of paris 
were still choke with fragment of what had once been an army. 

they enter with the night, a sullen horde, spatter with slime, faint 
with hunger and exhaustion. there was little disorder at first, and the 
throng at the gate part silent as the troops tramp along the 
freezing streets. confusion came as the hour passed. swift and more 
swiftly, crowd squadron after squadron and battery on battery, horse 
plunge and caisson jolting, the remnant from the front surge through 
the gates, a chaos of cavalry and artillery struggle for the right of 
way. close upon them stumble the infantry; here a skeleton of a regiment 
march with a desperate attempt at order, there a riotous mob of mobile 
crush their way to the streets, then a turmoil of horsemen, cannon, 
troops without, officers, officer without men, then again a line of 
ambulances, the wheels groan under their heavy loads. 

dumb with misery the crowd look on. 

all through the day the ambulance had been arriving, and all day long the 
ragged throng whimper and shiver by the barriers. at noon the crowd 
was increase ten-fold, filling the square about the gates, and swarm 
over the inner fortifications. 

at four o'clock in the afternoon the germany battery sudden wreathe 
themselves in smoke, and the shell fell fast on montparnasse. at twenty 
minutes after four two projectile struck a house in the rue de bac, and a 
moment later the first shell fell in the latin quarter. 

braith was painting in bed when west came in very much scared. 

"i wish you would come down; our house has been knock into a cock hat, 
and i'm afraid that some of the pillage may take it into their head to 
pay us a visit to-night." 

braith jump out of bed and bundle himself into a garment which had once 
been an overcoat. 

"anybody hurt?" he inquired, struggle with a sleeve full of dilapidated 
lining. 

"no. colette is barricade in the cellar, and the concierge ran away to 
the fortifications. there will be a rough gang there if the bombardment 
keeps up. you might help us--" 

"of course," said braith; but it was not until they had reach the rue 
serpente and had turn in the passage which led to west's cellar, that 
the latter cried: "have you seen jack trent, to-day?" 

"no," reply braith, look troubled, "he was not at ambulance 
headquarters." 

"he stay to take care of sylvia, i suppose." 

a bomb came crashing through the roof of a house at the end of the alley 
and burst in the basement, shower the street with slate and plaster. a 
second struck a chimney and plunge into the garden, follow by an 
avalanche of bricks, and another exploded with a deafen report in the 
next street. 

they hurried along the passage to the steps which led to the cellar. here 
again braith stopped. 

"don't you think i had better run up to see if jack and sylvia are well 
entrenched? i can get back before dark." 

"no. go in and find colette, and i'll go." 

"no, no, let me go, there's no danger." 

"i know it," reply west calmly; and, drag braith into the alley, 
pointed to the cellar steps. the iron door was barred. 

"colette! colette!" he called. the door swung inward, and the girl sprang 
up the stairs to meet them. at that instant, braith, glancing behind him, 
gave a startle cry, and push the two before him into the cellar, 
jump down after them and slam the iron door. a few seconds later a 
heavy jar from the outside shook the hinges. 

"they are here," mutter west, very pale. 

"that door," observe colette calmly, "will hold for ever." 

braith examine the low iron structure, now tremble with the blow 
rain on it from without. west glance anxious at colette, who 
display no agitation, and this comfort him. 

"i don't believe they will spend much time here," said braith; "they only 
rummage in cellar for spirits, i imagine." 

"unless they hear that valuable are bury there." 

"but surely nothing is bury here?" exclaim braith uneasily. 

"unfortunately there is," growl west. "that miserly landlord of mine--" 

a crash from the outside, follow by a yell, cut him short; then blow 
after blow shook the doors, until there came a sharp snap, a clink of 
metal and a triangular bit of iron fell inwards, leave a hole through 
which struggle a ray of light. 

instantly west knelt, and shove his revolver through the aperture fire 
every cartridge. for a moment the alley resound with the racket of the 
revolver, then absolute silence followed. 

presently a single questioning blow fell upon the door, and a moment later 
another and another, and then a sudden crack zigzag across the iron 
plate. 

"here," said west, seize colette by the wrist, "you follow me, braith!" 
and he ran swift toward a circular spot of light at the further end of 
the cellar. the spot of light came from a barred man-hole above. west 
motion braith to mount on his shoulders. 

"push it over. you _must_!" 

with little effort braith lift the barred cover, scramble out on his 
stomach, and easily raise colette from west's shoulders. 

"quick, old chap!" cry the latter. 

braith twist his leg around a fence-chain and lean down again. the 
cellar was flood with a yellow light, and the air reek with the stench 
of petroleum torches. the iron door still held, but a whole plate of metal 
was gone, and now as they look a figure came creep through, holding a 
torch. 

"quick!" whisper braith. "jump!" and west hung dangle until colette 
grasp him by the collar, and he was drag out. then her nerves gave 
way and she wept hysterically, but west threw his arm around her and led 
her across the garden into the next street, where braith, after replace 
the man-hole cover and pile some stone slab from the wall over it, 
rejoin them. it was almost dark. they hurried through the street, now 
only light by burning buildings, or the swift glare of the shells. they 
gave wide berth to the fires, but at a distance saw the flit form of 
pillage among the _débris_. sometimes they pass a female fury craze 
with drink shriek anathema upon the world, or some slouch lout 
whose blacken face and hand betray his share in the work of 
destruction. at last they reach the seine and pass the bridge, and 
then braith said: "i must go back. i am not sure of jack and sylvia." as 
he spoke, he made way for a crowd which came trample across the bridge, 
and along the river wall by the d'orsay barracks. in the midst of it west 
caught the measured tread of a platoon. a lantern passed, a file of 
bayonets, then another lantern which glimmer on a deathly face behind, 
and colette gasped, "hartman!" and he was gone. they peer fearful 
across the embankment, holding their breath. there was a shuffle of feet 
on the quay, and the gate of the barracks slammed. a lantern shone for a 
moment at the postern, the crowd pressed to the grille, then came the 
clang of the volley from the stone parade. 

one by one the petroleum torch flared up along the embankment, and now 
the whole square was in motion. down from the champ elysées and across 
the place de la concorde straggle the fragment of the battle, a company 
here, and a mob there. they pour in from every street follow by women 
and children, and a great murmur, borne on the icy wind, swept through the 
arc de triomphe and down the dark avenue,--"perdus! perdus!" 

a ragged end of a battalion was pressing past, the spectre of 
annihilation. west groaned. then a figure sprang from the shadowy ranks 
and call west's name, and when he saw it was trent he cry out. trent 
seize him, white with terror. 

"sylvia?" 

west stare speechless, but colette moaned, "oh, sylvia! sylvia!--and they 
are shell the quarter!" 

"trent!" shout braith; but he was gone, and they could not overtake 
them. 

the bombardment cease as trent cross the boulevard st. germain, but the 
entrance to the rue de seine was block by a heap of smoking bricks. 
everywhere the shell had torn great hole in the pavement. the café was a 
wreck of splinter and glass, the book-store tottered, rip from roof to 
basement, and the little bakery, long since closed, bulge outward above a 
mass of slate and tin. 

he climb over the steam brick and hurried into the rue de tournon. 
on the corner a fire blazed, lighting up his own street, and on the bank 
wall, beneath a shatter gas lamp, a child was writing with a bit of 
cinder. 

"here fell the first shell." 

the letters stare him in the face. the rat-killer finished and step 
back to view his work, but catching sight of trent's bayonet, scream and 
fled, and as trent stagger across the shatter street, from hole and 
cranny in the ruins fierce women flee from their work of pillage, 
curse him. 

at first he could not find his house, for the tear blind him, but he 
felt along the wall and reach the door. a lantern burn in the 
concierge's lodge and the old man lay dead beside it. faint with fright he 
lean a moment on his rifle, then, snatch the lantern, sprang up the 
stairs. he try to call, but his tongue hardly moved. on the second floor 
he saw plaster on the stairway, and on the third the floor was torn and 
the concierge lay in a pool of blood across the landing. the next floor 
was his, _theirs_. the door hung from its hinges, the wall gaped. he 
crept in and sank down by the bed, and there two arms were flung around 
his neck, and a tear-stained face sought his own. 

"sylvia!" 

"o jack! jack! jack!" 

from the tumble pillow beside them a child wailed. 

"they brought it; it is mine," she sobbed. 

"ours," he whispered, with his arms around them both. 

then from the stairs below came braith's anxious voice. 

"trent! is all well?" 




the street of our lady of the field 

"et tout le jour passés dan la tristesse 
nous sont comptés comme des jour heureux!" 


i 

the street is not fashionable, neither is it shabby. it is a pariah among 
streets--a street without a quarter. it is generally understood to lie 
outside the pale of the aristocratic avenue de l'observatoire. the 
student of the montparnasse quarter consider it swell and will have none 
of it. the latin quarter, from the luxembourg, its northern frontier, 
sneer at its respectability and regards with disfavour the correct 
costume student who haunt it. few stranger go into it. at times, 
however, the latin quarter student use it as a thoroughfare between the 
rue de renne and the bullier, but except for that and the weekly 
afternoon visit of parent and guardian to the convent near the rue 
vavin, the street of our lady of the field is as quiet as a passy 
boulevard. perhaps the most respectable portion lie between the rue de la 
grande chaumière and the rue vavin, at least this was the conclusion 
arrive at by the reverend joel byram, as he ramble through it with 
hastings in charge. to hastings the street look pleasant in the bright 
june weather, and he had begun to hope for its selection when the reverend 
byram shy violent at the cross on the convent opposite. 

"jesuits," he muttered. 

"well," said hastings wearily, "i imagine we won't find anything better. 
you say yourself that vice is triumphant in paris, and it seem to me that 
in every street we find jesuit or something worse." 

after a moment he repeated, "or something worse, which of course i would 
not notice except for your kindness in warning me." 

dr. byram suck in his lip and look about him. he was impress by the 
evident respectability of the surroundings. then frown at the convent 
he took hastings' arm and shuffle across the street to an iron gateway 
which bore the number 201 _bis_ paint in white on a blue ground. below 
this was a notice print in english: 

1. for porter please oppress once. 
2. for servant please oppress twice. 
3. for parlour please oppress thrice. 

hastings touched the electric button three times, and they were usher 
through the garden and into the parlour by a trim maid. the dining-room 
door, just beyond, was open, and from the table in plain view a stout 
woman hasty arose and came toward them. hastings caught a glimpse of a 
young man with a big head and several snuffy old gentlemen at breakfast, 
before the door closed and the stout woman waddle into the room, bring 
with her an aroma of coffee and a black poodle." 

"it ee a plaisir to you receive!" she cried. "monsieur is anglish? no? 
americain? off course. my pension it ee for americain surtout. here all 
spik angleesh, c'est à dire, ze personnel; ze sairvant do spik, plus ou 
moins, a little. i am happy to have you comme pensionnaires--" 

"madame," began dr. byram, but was cut short again. 

"ah, yess, i know, ah! mon dieu! you do not spik frainch but you have come 
to lairne! my husband do spik frainch wiss ze pensionnaires. we have at 
ze moment a family americaine who learn of my husband frainch--" 

here the poodle growl at dr. byram and was prompt cuff by his 
mistress. 

"veux tu!" she cried, with a slap, "veux tu! oh! le vilain, oh! le 
vilain!" 

"mais, madame," said hastings, smiling, "il n'a pas l'air très féroce." 

the poodle fled, and his mistress cried, "ah, ze accent charming! he do 
spik already frainch like a parisien young gentleman!" 

then dr. byram manage to get in a word or two and gather more or less 
information with regard to prices. 

"it ee a pension serieux; my clientèle ee of ze best, indeed a pension 
de famille where one ee at 'ome." 

then they went upstairs to examine hastings' future quarters, test the 
bed-springs and arrange for the weekly towel allowance. dr. byram appear 
satisfied. 

madame marotte accompany them to the door and rang for the maid, but as 
hastings step out into the gravel walk, his guide and mentor pause a 
moment and fixed madame with his watery eyes. 

"you understand," he said, "that he is a youth of most careful bring 
up, and his character and morals are without a stain. he is young and has 
never been abroad, never even seen a large city, and his parent have 
request me, as an old family friend living in paris, to see that he is 
placed under good influences. he is to study art, but on no account would 
his parent wish him to live in the latin quarter if they knew of the 
immorality which is rife there." 

a sound like the click of a latch interrupt him and he raise his eyes, 
but not in time to see the maid slap the big-headed young man behind the 
parlour-door. 

madame coughed, cast a deadly glance behind her and then beam on dr. 
byram. 

"it ee well zat he come here. the pension more serious, il n'en existe 
pas, eet ee not any!" she announce with conviction. 

so, as there was nothing more to add, dr. byram join hastings at the 
gate. 

"i trust," he said, eye the convent, "that you will make no 
acquaintance among jesuits!" 

hastings look at the convent until a pretty girl pass before the gray 
façade, and then he look at her. a young fellow with a paint-box and 
canvas came swinging along, stop before the pretty girl, said something 
during a brief but vigorous handshake at which they both laughed, and he 
went his way, calling back, "À demain valentine!" as in the same breath 
she cried, "À demain!" 

"valentine," thought hastings, "what a quaint name;" and he start to 
follow the reverend joel byram, who was shuffle towards the nearest 
tramway station. 




ii 

"an' you are plea wiz paris, monsieur' astang?" demand madame marotte 
the next morning as hastings came into the breakfast-room of the pension, 
rosy from his plunge in the limited bath above. 

"i am sure i shall like it," he replied, wonder at his own depression 
of spirits. 

the maid brought him coffee and rolls. he return the vacant glance of 
the big-headed young man and acknowledge diffident the salute of the 
snuffy old gentlemen. he did not try to finish his coffee, and sat 
crumble a roll, unconscious of the sympathetic glance of madame 
marotte, who had tact enough not to bother him. 

presently a maid enter with a tray on which were balanced two bowls of 
chocolate, and the snuffy old gentlemen leer at her ankles. the maid 
deposit the chocolate at a table near the window and smile at hastings. 
then a thin young lady, follow by her counterpart in all except years, 
march into the room and took the table near the window. they were 
evidently american, but hastings, if he expect any sign of recognition, 
was disappointed. to be ignore by compatriot intensify his depression. 
he fumble with his knife and look at his plate. 

the thin young lady was talkative enough. she was quite aware of hastings' 
presence, ready to be flatter if he look at her, but on the other hand 
she felt her superiority, for she had been three week in paris and he, it 
was easy to see, had not yet unpack his steamer-trunk. 

her conversation was complacent. she argue with her mother upon the 
relative merit of the louvre and the bon marché, but her mother's part of 
the discussion was mostly confine to the observation, "why, susie!" 

the snuffy old gentlemen had left the room in a body, outwardly polite and 
inward raging. they could not endure the americans, who fill the room 
with their chatter. 

the big-headed young man look after them with a knowing cough, 
murmuring, "gay old birds!" 

"they look like bad old men, mr. bladen," said the girl. 

to this mr. bladen smile and said, "they've had their day," in a tone 
which imply that he was now have his. 

"and that's why they all have baggy eyes," cry the girl. "i think it's a 
shame for young gentlemen--" 

"why, susie!" said the mother, and the conversation lagged. 

after a while mr. bladen threw down the _petit journal_, which he daily 
studied at the expense of the house, and turning to hastings, start to 
make himself agreeable. he began by saying, "i see you are american." 

to this brilliant and original opening, hastings, deadly homesick, reply 
gratefully, and the conversation was judicious nourish by observations 
from miss susie byng distinct address to mr. bladen. in the course of 
event miss susie, forget to address herself exclusively to mr. 
bladen, and hastings reply to her general question, the _entente 
cordiale_ was established, and susie and her mother extend a 
protectorate over what was clearly neutral territory. 

"mr. hastings, you must not desert the pension every evening as mr. bladen 
does. paris is an awful place for young gentlemen, and mr. bladen is a 
horrid cynic." 

mr. bladen look gratified. 

hastings answered, "i shall be at the studio all day, and i imagine i 
shall be glad enough to come back at night." 

mr. bladen, who, at a salary of fifteen dollar a week, act as agent for 
the pew manufacture company of troy, n.y., smile a sceptical smile 
and withdrew to keep an appointment with a customer on the boulevard 
magenta. 

hastings walk into the garden with mrs. byng and susie, and, at their 
invitation, sat down in the shade before the iron gate. 

the chestnut tree still bore their fragrant spike of pink and white, and 
the bee hum among the roses, trellis on the white-walled house. 

a faint fresh was in the air. the water cart move up and down the 
street, and a clear stream bubble over the spotless gutter of the rue de 
la grande chaumière. the sparrow were merry along the curb-stones, taking 
bath after bath in the water and ruffle their feather with delight. in 
a wall garden across the street a pair of blackbird whistle among the 
almond trees. 

hastings swallow the lump in his throat, for the song of the bird and 
the ripple of water in a paris gutter brought back to him the sunny 
meadow of millbrook. 

"that's a blackbird," observe miss byng; "see him there on the bush with 
pink blossoms. he's all black except his bill, and that looks as if it had 
been dip in an omelet, as some frenchman says--" 

"why, susie!" said mrs. byng. 

"that garden belong to a studio inhabit by two americans," continue 
the girl serenely, "and i often see them pass. they seem to need a great 
many models, mostly young and feminine--" 

"why, susie!" 

"perhaps they prefer painting that kind, but i don't see why they should 
invite five, with three more young gentlemen, and all get into two cab 
and drive away singing. this street," she continued, "is dull. there is 
nothing to see except the garden and a glimpse of the boulevard 
montparnasse through the rue de la grande chaumière. no one ever pass 
except a policeman. there is a convent on the corner." 

"i thought it was a jesuit college," began hastings, but was at once 
overwhelm with a baedecker description of the place, ending with, "on 
one side stand the palatial hotel of jean paul lauren and guillaume 
bouguereau, and opposite, in the little passage stanislas, carolu duran 
paints the masterpiece which charm the world." 

the blackbird burst into a ripple of golden throaty notes, and from some 
distant green spot in the city an unknown wild-bird answer with a frenzy 
of liquid trill until the sparrow pause in their ablutions to look up 
with restless chirps. 

then a butterfly came and sat on a cluster of heliotrope and wave his 
crimson-banded wings in the hot sunshine. hastings knew him for a friend, 
and before his eyes there came a vision of tall mullein and scent 
milkweed alive with paint wings, a vision of a white house and 
woodbine-covered piazza,--a glimpse of a man reading and a woman leaning 
over the pansy bed,--and his heart was full. he was startle a moment 
later by miss byng. 

"i believe you are homesick!" hastings blushed. miss byng look at him 
with a sympathetic sigh and continued: "whenever i felt homesick at first 
i use to go with mamma and walk in the luxembourg gardens. i don't know 
why it is, but those old-fashioned garden seem to bring me near home 
than anything in this artificial city." 

"but they are full of marble statues," said mrs. byng mildly; "i don't see 
the resemblance myself." 

"where is the luxembourg?" inquire hastings after a silence. 

"come with me to the gate," said miss byng. he rose and follow her, and 
she pointed out the rue vavin at the foot of the street. 

"you pass by the convent to the right," she smiled; and hastings went. 




iii 

the luxembourg was a blaze of flowers. he walk slow through the long 
avenue of trees, past mossy marbles and old-time columns, and thread 
the grove by the bronze lion, came upon the tree-crowned terrace above the 
fountain. below lay the basin shining in the sunlight. flowering almond 
encircle the terrace, and, in a greater spiral, grove of chestnut wound 
in and out and down among the moist thicket by the western palace wing. 
at one end of the avenue of tree the observatory rose, its white dome 
pile up like an eastern mosque; at the other end stood the heavy palace, 
with every window-pane ablaze in the fierce sun of june. 

around the fountain, children and white-capped nurse armed with bamboo 
pole were push toy boats, whose sail hung limp in the sunshine. a 
dark policeman, wearing red epaulette and a dress sword, watch them for 
a while and then went away to remonstrate with a young man who had 
unchained his dog. the dog was pleasant occupy in rubbing grass and 
dirt into his back while his leg wave into the air. 

the policeman pointed at the dog. he was speechless with indignation. 

"well, captain," smile the young fellow. 

"well, monsieur student," growl the policeman. 

"what do you come and complain to me for?" 

"if you don't chain him i'll take him," shout the policeman. 

"what's that to me, mon capitaine?" 

"wha--t! isn't that bull-dog yours?" 

"if it was, don't you suppose i'd chain him?" 

the officer glare for a moment in silence, then decide that as he was a 
student he was wicked, grab at the dog, who prompt dodged. around and 
around the flower-beds they raced, and when the officer came too near for 
comfort, the bull-dog cut across a flower-bed, which perhaps was not 
play fair. 

the young man was amused, and the dog also seem to enjoy the exercise. 

the policeman notice this and decided to strike at the fountain-head of 
the evil. he storm up to the student and said, "as the owner of this 
public nuisance i arrest you!" 

"but," object the other, "i disclaim the dog." 

that was a poser. it was useless to attempt to catch the dog until three 
garden lent a hand, but then the dog simply ran away and disappear in 
the rue de medici. 

the policeman shamble off to find consolation among the white-capped 
nurses, and the student, look at his watch, stood up yawning. then 
catching sight of hastings, he smile and bowed. hastings walk over to 
the marble, laughing. 

"why, clifford," he said, "i didn't recognize you." 

"it's my moustache," sigh the other. "i sacrifice it to humour a whim 
of--of--a friend. what do you think of my dog?" 

"then he is yours?" cry hastings. 

"of course. it's a pleasant change for him, this play tag with 
policemen, but he is known now and i'll have to stop it. he's gone home. 
he always do when the garden take a hand. it's a pity; he's fond of 
rolling on lawns." then they chat for a moment of hastings' prospects, 
and clifford polite offer to stand his sponsor at the studio. 

"you see, old tabby, i mean dr. byram, told me about you before i met 
you," explain clifford, "and elliott and i will be glad to do anything 
we can." then look at his watch again, he muttered, "i have just ten 
minutes to catch the versaille train; au revoir," and start to go, but 
catching sight of a girl advance by the fountain, took off his hat with 
a confuse smile. 

"why are you not at versailles?" she said, with an almost imperceptible 
acknowledgment of hastings' presence. 

"i--i'm going," murmur clifford. 

for a moment they face each other, and then clifford, very red, 
stammered, "with your permission i have the honour of present to you my 
friend, monsieur hastings." 

hastings bowed low. she smile very sweetly, but there was something of 
malice in the quiet inclination of her small parisienne head. 

"i could have wished," she said, "that monsieur clifford might spare me 
more time when he bring with him so charming an american." 

"must--must i go, valentine?" began clifford. 

"certainly," she replied. 

clifford took his leave with very bad grace, wincing, when she added, "and 
give my dearest love to cécile!" as he disappear in the rue d'assas, the 
girl turn as if to go, but then sudden remember hastings, look at 
him and shook her head. 

"monsieur clifford is so perfectly harebrained," she smiled, "it is 
embarrass sometimes. you have heard, of course, all about his success 
at the salon?" 

he look puzzle and she notice it. 

"you have been to the salon, of course?" 

"why, no," he answered, "i only arrive in paris three days ago." 

she seem to pay little heed to his explanation, but continued: "nobody 
imagine he had the energy to do anything good, but on varnish day the 
salon was astonish by the entrance of monsieur clifford, who stroll 
about as bland as you please with an orchid in his buttonhole, and a 
beautiful picture on the line." 

she smile to herself at the reminiscence, and look at the fountain. 

"monsieur bouguereau told me that monsieur julian was so astonish that 
he only shook hand with monsieur clifford in a daze manner, and actually 
forgot to pat him on the back! fancy," she continue with much merriment, 
"fancy papa julian forget to pat one on the back." 

hastings, wonder at her acquaintance with the great bouguereau, look 
at her with respect. "may i ask," he said diffidently, "whether you are a 
pupil of bouguereau?" 

"i?" she said in some surprise. then she look at him curiously. was he 
permit himself the liberty of joke on such short acquaintance? 

his pleasant serious face question hers. 

"tiens," she thought, "what a droll man!" 

"you surely study art?" he said. 

she lean back on the crooked stick of her parasol, and look at him. 
"why do you think so?" 

"because you speak as if you did." 

"you are making fun of me," she said, "and it is not good taste." 

she stopped, confused, as he coloured to the roots of his hair. 

"how long have you been in paris?" she said at length. 

"three days," he reply gravely. 

"but--but--surely you are not a nouveau! you speak france too well!" 

then after a pause, "really are you a nouveau?" 

"i am," he said. 

she sat down on the marble bench lately occupy by clifford, and tilt 
her parasol over her small head look at him. 

"i don't believe it." 

he felt the compliment, and for a moment hesitate to declare himself one 
of the despised. then muster up his courage, he told her how new and 
green he was, and all with a frank which made her blue eyes open very 
wide and her lip part in the sweetest of smiles. 

"you have never seen a studio?" 

"never." 

"nor a model?" 

"no." 

"how funny," she said solemnly. then they both laughed. 

"and you," he said, "have seen studios?" 

"hundreds." 

"and models?" 

"millions." 

"and you know bouguereau?" 

"yes, and henner, and constant and laurens, and puvi de chavanne and 
dagnan and courtois, and--and all the rest of them!" 

"and yet you say you are not an artist." 

"pardon," she said gravely, "did i say i was not?" 

"won't you tell me?" he hesitated. 

at first she look at him, shake her head and smiling, then of a sudden 
her eyes fell and she began tracing figures with her parasol in the gravel 
at her feet. hastings had taken a place on the seat, and now, with his 
elbow on his knees, sat watch the spray drift above the fountain 
jet. a small boy, dress as a sailor, stood poke his yacht and crying, 
"i won't go home! i won't go home!" his nurse raise her hand to heaven. 

"just like a little america boy," thought hastings, and a pang of 
homesick shot through him. 

presently the nurse capture the boat, and the small boy stood at bay. 

"monsieur rené, when you decide to come here you may have your boat." 

the boy back away scowling. 

"give me my boat, i say," he cried, "and don't call me rené, for my 
name's randall and you know it!" 

"hello!" said hastings,--"randall?--that's english." 

"i am american," announce the boy in perfectly good english, turning to 
look at hastings, "and she's such a fool she call me rené because mamma 
call me ranny--" 

here he dodge the exasperate nurse and took up his station behind 
hastings, who laughed, and catching him around the waist lift him into 
his lap. 

"one of my countrymen," he said to the girl beside him. he smile while he 
spoke, but there was a queer feeling in his throat. 

"don't you see the stars and stripe on my yacht?" demand randall. sure 
enough, the america colours hung limp under the nurse's arm. 

"oh," cry the girl, "he is charming," and impulsive stoop to kiss 
him, but the infant randall wriggle out of hastings' arms, and his nurse 
pounce upon him with an angry glance at the girl. 

she redden and then bit her lip as the nurse, with eyes still fixed on 
her, drag the child away and ostentatious wipe his lip with her 
handkerchief. 

then she stole a look at hastings and bit her lip again. 

"what an ill-tempered woman!" he said. "in america, most nurse are 
flatter when people kiss their children." 

for an instant she tip the parasol to hide her face, then closed it 
with a snap and look at him defiantly. 

"do you think it strange that she objected?" 

"why not?" he said in surprise. 

again she look at him with quick searching eyes. 

his eyes were clear and bright, and he smile back, repeating, "why not?" 

"you _are_ droll," she murmured, bend her head. 

"why?" 

but she made no answer, and sat silent, tracing curve and circle in the 
dust with her parasol. after a while he said--"i am glad to see that young 
people have so much liberty here. i understood that the france were not at 
all like us. you know in america--or at least where i live in milbrook, 
girl have every liberty,--go out alone and receive their friends alone, 
and i was afraid i should miss it here. but i see how it is now, and i am 
glad i was mistaken." 

she raise her eyes to his and kept them there. 

he continue pleasantly--"since i have sat here i have seen a lot of 
pretty girl walking alone on the terrace there,--and then _you_ are alone 
too. tell me, for i do not know france customs,--do you have the liberty 
of go to the theatre without a chaperone?" 

for a long time she studied his face, and then with a tremble smile 
said, "why do you ask me?" 

"because you must know, of course," he said gaily. 

"yes," she reply indifferently, "i know." 

he wait for an answer, but get none, decided that perhaps she had 
misunderstood him. 

"i hope you don't think i mean to presume on our short acquaintance," he 
began,--"in fact it is very odd but i don't know your name. when mr. 
clifford present me he only mention mine. is that the custom in 
france?" 

"it is the custom in the latin quarter," she said with a queer light in 
her eyes. then sudden she began talk almost feverishly. 

"you must know, monsieur hastings, that we are all _un peu sans gêne_ here 
in the latin quarter. we are very bohemian, and etiquette and ceremony are 
out of place. it was for that monsieur clifford present you to me with 
small ceremony, and left us together with less,--only for that, and i am 
his friend, and i have many friends in the latin quarter, and we all know 
each other very well--and i am not study art, but--but--" 

"but what?" he said, bewildered. 

"i shall not tell you,--it is a secret," she said with an uncertain smile. 
on both cheek a pink spot was burning, and her eyes were very bright. 

then in a moment her face fell. "do you know monsieur clifford very 
intimately?" 

"not very." 

after a while she turn to him, grave and a little pale. 

"my name is valentine--valentine tissot. might--might i ask a service of 
you on such very short acquaintance?" 

"oh," he cried, "i should be honoured." 

"it is only this," she said gently, "it is not much. promise me not to 
speak to monsieur clifford about me. promise me that you will speak to no 
one about me." 

"i promise," he said, greatly puzzled. 

she laugh nervously. "i wish to remain a mystery. it is a caprice." 

"but," he began, "i had wished, i had hope that you might give monsieur 
clifford permission to bring me, to present me at your house." 

"my--my house!" she repeated. 

"i mean, where you live, in fact, to present me to your family." 

the change in the girl's face shock him. 

"i beg your pardon," he cried, "i have hurt you." 

and as quick as a flash she understood him because she was a woman. 

"my parent are dead," she said. 

presently he began again, very gently. 

"would it displease you if i beg you to receive me? it is the custom?" 

"i cannot," she answered. then glancing up at him, "i am sorry; i should 
like to; but believe me. i cannot." 

he bowed seriously and look vague uneasy. 

"it isn't because i don't wish to. i--i like you; you are very kind to 
me." 

"kind?" he cried, surprise and puzzled. 

"i like you," she said slowly, "and we will see each other sometimes if 
you will." 

"at friends' houses." 

"no, not at friends' houses." 

"where?" 

"here," she said with defiant eyes. 

"why," he cried, "in paris you are much more liberal in your view than we 
are." 

she look at him curiously. 

"yes, we are very bohemian." 

"i think it is charming," he declared. 

"you see, we shall be in the best of society," she venture timidly, with 
a pretty gesture toward the statue of the dead queens, range in stately 
ranks above the terrace. 

he look at her, delighted, and she brighten at the success of her 
innocent little pleasantry. 

"indeed," she smiled, "i shall be well chaperoned, because you see we are 
under the protection of the gods themselves; look, there are apollo, and 
juno, and venus, on their pedestals," count them on her small glove 
fingers, "and ceres, hercules, and--but i can't make out--" 

hastings turn to look up at the wing god under whose shadow they were 
seated. 

"why, it's love," he said. 




iv 

"there is a nouveau here," drawl laffat, leaning around his easel and 
address his friend bowles, "there is a nouveau here who is so tender 
and green and appetizing that heaven help him if he should fall into a 
salad bowl." 

"hayseed?" inquire bowles, plastering in a background with a broken 
palette-knife and squint at the effect with approval. 

"yes, squeedunk or oshkosh, and how he ever grew up among the daisy and 
escape the cows, heaven alone knows!" 

bowl rub his thumb across the outline of his study to "throw in a 
little atmosphere," as he said, glare at the model, pull at his pipe 
and finding it out struck a match on his neighbour's back to relight it. 

"his name," continue laffat, hurling a bit of bread at the hat-rack, "his 
name is hastings. he _is_ a berry. he know no more about the world,"--and 
here mr. laffat's face spoke volumes for his own knowledge of that 
planet,--"than a maiden cat on its first moonlight stroll." 

bowl now have succeed in lighting his pipe, repeated the thumb touch 
on the other edge of the study and said, "ah!" 

"yes," continue his friend, "and would you imagine it, he seem to think 
that everything here go on as it do in his d----d little backwoods 
ranch at home; talks about the pretty girl who walk alone in the street; 
say how sensible it is; and how france parent are misrepresent in 
america; say that for his part he find france girls,--and he confessed 
to only knowing one,--as jolly as america girls. i try to set him 
right, try to give him a pointer as to what sort of ladies walk about 
alone or with students, and he was either too stupid or too innocent to 
catch on. then i gave it to him straight, and he said i was a vile-minded 
fool and march off." 

"did you assist him with your shoe?" inquire bowles, languid 
interested. 

"well, no." 

"he call you a vile-minded fool." 

"he was correct," said clifford from his easel in front. 

"what--what do you mean?" demand laffat, turning red. 

"_that_," reply clifford. 

"who spoke to you? is this your business?" sneer bowles, but nearly lost 
his balance as clifford swung about and eye him. 

"yes," he said slowly, "it's my business." 

no one spoke for some time. 

then clifford sang out, "i say, hastings!" 

and when hastings left his easel and came around, he nod toward the 
astonish laffat. 

"this man has been disagreeable to you, and i want to tell you that any 
time you feel inclined to kick him, why, i will hold the other creature." 

hastings, embarrassed, said, "why no, i don't agree with his ideas, 
nothing more." 

clifford said "naturally," and slip his arm through hastings', 
stroll about with him, and introduce him to several of his own friends, 
at which all the nouveaux open their eyes with envy, and the studio were 
given to understand that hastings, although prepared to do menial work as 
the latest nouveau, was already within the charm circle of the old, 
respect and feared, the truly great. 

the rest finished, the model resume his place, and work went on in a 
chorus of song and yell and every ear-splitting noise which the art 
student utter when study the beautiful. 

five o'clock struck,--the model yawned, stretch and climb into his 
trousers, and the noisy contents of six studio crowded through the hall 
and down into the street. ten minutes later, hastings found himself on top 
of a montrouge tram, and shortly afterward was join by clifford. 

they climb down at the rue gay lussac. 

"i always stop here," observe clifford, "i like the walk through the 
luxembourg." 

"by the way," said hastings, "how can i call on you when i don't know 
where you live?" 

"why, i live opposite you." 

"what--the studio in the garden where the almond tree are and the 
blackbirds--" 

"exactly," said clifford. "i'm with my friend elliott." 

hastings thought of the description of the two america artist which he 
had heard from miss susie byng, and look blank. 

clifford continued, "perhaps you had better let me know when you think of 
coming so,--so that i will be sure to--to be there," he end rather 
lamely. 

"i shouldn't care to meet any of your model friends there," said hastings, 
smiling. "you know--my idea are rather straitlaced,--i suppose you would 
say, puritanical. i shouldn't enjoy it and wouldn't know how to behave." 

"oh, i understand," said clifford, but add with great cordiality,--"i'm 
sure we'll be friends although you may not approve of me and my set, but 
you will like severn and selby because--because, well, they are like 
yourself, old chap." 

after a moment he continued, "there is something i want to speak about. 
you see, when i introduce you, last week, in the luxembourg, to 
valentine--" 

"not a word!" cry hastings, smiling; "you must not tell me a word of 
her!" 

"why--" 

"no--not a word!" he said gaily. "i insist,--promise me upon your honour 
you will not speak of her until i give you permission; promise!" 

"i promise," said clifford, amazed. 

"she is a charming girl,--we had such a delightful chat after you left, 
and i thank you for present me, but not another word about her until i 
give you permission." 

"oh," murmur clifford. 

"remember your promise," he smiled, as he turn into his gateway. 

clifford stroll across the street and, traverse the ivy-covered alley, 
enter his garden. 

he felt for his studio key, muttering, "i wonder--i wonder,--but of course 
he doesn't!" 

he enter the hallway, and fitting the key into the door, stood staring 
at the two cards tack over the panels. 

foxhall clifford 

richard osborne elliott 

"why the devil doesn't he want me to speak of her?" 

he open the door, and, discourage the caress of two brindle 
bull-dogs, sank down on the sofa. 

elliott sat smoking and sketch with a piece of charcoal by the window. 

"hello," he said without look around. 

clifford gaze absently at the back of his head, murmuring, "i'm afraid, 
i'm afraid that man is too innocent. i say, elliott," he said, at last, 
"hastings,--you know the chap that old tabby byram came around here to 
tell us about--the day you had to hide colette in the armoire--" 

"yes, what's up?" 

"oh, nothing. he's a brick." 

"yes," said elliott, without enthusiasm. 

"don't you think so?" demand clifford. 

"why yes, but he is go to have a tough time when some of his illusion 
are dispelled." 

"more shame to those who dispel 'em!" 

"yes,--wait until he come to pay his call on us, unexpectedly, of 
course--" 

clifford look virtuous and light a cigar. 

"i was just go to say," he observed, "that i have ask him not to come 
without letting us know, so i can postpone any orgie you may have 
intended--" 

"ah!" cry elliott indignantly, "i suppose you put it to him in that 
way." 

"not exactly," grin clifford. then more seriously, "i don't want 
anything to occur here to bother him. he's a brick, and it's a pity we 
can't be more like him." 

"i am," observe elliott complacently, "only living with you--" 

"listen!" cry the other. "i have manage to put my foot in it in great 
style. do you know what i've done? well--the first time i met him in the 
street,--or rather, it was in the luxembourg, i introduce him to 
valentine!" 

"did he object?" 

"believe me," said clifford, solemnly, "this rustic hastings has no more 
idea that valentine is--is--in fact is valentine, than he has that he 
himself is a beautiful example of moral decency in a quarter where morals 
are as rare as elephants. i heard enough in a conversation between that 
blackguard loffat and the little immoral eruption, bowles, to open my 
eyes. i tell you hastings is a trump! he's a healthy, clean-minded young 
fellow, bred in a small country village, brought up with the idea that 
saloon are way-stations to hell--and as for women--" 

"well?" demand elliott 

"well," said clifford, "his idea of the dangerous woman is probably a 
paint jezabel." 

"probably," reply the other. 

"he's a trump!" said clifford, "and if he swear the world is as good and 
pure as his own heart, i'll swear he's right." 

elliott rub his charcoal on his file to get a point and turn to his 
sketch saying, "he will never hear any pessimism from richard osborne e." 

"he's a lesson to me," said clifford. then he unfold a small perfume 
note, written on rose-coloured paper, which had been lie on the table 
before him. 

he read it, smiled, whistle a bar or two from "miss helyett," and sat 
down to answer it on his best cream-laid note-paper. when it was written 
and sealed, he picked up his stick and march up and down the studio two 
or three times, whistling. 

"going out?" inquire the other, without turning. 

"yes," he said, but linger a moment over elliott's shoulder, watch 
him pick out the lights in his sketch with a bit of bread. 

"to-morrow is sunday," he observe after a moment's silence. 

"well?" inquire elliott. 

"have you seen colette?" 

"no, i will to-night. she and rowden and jacqueline are coming to 
boulant's. i suppose you and, cécile will be there?" 

"well, no," reply clifford. "cécile dine at home to-night, and i--i had 
an idea of go to mignon's." 

elliott look at him with disapproval. 

"you can make all the arrangement for la roche without me," he continued, 
avoid elliott's eyes. 

"what are you up to now?" 

"nothing," protest clifford. 

"don't tell me," reply his chum, with scorn; "fellows don't rush off to 
mignon's when the set dine at boulant's. who is it now?--but no, i won't 
ask that,--what's the use!" then he lift up his voice in complaint and 
beat upon the table with his pipe. "what's the use of ever try to keep 
track of you? what will cécile say,--oh, yes, what will she say? it's a 
pity you can't be constant two months, yes, by jove! and the quarter is 
indulgent, but you abuse its good nature and mine too!" 

presently he arose, and jam his hat on his head, march to the door. 

"heaven alone know why any one put up with your antics, but they all do 
and so do i. if i were cécile or any of the other pretty fool after whom 
you have toddle and will, in all human probabilities, continue to toddle, 
i say, if i were cécile i'd spank you! now i'm go to boulant's, and as 
usual i shall make excuse for you and arrange the affair, and i don't 
care a continental where you are going, but, by the skull of the studio 
skeleton! if you don't turn up to-morrow with your sketching-kit under one 
arm and cécile under the other,--if you don't turn up in good shape, i'm 
done with you, and the rest can think what they please. good-night." 

clifford said good-night with as pleasant a smile as he could muster, and 
then sat down with his eyes on the door. he took out his watch and gave 
elliott ten minutes to vanish, then rang the concierge's call, murmuring, 
"oh dear, oh dear, why the devil do i do it?" 

"alfred," he said, as that gimlet-eyed person answer the call, "make 
yourself clean and proper, alfred, and replace your sabot with a pair of 
shoes. then put on your best hat and take this letter to the big white 
house in the rue de dragon. there is no answer, _mon petit_ alfred." 

the concierge departed with a snort in which unwilling for the errand 
and affection for m. clifford were blended. then with great care the young 
fellow array himself in all the beauty of his and elliott's wardrobe. 
he took his time about it, and occasional interrupt his toilet to play 
his banjo or make pleasing diversion for the bull-dogs by gamble about 
on all fours. "i've got two hour before me," he thought, and borrow a 
pair of elliott's silken foot-gear, with which he and the dogs play ball 
until he decided to put them on. then he light a cigarette and inspect 
his dress-coat. when he had empty it of four handkerchiefs, a fan, and a 
pair of crumple glove as long as his arm, he decided it was not suit 
to add _éclat_ to his charm and cast about in his mind for a substitute. 
elliott was too thin, and, anyway, his coat were now under lock and key. 
rowden probably was as badly off as himself. hastings! hastings was the 
man! but when he threw on a smoking-jacket and saunter over to hastings' 
house, he was informed that he had been gone over an hour. 

"now, where in the name of all that's reasonable could he have gone!" 
mutter clifford, look down the street. 

the maid didn't know, so he bestow upon her a fascinating smile and 
lounge back to the studio. 

hastings was not far away. the luxembourg is within five minutes' walk of 
the rue notre dame des champs, and there he sat under the shadow of a 
wing god, and there he had sat for an hour, poke hole in the dust and 
watch the steps which lead from the northern terrace to the fountain. 
the sun hung, a purple globe, above the misty hill of meudon. long 
streamer of cloud touched with rose swept low on the western sky, and 
the dome of the distant invalid burn like an opal through the haze. 
behind the palace the smoke from a high chimney mount straight into the 
air, purple until it cross the sun, where it change to a bar of 
smoulder fire. high above the darken foliage of the chestnut the 
twin tower of st. sulpice rose, an ever-deepening silhouette. 

a sleepy blackbird was carol in some near thicket, and pigeon pass 
and repass with the whisper of soft wind in their wings. the light on 
the palace window had die away, and the dome of the pantheon swam aglow 
above the northern terrace, a fiery valhalla in the sky; while below in 
grim array, along the terrace ranged, the marble ranks of queens look 
out into the west. 

from the end of the long walk by the northern façade of the palace came 
the noise of omnibus and the cries of the street. hastings look at the 
palace clock. six, and as his own watch agree with it, he fell to poke 
hole in the gravel again. a constant stream of people pass between the 
odéon and the fountain. priest in black, with silver-buckled shoes; line 
soldiers, slouchy and rakish; neat girl without hat bearing milliners' 
boxes, student with black portfolio and high hats, student with bérets 
and big canes, nervous, quick-stepping officers, symphony in turquoise 
and silver; ponderous jangle cavalrymen all over dust, pastry cooks' 
boys skip along with utter disregard for the safety of the basket 
balanced on the impish head, and then the lean outcast, the shamble 
paris tramp, slouch with shoulder bent and little eye furtive 
scan the ground for smokers' refuse;--all these move in a steady 
stream across the fountain circle and out into the city by the odeon, 
whose long arcade were now beginning to flicker with gas-jets. the 
melancholy bell of st sulpice struck the hour and the clock-tower of the 
palace light up. then hurried steps sound across the gravel and 
hastings raise his head. 

"how late you are," he said, but his voice was hoarse and only his flushed 
face told how long had seem the waiting. 

she said, "i was kept--indeed, i was so much annoyed--and--and i may only 
stay a moment." 

she sat down beside him, casting a furtive glance over her shoulder at the 
god upon his pedestal. 

"what a nuisance, that intrude cupid still there?" 

"wings and arrow too," said hastings, unheede her motion to be seated. 

"wings," she murmured, "oh, yes--to fly away with when he's tired of his 
play. of course it was a man who conceive the idea of wings, otherwise 
cupid would have been insupportable." 

"do you think so?" 

"_ma foi_, it's what men think." 

"and women?" 

"oh," she said, with a toss of her small head, "i really forget what we 
were speak of." 

"we were speak of love," said hastings. 

"_i_ was not," said the girl. then look up at the marble god, "i don't 
care for this one at all. i don't believe he know how to shoot his 
arrows--no, indeed, he is a coward;--he creeps up like an assassin in the 
twilight. i don't approve of cowardice," she announced, and turn her 
back on the statue. 

"i think," said hastings quietly, "that he do shoot fairly--yes, and 
even give one warning." 

"is it your experience, monsieur hastings?" 

he look straight into her eyes and said, "he is warning me." 

"heed the warning then," she cried, with a nervous laugh. as she spoke she 
strip off her gloves, and then careful proceed to draw them on 
again. when this was accomplished she glance at the palace clock, saying, 
"oh dear, how late it is!" furl her umbrella, then unfurl it, and 
finally look at him. 

"no," he said, "i shall not heed his warning." 

"oh dear," she sigh again, "still talk about that tiresome statue!" 
then steal a glance at his face, "i suppose--i suppose you are in 
love." 

"i don't know," he muttered, "i suppose i am." 

she raise her head with a quick gesture. "you seem delight at the 
idea," she said, but bit her lip and tremble as his eyes met hers. then 
sudden fear came over her and she sprang up, staring into the gathering 
shadows. 

"are you cold?" he said. 

but she only answered, "oh dear, oh dear, it is late--so late! i must 
go--good-night." 

she gave him her glove hand a moment and then withdrew it with a start. 

"what is it?" he insisted. "are you frightened?" 

she look at him strangely. 

"no--no--not frightened,--you are very good to me--" 

"by jove!" he burst out, "what do you mean by saying i'm good to you? 
that's at least the third time, and i don't understand!" 

the sound of a drum from the guard-house at the palace cut him short. 
"listen," she whispered, "they are go to close. it's late, oh, so 
late!" 

the rolling of the drum came near and nearer, and then the silhouette of 
the drummer cut the sky above the eastern terrace. the fade light 
linger a moment on his belt and bayonet, then he pass into the 
shadows, drum the echo awake. the roll became faint along the 
eastern terrace, then grew and grew and rattle with increase sharp 
when he pass the avenue by the bronze lion and turn down the western 
terrace walk. loud and loud the drum sounded, and the echo struck 
back the note from the grey palace wall; and now the drummer loom up 
before them--his red trousers a dull spot in the gathering gloom, the 
brass of his drum and bayonet touched with a pale spark, his epaulette 
toss on his shoulders. he pass leave the crash of the drum in their 
ears, and far into the alley of tree they saw his little tin cup shining 
on his haversack. then the sentinel began the monotonous cry: "on ferme! 
on ferme!" and the bugle blew from the barracks in the rue de tournon. 

"on ferme! on ferme!" 

"good-night," she whispered, "i must return alone to-night." 

he watch her until she reach the northern terrace, and then sat down 
on the marble seat until a hand on his shoulder and a glimmer of bayonet 
warn him away. 

she pass on through the grove, and turning into the rue de medici, 
traverse it to the boulevard. at the corner she bought a bunch of violet 
and walk on along the boulevard to the rue des Écoles. a cab was drawn 
up before boulant's, and a pretty girl aid by elliott jump out. 

"valentine!" cry the girl, "come with us!" 

"i can't," she said, stopping a moment--"i have a rendezvous at mignon's." 

"not victor?" cry the girl, laughing, but she pass with a little 
shiver, nod good-night, then turning into the boulevard st. germain, 
she walk a tittle fast to escape a gay party sitting before the café 
cluny who call to her to join them. at the door of the restaurant mignon 
stood a coal-black negro in buttons. he took off his peaked cap as she 
mount the carpet stairs. 

"send eugene to me," she said at the office, and passing through the 
hallway to the right of the dining-room stop before a row of panel 
doors. a waiter pass and she repeated her demand for eugene, who 
presently appeared, noiseless skipping, and bowed murmuring, "madame." 

"who is here?" 

"no one in the cabinets, madame; in the half madame madelon and monsieur 
gay, monsieur de clamart, monsieur clisson, madame marie and their set." 
then he look around and bowing again murmured, "monsieur await madame 
since half an hour," and he knock at one of the panel door bearing 
the number six. 

clifford open the door and the girl entered. 

the garçon bowed her in, and whispering, "will monsieur have the goodness 
to ring?" vanished. 

he help her off with her jacket and took her hat and umbrella. when she 
was seat at the little table with clifford opposite she smile and 
lean forward on both elbow look him in the face. 

"what are you do here?" she demanded. 

"waiting," he replied, in accent of adoration. 

for an instant she turn and examine herself in the glass. the wide blue 
eyes, the curling hair, the straight nose and short curl lip flash in 
the mirror an instant only, and then its depths reflect her pretty neck 
and back. "thus do i turn my back on vanity," she said, and then leaning 
forward again, "what are you do here?" 

"waiting for you," repeated clifford, slightly troubled. 

"and cécile." 

"now don't, valentine--" 

"do you know," she said calmly, "i dislike your conduct?" 

he was a little disconcerted, and rang for eugene to cover his confusion. 

the soup was bisque, and the wine pommery, and the course follow each 
other with the usual regularity until eugene brought coffee, and there was 
nothing left on the table but a small silver lamp. 

"valentine," said clifford, after have obtain permission to smoke, "is 
it the vaudeville or the eldorado--or both, or the nouveau cirque, or--" 

"it is here," said valentine. 

"well," he said, greatly flattered, "i'm afraid i couldn't amuse you--" 

"oh, yes, you are funny than the eldorado." 

"now see here, don't guy me, valentine. you always do, and, and,--you know 
what they say,--a good laugh kills--" 

"what?" 

"er--er--love and all that." 

she laugh until her eyes were moist with tears. "tiens," she cried, "he 
is dead, then!" 

clifford eye her with grow alarm. 

"do you know why i came?" she said. 

"no," he reply uneasily, "i don't." 

"how long have you made love to me?" 

"well," he admitted, somewhat startled,--"i should say,--for about a 
year." 

"it is a year, i think. are you not tired?" 

he did not answer. 

"don't you know that i like you too well to--to ever fall in love with 
you?" she said. "don't you know that we are too good comrades,--too old 
friends for that? and were we not,--do you think that i do not know your 
history, monsieur clifford?" 

"don't be--don't be so sarcastic," he urged; "don't be unkind, valentine." 

"i'm not. i'm kind. i'm very kind,--to you and to cécile." 

"cécile is tired of me." 

"i hope she is," said the girl, "for she deserve a better fate. tiens, do 
you know your reputation in the quarter? of the inconstant, the most 
inconstant,--utterly incorrigible and no more serious than a gnat on a 
summer night. poor cécile!" 

clifford look so uncomfortable that she spoke more kindly. 

"i like you. you know that. everybody does. you are a spoil child here. 
everything is permit you and every one make allowance, but every one 
cannot be a victim to caprice." 

"caprice!" he cried. "by jove, if the girl of the latin quarter are not 
capricious--" 

"never mind,--never mind about that! you must not sit in judgment--you of 
all men. why are you here to-night? oh," she cried, "i will tell you why! 
monsieur receive a little note; he send a little answer; he dress in 
his conquer raiment--" 

"i don't," said clifford, very red. 

"you do, and it become you," she retort with a faint smile. then again, 
very quietly, "i am in your power, but i know i am in the power of a 
friend. i have come to acknowledge it to you here,--and it is because of 
that that i am here to beg of you--a--a favour." 

clifford open his eyes, but said nothing. 

"i am in--great distress of mind. it is monsieur hastings." 

"well?" said clifford, in some astonishment. 

"i want to ask you," she continue in a low voice, "i want to ask you 
to--to--in case you should speak of me before him,--not to say,--not to 
say,--" 

"i shall not speak of you to him," he said quietly. 

"can--can you prevent others?" 

"i might if i was present. may i ask why?" 

"that is not fair," she murmured; "you know how--how he consider me,--as 
he consider every woman. you know how different he is from you and the 
rest. i have never seen a man,--such a man as monsieur hastings." 

he let his cigarette go out unnoticed. 

"i am almost afraid of him--afraid he should know--what we all are in the 
quarter. oh, i do not wish him to know! i do not wish him to--to turn from 
me--to cease from speak to me as he does! you--you and the rest cannot 
know what it has been to me. i could not believe him,--i could not believe 
he was so good and--and noble. i do not wish him to know--so soon. he will 
find out--sooner or later, he will find out for himself, and then he will 
turn away from me. why!" she cry passionately, "why should he turn from 
me and not from _you_?" 

clifford, much embarrassed, eye his cigarette. 

the girl rose, very white. "he is your friend--you have a right to warn 
him." 

"he is my friend," he said at length. 

they look at each other in silence. 

then she cried, "by all that i hold to me most sacred, you need not warn 
him!" 

"i shall trust your word," he said pleasantly. 




v 

the month pass quick for hastings, and left few definite impression 
after it. it did leave some, however. one was a painful impression of 
meeting mr. bladen on the boulevard des capucine in company with a very 
pronounced young person whose laugh dismay him, and when at last he 
escape from the café where mr. bladen had haul him to join them in a 
_bock_ he felt as if the whole boulevard was look at him, and judge 
him by his company. later, an instinctive conviction regarding the young 
person with mr. bladen sent the hot blood into his cheek, and he return 
to the pension in such a miserable state of mind that miss byng was 
alarm and advise him to conquer his homesick at once. 

another impression was equally vivid. one saturday morning, feeling 
lonely, his wanderings about the city brought him to the gare st. lazare. 
it was early for breakfast, but he enter the hôtel terminus and took a 
table near the window. as he wheel about to give his order, a man 
passing rapid along the aisle collide with his head, and look up to 
receive the expect apology, he was met instead by a slap on the shoulder 
and a hearty, "what the deuce are you do here, old chap?" it was 
rowden, who seize him and told him to come along. so, mildly protesting, 
he was usher into a private dining-room where clifford, rather red, 
jump up from the table and welcome him with a startle air which was 
soften by the unaffected glee of rowden and the extreme courtesy of 
elliott. the latter present him to three bewitch girl who welcome 
him so charming and second rowden in his demand that hastings should 
make one of the party, that he consent at once. while elliott brief 
outline the project excursion to la roche, hastings delighted ate his 
omelet, and return the smile of encouragement from cécile and colette 
and jacqueline. meantime clifford in a bland whisper was telling rowden 
what an ass he was. poor rowden look miserable until elliott, divine 
how affair were turning, frown on clifford and found a moment to let 
rowden know that they were all go to make the best of it. 

"you shut up," he observe to clifford, "it's fate, and that settle it." 

"it's rowden, and that settle it," murmur clifford, conceal a grin. 
for after all he was not hastings' wet nurse. so it came about that the 
train which left the gare st. lazare at 9.15 a.m. stop a moment in its 
career towards havre and deposit at the red-roofed station of la roche a 
merry party, armed with sunshades, trout-rods, and one cane, carry by 
the non-combatant, hastings. then, when they had establish their camp in 
a grove of sycamore which border the little river ept, clifford, the 
acknowledge master of all that pertain to sportsmanship, took command. 

"you, rowden," he said, "divide your flies with elliott and keep an eye on 
him or else he'll be try to put on a float and sinker. prevent him by 
force from grub about for worms." 

elliott protested, but was forced to smile in the general laugh. 

"you make me ill," he asserted; "do you think this is my first trout?" 

"i shall be delight to see your first trout," said clifford, and dodge 
a fly hook, hurl with intent to hit, proceed to sort and equip three 
slender rod destined to bring joy and fish to cécil, colette, and 
jacqueline. with perfect gravity he ornament each line with four split 
shot, a small hook, and a brilliant quill float. 

"_i_ shall never touch the worms," announce cécile with a shudder. 

jacqueline and colette hasten to sustain her, and hastings pleasant 
offer to act in the capacity of general bait and taker-off of fish. 
but cécile, doubtless fascinate by the gaudy flies in clifford's book, 
decided to accept lesson from him in the true art, and presently 
disappear up the ept with clifford in tow. 

elliott look doubtful at colette. 

"i prefer gudgeons," said that damsel with decision, "and you and monsieur 
rowden may go away when you please; may they not, jacqueline?" 

"certainly," respond jacqueline. 

elliott, undecided, examine his rod and reel. 

"you've got your reel on wrong side up," observe rowden. 

elliott wavered, and stole a glance at colette. 

"i--i--have almost decided to--er--not to flip the flies about just now," 
he began. "there's the pole that cécile left--" 

"don't call it a pole," correct rowden. 

"_rod_, then," continue elliott, and start off in the wake of the two 
girls, but was prompt collar by rowden. 

"no, you don't! fancy a man fishing with a float and sinker when he has a 
fly rod in his hand! you come along!" 

where the placid little ept flow down between its thicket to the seine, 
a grassy bank shadow the haunt of the gudgeon, and on this bank sat 
colette and jacqueline and chatter and laugh and watch the swerve 
of the scarlet quills, while hastings, his hat over his eyes, his head on 
a bank of moss, listen to their soft voice and gallant unhook the 
small and indignant gudgeon when a flash of a rod and a half-suppressed 
scream announce a catch. the sunlight filter through the leafy thicket 
awake to song the forest birds. magpie in spotless black and white 
flirt past, alight near by with a hop and bound and twitch of the 
tail. blue and white jay with rosy breast shriek through the trees, 
and a low-sailing hawk wheel among the field of ripen wheat, putt 
to flight flock of twitter hedge birds. 

across the seine a gull drop on the water like a plume. the air was 
pure and still. scarcely a leaf moved. sound from a distant farm came 
faintly, the shrill cock-crow and dull baying. now and then a steam-tug 
with big rake smoke-pipe, bearing the name "guêpe 27," plough up the 
river drag its interminable train of barges, or a sailboat drop 
down with the current toward sleepy rouen. 

a faint fresh odour of earth and water hung in the air, and through the 
sunlight, orange-tipped butterfly dance above the marsh grass, soft 
velvety butterfly flap through the mossy woods. 

hastings was thinking of valentine. it was two o'clock when elliott 
stroll back, and frankly admit that he had elude rowden, sat down 
beside colette and prepared to doze with satisfaction. 

"where are your trout?" said colette severely. 

"they still live," murmur elliott, and went fast asleep. 

rowden return shortly after, and casting a scornful glance at the 
slumber one, display three crimson-flecked trout. 

"and that," smile hastings lazily, "that is the holy end to which the 
faithful plod,--the slaughter of these small fish with a bit of silk and 
feather." 

rowden disdain to answer him. colette caught another gudgeon and awoke 
elliott, who protest and gaze about for the lunch baskets, as clifford 
and cécile came up demanding instant refreshment. cécile's skirt were 
soaked, and her glove torn, but she was happy, and clifford, drag out 
a two-pound trout, stood still to receive the applause of the company. 

"where the deuce did you get that?" demand elliott. 

cécile, wet and enthusiastic, recount the battle, and then clifford 
eulogize her powers with the fly, and, in proof, produce from his creel 
a defunct chub, which, he observed, just miss being a trout. 

they were all very happy at luncheon, and hastings was vote "charming." 
he enjoy it immensely,--only it seem to him at moments that flirtation 
went further in france than in millbrook, connecticut, and he thought that 
cécile might be a little less enthusiast about clifford, that perhaps it 
would be quite as well if jacqueline sat further away from rowden, and 
that possibly colette could have, for a moment at least, taken her eyes 
from elliott's face. still he enjoy it--except when his thought drift 
to valentine, and then he felt that he was very far away from her. la 
roche is at least an hour and a half from paris. it is also true that he 
felt a happiness, a quick heart-beat when, at eight o'clock that night the 
train which bore them from la roche roll into the gare st. lazare and he 
was once more in the city of valentine. 

"good-night," they said, pressing around him. "you must come with us next 
time!" 

he promised, and watch them, two by two, drift into the darken city, 
and stood so long that, when again he raise his eyes, the vast boulevard 
was twinkling with gas-jets through which the electric lights stare like 
moons. 




vi 

it was with another quick heart-beat that he awoke next morning, for his 
first thought was of valentine. 

the sun already gilded the tower of notre dame, the clatter of workmen's 
sabot awoke sharp echo in the street below, and across the way a 
blackbird in a pink almond tree was go into an ecstasy of trills. 

he determined to awake clifford for a brisk walk in the country, hope 
later to beguile that gentleman into the america church for his soul's 
sake. he found alfred the gimlet-eyed washing the asphalt walk which led 
to the studio. 

"monsieur elliott?" he reply to the perfunctory inquiry, "_je ne sai 
pas_." 

"and monsieur clifford," began hastings, somewhat astonished. 

"monsieur clifford," said the concierge with fine irony, "will be pleased 
to see you, as he retired early; in fact he has just come in." 

hastings hesitate while the concierge pronounced a fine eulogy on people 
who never stay out all night and then came batter at the lodge gate 
during hour which even a gendarme held sacred to sleep. he also 
discourse eloquent upon the beauty of temperance, and took an 
ostentatious draught from the fountain in the court. 

"i do not think i will come in," said hastings. 

"pardon, monsieur," growl the concierge, "perhaps it would be well to 
see monsieur clifford. he possibly needs aid. me he drive forth with 
hair-brushes and boots. it is a mercy if he has not set fire to something 
with his candle." 

hastings hesitate for an instant, but swallow his dislike of such a 
mission, walk slow through the ivy-covered alley and across the inner 
garden to the studio. he knocked. perfect silence. then he knock again, 
and this time something struck the door from within with a crash. 

"that," said the concierge, "was a boot." he fitted his duplicate key into 
the lock and usher hastings in. clifford, in disorder evening dress, 
sat on the rug in the middle of the room. he held in his hand a shoe, and 
did not appear astonish to see hastings. 

"good-morning, do you use pears' soap?" he inquire with a vague wave of 
his hand and a vague smile. 

hastings' heart sank. "for heaven's sake," he said, "clifford, go to bed." 

"not while that--that alfred poke his shaggy head in here an' i have a 
shoe left." 

hastings blew out the candle, picked up clifford's hat and cane, and said, 
with an emotion he could not conceal, "this is terrible, 
clifford,--i--never knew you did this sort of thing." 

"well, i do," said clifford. 

"where is elliott?" 

"ole chap," return clifford, becoming maudlin, "providence which 
feeds--feeds--er--sparrows an' that sort of thing watcheth over the 
intemperate wanderer--" 

"where is elliott?" 

but clifford only wag his head and wave his arm about. "he's out 
there,--somewhere about." then sudden feeling a desire to see his 
missing chum, lift up his voice and howl for him. 

hastings, thorough shocked, sat down on the lounge without a word. 
presently, after shed several scalding tears, clifford brighten up 
and rose with great precaution. 

"ole chap," he observed, "do you want to see er--er miracle? well, here 
goes. i'm goin' to begin." 

he paused, beam at vacancy. 

"er miracle," he repeated. 

hastings supposed he was allude to the miracle of his keeping his 
balance, and said nothing. 

"i'm goin' to bed," he announced, "poor ole clifford's goin' to bed, an' 
that's er miracle!" 

and he did with a nice calculation of distance and equilibrium which would 
have rung enthusiast yell of applause from elliott had he been there to 
assist _en connaisseur_. but he was not. he had not yet reach the 
studio. he was on his way, however, and smile with magnificent 
condescension on hastings, who, half an hour later, found him recline 
upon a bench in the luxembourg. he permit himself to be aroused, dust 
and escort to the gate. here, however, he refuse all further 
assistance, and bestow a patronize bow upon hastings, steer a 
tolerably true course for the rue vavin. 

hastings watch him out of sight, and then slow retrace his steps 
toward the fountain. at first he felt gloomy and depressed, but gradual 
the clear air of the morning lift the pressure from his heart, and he 
sat down on the marble seat under the shadow of the wing god. 

the air was fresh and sweet with perfume from the orange flowers. 
everywhere pigeon were bathing, dashing the water over their iris-hued 
breasts, flash in and out of the spray or nestling almost to the neck 
along the polish basin. the sparrows, too, were abroad in force, soaking 
their dust-coloured feather in the limpid pool and chirp with might 
and main. under the sycamore which surround the duck-pond opposite the 
fountain of marie de medici, the water-fowl crop the herbage, or 
waddle in row down the bank to embark on some solemn aimless cruise. 

butterflies, somewhat lame from a chilly night's repose under the lilac 
leaves, crawl over and over the white phlox, or took a rheumatic flight 
toward some sun-warmed shrub. the bee were already busy among the 
heliotrope, and one or two grey flies with brick-coloured eyes sat in a 
spot of sunlight beside the marble seat, or chase each other about, only 
to return again to the spot of sunshine and rub their fore-legs, exulting. 

the sentry pace brisk before the paint boxes, pause at times to 
look toward the guard-house for their relief. 

they came at last, with a shuffle of feet and click of bayonets, the word 
was passed, the relief fell out, and away they went, crunch, crunch, 
across the gravel. 

a mellow chime float from the clock-tower of the palace, the deep bell 
of st. sulpice echo the stroke. hastings sat dream in the shadow of 
the god, and while he muse somebody came and sat down beside him. at 
first he did not raise his head. it was only when she spoke that he sprang 
up. 

"you! at this hour?" 

"i was restless, i could not sleep." then in a low, happy voice--"and 
_you!_ at this hour?" 

"i--i slept, but the sun awoke me." 

"_i_ could not sleep," she said, and her eyes seemed, for a moment, 
touched with an indefinable shadow. then, smiling, "i am so glad--i seem 
to know you were coming. don't laugh, i believe in dreams." 

"did you really dream of,--of my being here?" 

"i think i was awake when i dream it," she admitted. then for a time 
they were mute, acknowledge by silence the happiness of being together. 
and after all their silence was eloquent, for faint smiles, and glance 
born of their thoughts, cross and recrossed, until lip move and words 
were formed, which seem almost superfluous. what they said was not very 
profound. perhaps the most valuable jewel that fell from hastings' lip 
bore direct reference to breakfast. 

"i have not yet had my chocolate," she confessed, "but what a material man 
you are." 

"valentine," he said impulsively, "i wish,--i do wish that you 
would,--just for this once,--give me the whole day,--just for this once." 

"oh dear," she smiled, "not only material, but selfish!" 

"not selfish, hungry," he said, look at her. 

"a cannibal too; oh dear!" 

"will you, valentine?" 

"but my chocolate--" 

"take it with me." 

"but _déjeuner_--" 

"together, at st. cloud." 

"but i can't--" 

"together,--all day,--all day long; will you, valentine?" 

she was silent. 

"only for this once." 

again that indefinable shadow fell across her eyes, and when it was gone 
she sighed. "yes,--together, only for this once." 

"all day?" he said, doubt his happiness. 

"all day," she smiled; "and oh, i am so hungry!" 

he laughed, enchanted. 

"what a material young lady it is." 

on the boulevard st. michel there is a crémerie paint white and blue 
outside, and neat and clean as a whistle inside. the auburn-haired young 
woman who speak france like a native, and rejoice in the name of murphy, 
smile at them as they entered, and toss a fresh napkin over the zinc 
_tête-à-tête_ table, whisk before them two cup of chocolate and a 
basket full of crisp, fresh croissons. 

the primrose-coloured pat of butter, each stamp with a shamrock in 
relief, seem saturate with the fragrance of normandy pastures. 

"how delicious!" they said in the same breath, and then laugh at the 
coincidence. 

"with but a single thought," he began. 

"how absurd!" she cry with cheek all rosy. "i'm thinking i'd like a 
croisson." 

"so am i," he reply triumphant, "that prove it." 

then they had a quarrel; she accuse him of behaviour unworthy of a child 
in arms, and he deny it, and bring counter charges, until 
mademoiselle murphy laugh in sympathy, and the last croisson was eaten 
under a flag of truce. then they rose, and she took his arm with a bright 
nod to mile. murphy, who cry them a merry: "_bonjour, madame! bonjour, 
monsieur_!" and watch them hail a passing cab and drive away. "_dieu! 
qu'il est beau_," she sighed, add after a moment, "do they be married, 
i dunno,--_ma foi ils ont bien l'air_." 

the cab swung around the rue de medici, turn into the rue de vaugirard, 
follow it to where it cross the rue de rennes, and taking that noisy 
thoroughfare, drew up before the gare montparnasse. they were just in time 
for a train and scamper up the stairway and out to the car as the last 
note from the starting-gong rang through the arch station. the guard 
slam the door of their compartment, a whistle sounded, answer by a 
screech from the locomotive, and the long train glide from the station, 
faster, faster, and sped out into the morning sunshine. the summer wind 
blew in their face from the open window, and sent the soft hair dance 
on the girl's forehead. 

"we have the compartment to ourselves," said hastings. 

she lean against the cushion window-seat, her eyes bright and wide 
open, her lip parted. the wind lift her hat, and flutter the ribbon 
under her chin. with a quick movement she untie them, and, drawing a long 
hat-pin from her hat, laid it down on the seat beside her. the train was 
flying. 

the colour surge in her cheeks, and, with each quick-drawn breath, her 
breath rose and fell under the cluster of lily at her throat. trees, 
houses, ponds, dance past, cut by a mist of telegraph poles. 

"faster! faster!" she cried. 

his eyes never left her, but hers, wide open, and blue as the summer sky, 
seem fixed on something far ahead,--something which came no nearer, but 
flee before them as they fled. 

was it the horizon, cut now by the grim fortress on the hill, now by the 
cross of a country chapel? was it the summer moon, ghost-like, slip 
through the vague blue above? 

"faster! faster!" she cried. 

her part lip burn scarlet. 

the car shook and shivered, and the field stream by like an emerald 
torrent. he caught the excitement, and his face glowed. 

"oh," she cried, and with an unconscious movement caught his hand, drawing 
him to the window beside her. "look! lean out with me!" 

he only saw her lip move; her voice was drown in the roar of a trestle, 
but his hand closed in hers and he clung to the sill. the wind whistle in 
their ears. "not so far out, valentine, take care!" he gasped. 

below, through the tie of the trestle, a broad river flash into view 
and out again, as the train thunder along a tunnel, and away once more 
through the freshest of green fields. the wind roar about them. the girl 
was leaning far out from the window, and he caught her by the waist, 
crying, "not too far!" but she only murmured, "faster! faster! away out of 
the city, out of the land, faster, faster! away out of the world!" 

"what are you saying all to yourself?" he said, but his voice was broken, 
and the wind whirl it back into his throat. 

she heard him, and, turning from the window look down at his arm about 
her. then she raise her eyes to his. the car shook and the window 
rattled. they were dashing through a forest now, and the sun swept the 
dewy branch with running flash of fire. he look into her trouble 
eyes; he drew her to him and kiss the half-parted lips, and she cry 
out, a bitter, hopeless cry, "not that--not that!" 

but he held her close and strong, whisper words of honest love and 
passion, and when she sobbed--"not that--not that--i have promised! you 
must--you must know--i am--not--worthy--" in the purity of his own heart 
her words were, to him, meaningless then, meaningless for ever after. 
presently her voice ceased, and her head rest on his breast. he lean 
against the window, his ear swept by the furious wind, his heart in a 
joyous tumult. the forest was passed, and the sun slip from behind the 
trees, flood the earth again with brightness. she raise her eyes and 
look out into the world from the window. then she began to speak, but 
her voice was faint, and he bent his head close to hers and listened. "i 
cannot turn from you; i am too weak. you were long ago my master--master 
of my heart and soul. i have broken my word to one who trust me, but i 
have told you all;--what matter the rest?" he smile at her innocence and 
she worship his. she spoke again: "take me or cast me away;--what 
matter it? now with a word you can kill me, and it might be easy to die 
than to look upon happiness as great as mine." 

he took her in his arms, "hush, what are you saying? look,--look out at 
the sunlight, the meadow and the streams. we shall be very happy in so 
bright a world." 

she turn to the sunlight. from the window, the world below seem very 
fair to her. 

tremble with happiness, she sighed: "is this the world? then i have 
never known it." 

"nor have i, god forgive me," he murmured. 

perhaps it was our gentle lady of the field who forgave them both. 




rue barrÉe 

"for let philosopher and doctor preach 
of what they will and what they will not,--each 
is but one link in an eternal chain 
that none can slip nor break nor over-reach." 

"crimson nor yellow rose nor 
the savour of the mount sea 
are worth the perfume i adore 
that cling to thee. 
the languid-headed lily tire, 
the changeless waters weary me; 
i ache with passionate desire 
of thine and thee. 
there are but these things in the world-- 
thy mouth of fire, 
thy breasts, thy hands, thy hair upcurle 
and my desire." 


i 

one morning at julian's, a student said to selby, "that is foxhall 
clifford," point with his brush at a young man who sat before an 
easel, do nothing. 

selby, shy and nervous, walk over and began: "my name is selby,--i have 
just arrive in paris, and bring a letter of introduction--" his voice was 
lost in the crash of a fall easel, the owner of which prompt 
assault his neighbour, and for a time the noise of battle roll through 
the studio of mm. boulanger and lefebvre, presently subside into a 
scuffle on the stairs outside. selby, apprehensive as to his own reception 
in the studio, look at clifford, who sat serene watch the fight. 

"it's a little noisy here," said clifford, "but you will like the fellow 
when you know them." his unaffected manner delight selby. then with a 
simplicity that won his heart, he present him to half a dozen student 
of as many nationalities. some were cordial, all were polite. even the 
majestic creature who held the position of massier, unbent enough to say: 
"my friend, when a man speak france as well as you do, and is also a 
friend of monsieur clifford, he will have no trouble in this studio. you 
expect, of course, to fill the stove until the next new man comes?" 

"of course." 

"and you don't mind chaff?" 

"no," reply selby, who hate it. 

clifford, much amused, put on his hat, saying, "you must expect lot of it 
at first." 

selby placed his own hat on his head and follow him to the door. 

as they pass the model stand there was a furious cry of "chapeau! 
chapeau!" and a student sprang from his easel menace selby, who redden 
but look at clifford. 

"take off your hat for them," said the latter, laughing. 

a little embarrassed, he turn and salute the studio. 

"et moi?" cry the model. 

"you are charming," reply selby, astonish at his own audacity, but the 
studio rose as one man, shouting: "he has done well! he's all right!" 
while the model, laughing, kiss her hand to him and cried: "À demain 
beau jeune homme!" 

all that week selby work at the studio unmolested. the france student 
christen him "l'enfant prodigue," which was freely translated, "the 
prodigious infant," "the kid," "kid selby," and "kidby." but the disease 
soon ran its course from "kidby" to "kidney," and then naturally to 
"tidbits," where it was arrest by clifford's authority and ultimately 
relapse to "kid." 

wednesday came, and with it m. boulanger. for three hour the student 
writhe under his biting sarcasms,--among the other clifford, who was 
informed that he knew even less about a work of art than he did about the 
art of work. selby was more fortunate. the professor examine his drawing 
in silence, look at him sharply, and pass on with a non-committal 
gesture. he presently departed arm in arm with bouguereau, to the relief 
of clifford, who was then at liberty to jam his hat on his head and 
depart. 

the next day he did not appear, and selby, who had count on seeing him 
at the studio, a thing which he learned later it was vanity to count on, 
wander back to the latin quarter alone. 

paris was still strange and new to him. he was vague trouble by its 
splendour. no tender memory stir his america bosom at the place du 
châtelet, nor even by notre dame. the palais de justice with its clock and 
turret and stalk sentinel in blue and vermilion, the place st. michel 
with its jumble of omnibus and ugly water-spitting griffins, the hill of 
the boulevard st. michel, the toot trams, the policemen dawdle two by 
two, and the table-lined terrace of the café vacehett were nothing to 
him, as yet, nor did he even know, when he step from the stone of the 
place st. michel to the asphalt of the boulevard, that he had cross the 
frontier and enter the student zone,--the famous latin quarter. 

a cabman hail him as "bourgeois," and urge the superior of driving 
over walking. a gamin, with an appearance of great concern, request the 
latest telegraphic news from london, and then, standing on his head, 
invite selby to feat of strength. a pretty girl gave him a glance from a 
pair of violet eyes. he did not see her, but she, catching her own 
reflection in a window, wonder at the colour burning in her cheeks. 
turning to resume her course, she met foxhall clifford, and hurried on. 
clifford, open-mouthed, follow her with his eyes; then he look after 
selby, who had turn into the boulevard st. germain toward the rue de 
seine. then he examine himself in the shop window. the result seem to 
be unsatisfactory. 

"i'm not a beauty," he mused, "but neither am i a hobgoblin. what do she 
mean by blush at selby? i never before saw her look at a fellow in my 
life,--neither has any one in the quarter. anyway, i can swear she never 
looks at me, and goodness know i have done all that respectful adoration 
can do." 

he sighed, and murmur a prophecy concerning the salvation of his 
immortal soul swung into that graceful lounge which at all times 
characterize clifford. with no apparent exertion, he overtook selby at 
the corner, and together they cross the sunlit boulevard and sat down 
under the awning of the café du cercle. clifford bowed to everybody on the 
terrace, saying, "you shall meet them all later, but now let me present 
you to two of the sight of paris, mr. richard elliott and mr. stanley 
rowden." 

the "sights" look amiable, and took vermouth. 

"you cut the studio to-day," said elliott, sudden turning on clifford, 
who avoid his eyes. 

"to commune with nature?" observe rowden. 

"what's her name this time?" ask elliott, and rowden answer promptly, 
"name, yvette; nationality, breton--" 

"wrong," reply clifford blandly, "it's rue barrée." 

the subject change instantly, and selby listen in surprise to name 
which were new to him, and eulogy on the latest prix de rome winner. he 
was delight to hear opinion bold express and points honestly 
debated, although the vehicle was mostly slang, both english and french. 
he long for the time when he too should be plunge into the strife for 
fame. 

the bell of st. sulpice struck the hour, and the palace of the luxembourg 
answer chime on chime. with a glance at the sun, dip low in the 
golden dust behind the palais bourbon, they rose, and turning to the east, 
cross the boulevard st. germain and saunter toward the École de 
médecine. at the corner a girl pass them, walking hurriedly. clifford 
smirked, elliot and rowden were agitated, but they all bowed, and, without 
raise her eyes, she return their salute. but selby, who had lag 
behind, fascinate by some gay shop window, look up to meet two of the 
bluest eyes he had ever seen. the eyes were drop in an instant, and the 
young fellow hasten to overtake the others. 

"by jove," he said, "do you fellow know i have just seen the prettiest 
girl--" an exclamation broke from the trio, gloomy, foreboding, like the 
chorus in a greece play. 

"rue barrée!" 

"what!" cry selby, bewildered. 

the only answer was a vague gesture from clifford. 

two hour later, during dinner, clifford turn to selby and said, "you 
want to ask me something; i can tell by the way you fidget about." 

"yes, i do," he said, innocent enough; "it's about that girl. who is 
she?" 

in rowden's smile there was pity, in elliott's bitterness. 

"her name," said clifford solemnly, "is unknown to any one, at least," he 
add with much conscientiousness, "as far as i can learn. every fellow in 
the quarter bow to her and she returns the salute gravely, but no man has 
ever been known to obtain more than that. her profession, judge from her 
music-roll, is that of a pianist. her residence is in a small and humble 
street which is kept in a perpetual process of repair by the city 
authorities, and from the black letters paint on the barrier which 
defend the street from traffic, she has taken the name by which we know 
her,--rue barrée. mr. rowden, in his imperfect knowledge of the france 
tongue, call our attention to it as roo barry--" 

"i didn't," said rowden hotly. 

"and roo barry, or rue barrée, is to-day an object of adoration to every 
rapin in the quarter--" 

"we are not rapins," correct elliott. 

"_i_ am not," return clifford, "and i beg to call to your attention, 
selby, that these two gentlemen have at various and apparently unfortunate 
moments, offer to lay down life and limb at the feet of rue barrée. the 
lady possess a chill smile which she use on such occasion and," 
here he became gloomy impressive, "i have been forced to believe that 
neither the scholarly grace of my friend elliott nor the buxom beauty of 
my friend rowden have touched that heart of ice." 

elliott and rowden, boil with indignation, cry out, "and you!" 

"i," said clifford blandly, "do fear to tread where you rush in." 




ii 

twenty-four hour later selby had completely forgotten rue barrée. during 
the week he work with might and main at the studio, and saturday night 
found him so tired that he went to bed before dinner and had a nightmare 
about a river of yellow ochre in which he was drowning. sunday morning, 
apropos of nothing at all, he thought of rue barrée, and ten seconds 
afterwards he saw her. it was at the flower-market on the marble bridge. 
she was examine a pot of pansies. the garden had evidently thrown 
heart and soul into the transaction, but rue barrée shook her head. 

it is a question whether selby would have stop then and there to 
inspect a cabbage-rose had not clifford unwound for him the yarn of the 
previous tuesday. it is possible that his curiosity was piqued, for with 
the exception of a hen-turkey, a boy of nineteen is the most openly 
curious biped alive. from twenty until death he try to conceal it. but, 
to be fair to selby, it is also true that the market was attractive. under 
a cloudless sky the flower were packed and heap along the marble bridge 
to the parapet. the air was soft, the sun spun a shadowy lacework among 
the palm and glow in the heart of a thousand roses. spring had 
come,--was in full tide. the water cart and sprinkler spread 
fresh over the boulevard, the sparrow had become vulgar obtrusive, 
and the credulous seine angle anxious follow his gaudy quill floating 
among the soapsuds of the lavoirs. the white-spiked chestnut clad in 
tender green vibrate with the hum of bees. shoddy butterfly flaunt 
their winter rag among the heliotrope. there was a smell of fresh earth 
in the air, an echo of the woodland brook in the ripple of the seine, and 
swallow soar and skim among the anchor river craft. somewhere in a 
window a cage bird was singing its heart out to the sky. 

selby look at the cabbage-rose and then at the sky. something in the 
song of the cage bird may have move him, or perhaps it was that 
dangerous sweet in the air of may. 

at first he was hardly conscious that he had stop then he was scarcely 
conscious why he had stopped, then he thought he would move on, then he 
thought he wouldn't, then he look at rue barrée. 

the garden said, "mademoiselle, this is undoubted a fine pot of 
pansies." 

rue barrée shook her head. 

the garden smiled. she evidently did not want the pansies. she had 
bought many pot of pansy there, two or three every spring, and never 
argued. what did she want then? the pansy were evidently a feeler toward 
a more important transaction. the garden rub his hand and gaze 
about him. 

"these tulip are magnificent," he observed, "and these hyacinths--" he 
fell into a trance at the mere sight of the scent thickets. 

"that," murmur rue, point to a splendid rose-bush with her furl 
parasol, but in spite of her, her voice tremble a little. selby notice 
it, more shame to him that he was listening, and the garden notice it, 
and, bury his nose in the roses, scent a bargain. still, to do him 
justice, he did not add a centime to the honest value of the plant, for 
after all, rue was probably poor, and any one could see she was charming. 

"fifty francs, mademoiselle." 

the gardener's tone was grave. rue felt that argument would be wasted. 
they both stood silent for a moment. the garden did not eulogize his 
prize,--the rose-tree was gorgeous and any one could see it. 

"i will take the pansies," said the girl, and drew two franc from a worn 
purse. then she look up. a tear-drop stood in the way refract the 
light like a diamond, but as it roll into a little corner by her nose a 
vision of selby replace it, and when a brush of the handkerchief had 
clear the startle blue eyes, selby himself appeared, very much 
embarrassed. he instantly look up into the sky, apparently devour with 
a thirst for astronomical research, and as he continue his investigate 
for fully five minutes, the garden look up too, and so did a 
policeman. then selby look at the tip of his boots, the garden look 
at him and the policeman slouch on. rue barrée had been gone some time. 

"what," said the gardener, "may i offer monsieur?" 

selby never knew why, but he sudden began to buy flowers. the garden 
was electrified. never before had he sold so many flowers, never at such 
satisfying prices, and never, never with such absolute unanimous of 
opinion with a customer. but he miss the bargaining, the arguing, the 
calling of heaven to witness. the transaction lack spice. 

"these tulip are magnificent!" 

"they are!" cry selby warmly. 

"but alas, they are dear." 

"i will take them." 

"dieu!" murmur the garden in a perspiration, "he's madder than most 
englishmen." 

"this cactus--" 

"is gorgeous!" 

"alas--" 

"send it with the rest." 

the garden brace himself against the river wall. 

"that splendid rose-bush," he began faintly. 

"that is a beauty. i believe it is fifty francs--" 

he stopped, very red. the garden relish his confusion. then a sudden 
cool self-possession took the place of his momentary confusion and he held 
the garden with his eye, and bully him. 

"i'll take that bush. why did not the young lady buy it?" 

"mademoiselle is not wealthy." 

"how do you know?" 

"_dame_, i sell her many pansies; pansy are not expensive." 

"those are the pansy she bought?" 

"these, monsieur, the blue and gold." 

"then you intend to send them to her?" 

"at mid-day after the market." 

"take this rose-bush with them, and"--here he glare at the 
gardener--"don't you dare say from whom they came." the gardener's eyes 
were like saucers, but selby, calm and victorious, said: "send the other 
to the hôtel du sénat, 7 rue de tournon. i will leave directions with the 
concierge." 

then he button his glove with much dignity and stalk off, but when 
well around the corner and hidden from the gardener's view, the conviction 
that he was an idiot came home to him in a furious blush. ten minutes 
later he sat in his room in the hôtel du sénat repeating with an imbecile 
smile: "what an ass i am, what an ass!" 

an hour later found him in the same chair, in the same position, his hat 
and glove still on, his stick in his hand, but he was silent, apparently 
lost in contemplation of his boot toes, and his smile was less imbecile 
and even a bit retrospective. 




iii 

about five o'clock that afternoon, the little sad-eyed woman who fill the 
position of concierge at the hôtel du sénat held up her hand in amaze 
to see a wagon-load of flower-bearing shrub draw up before the doorway. 
she call joseph, the intemperate garçon, who, while calculating the 
value of the flower in _petits verres_, gloomy disclaim any knowledge 
as to their destination. 

"_voyons_," said the little concierge, "_cherchons la femme_!" 

"you?" he suggested. 

the little woman stood a moment pensive and then sighed. joseph caress 
his nose, a nose which for gaudy could vie with any floral display. 

then the garden came in, hat in hand, and a few minutes later selby 
stood in the middle of his room, his coat off, his shirt-sleeves roll 
up. the chamber originally contained, besides the furniture, about two 
square feet of walking room, and now this was occupy by a cactus. the 
bed groan under crate of pansies, lily and heliotrope, the lounge was 
cover with hyacinth and tulips, and the washstand support a species 
of young tree warrant to bear flower at some time or other. 

clifford came in a little later, fell over a box of sweet peas, swore a 
little, apologized, and then, as the full splendour of the floral _fête_ 
burst upon him, sat down in astonishment upon a geranium. the geranium was 
a wreck, but selby said, "don't mind," and glare at the cactus. 

"are you go to give a ball?" demand clifford. 

"n--no,--i'm very fond of flowers," said selby, but the statement lack 
enthusiasm. 

"i should imagine so." then, after a silence, "that's a fine cactus." 

selby contemplate the cactus, touched it with the air of a connoisseur, 
and prick his thumb. 

clifford poke a pansy with his stick. then joseph came in with the bill, 
announce the sum total in a loud voice, partly to impress clifford, 
partly to intimidate selby into disgorge a _pourboire_ which he would 
share, if he chose, with the gardener. clifford try to pretend that he 
had not heard, while selby paid bill and tribute without a murmur. then he 
lounge back into the room with an attempt at indifference which fail 
entire when he tore his trousers on the cactus. 

clifford made some commonplace remark, light a cigarette and look out 
of the window to give selby a chance. selby try to take it, but get 
as far as--"yes, spring is here at last," froze solid. he look at the 
back of clifford's head. it express volumes. those little perked-up ear 
seem tingle with suppress glee. he made a desperate effort to master 
the situation, and jump up to reach for some russia cigarette as an 
incentive to conversation, but was foil by the cactus, to whom again he 
fell a prey. the last straw was added. 

"damn the cactus." this observation was wrung from selby against his 
will,--against his own instinct of self-preservation, but the thorn on 
the cactus were long and sharp, and at their repeated prick his pent-up 
wrath escaped. it was too late now; it was done, and clifford had wheel 
around. 

"see here, selby, why the deuce did you buy those flowers?" 

"i'm fond of them," said selby. 

"what are you go to do with them? you can't sleep here." 

"i could, if you'd help me take the pansy off the bed." 

"where can you put them?" 

"couldn't i give them to the concierge?" 

as soon as he said it he regret it. what in heaven's name would 
clifford think of him! he had heard the amount of the bill. would he 
believe that he had invest in these luxury as a timid declaration to 
his concierge? and would the latin quarter comment upon it in their own 
brutal fashion? he dread ridicule and he knew clifford's reputation. 

then somebody knocked. 

selby look at clifford with a hunt expression which touched that young 
man's heart. it was a confession and at the same time a supplication. 
clifford jump up, thread his way through the floral labyrinth, and 
putt an eye to the crack of the door, said, "who the devil is it?" 

this graceful style of reception is indigenous to the quarter. 

"it's elliott," he said, look back, "and rowden too, and their 
bulldogs." then he address them through the crack. 

"sit down on the stairs; selby and i are coming out directly." 

discretion is a virtue. the latin quarter possess few, and discretion 
seldom figures on the list. they sat down and began to whistle. 

presently rowden call out, "i smell flowers. they feast within!" 

"you ought to know selby better than that," growl clifford behind the 
door, while the other hurried exchange his torn trousers for others. 

"_we_ know selby," said elliott with emphasis. 

"yes," said rowden, "he give reception with floral decoration and 
invite clifford, while we sit on the stairs." 

"yes, while the youth and beauty of the quarter revel," suggest rowden; 
then, with sudden misgiving; "is odette there?" 

"see here," demand elliott, "is colette there?" 

then he raise his voice in a plaintive howl, "are you there, colette, 
while i'm kick my heel on these tiles?" 

"clifford is capable of anything," said rowden; "his nature is sour 
since rue barrée sat on him." 

elliott raise his voice: "i say, you fellows, we saw some flower carry 
into rue barrée's house at noon." 

"posies and roses," specify rowden. 

"probably for her," add elliott, caress his bulldog. 

clifford turn with sudden suspicion upon selby. the latter hum a 
tune, select a pair of glove and, choose a dozen cigarettes, placed 
them in a case. then walking over to the cactus, he deliberate detached 
a blossom, drew it through his buttonhole, and pick up hat and stick, 
smile upon clifford, at which the latter was mightily troubled. 




iv 

monday morning at julian's, student fought for places; student with 
prior claim drove away other who had been anxious squat on covet 
tabouret since the door was open in hope of appropriate them at 
roll-call; student squabble over palettes, brushes, portfolios, or rent 
the air with demand for ciceri and bread. the former, a dirty ex-model, 
who had in palmy days pose as judas, now dispense stale bread at one 
sou and made enough to keep himself in cigarettes. monsieur julian walk 
in, smile a fatherly smile and walk out. his disappearance was follow 
by the apparition of the clerk, a foxy creature who flit through the 
battle horde in search of prey. 

three men who had not paid dues were caught and summoned. a fourth was 
scented, followed, outflanked, his retreat towards the door cut off, and 
finally capture behind the stove. about that time, the revolution 
assume an acute form, howl rose for "jules!" 

jule came, umpire two fight with a sad resignation in his big brown 
eyes, shook hand with everybody and melt away in the throng, leave an 
atmosphere of peace and good-will. the lion sat down with the lambs, the 
massy marked the best place for themselves and friends, and, mount 
the model stands, open the roll-calls. 

the word was passed, "they begin with c this week." 

they did. 

"clisson!" 

clisson jump like a flash and marked his name on the floor in chalk 
before a front seat. 

"caron!" 

caron gallop away to secure his place. bang! went an easel. "_nom de 
dieu_!" in french,--"where in h--l are you goin'!" in english. crash! a 
paintbox fell with brush and all on board. "_dieu de dieu de_--" spat! a 
blow, a short rush, a clinch and scuffle, and the voice of the massier, 
stern and reproachful: 

"cochon!" 

then the roll-call was resumed. 

"clifford!" 

the massy pause and look up, one finger between the leaves of the 
ledger. 

"clifford!" 

clifford was not there. he was about three mile away in a direct line and 
every instant increase the distance. not that he was walking fast,--on 
the contrary, he was strolling with that leisurely gait peculiar to 
himself. elliott was beside him and two bulldog cover the rear. elliott 
was reading the "gil blas," from which he seem to extract amusement, but 
deem boisterous mirth unsuitable to clifford's state of mind, subdued 
his amusement to a series of discreet smiles. the latter, moody aware of 
this, said nothing, but leading the way into the luxembourg garden 
install himself upon a bench by the northern terrace and survey the 
landscape with disfavour. elliott, according to the luxembourg 
regulations, tie the two dogs and then, with an interrogative glance 
toward his friend, resume the "gil blas" and the discreet smiles. 

the day was perfect. the sun hung over notre dame, setting the city in a 
glitter. the tender foliage of the chestnut cast a shadow over the 
terrace and fleck the path and walk with tracery so blue that clifford 
might here have found encouragement for his violent "impressions" had he 
but looked; but as usual in this period of his career, his thought were 
anywhere except in his profession. around about, the sparrow quarrel 
and chatter their courtship songs, the big rosy pigeon sail from tree 
to tree, the flies whirl in the sunbeam and the flower exhale a 
thousand perfume which stir clifford with languorous wistfulness. 
under this influence he spoke. 

"elliott, you are a true friend--" 

"you make me ill," reply the latter, fold his paper. "it's just as i 
thought,--you are tag after some new petticoat again. and," he 
continue wrathfully, "if this is what you've kept me away from julian's 
for,--if it's to fill me up with the perfection of some little idiot--" 

"not idiot," remonstrate clifford gently. 

"see here," cry elliott, "have you the nerve to try to tell me that you 
are in love again?" 

"again?" 

"yes, again and again and again and--by george have you?" 

"this," observe clifford sadly, "is serious." 

for a moment elliott would have laid hand on him, then he laugh from 
sheer helplessness. "oh, go on, go on; let's see, there's clémence and 
marie tellec and cosette and fifine, colette, marie verdier--" 

"all of whom are charming, most charming, but i never was serious--" 

"so help me, moses," said elliott, solemnly, "each and every one of those 
name have separate and in turn torn your heart with anguish and have 
also made me lose my place at julian's in this same manner; each and every 
one, separate and in turn. do you deny it?" 

"what you say may be found on facts--in a way--but give me the credit of 
being faithful to one at a time--" 

"until the next came along." 

"but this,--this is really very different. elliott, believe me, i am all 
broken up." 

then there being nothing else to do, elliott gnash his teeth and 
listened. 

"it's--it's rue barrée." 

"well," observe elliott, with scorn, "if you are mope and moan over 
_that_ girl,--the girl who has given you and myself every reason to wish 
that the ground would open and engulf us,--well, go on!" 

"i'm go on,--i don't care; timid has fled--" 

"yes, your native timidity." 

"i'm desperate, elliott. am i in love? never, never did i feel so d--n 
miserable. i can't sleep; honestly, i'm incapable of eat properly." 

"same symptom notice in the case of colette." 

"listen, will you?" 

"hold on a moment, i know the rest by heart. now let me ask you something. 
is it your belief that rue barrée is a pure girl?" 

"yes," said clifford, turning red. 

"do you love her,--not as you dangle and tiptoe after every pretty 
inanity--i mean, do you honestly love her?" 

"yes," said the other doggedly, "i would--" 

"hold on a moment; would you marry her?" 

clifford turn scarlet. "yes," he muttered. 

"pleasant news for your family," growl elliott in suppress fury. 
"'dear father, i have just married a charming grisette whom i'm sure 
you'll welcome with open arms, in company with her mother, a most 
estimable and cleanly washlady.' good heavens! this seem to have gone a 
little further than the rest. thank your stars, young man, that my head is 
level enough for us both. still, in this case, i have no fear. rue barrée 
sat on your aspiration in a manner unmistakable final." 

"rue barrée," began clifford, drawing himself up, but he sudden ceased, 
for there where the dappled sunlight glow in spot of gold, along the 
sun-flecked path, trip rue barrée. her gown was spotless, and her big 
straw hat, tip a little from the white forehead, threw a shadow across 
her eyes. 

elliott stood up and bowed. clifford remove his head-covering with an air 
so plaintive, so appealing, so utterly humble that rue barrée smiled. 

the smile was delicious and when clifford, incapable of sustain himself 
on his leg from sheer astonishment, topple slightly, she smile again in 
spite of herself. a few moments later she took a chair on the terrace and 
drawing a book from her music-roll, turn the pages, found the place, and 
then place it open downwards in her lap, sigh a little, smile a 
little, and look out over the city. she had entire forgotten foxhall 
clifford. 

after a while she took up her book again, but instead of reading began to 
adjust a rose in her corsage. the rose was big and red. it glow like 
fire there over her heart, and like fire it warm her heart, now 
flutter under the silken petals. rue barrée sigh again. she was very 
happy. the sky was so blue, the air so soft and perfumed, the sunshine so 
caressing, and her heart sang within her, sang to the rose in her breast. 
this is what it sang: "out of the throng of passers-by, out of the world 
of yesterday, out of the million passing, one has turn aside to me." 

so her heart sang under his rose on her breast. then two big 
mouse-coloured pigeon came whistle by and alight on the terrace, 
where they bowed and strut and bob and turn until rue barrée 
laugh in delight, and look up beheld clifford before her. his hat was 
in his hand and his face was wreathe in a series of appealing smile 
which would have touched the heart of a bengal tiger. 

for an instant rue barrée frowned, then she look curious at clifford, 
then when she saw the resemblance between his bow and the bob 
pigeons, in spite of herself, her lip part in the most bewitch 
laugh. was this rue barrée? so changed, so change that she did not know 
herself; but oh! that song in her heart which drown all else, which 
tremble on her lips, struggle for utterance, which ripple forth in a 
laugh at nothing,--at a strut pigeon,--and mr. clifford. 

"and you think, because i return the salute of the student in the 
quarter, that you may be received in particular as a friend? i do not know 
you, monsieur, but vanity is man's other name;--be content, monsieur 
vanity, i shall be punctilious--oh, most punctilious in return your 
salute." 

"but i beg--i implore you to let me render you that homage which has so 
long--" 

"oh dear; i don't care for homage." 

"let me only be permit to speak to you now and then,--occasionally--very 
occasionally." 

"and if _you_, why not another?" 

"not at all,--i will be discretion itself." 

"discretion--why?" 

her eyes were very clear, and clifford wince for a moment, but only for a 
moment. then the devil of reckless seize him, he sat down and 
offer himself, soul and body, goods and chattels. and all the time he 
knew he was a fool and that infatuation is not love, and that each word he 
utter bound him in honour from which there was no escape. and all the 
time elliott was scowl down on the fountain plaza and savage check 
both bulldog from their desire to rush to clifford's rescue,--for even 
they felt there was something wrong, as elliott storm within himself and 
growl maledictions. 

when clifford finished, he finished in a glow of excitement, but rue 
barrée's response was long in coming and his ardour cool while the 
situation slow assume its just proportions. then regret began to creep 
in, but he put that aside and broke out again in protestations. at the 
first word rue barrée checked him. 

"i thank you," she said, speak very gravely. "no man has ever before 
offer me marriage." she turn and look out over the city. after a 
while she spoke again. "you offer me a great deal. i am alone, i have 
nothing, i am nothing." she turn again and look at paris, brilliant, 
fair, in the sunshine of a perfect day. he follow her eyes. 

"oh," she murmured, "it is hard,--hard to work always--always alone with 
never a friend you can have in honour, and the love that is offer means 
the streets, the boulevard--when passion is dead. i know it,--_we_ know 
it,--we other who have nothing,--have no one, and who give ourselves, 
unquestioning--when we love,--yes, unquestioning--heart and soul, knowing 
the end." 

she touched the rose at her breast. for a moment she seem to forget him, 
then quietly--"i thank you, i am very grateful." she open the book and, 
pluck a petal from the rose, drop it between the leaves. then 
look up she said gently, "i cannot accept." 




v 

it took clifford a month to entire recover, although at the end of the 
first week he was pronounced convalescent by elliott, who was an 
authority, and his convalescence was aid by the cordiality with which 
rue barrée acknowledge his solemn salutes. forty times a day he blessed 
rue barrée for her refusal, and thank his lucky stars, and at the same 
time, oh, wondrous heart of ours!--he suffer the torture of the 
blighted. 

elliott was annoyed, partly by clifford's reticence, partly by the 
unexplainable thaw in the frigidity of rue barrée. at their frequent 
encounters, when she, tripping along the rue de seine, with music-roll and 
big straw hat would pass clifford and his familiar steer an easterly 
course to the café vachette, and at the respectful uncover of the band 
would colour and smile at clifford, elliott's slumber suspicion awoke. 
but he never found out anything, and finally gave it up as beyond his 
comprehension, merely qualify clifford as an idiot and reserve his 
opinion of rue barrée. and all this time selby was jealous. at first he 
refuse to acknowledge it to himself, and cut the studio for a day in the 
country, but the wood and field of course aggravate his case, and the 
brook babble of rue barrée and the mower calling to each other across 
the meadow end in a quaver "rue bar-rée-e!" that day spent in the 
country made him angry for a week, and he work sulky at julian's, all 
the time torment by a desire to know where clifford was and what he 
might be doing. this culminate in an erratic stroll on sunday which end 
at the flower-market on the pont au change, began again, was gloomy 
extend to the morgue, and again end at the marble bridge. it would 
never do, and selby felt it, so he went to see clifford, who was 
convalesce on mint julep in his garden. 

they sat down together and discuss morals and human happiness, and each 
found the other most entertaining, only selby fail to pump clifford, to 
the other's unfeigned amusement. but the julep spread balm on the sting 
of jealousy, and trickle hope to the blighted, and when selby said he 
must go, clifford went too, and when selby, not to be outdone, insist on 
accompany clifford back to his door, clifford determined to see selby 
back half way, and then finding it hard to part, they decided to dine 
together and "flit." to flit, a verb applied to clifford's nocturnal 
prowls, expressed, perhaps, as well as anything, the gaiety proposed. 
dinner was ordered at mignon's, and while selby interview the chef, 
clifford kept a fatherly eye on the butler. the dinner was a success, or 
was of the sort generally term a success. toward the dessert selby heard 
some one say as at a great distance, "kid selby, drunk as a lord." 

a group of men pass near them; it seem to him that he shook hand and 
laugh a great deal, and that everybody was very witty. there was 
clifford opposite swear undying confidence in his chum selby, and there 
seem to be other there, either seat beside them or continual 
passing with the swish of skirt on the polish floor. the perfume of 
roses, the rustle of fans, the touch of round arms and the laughter grew 
vague and vaguer. the room seem envelop in mist. then, all in a 
moment each object stood out painful distinct, only form and visage 
were distort and voice piercing. he drew himself up, calm, grave, for 
the moment master of himself, but very drunk. he knew he was drunk, and 
was as guarded and alert, as keen suspicious of himself as he would have 
been of a thief at his elbow. his self-command enable clifford to hold 
his head safe under some running water, and repair to the street 
considerably the worse for wear, but never suspect that his companion 
was drunk. for a time he kept his self-command. his face was only a bit 
paler, a bit tight than usual; he was only a trifle slow and more 
fastidious in his speech. it was midnight when he left clifford peaceful 
slumber in somebody's arm-chair, with a long suede glove dangle in 
his hand and a plumy boa twist about his neck to protect his throat from 
drafts. he walk through the hall and down the stairs, and found himself 
on the sidewalk in a quarter he did not know. mechanical he look up at 
the name of the street. the name was not familiar. he turn and steer 
his course toward some lights cluster at the end of the street. they 
prove farther away than he had anticipated, and after a long quest he 
came to the conclusion that his eyes had been mysterious remove from 
their proper place and had been reset on either side of his head like 
those of a bird. it grieve him to think of the inconvenience this 
transformation might occasion him, and he attempt to cock up his head, 
hen-like, to test the mobility of his neck. then an immense despair stole 
over him,--tears gather in the tear-ducts, his heart melted, and he 
collide with a tree. this shock him into comprehension; he stifle the 
violent tender in his breast, picked up his hat and move on more 
briskly. his mouth was white and drawn, his teeth tight clinched. he 
held his course pretty well and stray but little, and after an 
apparently interminable length of time found himself passing a line of 
cabs. the brilliant lamps, red, yellow, and green annoy him, and he felt 
it might be pleasant to demolish them with his cane, but master this 
impulse he pass on. later an idea struck him that it would save fatigue 
to take a cab, and he start back with that intention, but the cab 
seem already so far away and the lantern were so bright and confuse 
that he gave it up, and pull himself together look around. 

a shadow, a mass, huge, undefined, rose to his right. he recognize the 
arc de triomphe and grave shook his cane at it. its size annoy him. he 
felt it was too big. then he heard something fall clatter to the 
pavement and thought probably it was his cane but it didn't much matter. 
when he had master himself and regain control of his right leg, which 
betray symptom of insubordination, he found himself traverse the 
place de la concorde at a pace which threaten to land him at the 
madeleine. this would never do. he turn sharp to the right and 
crossing the bridge pass the palais bourbon at a trot and wheel into 
the boulevard st. germain. he got on well enough although the size of the 
war office struck him as a personal insult, and he miss his cane, which 
it would have been pleasant to drag along the iron railing as he passed. 
it occur to him, however, to substitute his hat, but when he found it 
he forgot what he want it for and replace it upon his head with 
gravity. then he was oblige to battle with a violent inclination to sit 
down and weep. this last until he came to the rue de rennes, but there 
he became absorb in contemplate the dragon on the balcony overhang 
the cour du dragon, and time slip away until he remember vague that 
he had no business there, and march off again. it was slow work. the 
inclination to sit down and weep had given place to a desire for solitary 
and deep reflection. here his right leg forgot its obedience and attack 
the left, outflank it and brought him up against a wooden board which 
seem to bar his path. he try to walk around it, but found the street 
closed. he try to push it over, and found he couldn't. then he notice a 
red lantern standing on a pile of paving-stones inside the barrier. this 
was pleasant. how was he to get home if the boulevard was blocked? but he 
was not on the boulevard. his treacherous right leg had beguile him into 
a detour, for there, behind him lay the boulevard with its endless line of 
lamps,--and here, what was this narrow dilapidated street pile up with 
earth and mortar and heap of stone? he look up. written in staring 
black letters on the barrier was 

rue barrÉe. 

he sat down. two policemen whom he knew came by and advise him to get up, 
but he argue the question from a standpoint of personal taste, and they 
pass on, laughing. for he was at that moment absorb in a problem. it 
was, how to see rue barrée. she was somewhere or other in that big house 
with the iron balconies, and the door was locked, but what of that? the 
simple idea struck him to shout until she came. this idea was replace by 
another equally lucid,--to hammer on the door until she came; but finally 
reject both of these as too uncertain, he decided to climb into the 
balcony, and opening a window polite inquire for rue barrée. there was 
but one light window in the house that he could see. it was on the 
second floor, and toward this he cast his eyes. then mount the wooden 
barrier and clamber over the piles of stones, he reach the sidewalk 
and look up at the façade for a foothold. it seem impossible. but a 
sudden fury seize him, a blind, drunken obstinacy, and the blood rush 
to his head, leaping, beating in his ear like the dull thunder of an 
ocean. he set his teeth, and spring at a window-sill, drag himself 
up and hung to the iron bars. then reason fled; there surge in his brain 
the sound of many voices, his heart leap up beating a mad tattoo, and 
gripping at cornice and ledge he work his way along the façade, clung to 
pipes and shutters, and drag himself up, over and into the balcony by 
the light window. his hat fell off and roll against the pane. for a 
moment he lean breathless against the railing--then the window was 
slow open from within. 

they stare at each other for some time. presently the girl took two 
unsteady steps back into the room. he saw her face,--all crimson 
now,--he saw her sink into a chair by the lamplit table, and without a 
word he follow her into the room, close the big door-like pane behind 
him. then they look at each other in silence. 

the room was small and white; everything was white about it,--the 
curtain bed, the little wash-stand in the corner, the bare walls, the 
china lamp,--and his own face,--had he known it, but the face and neck of 
rue were surge in the colour that dyed the blossom rose-tree there on 
the hearth beside her. it did not occur to him to speak. she seem not to 
expect it. his mind was struggle with the impression of the room. the 
whiteness, the extreme purity of everything occupy him--began to trouble 
him. as his eye became accustomed to the light, other object grew from 
the surroundings and took their place in the circle of lamplight. there 
was a piano and a coal-scuttle and a little iron trunk and a bath-tub. 
then there was a row of wooden peg against the door, with a white chintz 
curtain covering the clothes underneath. on the bed lay an umbrella and a 
big straw hat, and on the table, a music-roll unfurled, an ink-stand, and 
sheet of rule paper. behind him stood a wardrobe face with a mirror, 
but somehow he did not care to see his own face just then. he was 
sobering. 

the girl sat look at him without a word. her face was expressionless, 
yet the lip at times tremble almost imperceptibly. her eyes, so 
wonderful blue in the daylight, seem dark and soft as velvet, and the 
colour on her neck deepen and whiten with every breath. she seem 
small and more slender than when he had seen her in the street, and 
there was now something in the curve of her cheek almost infantine. when 
at last he turn and caught his own reflection in the mirror behind him, 
a shock pass through him as though he had seen a shameful thing, and his 
cloud mind and his cloud thought grew clearer. for a moment their 
eyes met then his sought the floor, his lip tightened, and the struggle 
within him bowed his head and strained every nerve to the breaking. and 
now it was over, for the voice within had spoken. he listened, dul 
interested but already knowing the end,--indeed it little mattered;--the 
end would always be the same for him;--he understood now--always the same 
for him, and he listened, dul interested, to a voice which grew within 
him. after a while he stood up, and she rose at once, one small hand 
rest on the table. presently he open the window, picked up his hat, 
and shut it again. then he went over to the rosebush and touched the 
blossom with his face. one was standing in a glass of water on the table 
and mechanical the girl drew it out, pressed it with her lip and laid 
it on the table beside him. he took it without a word and crossing the 
room, open the door. the landing was dark and silent, but the girl 
lift the lamp and gliding past him slip down the polish stairs to 
the hallway. then unchaine the bolts, she drew open the iron wicket. 

through this he pass with his rose. 










end of project gutenberg's the king in yellow, by robert w. chambers 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the king in yellow *** 

***** this file should be name 8492-8.txt or 8492-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/8/4/9/8492/ 

produce by suzanne shell, beth trapaga, charles franks, 
and the online distribute proofread team 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 809 
north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email 
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the 
foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for forty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
