project gutenberg's dr. jekyll and mr. hyde, by robert louis stevenson 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: dr. jekyll and mr. hyde 

author: robert louis stevenson 

posting date: december 18, 2011 [ebook #42] 
release date: october, 1992 
last updated: july 1, 2005 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook dr. jekyll and mr. hyde *** 



[editor's note: it has been call to our attention that project gutenberg ebook #43 which is the same title as this, is much easy to read than file #42 which you have presently opened.] 




strange case of 
dr. jekyll and 
mr. hyde 

by 
robert louis stevenson 




1) 



story of the door 
preface 
mr. utterson the lawyer was a man of a rugged countenance, that was 
never light by a smile; cold, scanty and embarrass in 
discourse; backward in sentiment; lean, long, dusty, dreary, and 
yet somehow lovable. at friendly meetings, and when the wine was to 
his taste, something eminently human beacon from his eye; 
something indeed which never found its way into his talk, but which 
spoke not only in these silent symbol of the after-dinner face, but 
more often and loud in the acts of his life. he was austere with 
himself; drank gin when he was alone, to mortify a taste for 
vintages; and though he enjoy the theatre, had not cross the 
door of one for twenty years. but he had an approve tolerance for 
others; sometimes wondering, almost with envy, at the high pressure 
of spirits involved in their misdeeds; and in any extremity inclined 
to help rather than to reprove. 

2) 

"i incline to cain's heresy," he use to say quaintly: "i let my 
brother go to the devil in his own way." in this character, it was 
frequent his fortune to be the last reputable acquaintance and the 
last good influence in the lives of down-going men. and to such as 
these, so long as they came about his chambers, he never marked a 
shade of change in his demeanour. 

no doubt the feat was easy to mr. utterson; for he was 
undemonstrative at the best, and even his friendship seem to be 
found in a similar catholicity of good-nature. it is the mark of a 
modest man to accept his friendly circle ready-made from the hand 
of opportunity; and that was the lawyer's way. his friends were 
those of his own blood or those whom he had known the longest; his 
affections, like ivy, were the growth of time, they imply no 
apt in the object. hence, no doubt, the bond that united him to 
mr. richard enfield, his distant kinsman, the well-known man about 
town. it was a nut to crack for many, what these two could see in 
each other, or what subject they could find in common. it was 
report by those who encounter them in their sunday walks, that 
they said nothing, look singularly dull, and would hail with 
obvious relief the appearance of a friend. for all that, the two men 
put the greatest store by these excursions, count them the chief 
jewel of each week, and not only set aside occasion of pleasure, 
but even resist the call 

3) 

of business, that they might enjoy them uninterrupted. 

it chance on one of these ramble that their way led them down a 
by-street in a busy quarter of london. the street was small and 
what is call quiet, but it drove a thrive trade on the 
week-days. the inhabitant were all do well, it seemed, and all 
emulous hope to do better still, and lay out the surplus of 
their gain in coquetry; so that the shop front stood along that 
thoroughfare with an air of invitation, like row of smile 
saleswomen. even on sunday, when it veiled its more florid charm 
and lay comparatively empty of passage, the street shone out in 
contrast to its dingy neighbourhood, like a fire in a forest; and 
with its freshly paint shutters, well-polished brasses, and 
general cleanliness and gaiety of note, instantly caught and pleased 
the eye of the passenger. 

two door from one corner, on the left hand go east, the line 
was broken by the entry of a court; and just at that point, a 
certain sinister block of building thrust forward its gable on the 
street. it was two story high; show no window, nothing but a 
door on the lower story and a blind forehead of discolour wall on 
the upper; and bore in every feature, the mark of prolonged and 
sordid negligence. the door, which was equip with neither bell 
nor knocker, was blister and distained. tramp slouch into the 
recess and struck match on 

4) 

the panels; children kept shop upon the steps; the schoolboy had 
try his knife on the mouldings; and for close on a generation, no 
one had appear to drive away these random visitor or to repair 
their ravages. 

mr. enfield and the lawyer were on the other side of the by-street; 
but when they came abreast of the entry, the former lift up his 
cane and pointed. 

"did you ever remark that door?" he asked; and when his companion 
had reply in the affirmative, "it is connected in my mind," add 
he, "with a very odd story." 

"indeed?" said mr. utterson, with a slight change of voice, "and 
what was that?" 

"well, it was this way," return mr. enfield: "i was coming home 
from some place at the end of the world, about three o'clock of a 
black winter morning, and my way lay through a part of town where 
there was literally nothing to be seen but lamps. street after 
street, and all the folks asleep--street after street, all light 
up as if for a procession and all as empty as a church--till at 
last i got into that state of mind when a man listen and listen 
and begin to long for the sight of a policeman. all at once, i saw 
two figures: one a little man who was stump along eastward at a 
good walk, and the other a girl of maybe eight or ten who was 
running as hard as she was able down a cross street. well, sir, the 
two ran into one another naturally enough at the 

5) 

corner; and then came the horrible part of the thing; for the man 
trample calm over the child's body and left her scream on 
the ground. it sound nothing to hear, but it was hellish to see. 
it wasn't like a man; it was like some damn juggernaut. i gave a 
view-halloa, took to my heels, collar my gentleman, and brought 
him back to where there was already quite a group about the 
scream child. he was perfectly cool and made no resistance, but 
gave me one look, so ugly that it brought out the sweat on me like 
running. the people who had turn out were the girl's own family; 
and pretty soon, the doctor, for whom she had been sent, put in his 
appearance. well, the child was not much the worse, more frightened, 
according to the sawbones; and there you might have supposed would 
be an end to it. but there was one curious circumstance. i had taken 
a loathing to my gentleman at first sight. so had the child's 
family, which was only natural. but the doctor's case was what 
struck me. he was the usual cut-and-dry apothecary, of no particular 
age and colour, with a strong edinburgh accent, and about as 
emotional as a bagpipe. well, sir, he was like the rest of us; every 
time he look at my prisoner, i saw that sawbones turn sick and 
white with the desire to kill him. i knew what was in his mind, just 
as he knew what was in mine; and killing being out of the question, 
we did the next best. we told the man we could 

6) 

and would make such a scandal out of this, as should make his name 
stink from one end of london to the other. if he had any friends or 
any credit, we undertook that he should lose them. and all the time, 
as we were pitch it in red hot, we were keeping the women off him 
as best we could, for they were as wild as harpies. i never saw a 
circle of such hateful faces; and there was the man in the middle, 
with a kind of black, sneer coolness--frightened too, i could 
see that--but carry it off, sir, really like satan. 'if you 
choose to make capital out of this accident,' said he, 'i am 
naturally helpless. no gentleman but wish to avoid a scene,' say 
he. 'name your figure.' well, we screw him up to a hundred pound 
for the child's family; he would have clearly like to stick out; 
but there was something about the lot of us that meant mischief, and 
at last he struck. the next thing was to get the money; and where 
do you think he carry us but to that place with the door?-- 
whip out a key, went in, and presently came back with the matter 
of ten pound in gold and a cheque for the balance on coutts's, 
drawn payable to bearer and sign with a name that i can't mention, 
though it's one of the points of my story, but it was a name at 
least very well known and often printed. the figure was stiff; but 
the signature was good for more than that, if it was only genuine. i 
took the liberty of point out to my gentleman that the whole 

7) 

business look apocryphal, and that a man do not, in real life, 
walk into a cellar door at four in the morning and come out of it 
with another man's cheque for close upon a hundred pounds. but he 
was quite easy and sneering. 'set your mind at rest,' say he, 'i 
will stay with you till the bank open and cash the cheque myself.' 
so we all set off, the doctor, and the child's father, and our 
friend and myself, and pass the rest of the night in my chambers; 
and next day, when we had breakfasted, went in a body to the bank. i 
gave in the check myself, and said i had every reason to believe it 
was a forgery. not a bit of it. the cheque was genuine." 

"tut-tut," said mr. utterson. 

"i see you feel as i do," said mr. enfield. "yes, it's a bad story. 
for my man was a fellow that nobody could have to do with, a really 
damnable man; and the person that drew the cheque is the very pink 
of the proprieties, celebrated too, and (what make it worse) one of 
your fellow who do what they call good. black-mail, i suppose; an 
honest man pay through the nose for some of the caper of his 
youth. black-mail house is what i call that place with the door, in 
consequence. though even that, you know, is far from explain 
all," he added, and with the words fell into a vein of musing. 

from this he was recall by mr. utterson ask rather suddenly: 
"and you don't know if the drawer of the cheque lives there?" 

8) 

"a likely place, isn't it?" return mr. enfield. "but i happen to 
have notice his address; he lives in some square or other." 

"and you never ask about the--place with the door?" said mr. 
utterson. 

"no, sir: i had a delicacy," was the reply. "i feel very strong 
about putt questions; it partake too much of the style of the 
day of judgment. you start a question, and it's like start a 
stone. you sit quiet on the top of a hill; and away the stone 
goes, start others; and presently some bland old bird (the last 
you would have thought of) is knock on the head in his own 
back-garden and the family have to change their name. no, sir, i 
make it a rule of mine: the more it looks like queer street, the 
less i ask." 

"a very good rule, too," said the lawyer. 

"but i have studied the place for myself," continue mr. enfield. 
"it seem scarcely a house. there is no other door, and nobody go 
in or out of that one but, once in a great while, the gentleman of 
my adventure. there are three window look on the court on the 
first floor; none below; the window are always shut but they're 
clean. and then there is a chimney which is generally smoking; so 
somebody must live there. and yet it's not so sure; for the 
building are so packed together about that court, that it's hard to 
say where one end and another begins." 

9) 

the pair walk on again for a while in silence; and then, 
"enfield," said mr. utterson, "that's a good rule of yours." 

"yes, i think it is," return enfield. 

"but for all that," continue the lawyer, "there's one point i want 
to ask: i want to ask the name of that man who walk over the 
child." 

"well," said mr. enfield, "i can't see what harm it would do. it 
was a man of the name of hyde." 

"h'm," said mr. utterson. "what sort of a man is he to see?" 

"he is not easy to describe. there is something wrong with his 
appearance; something displeasing, something downright detestable. i 
never saw a man i so disliked, and yet i scarce know why. he must be 
deform somewhere; he give a strong feeling of deformity, although 
i couldn't specify the point. he's an extraordinary-looking man, and 
yet i really can name nothing out of the way. no, sir; i can make no 
hand of it; i can't describe him. and it's not want of memory; for i 
declare i can see him this moment." 

mr. utterson again walk some way in silence and obviously under a 
weight of consideration. 

"you are sure he use a key?" he inquire at last. 

"my dear sir..." began enfield, surprise out of himself. 

10) 

"yes, i know," said utterson; "i know it must seem strange. the 
fact is, if i do not ask you the name of the other party, it is 
because i know it already. you see, richard, your tale has gone 
home. if you have been inexact in any point, you had better correct 
it." 

"i think you might have warn me," return the other, with a 
touch of sullenness. "but i have been pedantic exact, as you 
call it. the fellow had a key; and what's more, he has it still. i 
saw him use it, not a week ago." 

mr. utterson sigh deep but said never a word; and the young man 
presently resumed. "here is another lesson to say nothing," said he. 
"i am ashamed of my long tongue. let us make a bargain never to 
refer to this again." 

"with all my heart," said the lawyer. "i shake hand on that, 
richard." 

11) 


search for mr. hyde 

that evening mr. utterson came home to his bachelor house in sombre 
spirits and sat down to dinner without relish. it was his custom of 
a sunday, when this meal was over, to sit close by the fire, a 
volume of some dry divinity on his reading-desk, until the clock of 
the neighbouring church rang out the hour of twelve, when he would 
go sober and grateful to bed. on this night, however, as soon as 
the cloth was taken away, he took up a candle and went into his 
business-room. there he open his safe, took from the most private 
part of it a document endorse on the envelope as dr. jekyll's will, 
and sat down with a cloud brow to study its contents. the will was 
holograph, for mr. utterson, though he took charge of it now that it 
was made, had refuse to lend the least assistance in the making of 
it; it provided not only that, in case of the decease of henry 
jekyll, m.d., d.c.l., l.l.d., f.r.s., etc., all his possession were 
to pass into the hand of his "friend and benefactor edward hyde," 
but that in case of 

12) 

dr. jekyll's "disappearance or unexplained absence for any period 
exceed three calendar months," the said edward hyde should step 
into the said henry jekyll's shoe without further delay and free 
from any burthen or obligation, beyond the payment of a few small 
sum to the member of the doctor's household. this document had 
long been the lawyer's eyesore. it offend him both as a lawyer and 
as a lover of the sane and customary side of life, to whom the 
fanciful was the immodest. and hitherto it was his ignorance of mr. 
hyde that had swell his indignation; now, by a sudden turn, it was 
his knowledge. it was already bad enough when the name was but a 
name of which he could learn no more. it was worse when it began to 
be clothe upon with detest attributes; and out of the shifting, 
insubstantial mists that had so long baffle his eye, there leap 
up the sudden, definite present of a fiend. 

"i thought it was madness," he said, as he replace the obnoxious 
paper in the safe, "and now i begin to fear it is disgrace." 

with that he blew out his candle, put on a great-coat, and set 
forth in the direction of cavendish square, that citadel of 
medicine, where his friend, the great dr. lanyon, had his house and 
received his crowd patients. "if any one knows, it will be 
lanyon," he had thought. 

the solemn butler knew and welcome him; 

13) 

he was subject to no stage of delay, but usher direct from the 
door to the dining-room where dr. lanyon sat alone over his wine. 
this was a hearty, healthy, dapper, red-faced gentleman, with a 
shock of hair premature white, and a boisterous and decided 
manner. at sight of mr. utterson, he sprang up from his chair and 
welcome him with both hands. the geniality, as was the way of the 
man, was somewhat theatrical to the eye; but it repose on genuine 
feeling. for these two were old friends, old mate both at school 
and college, both thorough respecter of themselves and of each 
other, and, what do not always follow, men who thorough enjoy 
each other's company. 

after a little rambling talk, the lawyer led up to the subject 
which so disagreeable pre-occupied his mind. 

"i suppose, lanyon," said he "you and i must be the two oldest 
friends that henry jekyll has?" 

"i wish the friends were younger," chuckle dr. lanyon. "but i 
suppose we are. and what of that? i see little of him now." 


"indeed?" said utterson. "i thought you had a bond of common 
interest." 

"we had," was the reply. "but it is more than ten years since henry 
jekyll became too fanciful for me. he began to go wrong, wrong in 
mind; and though of course i continue to take an interest in him for 
old sake's sake, as they say, 

14) 

i see and i have seen devilish little of the man. such unscientific 
balderdash," add the doctor, flush sudden purple, "would have 
estrange damon and pythias." 

this little spirit of temper was somewhat of a relief to mr. 
utterson. "they have only differ on some point of science," he 
thought; and being a man of no scientific passion (except in the 
matter of conveyancing), he even added: "it is nothing worse than 
that!" he gave his friend a few seconds to recover his composure, 
and then approach the question he had come to put. "did you ever 
come across a protege of his--one hyde?" he asked. 

"hyde?" repeated lanyon. "no. never heard of him. since my time." 

that was the amount of information that the lawyer carry back 
with him to the great, dark bed on which he toss to and fro, 
until the small hour of the morning began to grow large. it was a 
night of little ease to his toil mind, toil in mere dark 
and besiege by questions. 

six o'clock struck on the bell of the church that was so 
convenient near to mr. utterson's dwelling, and still he was 
digging at the problem. hitherto it had touched him on the 
intellectual side alone; but now his imagination also was engaged, 
or rather enslaved; and as he lay and toss in the gross dark 
of the night and the curtain room, mr. enfield's tale went by 

15) 

before his mind in a scroll of light pictures. he would be aware 
of the great field of lamp of a nocturnal city; then of the figure 
of a man walking swiftly; then of a child running from the doctor's; 
and then these met, and that human juggernaut trod the child down 
and pass on regardless of her screams. or else he would see a room 
in a rich house, where his friend lay asleep, dream and smile 
at his dreams; and then the door of that room would be opened, the 
curtains of the bed pluck apart, the sleeper recalled, and lo! 
there would stand by his side a figure to whom power was given, and 
even at that dead hour, he must rise and do its bidding. the figure 
in these two phase haunt the lawyer all night; and if at any time 
he doze over, it was but to see it glide more stealthy through 
sleep houses, or move the more swift and still the more 
swiftly, even to dizziness, through wide labyrinth of lamplighte 
city, and at every street-corner crush a child and leave her 
screaming. and still the figure had no face by which he might know 
it; even in his dreams, it had no face, or one that baffle him and 
melt before his eyes; and thus it was that there sprang up and 
grew apace in the lawyer's mind a singularly strong, almost an 
inordinate, curiosity to behold the features of the real mr. hyde. 
if he could but once set eyes on him, he thought the mystery would 
lighten and perhaps roll altogether away, as was the habit of 
mysterious 

16) 

things when well examined. he might see a reason for his friend's 
strange preference or bondage (call it which you please) and even 
for the startle clause of the will. at least it would be a face 
worth seeing: the face of a man who was without bowels of mercy: a 
face which had but to show itself to raise up, in the mind of the 
unimpressionable enfield, a spirit of enduring hatred. 

from that time forward, mr. utterson began to haunt the door in the 
by-street of shops. in the morning before office hours, at noon when 
business was plenty, and time scarce, at night under the face of the 
fog city moon, by all lights and at all hour of solitude or 
concourse, the lawyer was to be found on his chosen post. 

"if he be mr. hyde," he had thought, "i shall be mr. seek." 

and at last his patience was rewarded. it was a fine dry night; 
frost in the air; the street as clean as a ballroom floor; the 
lamps, unshaken, by any wind, drawing a regular pattern of light 
and shadow. by ten o'clock, when the shop were closed, the 
by-street was very solitary and, in spite of the low growl of 
london from all round, very silent. small sound carry far; 
domestic sound out of the house were clearly audible on either 
side of the roadway; and the rumour of the approach of any 
passenger precede him by a long time. mr. utterson had been some 
minutes at his post, when he was 

17) 

aware of an odd, light footstep drawing near. in the course of his 
nightly patrols, he had long grown accustomed to the quaint effect 
with which the footfall of a single person, while he is still a 
great way off, sudden spring out distinct from the vast hum and 
clatter of the city. yet his attention had never before been so 
sharp and decisive arrested; and it was with a strong, 
superstitious prevision of success that he withdrew into the entry 
of the court. 

the steps drew swift nearer, and swell out sudden loud as 
they turn the end of the street. the lawyer, look forth from 
the entry, could soon see what manner of man he had to deal with. 
he was small and very plainly dressed, and the look of him, even at 
that distance, went somehow strong against the watcher's 
inclination. but he made straight for the door, crossing the 
roadway to save time; and as he came, he drew a key from his pocket 
like one approach home. 

mr. utterson step out and touched him on the shoulder as he 
passed. "mr. hyde, i think?" 

mr. hyde shrank back with a hiss intake of the breath. but his 
fear was only momentary; and though he did not look the lawyer in 
the face, he answer cool enough: "that is my name. what do you 
want?" 

"i see you are go in," return the lawyer. "i am an old friend 
of dr. jekyll's--mr. utter- 

18) 

son of gaunt street--you must have heard my name; and meeting you 
so conveniently, i thought you might admit me." 

"you will not find dr. jekyll; he is from home," reply mr. hyde, 
blow in the key. and then suddenly, but still without look up, 
"how did you know me?" he asked. 

"on your side," said mr. utterson, "will you do me a favour?" 

"with pleasure," reply the other. "what shall it be?" 

"will you let me see your face?" ask the lawyer. 

mr. hyde appear to hesitate, and then, as if upon some sudden 
reflection, front about with an air of defiance; and the pair 
stare at each other pretty fixedly for a few seconds. "now i shall 
know you again," said mr. utterson. "it may be useful." 

"yes," return mr. hyde, "it is as well we have, met; and a 
propos, you should have my address." and he gave a number of a 
street in soho. 

"good god!" thought mr. utterson, "can he, too, have been thinking 
of the will?" but he kept his feelings to himself and only grunt 
in acknowledgment of the address. 

"and now," said the other, "how did you know me?" 

"by description," was the reply. 

"whose description?" 

19) 

"we have common friends," said mr. utterson. 

"common friends?" echo mr. hyde, a little hoarsely. "who are 
they?" 

"jekyll, for instance," said the lawyer. 

"he never told you," cry mr. hyde, with a flush of anger. "i did 
not think you would have lied." 

"come," said mr. utterson, "that is not fitting language." 


the other snarl aloud into a savage laugh; and the next moment, 
with extraordinary quickness, he had unlock the door and 
disappear into the house. 

the lawyer stood awhile when mr. hyde had left him, the picture of 
disquietude. then he began slow to mount the street, pause 
every step or two and putt his hand to his brow like a man in 
mental perplexity. the problem he was thus debate as he walked, 
was one of a class that is rarely solved. mr. hyde was pale and 
dwarfish, he gave an impression of deformity without any name 
malformation, he had a displease smile, he had borne himself to 
the lawyer with a sort of murderous mixture of timid and 
boldness, and he spoke with a husky, whisper and somewhat broken 
voice; all these were points against him, but not all of these 
together could explain the hitherto unknown disgust, loathing, and 
fear with which mr. utterson regard him. "there must be some- 

20) 

thing else," said the perplexed gentleman. "there is something 
more, if i could find a name for it. god bless me, the man seem 
hardly human! something troglodytic, shall we say? or can it be the 
old story of dr. fell? or is it the mere radiance of a foul soul 
that thus transpire through, and transfigures, its clay continent? 
the last, i think; for, o my poor old harry jekyll, if ever i read 
satan's signature upon a face, it is on that of your new friend." 

round the corner from the by-street, there was a square of ancient, 
handsome houses, now for the most part decay from their high 
estate and let in flat and chambers to all sort and conditions of 
men: map-engravers, architects, shady lawyers, and the agent of 
obscure enterprises. one house, however, second from the corner, was 
still occupy entire; and at the door of this, which wore a great 
air of wealth and comfort, though it was now plunge in dark 
except for the fan-light, mr. utterson stop and knocked. a 
well-dressed, elderly servant open the door. 

"is dr. jekyll at home, poole?" ask the lawyer. 

"i will see, mr. utterson," said poole, admit the visitor, as 
he spoke, into a large, low-roofed, comfortable hall, paved with 
flags, warm (after the fashion of a country house) by a bright, 
open fire, and furnish with costly cabinet of oak. "will you 
wait here by the 

21) 

fire, sir? or shall i give you a light in the dine room?" 

"here, thank you," said the lawyer, and he drew near and lean on 
the tall fender. this hall, in which he was now left alone, was a 
pet fancy of his friend the doctor's; and utterson himself was wont 
to speak of it as the pleasantest room in london. but to-night there 
was a shudder in his blood; the face of hyde sat heavy on his 
memory; he felt (what was rare with him) a nausea and distaste of 
life; and in the gloom of his spirits, he seem to read a menace in 
the flicker of the firelight on the polish cabinet and the 
uneasy start of the shadow on the roof. he was ashamed of his 
relief, when poole presently return to announce that dr. jekyll 
was gone out. 

"i saw mr. hyde go in by the old dissecting-room door, poole," he 
said. "is that right, when dr. jekyll is from home?" 

"quite right, mr. utterson, sir," reply the servant. "mr. hyde 
has a key." 

"your master seem to repose a great deal of trust in that young 
man, poole," resume the other musingly. 

"yes, sir, he do indeed," said poole. "we have all orders to obey 
him." 

"i do not think i ever met mr. hyde?" ask utterson. 


"o, dear no, sir. he never dine here," reply the butler. "indeed 
we see very little of 

22) 

him on this side of the house; he mostly come and go by the 
laboratory." 

"well, good-night, poole." 

"good-night, mr. utterson." and the lawyer set out homeward with a 
very heavy heart. "poor harry jekyll," he thought, "my mind 
misgive me he is in deep waters! he was wild when he was young; a 
long while ago to be sure; but in the law of god, there is no 
statute of limitations. ay, it must be that; the ghost of some old 
sin, the cancer of some conceal disgrace: punishment coming, pede 
claudo, years after memory has forgotten and self-love condone the 
fault." and the lawyer, scared by the thought, brood a while on 
his own past, grope in all the corner of memory, lest by chance 
some jack-in-the-box of an old iniquity should leap to light there. 
his past was fairly blameless; few men could read the rolls of their 
life with less apprehension; yet he was humble to the dust by the 
many ill things he had done, and raise up again into a sober and 
fearful gratitude by the many that he had come so near to doing, yet 
avoided. and then by a return on his former subject, he conceive a 
spark of hope. "this master hyde, if he were studied," thought he, 
"must have secret of his own; black secrets, by the look of him; 
secret compare to which poor jekyll's worst would be like 
sunshine. things cannot continue as they are. it turn me cold to 
think of this creature steal like a 

23) 

thief to harry's bedside; poor harry, what a wakening! and the 
danger of it; for if this hyde suspect the existence of the will, 
he may grow impatient to inherit. ay, i must put my shoulder to the 
wheel if jekyll will but let me," he added, "if jekyll will only let 
me." for once more he saw before his mind's eye, as clear as a 
transparency, the strange clause of the will. 

24) 



dr. jekyll was quite at ease 

a fortnight later, by excellent good fortune, the doctor gave one 
of his pleasant dinner to some five or six old cronies, all 
intelligent, reputable men and all judge of good wine; and mr. 
utterson so contrived that he remain behind after the other had 
departed. this was no new arrangement, but a thing that had 
befallen many score of times. where utterson was liked, he was 
like well. host love to detain the dry lawyer, when the 
light-hearted and the loose-tongued had already their foot on the 
threshold; they like to sit a while in his unobtrusive company, 
practise for solitude, sober their mind in the man's rich 
silence after the expense and strain of gaiety. to this rule, dr. 
jekyll was no exception; and as he now sat on the opposite side of 
the fire--a large, well-made, smooth-faced man of fifty, with 
something of a slyish cast perhaps, but every mark of capacity and 
kindness--you could see by his looks that he cherish for mr. 
utterson a sincere and warm affection. 

25) 


"i have been wanting to speak to you, jekyll," began the latter. 
"you know that will of yours?" 

a close observer might have gather that the topic was 
distasteful; but the doctor carry it off gaily. "my poor 
utterson," said he, "you are unfortunate in such a client. i never 
saw a man so distress as you were by my will; unless it were that 
hide-bound pedant, lanyon, at what he call my scientific heresies. 
oh, i know he's a good fellow--you needn't frown--an excellent 
fellow, and i always mean to see more of him; but a hide-bound 
pedant for all that; an ignorant, blatant pedant. i was never more 
disappointed in any man than lanyon." 

"you know i never approve of it," pursue utterson, ruthless 
disregard the fresh topic. 

"my will? yes, certainly, i know that," said the doctor, a trifle 
sharply. "you have told me so." 

"well, i tell you so again," continue the lawyer. "i have been 
learning something of young hyde." 

the large handsome face of dr. jekyll grew pale to the very lips, 
and there came a black about his eyes. "i do not care to hear 
more," said he. "this is a matter i thought we had agree to drop." 

"what i heard was abominable," said utterson. 

"it can make no change. you do not under- 

26) 

stand my position," return the doctor, with a certain incoherent 
of manner. "i am painful situated, utterson; my position is a very 
strange--a very strange one. it is one of those affair that 
cannot be mend by talking." 

"jekyll," said utterson, "you know me: i am a man to be trusted. 
make a clean breast of this in confidence; and i make no doubt i 
can get you out of it." 

"my good utterson," said the doctor, "this is very good of you, 
this is downright good of you, and i cannot find words to thank you 
in. i believe you fully; i would trust you before any man alive, ay, 
before myself, if i could make the choice; but indeed it isn't what 
you fancy; it is not so bad as that; and just to put your good heart 
at rest, i will tell you one thing: the moment i choose, i can be 
rid of mr. hyde. i give you my hand upon that; and i thank you again 
and again; and i will just add one little word, utterson, that i'm 
sure you'll take in good part: this is a private matter, and i beg 
of you to let it sleep." 


utterson reflect a little, look in the fire. 

"i have no doubt you are perfectly right," he said at last, get 
to his feet. 

"well, but since we have touched upon this business, and for the 
last time i hope," continue the doctor, "there is one point i 
should like you to understand. i have really a very great interest 
in poor hyde. i know you have seen 

27) 

him; he told me so; and i fear he was rude. but, i do sincerely 
take a great, a very great interest in that young man; and if i am 
taken away, utterson, i wish you to promise me that you will bear 
with him and get his rights for him. i think you would, if you knew 
all; and it would be a weight off my mind if you would promise." 

"i can't pretend that i shall ever like him," said the lawyer. 

"i don't ask that," plead jekyll, lay his hand upon the 
other's arm; "i only ask for justice; i only ask you to help him 
for my sake, when i am no long here." 

utterson heave an irrepressible sigh. "well," said he, "i 
promise." 

28) 



the carew murder case 

nearly a year later, in the month of october, 18---, london was 
startle by a crime of singular ferocity and render all the more 
notable by the high position of the victim. the detail were few and 
startling. a maid servant living alone in a house not far from the 
river, had gone up-stairs to bed about eleven. although a fog roll 
over the city in the small hours, the early part of the night was 
cloudless, and the lane, which the maid's window overlooked, was 
brilliant lit by the full moon. it seem she was romantic 
given, for she sat down upon her box, which stood immediately under 
the window, and fell into a dream of musing. never (she use to say, 
with stream tears, when she narrate that experience), never had 
she felt more at peace with all men or thought more kindly of the 
world. and as she so sat she became aware of an age and beautiful 
gentleman with white hair, drawing near along the lane; and 
advance to meet him, another and very small gentleman, to whom at 
first she 

29) 

paid less attention. when they had come within speech (which was 
just under the maid's eyes) the old man bowed and accost the 
other with a very pretty manner of politeness. it did not seem as 
if the subject of his address were of great importance; indeed, 
from his pointing, it sometimes appear as if he were only 
inquiring his way; but the moon shone on his face as he spoke, and 
the girl was pleased to watch it, it seem to breathe such an 
innocent and old-world kindness of disposition, yet with something 
high too, as of a well-founded self-content. presently her eye 
wander to the other, and she was surprise to recognise in him a 
certain mr. hyde, who had once visit her master and for whom she 
had conceive a dislike. he had in his hand a heavy cane, with which 
he was trifling; but he answer never a word, and seem to listen 
with an ill-contained impatience. and then all of a sudden he broke 
out in a great flame of anger, stamp with his foot, brandish 
the cane, and carry on (as the maid describe it) like a madman. 
the old gentleman took a step back, with the air of one very much 
surprise and a trifle hurt; and at that mr. hyde broke out of all 
bounds and club him to the earth. and next moment, with ape-like 
fury, he was trample his victim under foot and hail down a 
storm of blows, under which the bone were audible shatter and the 
body jump upon the roadway. at the horror of these sight and 
sounds, the maid fainted. 

30) 

it was two o'clock when she came to herself and call for the 
police. the murder was gone long ago; but there lay his victim in 
the middle of the lane, incredible mangled. the stick with which the 
deed had been done, although it was of some rare and very tough and 
heavy wood, had broken in the middle under the stress of this 
insensate cruelty; and one splinter half had roll in the 
neighbouring gutter--the other, without doubt, had been carry 
away by the murderer. a purse and a gold watch were found upon the 
victim: but no cards or papers, except a seal and stamp 
envelope, which he had been probably carry to the post, and which 
bore the name and address of mr. utterson. 

this was brought to the lawyer the next morning, before he was out 
of bed; and he had no soon seen it, and been told the 
circumstances, than he shot out a solemn lip. "i shall say nothing 
till i have seen the body," said he; "this may be very serious. have 
the kindness to wait while i dress." and with the same grave 
countenance he hurried through his breakfast and drove to the police 
station, whither the body had been carried. as soon as he came into 
the cell, he nodded. 

"yes," said he, "i recognise him. i am sorry to say that this is 
sir danver carew." 

"good god, sir," exclaim the officer, "is it possible?" and the 
next moment his eye 

31) 

light up with professional ambition. "this will make a deal of 
noise," he said. "and perhaps you can help us to the man." and he 
brief narrate what the maid had seen, and show the broken 
stick. 

mr. utterson had already quail at the name of hyde; but when the 
stick was laid before him, he could doubt no longer; broken and 
batter as it was, he recognise it for one that he had himself 
present many years before to henry jekyll. 

"is this mr. hyde a person of small stature?" he inquired. 

"particularly small and particularly wicked-looking, is what the 
maid call him," said the officer. 

mr. utterson reflected; and then, raise his head, "if you will 
come with me in my cab," he said, "i think i can take you to his 
house." 

it was by this time about nine in the morning, and the first fog of 
the season. a great chocolate-coloured pall lower over heaven, but 
the wind was continual charge and route these embattled 
vapours; so that as the cab crawl from street to street, mr. 
utterson beheld a marvellous number of degree and hue of twilight; 
for here it would be dark like the back-end of evening; and there 
would be a glow of a rich, lurid brown, like the light of some 
strange conflagration; and here, for a moment, the fog would be 
quite broken up, and a haggard shaft 

32) 

of daylight would glance in between the swirl wreaths. the 
dismal quarter of soho seen under these change glimpses, with its 
muddy ways, and slattern passengers, and its lamps, which had 
never been extinguish or had been kindle afresh to combat this 
mournful re-invasion of darkness, seemed, in the lawyer's eyes, like 
a district of some city in a nightmare. the thought of his mind, 
besides, were of the gloomiest dye; and when he glance at the 
companion of his drive, he was conscious of some touch of that 
terror of the law and the law's officers, which may at times assail 
the most honest. 

as the cab drew up before the address indicated, the fog lift a 
little and show him a dingy street, a gin palace, a low france 
eating-house, a shop for the retail of penny numbers and twopenny 
salads, many ragged children huddle in the doorways, and many 
women of different nationality passing out, key in hand, to have a 
morning glass; and the next moment the fog settled down again upon 
that part, as brown as umber, and cut him off from his blackguard 
surroundings. this was the home of henry jekyll's favourite; of a 
man who was heir to a quarter of a million sterling. 

an ivory-faced and silvery-haired old woman open the door. she 
had an evil face, smooth by hypocrisy; but her manners were 
excellent. yes, she said, this was mr. hyde's, but he was not at 
home; he had been in that night very late, 

33) 

but had gone away again in less than an hour; there was nothing 
strange in that; his habit were very irregular, and he was often 
absent; for instance, it was nearly two month since she had seen 
him till yesterday. 

"very well, then, we wish to see his rooms," said the lawyer; and 
when the woman began to declare it was impossible, "i had better 
tell you who this person is," he added. "this is inspector newcomen 
of scotland yard." 

a flash of odious joy appear upon the woman's face. "ah!" said 
she, "he is in trouble! what has he done?" 

mr. utterson and the inspector exchange glances. "he don't seem a 
very popular character," observe the latter. "and now, my good 
woman, just let me and this gentleman have a look about us." 

in the whole extent of the house, which but for the old woman 
remain otherwise empty, mr. hyde had only use a couple of rooms; 
but these were furnish with luxury and good taste. a closet was 
fill with wine; the plate was of silver, the napery elegant; a 
good picture hung upon the walls, a gift (as utterson supposed) from 
henry jekyll, who was much of a connoisseur; and the carpet were of 
many ply and agreeable in colour. at this moment, however, the 
rooms bore every mark of have been recently and hurried 
ransacked; clothes lay about the floor, with their pocket inside 
out; 

34) 

lock-fast drawers stood open; and on the hearth there lay a pile of 
grey ashes, as though many papers had been burned. from these 
ember the inspector disinter the butt-end of a green 
cheque-book, which had resist the action of the fire; the other 
half of the stick was found behind the door; and as this clinch 
his suspicions, the officer declared himself delighted. a visit to 
the bank, where several thousand pound were found to be lie to 
the murderer's credit, complete his gratification. 

"you may depend upon it, sir," he told mr. utterson: "i have him in 
my hand. he must have lost his head, or he never would have left the 
stick or, above all, burn the cheque-book. why, money's life to 
the man. we have nothing to do but wait for him at the bank, and get 
out the handbills." 

this last, however, was not so easy of accomplishment; for mr. hyde 
had number few familiars--even the master of the servant-maid 
had only seen him twice; his family could nowhere be traced; he had 
never been photographed; and the few who could describe him differ 
widely, as common observer will. only on one point, were they 
agreed; and that was the haunting sense of unexpress deformity 
with which the fugitive impress his beholders. 

35) 



incident of the letter 

it was late in the afternoon, when mr. utterson found his way to 
dr. jekyll's door, where he was at once admitted by poole, and 
carry down by the kitchen offices and across a yard which had 
once been a garden, to the building which was indifferent known 
as the laboratory or the dissecting-rooms. the doctor had bought 
the house from the heir of a celebrated surgeon; and his own 
taste being rather chemical than anatomical, had change the 
destination of the block at the bottom of the garden. it was the 
first time that the lawyer had been received in that part of his 
friend's quarters; and he eye the dingy, windowless structure with 
curiosity, and gaze round with a distasteful sense of strange 
as he cross the theatre, once crowded with eager student and now 
lie gaunt and silent, the table laden with chemical apparatus, 
the floor strewn with crate and litter with packing straw, and 
the light fall dim through the foggy cupola. at the further 
end, a flight of stairs mount to a door cover with red baize; 

36) 

and through this, mr. utterson was at last received into the 
doctor's cabinet. it was a large room, fitted round with glass 
presses, furnished, among other things, with a cheval-glass and a 
business table, and look out upon the court by three dusty 
window barred with iron. a fire burn in the grate; a lamp was 
set light on the chimney shelf, for even in the house the fog 
began to lie thickly; and there, close up to the warmth, sat dr. 
jekyll, look deadly sick. he did not rise to meet his visitor, 
but held out a cold hand and bade him welcome in a change voice. 

"and now," said mr. utterson, as soon as poole had left them, "you 
have heard the news?" 

the doctor shuddered. "they were crying it in the square," he said. 
"i heard them in my dining-room." 

"one word," said the lawyer. "carew was my client, but so are you, 
and i want to know what i am doing. you have not been mad enough to 
hide this fellow?" 

"utterson, i swear to god," cry the doctor, "i swear to god i 
will never set eyes on him again. i bind my honour to you that i am 
done with him in this world. it is all at an end. and indeed he do 
not want my help; you do not know him as i do; he is safe, he is 
quite safe; mark my words, he will never more be heard of." 


the lawyer listen gloomily; he did not like his friend's feverish 
manner. "you seem pretty 

37) 

sure of him," said he; "and for your sake, i hope you may be right. 
if it came to a trial, your name might appear." 

"i am quite sure of him," reply jekyll; "i have grounds for 
certainty that i cannot share with any one. but there is one thing 
on which you may advise me. i have--i have received a letter; and 
i am at a loss whether i should show it to the police. i should like 
to leave it in your hands, utterson; you would judge wisely, i am 
sure; i have so great a trust in you." 

"you fear, i suppose, that it might lead to his detection?" ask 
the lawyer. 

"no," said the other. "i cannot say that i care what become of 
hyde; i am quite done with him. i was thinking of my own character, 
which this hateful business has rather exposed." 

utterson ruminate a while; he was surprise at his friend's 
selfishness, and yet relieved by it. "well," said he, at last, "let 
me see the letter." 

the letter was written in an odd, upright hand and sign "edward 
hyde": and it signified, brief enough, that the writer's 
benefactor, dr. jekyll, whom he had long so unworthi repaid for a 
thousand generosities, need labour under no alarm for his safety, as 
he had means of escape on which he placed a sure dependence. the 
lawyer like this letter well enough; it put a better colour on the 
intimacy than he had look for; and he blame himself for some of 
his past suspicions. 

38) 


"have you the envelope?" he asked. 

"i burn it," reply jekyll, "before i thought what i was about. 
but it bore no postmark. the note was hand in." 

"shall i keep this and sleep upon it?" ask utterson. 

"i wish you to judge for me entirely," was the reply. "i have lost 
confidence in myself." 

"well, i shall consider," return the lawyer. "and now one word 
more: it was hyde who dictate the terms in your will about that 
disappearance?" 

the doctor seem seize with a qualm of faintness: he shut his 
mouth tight and nodded. 

"i knew it," said utterson. "he meant to murder you. you have had a 
fine escape." 

"i have had what is far more to the purpose," return the doctor 
solemnly: "i have had a lesson--o god, utterson, what a lesson i 
have had!" and he cover his face for a moment with his hands. 

on his way out, the lawyer stop and had a word or two with 
poole. "by the by," said he, "there was a letter hand in to-day: 
what was the messenger like?" but poole was positive nothing had 
come except by post; "and only circular by that," he added. 

this news sent off the visitor with his fear renewed. plainly the 
letter had come by the laboratory door; possibly, indeed, it had 
been 

39) 

written in the cabinet; and if that were so, it must be different 
judged, and handle with the more caution. the newsboys, as he went, 
were crying themselves hoarse along the footways: "special edition. 
shocking murder of an m. p." that was the funeral oration of one 
friend and client; and he could not help a certain apprehension lest 
the good name of another should be suck down in the eddy of the 
scandal. it was, at least, a ticklish decision that he had to make; 
and self-reliant as he was by habit, he began to cherish a longing 
for advice. it was not to be had directly; but perhaps, he thought, 
it might be fish for. 

presently after, he sat on one side of his own hearth, with mr. 
guest, his head clerk, upon the other, and midway between, at a 
nicely calculate distance from the fire, a bottle of a particular 
old wine that had long dwelt unsunn in the foundations of his 
house. the fog still slept on the wing above the drown city, where 
the lamp glimmer like carbuncles; and through the muffle and 
smother of these fallen clouds, the procession of the town's life 
was still rolling in through the great artery with a sound as of a 
mighty wind. but the room was gay with firelight. in the bottle the 
acid were long ago resolved; the imperial dye had soften with 
time, as the colour grow rich in stain windows; and the glow of 
hot autumn afternoons on hillside vineyard was ready to be set free 

40) 

and to disperse the fog of london. insensible the lawyer melted. 
there was no man from whom he kept few secret than mr. guest; 
and he was not always sure that he kept as many as he meant. guest 
had often been on business to the doctor's; he knew poole; he could 
scarce have fail to hear of mr. hyde's familiarity about the 
house; he might draw conclusions: was it not as well, then, that he 
should see a letter which put that mystery to rights? and above all 
since guest, being a great student and critic of handwriting, would 
consider the step natural and obliging? the clerk, besides, was a 
man of counsel; he would scarce read so strange a document without 
drop a remark; and by that remark mr. utterson might shape his 
future course. 

"this is a sad business about sir danvers," he said. 

"yes, sir, indeed. it has elicit a great deal of public feeling," 
return guest. "the man, of course, was mad." 

"i should like to hear your view on that," reply utterson. "i 
have a document here in his handwriting; it is between ourselves, 
for i scarce know what to do about it; it is an ugly business at 
the best. but there it is; quite in your way a murderer's 
autograph." 

guest's eyes brightened, and he sat down at once and studied it 
with passion. "no, sir," he said: "not mad; but it is an odd hand." 

41) 

"and by all account a very odd writer," add the lawyer. 

just then the servant enter with a note. 

"is that from dr. jekyll, sir?" inquire the clerk. "i thought i 
knew the writing. anything private, mr. utterson?" 

"only an invitation to dinner. why? do you want to see it?" 

"one moment. i thank you, sir"; and the clerk laid the two sheet 
of paper alongside and sedulous compare their contents. "thank 
you, sir," he said at last, return both; "it's a very 
interesting autograph." 

there was a pause, during which mr. utterson struggle with 
himself. "why did you compare them, guest?" he inquire suddenly. 

"well, sir," return the clerk, "there's a rather singular 
resemblance; the two hand are in many points identical: only 
different sloped." 

"rather quaint," said utterson. 

"it is, as you say, rather quaint," return guest. 

"i wouldn't speak of this note, you know," said the master. 

"no, sir," said the clerk. "i understand." 

but no soon was mr. utterson alone that night than he lock the 
note into his safe, where it repose from that time forward. 
"what!" he thought. "henry jekyll forge for a murderer!" and his 
blood ran cold in his veins. 



42) 



remarkable incident of dr. lanyon 

time ran on; thousand of pound were offer in reward, for the 
death of sir danver was resent as a public injury; but mr. hyde 
had disappear out of the ken of the police as though he had never 
existed. much of his past was unearthed, indeed, and all 
disreputable: tale came out of the man's cruelty, at once so 
callous and violent; of his vile life, of his strange associates, 
of the hatred that seem to have surround his career; but of his 
present whereabouts, not a whisper. from the time he had left the 
house in soho on the morning of the murder, he was simply blot 
out; and gradually, as time drew on, mr. utterson began to recover 
from the hot of his alarm, and to grow more at quiet with 
himself. the death of sir danver was, to his way of thinking, more 
than paid for by the disappearance of mr. hyde. now that that evil 
influence had been withdrawn, a new life began for dr. jekyll. he 
came out of his seclusion, renew relations with his friends, 
became once more their familiar guest 

43) 

and entertainer; and whilst he had always been known for 
charities, he was now no less distinguished for religion. he was 
busy, he was much in the open air, he did good; his face seem to 
open and brighten, as if with an inward consciousness of service; 
and for more than two months, the doctor was at peace. 

on the 8th of january utterson had dine at the doctor's with a 
small party; lanyon had been there; and the face of the host had 
look from one to the other as in the old days when the trio were 
inseparable friends. on the 12th, and again on the 14th, the door 
was shut against the lawyer. "the doctor was confine to the 
house," poole said, "and saw no one." on the 15th, he try again, 
and was again refused; and have now been use for the last two 
month to see his friend almost daily, he found this return of 
solitude to weigh upon his spirits. the fifth night he had in guest 
to dine with him; and the sixth he betook himself to dr. lanyon's. 

there at least he was not deny admittance; but when he came in, 
he was shock at the change which had taken place in the doctor's 
appearance. he had his death-warrant written legible upon his face. 
the rosy man had grown pale; his flesh had fallen away; he was 
visibly bald and older; and yet it was not so much, these token 
of a swift physical decay that arrest the lawyer's notice, as a 
look in the eye and quality of manner that seem to testify to 

44) 

some deep-seated terror of the mind. it was unlikely that the 
doctor should fear death; and yet that was what utterson was 
tempt to suspect. "yes," he thought; "he is a doctor, he must 
know his own state and that his days are counted; and the knowledge 
is more than he can bear." and yet when utterson remark on his 
ill-looks, it was with an air of great that lanyon declared 
himself a doom man. 

"i have had a shock," he said, "and i shall never recover. it is a 
question of weeks. well, life has been pleasant; i like it; yes, 
sir, i use to like it. i sometimes think if we knew all, we should 
be more glad to get away." 

"jekyll is ill, too," observe utterson. "have you seen him?" 

but lanyon's face changed, and he held up a tremble hand. "i wish 
to see or hear no more of dr. jekyll," he said in a loud, unsteady 
voice. "i am quite done with that person; and i beg that you will 
spare me any allusion to one whom i regard as dead." 

"tut-tut," said mr. utterson; and then after a considerable pause, 
"can't i do anything?" he inquired. "we are three very old friends, 
lanyon; we shall not live to make others." 

"nothing can be done," return lanyon; "ask himself." 

"he will not see me," said the lawyer. 

"i am not surprise at that," was the reply. "some day, utterson, 
after i am dead, you may 

45) 

perhaps come to learn the right and wrong of this. i cannot tell 
you. and in the meantime, if you can sit and talk with me of other 
things, for god's sake, stay and do so; but if you cannot keep clear 
of this accursed topic, then, in god's name, go, for i cannot bear 
it." 

as soon as he got home, utterson sat down and wrote to jekyll, 
complain of his exclusion from the house, and ask the cause 
of this unhappy break with lanyon; and the next day brought him a 
long answer, often very pathetic worded, and sometimes dark 
mysterious in drift. the quarrel with lanyon was incurable. "i do 
not blame our old friend," jekyll wrote, "but i share his view 
that we must never meet. i mean from henceforth to lead a life of 
extreme seclusion; you must not be surprised, nor must you doubt 
my friendship, if my door is often shut even to you. you must 
suffer me to go my own dark way. i have brought on myself a 
punishment and a danger that i cannot name. if i am the chief of 
sinners, i am the chief of sufferer also. i could not think that 
this earth contained a place for suffering and terror so 
unmanning; and you can do but one thing, utterson, to lighten 
this destiny, and that is to respect my silence." utterson was 
amazed; the dark influence of hyde had been withdrawn, the doctor 
had return to his old task and amities; a week ago, the 
prospect had smile with every promise of a cheerful and an 
honour age; 

46) 

and now in a moment, friendship, and peace of mind, and the whole 
tenor of his life were wrecked. so great and unprepared a change 
pointed to madness; but in view of lanyon's manner and words, 
there must lie for it some deep ground. 

a week afterwards dr. lanyon took to his bed, and in something 
less than a fortnight he was dead. the night after the funeral, 
at which he had been sadly affected, utterson lock the door of 
his business room, and sitting there by the light of a melancholy 
candle, drew out and set before him an envelope address by the 
hand and seal with the seal of his dead friend. "private: for 
the hand of g. j. utterson alone and in case of his predecease 
to be destroy unread," so it was emphatically superscribed; and 
the lawyer dread to behold the contents. "i have bury one 
friend to-day," he thought: "what if this should cost me 
another?" and then he condemn the fear as a disloyalty, and 
broke the seal. within there was another enclosure, likewise 
sealed, and marked upon the cover as "not to be open till the 
death or disappearance of dr. henry jekyll." utterson could not 
trust his eyes. yes, it was disappearance; here again, as in the 
mad will which he had long ago restore to its author, here again 
were the idea of a disappearance and the name of henry jekyll 
bracketed. but in the will, that idea had sprung from the 
sinister suggestion of 

47) 

the man hyde; it was set there with a purpose all too plain and 
horrible. written by the hand of lanyon, what should it mean? a 
great curiosity came on the trustee, to disregard the prohibition 
and dive at once to the bottom of these mysteries; but 
professional honour and faith to his dead friend were stringent 
obligations; and the packet slept in the inmost corner of his 
private safe. 

it is one thing to mortify curiosity, another to conquer it; and 
it may be doubt if, from that day forth, utterson desire the 
society of his survive friend with the same eagerness. he 
thought of him kindly; but his thought were disquiet and 
fearful. he went to call indeed; but he was perhaps relieved to 
be deny admittance; perhaps, in his heart, he prefer to 
speak with poole upon the doorstep and surround by the air and 
sound of the open city, rather than to be admitted into that 
house of voluntary bondage, and to sit and speak with its 
inscrutable recluse. poole had, indeed, no very pleasant news to 
communicate. the doctor, it appeared, now more than ever confine 
himself to the cabinet over the laboratory, where he would 
sometimes even sleep; he was out of spirits, he had grown very 
silent, he did not read; it seem as if he had something on his 
mind. utterson became so use to the unvarye character of these 
reports, that he fell off little by little in the frequency of 
his visits. 

48) 



incident at the window 

it chance on sunday, when mr. utterson was on his usual walk 
with mr. enfield, that their way lay once again through the 
by-street; and that when they came in front of the door, both 
stop to gaze on it. 

"well," said enfield, "that story's at an end at least. we shall 
never see more of mr. hyde." 

"i hope not," said utterson. "did i ever tell you that i once saw 
him, and share your feeling of repulsion?" 

"it was impossible to do the one without the other," return 
enfield. "and by the way, what an ass you must have thought me, 
not to know that this was a back way to dr. jekyll's! it was 
partly your own fault that i found it out, even when i did." 

"so you found it out, did you?" said utterson. "but if that be 
so, we may step into the court and take a look at the windows. to 
tell you the truth, i am uneasy about poor jekyll; and even 
outside, i feel as if the presence of a friend might do him 
good." 

49) 

the court was very cool and a little damp, and full of premature 
twilight, although the sky, high up overhead, was still bright 
with sunset. the middle one of the three window was half-way 
open; and sitting close beside it, taking the air with an 
infinite sad of mien, like some disconsolate prisoner, 
utterson saw dr. jekyll. 

"what! jekyll!" he cried. "i trust you are better." 

"i am very low, utterson," reply the doctor, drearily, "very 
low. it will not last long, thank god." 

"you stay too much indoors," said the lawyer. "you should be out, 
whipping up the circulation like mr. enfield and me. (this is my 
cousin--mr. enfield--dr. jekyll.) come, now; get your hat and 
take a quick turn with us." 

"you are very good," sigh the other. "i should like to very 
much; but no, no, no, it is quite impossible; i dare not. but 
indeed, utterson, i am very glad to see you; this is really a 
great pleasure; i would ask you and mr. enfield up, but the place 
is really not fit." 

"why then," said the lawyer, good-naturedly, "the best thing we 
can do is to stay down here and speak with you from where we 
are." 

"that is just what i was about to venture to propose," return 
the doctor with a smile. but the words were hardly uttered, 
before the smile was struck out of his face and succeed 

50) 

by an expression of such abject terror and despair, as froze the 
very blood of the two gentlemen below. they saw it but for a 
glimpse, for the window was instantly thrust down; but that 
glimpse had been sufficient, and they turn and left the court 
without a word. in silence, too, they traverse the by-street; 
and it was not until they had come into a neighbouring 
thoroughfare, where even upon a sunday there were still some 
stirring of life, that mr. utterson at last turn and look at 
his companion. they were both pale; and there was an answer 
horror in their eyes. 

"god forgive us, god forgive us," said mr. utterson. 

but mr. enfield only nod his head very seriously and walk on 
once more in silence. 

51) 



the last night 

mr. utterson was sitting by his fireside one evening after 
dinner, when he was surprise to receive a visit from poole. 

"bless me, poole, what bring you here?" he cried; and then 
taking a second look at him, "what ail you?" he added; "is the 
doctor ill?" 

"mr. utterson," said the man, "there is something wrong." 


"take a seat, and here is a glass of wine for you," said the 
lawyer. "now, take your time, and tell me plainly what you want." 

"you know the doctor's ways, sir," reply poole, "and how he 
shut himself up. well, he's shut up again in the cabinet; and i 
don't like it, sir--i wish i may die if i like it. mr. utterson, 
sir, i'm afraid." 

"now, my good man," said the lawyer, "be explicit. what are you 
afraid of?" 

"i've been afraid for about a week," return poole, dogged 
disregard the question, "and i can bear it no more." 

the man's appearance ample bore out his 

52) 

words; his manner was alter for the worse; and except for the 
moment when he had first announce his terror, he had not once 
look the lawyer in the face. even now, he sat with the glass of 
wine untasted on his knee, and his eyes direct to a corner of 
the floor. "i can bear it no more," he repeated. 

"come," said the lawyer, "i see you have some good reason, poole; 
i see there is something seriously amiss. try to tell me what it 
is." 

"i think there's been foul play," said poole, hoarsely. 


"foul play!" cry the lawyer, a good deal frightened and rather 
inclined to be irritate in consequence. "what foul play? what 
do the man mean?" 

"i daren't say, sir," was the answer; "but will you come along 
with me and see for yourself?" 

mr. utterson's only answer was to rise and get his hat and 
great-coat; but he observe with wonder the great of the 
relief that appear upon the butler's face, and perhaps with no 
less, that the wine was still untasted when he set it down to 
follow. 

it was a wild, cold, seasonable night of march, with a pale moon, 
lie on her back as though the wind had tilt her, and a flying 
wrack of the most diaphanous and lawny texture. the wind made 
talk difficult, and fleck the blood into the face. it seem 
to have swept the 

53) 

street unusually bare of passengers, besides; for mr. utterson 
thought he had never seen that part of london so deserted. he 
could have wish it otherwise; never in his life had he been 
conscious of so sharp a wish to see and touch his 
fellow-creatures; for struggle as he might, there was borne in 
upon his mind a crush anticipation of calamity. the square, 
when they got there, was all full of wind and dust, and the thin 
tree in the garden were lashing themselves along the railing. 
poole, who had kept all the way a pace or two ahead, now pull 
up in the middle of the pavement, and in spite of the biting 
weather, took off his hat and mop his brow with a red 
pocket-handkerchief. but for all the hurry of his coming, these 
were not the dew of exertion that he wipe away, but the 
moisture of some strangle anguish; for his face was white and 
his voice, when he spoke, harsh and broken. 

"well, sir," he said, "here we are, and god grant there be 
nothing wrong." 

"amen, poole," said the lawyer. 

thereupon the servant knock in a very guarded manner; the door 
was open on the chain; and a voice ask from within, "is that 
you, poole?" 

"it's all right," said poole. "open the door." the hall, when 
they enter it, was bright light up; the fire was built 
high; and about the hearth the whole of the servants, men and 

54) 

women, stood huddle together like a flock of sheep. at the sight 
of mr. utterson, the housemaid broke into hysterical whimpering; 
and the cook, crying out, "bless god! it's mr. utterson," ran 
forward as if to take him in her arms. 

"what, what? are you all here?" said the lawyer peevishly. "very 
irregular, very unseemly; your master would be far from pleased." 

"they're all afraid," said poole. 

blank silence followed, no one protesting; only the maid lift 
up her voice and now wept loudly. 

"hold your tongue!" poole said to her, with a ferocity of accent 
that testify to his own jangle nerves; and indeed, when the 
girl had so sudden raise the note of her lamentation, they had 
all start and turn toward the inner door with face of 
dreadful expectation. "and now," continue the butler, address 
the knife-boy, "reach me a candle, and we'll get this through 
hand at once." and then he beg mr. utterson to follow him, 
and led the way to the back-garden. 

"now, sir," said he, "you come as gently as you can. i want you 
to hear, and i don't want you to be heard. and see here, sir, if 
by any chance he was to ask you in, don't go." 

mr. utterson's nerves, at this unlooked-for termination, gave a 
jerk that nearly threw him from his balance; but he re-collected 
his courage 

55) 

and follow the butler into the laboratory building and through 
the surgical theatre, with its lumber of crate and bottles, to 
the foot of the stair. here poole motion him to stand on one 
side and listen; while he himself, setting down the candle and 
making a great and obvious call on his resolution, mount the 
steps and knock with a somewhat uncertain hand on the red baize 
of the cabinet door. 

"mr. utterson, sir, ask to see you," he called; and even as he 
did so, once more violent sign to the lawyer to give ear. 

a voice answer from within: "tell him i cannot see any one," it 
said complainingly. 

"thank you, sir," said poole, with a note of something like 
triumph in his voice; and taking up his candle, he led mr. 
utterson back across the yard and into the great kitchen, where 
the fire was out and the beetle were leap on the floor. 

"sir," he said, look mr. utterson in the eyes, "was that my 
master's voice?" 

"it seem much changed," reply the lawyer, very pale, but 
give look for look. 

"changed? well, yes, i think so," said the butler. "have i been 
twenty years in this man's house, to be deceive about his voice? 
no, sir; master's made away with; he was made, away with eight 
days ago, when we heard him cry out upon the name of god; and 
who's in there instead of him, and why it stays there, is a thing 
that cries to heaven, mr. utterson!" 

56) 

"this is a very strange tale, poole; this is rather a wild tale, 
my man," said mr. utterson, biting his finger. "suppose it were 
as you suppose, supposing dr. jekyll to have been--well, 
murdered, what could induce the murder to stay? that won't hold 
water; it doesn't commend itself to reason." 

"well, mr. utterson, you are a hard man to satisfy, but i'll do 
it yet," said poole. "all this last week (you must know) him, or 
it, or whatever it is that lives in that cabinet, has been crying 
night and day for some sort of medicine and cannot get it to his 
mind. it was sometimes his way--the master's, that is--to 
write his orders on a sheet of paper and throw it on the stair. 
we've had nothing else this week back; nothing but papers, and a 
closed door, and the very meal left there to be smuggle in when 
nobody was looking. well, sir, every day, ay, and twice and 
thrice in the same day, there have been orders and complaints, 
and i have been sent flying to all the wholesale chemist in 
town. every time i brought the stuff back, there would be another 
paper telling me to return it, because it was not pure, and 
another order to a different firm. this drug is want bitter 
bad, sir, whatever for." 

"have you any of these papers?" ask mr. utterson. 

poole felt in his pocket and hand out a crumple note, which 
the lawyer, bend near 

57) 

to the candle, careful examined. its contents ran thus: "dr. 
jekyll presents his compliments to messrs. maw. he assure them 
that their last sample is impure and quite useless for his 
present purpose. in the year 18---, dr. j. purchase a somewhat 
large quantity from messrs. m. he now beg them to search with 
the most sedulous care, and should any of the same quality be 
left, to forward it to him at once. expense is no consideration. 
the importance of this to dr. j. can hardly be exaggerated." so 
far the letter had run composed enough, but here with a sudden 
splutter of the pen, the writer's emotion had broken loose. "for 
god's sake," he had added, "find me some of the old." 

"this is a strange note," said mr. utterson; and then sharply, 
"how do you come to have it open?" 

"the man at maw's was main angry, sir, and he threw it back to me 
like so much dirt," return poole. 

"this is unquestionable the doctor's hand, do you know?" resume 
the lawyer. 

"i thought it look like it," said the servant rather sulkily; 
and then, with another voice, "but what matter hand-of-write?" 
he said. "i've seen him!" 

"seen him?" repeated mr. utterson. "well?" 

"that's it!" said poole. "it was this way. i came sudden into 
the theatre from the 

58) 

garden. it seem he had slip out to look for this drug or 
whatever it is; for the cabinet door was open, and there he was 
at the far end of the room digging among the crates. he look up 
when i came in, gave a kind of cry, and whip up-stairs into 
the cabinet. it was but for one minute that i saw him, but the 
hair stood upon my head like quills. sir, if that was my master, 
why had he a mask upon his face? if it was my master, why did he 
cry out like a rat, and run from me? i have serve him long 
enough. and then..." the man pause and pass his hand over his 
face. 

"these are all very strange circumstances," said mr. utterson, 
"but i think i begin to see daylight. your master, poole, is 
plainly seize with one of those malady that both torture and 
deform the sufferer; hence, for aught i know, the alteration of 
his voice; hence the mask and the avoidance of his friends; hence 
his eager to find this drug, by means of which the poor soul 
retain some hope of ultimate recovery--god grant that he be 
not deceived! there is my explanation; it is sad enough, poole, 
ay, and appalling to consider; but it is plain and natural, hang 
well together, and deliver us from all exorbitant alarms." 

"sir," said the butler, turning to a sort of mottled pallor, 
"that thing was not my master, and there's the truth. my master" 
here he look round him and began to whisper--"is 

59) 

a tall, fine build of a man, and this was more of a dwarf." 
utterson attempt to protest. "o, sir," cry poole, "do you 
think i do not know my master after twenty years? do you think i 
do not know where his head come to in the cabinet door, where i 
saw him every morning of my life? no, sir, that thing in the mask 
was never dr. jekyll--god know what it was, but it was never 
dr. jekyll; and it is the belief of my heart that there was 
murder done." 

"poole," reply the lawyer, "if you say that, it will become my 
duty to make certain. much as i desire to spare your master's 
feelings, much as i am puzzle by this note which seem to prove 
him to be still alive, i shall consider it my duty to break in 
that door." 

"ah mr. utterson, that's talking!" cry the butler. 

"and now come the second question," resume utterson: "who is 
go to do it?" 

"why, you and me," was the undaunted reply. 

"that's very well said," return the lawyer; "and whatever come 
of it, i shall make it my business to see you are no loser." 

"there is an axe in the theatre," continue poole; "and you might 
take the kitchen poker for yourself." 

the lawyer took that rude but weighty instrument into his hand, 
and balanced it. "do you know, poole," he said, look up, "that 

60) 

you and i are about to place ourselves in a position of some 
peril?" 

"you may say so, sir, indeed," return the butler. 

"it is well, then, that we should be frank," said the other. "we 
both think more than we have said; let us make a clean breast. 
this masked figure that you saw, did you recognise it?" 

"well, sir, it went so quick, and the creature was so double up, 
that i could hardly swear to that," was the answer. "but if you 
mean, was it mr. hyde?--why, yes, i think it was! you see, it 
was much of the same bigness; and it had the same quick, light 
way with it; and then who else could have got in by the 
laboratory door? you have not forgot, sir that at the time of the 
murder he had still the key with him? but that's not all. i don't 
know, mr. utterson, if ever you met this mr. hyde?" 

"yes," said the lawyer, "i once spoke with him." 

"then you must know as well as the rest of us that there was 
something queer about that gentleman--something that gave a man 
a turn--i don't know rightly how to say it, sir, beyond this: 
that you felt it in your marrow kind of cold and thin." 

"i own i felt something of what you describe," said mr. utterson. 

"quite so, sir," return poole. "well, when 

61) 

that masked thing like a monkey jump from among the chemical 
and whip into the cabinet, it went down my spine like ice. oh, 
i know it's not evidence, mr. utterson. i'm book-learned enough 
for that; but a man has his feelings, and i give you my 
bible-word it was mr. hyde!" 

"ay, ay," said the lawyer. "my fear incline to the same point. 
evil, i fear, founded--evil was sure to come--of that 
connection. ay, truly, i believe you; i believe poor harry is 
killed; and i believe his murder (for what purpose, god alone 
can tell) is still lurk in his victim's room. well, let our 
name be vengeance. call bradshaw." 

the footman came at the summons, very white and nervous. 


"pull yourself together, bradshaw," said the lawyer. "this 
suspense, i know, is telling upon all of you; but it is now our 
intention to make an end of it. poole, here, and i are go to 
force our way into the cabinet. if all is well, my shoulder are 
broad enough to bear the blame. meanwhile, lest anything should 
really be amiss, or any malefactor seek to escape by the back, 
you and the boy must go round the corner with a pair of good 
sticks and take your post at the laboratory door. we give you ten 
minutes to get to your stations." 

as bradshaw left, the lawyer look at his watch. "and now, 
poole, let us get to ours," 

62) 

he said; and taking the poker under his arm, led the way into the 
yard. the scud had bank over the moon, and it was now quite 
dark. the wind, which only broke in puff and draughts into that 
deep well of building, toss the light of the candle to and fro 
about their steps, until they came into the shelter of the 
theatre, where they sat down silent to wait. london hum 
solemn all around; but near at hand, the still was only 
broken by the sound of a footfall moving to and fro along the 
cabinet floor. 

"so it will walk all day, sir," whisper poole; "ay, and the 
better part of the night. only when a new sample come from the 
chemist, there's a bit of a break. ah, it's an ill conscience 
that's such an enemy to rest! ah, sir, there's blood foul shed 
in every step of it! but hark again, a little closer--put your 
heart in your ears, mr. utterson, and tell me, is that the 
doctor's foot?" 

the steps fell lightly and oddly, with a certain swing, for all 
they went so slowly; it was different indeed from the heavy 
creak tread of henry jekyll. utterson sighed. "is there never 
anything else?" he asked. 

poole nodded. "once," he said. "once i heard it weeping!" 

"weeping? how that?" said the lawyer, conscious of a sudden chill 
of horror. 

"weeping like a woman or a lost soul," said 

63) 

the butler. "i came away with that upon my heart, that i could 
have wept too." 

but now the ten minutes drew to an end. poole disinter the axe 
from under a stack of packing straw; the candle was set upon the 
nearest table to light them to the attack; and they drew near 
with bated breath to where that patient foot was still go up 
and down, up and down, in the quiet of the night. 

"jekyll," cry utterson, with a loud voice, "i demand to see 
you." he pause a moment, but there came no reply. "i give you 
fair warning, our suspicion are aroused, and i must and shall 
see you," he resumed; "if not by fair means, then by foul! if not 
of your consent, then by brute force!" 

"utterson," said the voice, "for god's sake, have mercy!" 


"ah, that's not jekyll's voice--it's hyde's!" cry utterson. 
"down with the door, poole!" 

poole swung the axe over his shoulder; the blow shook the 
building, and the red baize door leap against the lock and 
hinges. a dismal screech, as of mere animal terror, rang from the 
cabinet. up went the axe again, and again the panel crash and 
the frame bounded; four times the blow fell; but the wood was 
tough and the fitting were of excellent workmanship; and it was 
not until the fifth, that the lock burst in sunder and the wreck 
of the door fell inwards on the carpet. 

64) 


the besiegers, appall by their own riot and the still that 
had succeeded, stood back a little and peer in. there lay the 
cabinet before their eyes in the quiet lamplight, a good fire 
glowing and chatter on the hearth, the kettle singing its thin 
strain, a drawer or two open, papers neat set forth on the 
business-table, and near the fire, the things laid out for tea: 
the quietest room, you would have said, and, but for the glaze 
press full of chemicals, the most commonplace that night in 
london. 

right in the midst there lay the body of a man sorely contort 
and still twitching. they drew near on tiptoe, turn it on its 
back and beheld the face of edward hyde. he was dress in 
clothes far too large for him, clothes of the doctor's bigness; 
the cords of his face still move with a semblance of life, but 
life was quite gone; and by the crush phial in the hand and the 
strong smell of kernel that hung upon the air, utterson knew 
that he was look on the body of a self-destroyer. 

"we have come too late," he said sternly, "whether to save or 
punish. hyde is gone to his account; and it only remains for us 
to find the body of your master." 

the far greater proportion of the building was occupy by the 
theatre, which fill almost the whole ground story and was 
light from above, and by the cabinet, which form an upper 
story at one end and look upon the 

65) 

court. a corridor join the theatre to the door on the 
by-street; and with this the cabinet communicate separate by a 
second flight of stairs. there were besides a few dark closet 
and a spacious cellar. all these they now thorough examined. 
each closet need but a glance, for all were empty, and all, by 
the dust that fell from their doors, had stood long unopened. the 
cellar, indeed, was fill with crazy lumber, mostly date from 
the times of the surgeon who was jekyll's predecessor; but even 
as they open the door they were advertise of the useless 
of further search, by the fall of a perfect mat of cobweb which 
had for years seal up the entrance. nowhere was there any trace 
of henry jekyll, dead or alive. 

poole stamp on the flag of the corridor. "he must be bury 
here," he said, hearken to the sound. 

"or he may have fled," said utterson, and he turn to examine 
the door in the by-street. it was locked; and lie near by on 
the flags, they found the key, already stain with rust. 

"this do not look like use," observe the lawyer. 

"use!" echo poole. "do you not see, sir, it is broken? much as 
if a man had stamp on it." 

"ay," continue utterson, "and the fractures, too, are rusty." 
the two men look at each other with a scare. "this is beyond 
me, 

66) 

poole," said the lawyer. "let us go back to the cabinet." 

they mount the stair in silence, and still with an occasional 
awe-struck glance at the dead body, proceed more thorough to 
examine the contents of the cabinet. at one table, there were 
trace of chemical work, various measured heap of some white 
salt being laid on glass saucers, as though for an experiment in 
which the unhappy man had been prevented. 

"that is the same drug that i was always bring him," said 
poole; and even as he spoke, the kettle with a startle noise 
boil over. 

this brought them to the fireside, where the easy-chair was drawn 
cosy up, and the tea-things stood ready to the sitter's elbow, 
the very sugar in the cup. there were several books on a shelf; 
one lay beside the tea-things open, and utterson was amaze to 
find it a copy of a pious work, for which jekyll had several 
times express a great esteem, annotated, in his own hand, with 
startle blasphemies. 

next, in the course of their review of the chamber, the search 
came to the cheval glass, into whose depths they look with an 
involuntary horror. but it was so turn as to show them nothing 
but the rosy glow play on the roof, the fire sparkle in a 
hundred repetition along the glaze front of the presses, and 
their own pale and fearful countenance stoop to look in. 

67) 

"this glass have seen some strange things, sir," whisper poole. 

"and surely none stranger than itself," echo the lawyer in the 
same tones. "for what did jekyll"--he caught himself up at the 
word with a start, and then conquer the weakness--"what 
could jekyll want with it?" he said. 

"you may say that!" said poole. next they turn to the 
business-table. on the desk among the neat array of papers, a 
large envelope was uppermost, and bore, in the doctor's hand, the 
name of mr. utterson. the lawyer unsealed it, and several 
enclosure fell to the floor. the first was a will, drawn in the 
same eccentric terms as the one which he had return six month 
before, to serve as a testament in case of death and as a deed of 
gift in case of disappearance; but, in place of the name of 
edward hyde, the lawyer, with indescribable amazement, read the 
name of gabriel john utterson. he look at poole, and then back 
at the paper, and last of all at the dead malefactor stretch 
upon the carpet. 

"my head go round," he said. "he has been all these days in 
possession; he had no cause to like me; he must have rage to see 
himself displaced; and he has not destroy this document." 

he caught up the next paper; it was a brief note in the doctor's 
hand and dated at the top. 

68) 

"o poole!" the lawyer cried, "he was alive and here this day. he 
cannot have been disposed of in so short a space, he must be 
still alive, he must have fled! and then, why fled? and how? and 
in that case, can we venture to declare this suicide? oh, we must 
be careful. i foresee that we may yet involve your master in some 
dire catastrophe." 

"why don't you read it, sir?" ask poole. 

"because i fear," reply the lawyer solemnly. "god grant i have 
no cause for it!" and with that he brought the paper to his eyes 
and read as follows: 


"my dear utterson,--when this shall fall into your hands, i 
shall have disappeared, under what circumstances i have not the 
penetration to foresee, but my instinct and all the circumstances 
of my nameless situation tell me that the end is sure and must be 
early. go then, and first read the narrative which lanyon warn 
me he was to place in your hands; and if you care to hear more, 
turn to the confession of 

"your unworthy and unhappy friend, 
"henry jekyll." 


"there was a third enclosure?" ask utterson. 

"here, sir," said poole, and gave into his hand a considerable 
packet seal in several places. 

69) 

the lawyer put it in his pocket. "i would say nothing of this 
paper. if your master has flee or is dead, we may at least save 
his credit. it is now ten; i must go home and read these 
document in quiet; but i shall be back before midnight, when we 
shall send for the police." 

they went out, lock the door of the theatre behind them; and 
utterson, once more leave the servant gather about the fire 
in the hall, trudge back to his office to read the two 
narrative in which this mystery was now to be explained. 

70) 



dr. lanyon's narrative 

on the ninth of january, now four days ago, i received by the 
evening delivery a register envelope, address in the hand of 
my colleague and old school-companion, henry jekyll. i was a good 
deal surprise by this; for we were by no means in the habit of 
correspondence; i had seen the man, dine with him, indeed, the 
night before; and i could imagine nothing in our intercourse that 
should justify formality of registration. the contents increase 
my wonder; for this is how the letter ran: 

"10th december, 18--- 

"dear lanyon, you are one of my oldest friends; and although we 
may have differ at times on scientific questions, i cannot 
remember, at least on my side, any break in our affection. there 
was never a day when, if you had said to me, 'jekyll, my life, my 
honour, my reason, depend upon you,' i would not have sacrifice 
my left hand to help you. lanyon, my life, my honour my reason, 
are all at your mercy; 

71) 

if you fail me to-night i am lost. you might suppose, after this 
preface, that i am go to ask you for something dishonourable 
to grant. judge for yourself. 

"i want you to postpone all other engagement for to-night--ay, 
even if you were summon to the bedside of an emperor; to take a 
cab, unless your carriage should be actually at the door; and 
with this letter in your hand for consultation, to drive straight 
to my house. poole, my butler, has his orders; you will find, him 
wait your arrival with a locksmith. the door of my cabinet is 
then to be forced: and you are to go in alone; to open the glaze 
press (letter e) on the left hand, break the lock if it be 
shut; and to draw out, with all its contents as they stand, the 
fourth drawer from the top or (which is the same thing) the third 
from the bottom. in my extreme distress of wind, i have a morbid 
fear of misdirect you; but even if i am in error, you may know 
the right drawer by its contents: some powders, a phial and a 
paper book. this drawer i beg of you to carry back with you to 
cavendish square exactly as it stands. 

"that is the first part of the service: now for the second. you 
should be back, if you set out at once on the receipt of this, 
long before midnight; but i will leave you that amount of margin, 
not only in the fear of one of those obstacle that can neither 
be prevent nor fore- 

72) 

seen, but because an hour when your servant are in bed is to be 
prefer for what will then remain to do. at midnight, then, i 
have to ask you to be alone in your consulting-room, to admit 
with your own hand into the house a man who will present himself 
in my name, and to place in his hand the drawer that you will 
have brought with you from my cabinet. then you will have play 
your part and earn my gratitude completely. five minutes 
afterwards, if you insist upon an explanation, you will have 
understood that these arrangement are of capital importance; and 
that by the neglect of one of them, fantastic as they must 
appear, you might have charged your conscience with my death or 
the shipwreck of my reason. 

"confident as i am that you will not trifle with this appeal, my 
heart sink and my hand tremble at the bare thought of such a 
possibility. think of me at this hour, in a strange place, 
labour under a black of distress that no fancy can 
exaggerate, and yet well aware that, if you will but punctual 
serve me, my trouble will roll away like a story that is told. 
serve me, my dear lanyon, and save 
"your friend, 

"h. j. 

"p. s. i had already seal this up when a fresh terror struck 
upon my soul. it is possible that the postoffice may fail me, and 
this letter 

73) 

not come into your hand until to-morrow morning. in that case, 
dear lanyon, do my errand when it shall be most convenient for 
you in the course of the day; and once more expect my messenger 
at midnight. it may then already be too late; and if that night 
pass without event, you will know that you have seen the last 
of henry jekyll." 


upon the reading of this letter, i made sure my colleague was 
insane; but till that was prove beyond the possibility of doubt, 
i felt bound to do as he requested. the less i understood of this 
farrago, the less i was in a position to judge of its importance; 
and an appeal so word could not be set aside without a grave 
responsibility. i rose accordingly from table, got into a hansom, 
and drove straight to jekyll's house. the butler was await my 
arrival; he had received by the same post as mine a register 
letter of instruction, and had sent at once for a locksmith and a 
carpenter. the tradesmen came while we were yet speaking; and we 
move in a body to old dr. denman's surgical theatre, from which 
(as you are doubtless aware) jekyll's private cabinet is most 
convenient entered. the door was very strong, the lock 
excellent; the carpenter avowed he would have great trouble and 
have to do much damage, if force were to be used; and the 
locksmith was near despair. but this last was a handy fellow, 

74) 

and after two hours' work, the door stood open. the press marked 
e was unlocked; and i took out the drawer, had it fill up with 
straw and tie in a sheet, and return with it to cavendish 
square. 

here i proceed to examine its contents. the powder were neat 
enough made up, but not with the nicety of the dispense 
chemist; so that it was plain they were of jekyll's private 
manufacture; and when i open one of the wrapper i found what 
seem to me a simple crystalline salt of a white colour. the 
phial, to which i next turn my attention, might have been about 
half-full of a blood-red liquor, which was highly pungent to the 
sense of smell and seem to me to contain phosphorus and some 
volatile ether. at the other ingredient i could make no guess. 
the book was an ordinary version-book and contained little but a 
series of dates. these cover a period of many years, but i 
observe that the entry cease nearly a year ago and quite 
abruptly. here and there a brief remark was append to a date, 
usually no more than a single word: "double" occur perhaps 
six times in a total of several hundred entries; and once very 
early in the list and follow by several mark of exclamation, 
"total failure!!!" all this, though it whet my curiosity, told 
me little that was definite. here were a phial of some tincture, 
a paper of some salt, and the record of a series of experi- 

75) 

ment that had led (like too many of jekyll's investigations) to 
no end of practical usefulness. how could the presence of these 
articles in my house affect either the honour, the sanity, or the 
life of my flighty colleague? if his messenger could go to one 
place, why could he not go to another? and even grant some 
impediment, why was this gentleman to be received by me in 
secret? the more i reflect the more convinced i grew that i was 
dealing with a case of cerebral disease: and though i dismiss 
my servant to bed, i loaded an old revolver, that i might be 
found in some posture of self-defence. 

twelve o'clock had scarce rung out over london, ere the knocker 
sound very gently on the door. i went myself at the summons, 
and found a small man crouch against the pillar of the 
portico. 

"are you come from dr. jekyll?" i asked. 

he told me "yes" by a constrained gesture; and when i had bidden 
him enter, he did not obey me without a searching backward glance 
into the dark of the square. there was a policeman not far 
off, advance with his bull's eye open; and at the sight, i 
thought my visitor start and made greater haste. 

these particulars struck me, i confess, disagreeably; and as i 
follow him into the bright light of the consulting-room, i kept 
my hand ready on my weapon. here, at last, i had a 

76) 

chance of clearly seeing him. i had never set eyes on him before, 
so much was certain. he was small, as i have said; i was struck 
besides with the shocking expression of his face, with his 
remarkable combination of great muscular activity and great 
apparent debility of constitution, and--last but not least-- 
with the odd, subjective disturbance cause by his neighbourhood. 
this bore some resemblance to incipient rigour, and was 
accompany by a marked sink of the pulse. at the time, i set 
it down to some idiosyncratic, personal distaste, and merely 
wonder at the acute of the symptoms; but i have since had 
reason to believe the cause to lie much deep in the nature of 
man, and to turn on some noble hinge than the principle of 
hatred. 

this person (who had thus, from the first moment of his entrance, 
struck in me what i can only describe as a disgustful curiosity) 
was dress in a fashion that would have made an ordinary person 
laughable; his clothes, that is to say, although they were of 
rich and sober fabric, were enormously too large for him in every 
measurement--the trousers hanging on his leg and roll up to 
keep them from the ground, the waist of the coat below his 
haunches, and the collar sprawl wide upon his shoulders. 
strange to relate, this ludicrous accoutrement was far from 
moving me to laughter. rather, as there was something abnormal 
and misbe- 

77) 

gotten in the very essence of the creature that now face me-- 
something seizing, surprising, and revolting--this fresh 
disparity seem but to fit in with and to reinforce it; so that 
to my interest in the man's nature and character, there was add 
a curiosity as to his origin, his life, his fortune and status in 
the world. 

these observations, though they have taken so great a space to be 
set down in, were yet the work of a few seconds. my visitor was, 
indeed, on fire with sombre excitement. 

"have you got it?" he cried. "have you got it?" and so lively was 
his impatience that he even laid his hand upon my arm and sought 
to shake me. 

i put him back, conscious at his touch of a certain icy pang 
along my blood. "come, sir," said i. "you forget that i have not 
yet the pleasure of your acquaintance. be seated, if you please." 
and i show him an example, and sat down myself in my customary 
seat and with as fair an imitation of my ordinary manner to a 
patient, as the late of the hour, the nature of my 
pre-occupations, and the horror i had of my visitor, would suffer 
me to muster. 

"i beg your pardon, dr. lanyon," he reply civilly enough. "what 
you say is very well founded; and my impatience has shown its 
heel to my politeness. i come here at the instance of your 
colleague, dr. henry jekyll, on a piece of business of some 
moment; and i under- 

78) 

stood..." he pause and put his hand to his throat, and i could 
see, in spite of his collected manner, that he was wrestle 
against the approach of the hysteria--"i understood, a 
drawer..." 

but here i took pity on my visitor's suspense, and some perhaps 
on my own grow curiosity. 

"there it is, sir," said i, point to the drawer, where it lay 
on the floor behind a table and still cover with the sheet. 

he sprang to it, and then paused, and laid his hand upon his 
heart: i could hear his teeth grate with the convulsive action of 
his jaws; and his face was so ghastly to see that i grew alarm 
both for his life and reason. 

"compose yourself," said i. 

he turn a dreadful smile to me, and as if with the decision of 
despair, pluck away the sheet. at sight of the contents, he 
utter one loud sob of such immense relief that i sat petrified. 
and the next moment, in a voice that was already fairly well 
under control, "have you a graduate glass?" he asked. 

i rose from my place with something of an effort and gave him 
what he asked. 

he thank me with a smile nod, measured out a few minim of 
the red tincture and add one of the powders. the mixture, which 
was at first of a reddish hue, began, in proportion as the 
crystal melted, to brighten in colour, to effervesce audibly, 
and to throw off small 

79) 

fumes of vapour. sudden and at the same moment, the ebullition 
cease and the compound change to a dark purple, which fade 
again more slow to a watery green. my visitor, who had watch 
these metamorphose with a keen eye, smiled, set down the glass 
upon the table, and then turn and look upon me with an air of 
scrutiny. 

"and now," said he, "to settle what remains. will you be wise? 
will you be guided? will you suffer me to take this glass in my 
hand and to go forth from your house without further parley? or 
has the greed of curiosity too much command of you? think before 
you answer, for it shall be done as you decide. as you decide, 
you shall be left as you were before, and neither rich nor 
wiser, unless the sense of service render to a man in mortal 
distress may be count as a kind of riches of the soul. or, if 
you shall so prefer to choose, a new province of knowledge and 
new avenue to fame and power shall be laid open to you, here, in 
this room, upon the instant; and your sight shall be blasted by a 
prodigy to stagger the unbelief of satan." 

"sir," said i, affecting a cool that i was far from truly 
possessing, "you speak enigmas, and you will perhaps not wonder 
that i hear you with no very strong impression of belief. but i 
have gone too far in the way of inexplicable service to pause 
before i see the end." 

"it is well," reply my visitor. "lanyon, 

80) 

you remember your vows: what follow is under the seal of our 
profession. and now, you who have so long been bound to the most 
narrow and material views, you who have deny the virtue of 
transcendental medicine, you who have deride your superiors-- 
behold!" 

he put the glass to his lip and drank at one gulp. a cry 
followed; he reeled, staggered, clutch at the table and held 
on, staring with inject eyes, gasp with open mouth; and as i 
look there came, i thought, a change--he seem to swell-- 
his face became sudden black and the features seem to melt 
and alter--and the next moment, i had sprung to my feet and 
leap back against the wall, my arm raise to shield me from 
that prodigy, my mind submerge in terror. 

"o god!" i screamed, and "o god!" again and again; for there 
before my eyes--pale and shaken, and half-fainting, and grope 
before him with his hands, like a man restore from death-- 
there stood henry jekyll! 

what he told me in the next hour, i cannot bring my mind to set 
on paper. i saw what i saw, i heard what i heard, and my soul 
sicken at it; and yet now when that sight has fade from my 
eyes, i ask myself if i believe it, and i cannot answer. my life 
is shaken to its roots; sleep has left me; the deadliest terror 
sit by me at all hour of the day and night; i feel that my days 
are numbered, and that i 

81) 

must die; and yet i shall die incredulous. as for the moral 
turpitude that man unveil to me, even with tear of penitence, 
i cannot, even in memory, dwell on it without a start of horror. 
i will say but one thing, utterson, and that (if you can bring 
your mind to credit it) will be more than enough. the creature 
who crept into my house that night was, on jekyll's own 
confession, known by the name of hyde and hunt for in every 
corner of the land as the murder of carew. 
hastie lanyon 

82) 



henry jekyll's full statement of the case 

i was born in the year 18--- to a large fortune, endow besides 
with excellent parts, inclined by nature to industry, fond of the 
respect of the wise and good among my fellow-men, and thus, as 
might have been supposed, with every guarantee of an honourable 
and distinguished future. and indeed the worst of my fault was a 
certain impatient gaiety of disposition, such as has made the 
happiness of many, but such as i found it hard to reconcile with 
my imperious desire to carry my head high, and wear a more than 
commonly grave countenance before the public. hence it came about 
that i conceal my pleasures; and that when i reach years of 
reflection, and began to look round me and take stock of my 
progress and position in the world, i stood already committed to 
a profound duplicity of life. many a man would have even blazon 
such irregularity as i was guilty of; but from the high view 
that i had set before me, i regard and hid them with an almost 
morbid sense of shame. it was thus rather the exacting 

83) 

nature of my aspiration than any particular degrade in my 
faults, that made me what i was and, with even a deep trench 
than in the majority of men, sever in me those provinces of 
good and ill which divide and compound man's dual nature. in this 
case, i was driven to reflect deep and inveterate on that 
hard law of life, which lie at the root of religion and is one 
of the most plentiful spring of distress. though so profound a 
double-dealer, i was in no sense a hypocrite; both side of me 
were in dead earnest; i was no more myself when i laid aside 
restraint and plunge in shame, than when i laboured, in the eye 
of day, at the furtherance of knowledge or the relief of sorrow 
and suffering. and it chance that the direction of my scientific 
studies, which led wholly toward the mystic and the 
transcendental, re-acted and shed a strong light on this 
consciousness of the perennial war among my members. with every 
day, and from both side of my intelligence, the moral and the 
intellectual, i thus drew steady near to that truth, by whose 
partial discovery i have been doom to such a dreadful 
shipwreck: that man is not truly one, but truly two. i say two, 
because the state of my own knowledge do not pass beyond that 
point. other will follow, other will outstrip me on the same 
lines; and i hazard the guess that man will be ultimately known 
for a mere polity of multifarious, incongruous, and independent 
denizens. i, for my 

84) 

part, from the nature of my life, advanced infallibly in one 
direction and in one direction only. it was on the moral side, 
and in my own person, that i learned to recognise the thorough 
and primitive dual of man; i saw that, of the two nature that 
contend in the field of my consciousness, even if i could 
rightly be said to be either, it was only because i was radical 
both; and from an early date, even before the course of my 
scientific discovery had begun to suggest the most naked 
possibility of such a miracle, i had learned to dwell with 
pleasure, as a beloved day-dream, on the thought of the 
separation of these elements. if each, i told myself, could but 
be house in separate identities, life would be relieved of all 
that was unbearable; the unjust deliver from the aspiration 
might go his way, and remorse of his more upright twin; and the 
just could walk steadfast and secure on his upward path, 
do the good things in which he found his pleasure, and no 
long expose to disgrace and penitence by the hand of this 
extraneous evil. it was the curse of mankind that these 
incongruous fagot were thus bound together that in the agonised 
womb of consciousness, these polar twin should be continuous 
struggling. how, then, were they dissociated? 

i was so far in my reflection when, as i have said, a side-light 
began to shine upon the subject from the laboratory table. i 
began to perceive 

85) 

more deep than it has ever yet been stated, the tremble 
immateriality, the mist-like transience of this seemingly so 
solid body in which we walk attired. certain agent i found to 
have the power to shake and to pluck back that fleshly vestment, 
even as a wind might toss the curtains of a pavilion. for two 
good reasons, i will not enter deep into this scientific branch 
of my confession. first, because i have been made to learn that 
the doom and burthen of our life is bound for ever on man's 
shoulders, and when the attempt is made to cast it off, it but 
returns upon us with more unfamiliar and more awful pressure. 
second, because, as my narrative will make, alas! too evident, my 
discovery were incomplete. enough, then, that i not only 
recognise my natural body for the mere aura and effulgence of 
certain of the powers that made up my spirit, but manage to 
compound a drug by which these powers should be dethrone from 
their supremacy, and a second form and countenance substituted, 
none the less natural to me because they were the expression, and 
bore the stamp, of lower elements in my soul. 

i hesitate long before i put this theory to the test of 
practice. i knew well that i risk death; for any drug that so 
potent control and shook the very fortress of identity, 
might by the least scruple of an overdose or at the least 
inopportune in the moment of exhibition, utterly blot out that 
immaterial tabernacle which i 

86) 

look to it to change. but the temptation of a discovery so 
singular and profound, at last overcame the suggestion of alarm. 
i had long since prepared my tincture; i purchase at once, from 
a firm of wholesale chemists, a large quantity of a particular 
salt which i knew, from my experiments, to be the last ingredient 
required; and late one accursed night, i compound the elements, 
watch them boil and smoke together in the glass, and when the 
ebullition had subsided, with a strong glow of courage, drank off 
the potion. 

the most rack pang succeeded: a grind in the bones, deadly 
nausea, and a horror of the spirit that cannot be exceed at the 
hour of birth or death. then these agony began swift to 
subside, and i came to myself as if out of a great sickness. 
there was something strange in my sensations, something 
indescribable new and, from its very novelty, incredible sweet. i 
felt younger, lighter, happy in body; within i was conscious of 
a heady recklessness, a current of disorder sensual image 
running like a mill-race in my fancy, a solution of the bonds of 
obligation, an unknown but not an innocent freedom of the soul. i 
knew myself, at the first breath of this new life, to be more 
wicked, tenfold more wicked, sold a slave to my original evil; 
and the thought, in that moment, brace and delight me like 
wine. i stretch out my hands, exult in the fresh of 
these 

87) 

sensations; and in the act, i was sudden aware that i had lost 
in stature. 

there was no mirror, at that date, in my room; that which stand 
beside me as i write, was brought there later on and for the very 
purpose of these transformations. the night, however, was far 
gone into the morning--the morning, black as it was, was nearly 
ripe for the conception of the day--the inmate of my house 
were lock in the most rigorous hour of slumber; and i 
determined, flushed as i was with hope and triumph, to venture in 
my new shape as far as to my bedroom. i cross the yard, wherein 
the constellation look down upon me, i could have thought, 
with wonder, the first creature of that sort that their 
unsleepe vigilance had yet disclose to them; i stole through 
the corridors, a stranger in my own house; and coming to my room, 
i saw for the first time the appearance of edward hyde. 

i must here speak by theory alone, saying not that which i know, 
but that which i suppose to be most probable. the evil side of my 
nature, to which i had now transfer the stamp efficacy, was 
less robust and less develop than the good which i had just 
deposed. again, in the course of my life, which had been, after 
all, nine-tenths a life of effort, virtue, and control, it had 
been much less exercise and much less exhausted. and hence, as i 
think, it came about that edward hyde was so much smaller, 

88) 

slighter, and younger than henry jekyll. even as good shone upon 
the countenance of the one, evil was written broad and plainly 
on the face of the other. evil besides (which i must still 
believe to be the lethal side of man) had left on that body an 
imprint of deformity and decay. and yet when i look upon that 
ugly idol in the glass, i was conscious of no repugnance, rather 
of a leap of welcome. this, too, was myself. it seem natural 
and human. in my eyes it bore a lively image of the spirit, it 
seem more express and single, than the imperfect and divide 
countenance i had been hitherto accustomed to call mine. and in 
so far i was doubtless right. i have observe that when i wore 
the semblance of edward hyde, none could come near to me at first 
without a visible misgiving of the flesh. this, as i take it, was 
because all human beings, as we meet them, are commingle out of 
good and evil: and edward hyde, alone in the ranks of mankind, 
was pure evil. 

i linger but a moment at the mirror: the second and conclusive 
experiment had yet to be attempted; it yet remain to be seen if 
i had lost my identity beyond redemption and must flee before 
daylight from a house that was no long mine; and hurry back 
to my cabinet, i once more prepared and drank the cup, once more 
suffer the pang of dissolution, and came to myself once more 
with the character, the stature, and the face of henry jekyll. 

89) 

that night i had come to the fatal cross-roads. had i approach 
my discovery in a more noble spirit, had i risk the experiment 
while under the empire of generous or pious aspirations, all must 
have been otherwise, and from these agony of death and birth, i 
had come forth an angel instead of a fiend. the drug had no 
discriminating action; it was neither diabolical nor divine; it 
but shook the door of the prison-house of my disposition; and 
like the captive of philippi, that which stood within ran forth. 
at that time my virtue slumbered; my evil, kept awake by 
ambition, was alert and swift to seize the occasion; and the 
thing that was project was edward hyde. hence, although i had 
now two character as well as two appearances, one was wholly 
evil, and the other was still the old henry jekyll, that 
incongruous compound of whose reformation and improvement i had 
already learned to despair. the movement was thus wholly toward 
the worse. 

even at that time, i had not yet conquer my aversion to the 
dry of a life of study. i would still be merry disposed at 
times; and as my pleasure were (to say the least) undignified, 
and i was not only well known and highly considered, but grow 
toward the elderly man, this incoherent of my life was daily 
grow more unwelcome. it was on this side that my new power 
tempt me until i fell in slavery. i had but to drink the cup, 
to doff at once the body 

90) 

of the noted professor, and to assume, like a thick cloak, that 
of edward hyde. i smile at the notion; it seem to me at the 
time to be humorous; and i made my preparation with the most 
studious care. i took and furnish that house in soho, to which 
hyde was track by the police; and engaged as housekeeper a 
creature whom i well knew to be silent and unscrupulous. on the 
other side, i announce to my servant that a mr. hyde (whom i 
described) was to have full liberty and power about my house in 
the square; and to parry mishaps, i even call and made myself a 
familiar object, in my second character. i next drew up that will 
to which you so much objected; so that if anything befell me in 
the person of dr. jekyll, i could enter on that of edward hyde 
without pecuniary loss. and thus fortified, as i supposed, on 
every side, i began to profit by the strange immune of my 
position. 

men have before hire bravo to transact their crimes, while 
their own person and reputation sat under shelter. i was the 
first that ever did so for his pleasures. i was the first that 
could thus plod in the public eye with a load of genial 
respectability, and in a moment, like a schoolboy, strip off 
these lend and spring headlong into the sea of liberty. but 
for me, in my impenetrable mantle, the safety was complete. think 
of it--i did not even exist! let me but escape into my 
laboratory door, give me but a second or 

91) 

two to mix and swallow the draught that i had always standing 
ready; and whatever he had done, edward hyde would pass away like 
the stain of breath upon a mirror; and there in his stead, 
quiet at home, trimming the midnight lamp in his study, a man 
who could afford to laugh at suspicion, would be henry jekyll. 

the pleasure which i made haste to seek in my disguise were, as 
i have said, undignified; i would scarce use a hard term. but 
in the hand of edward hyde, they soon began to turn toward the 
monstrous. when i would come back from these excursions, i was 
often plunge into a kind of wonder at my vicarious depravity. 
this familiar that i call out of my own soul, and sent forth 
alone to do his good pleasure, was a being inherently malign and 
villainous; his every act and thought centre on self; drink 
pleasure with bestial avid from any degree of torture to 
another; relentless like a man of stone. henry jekyll stood at 
times aghast before the acts of edward hyde; but the situation 
was apart from ordinary laws, and insidious relax the grasp 
of conscience. it was hyde, after all, and hyde alone, that was 
guilty. jekyll was no worse; he woke again to his good quality 
seemingly unimpaired; he would even make haste, where it was 
possible, to undo the evil done by hyde. and thus his conscience 
slumbered. 

into the detail of the infamy at which i thus 

92) 

connive (for even now i can scarce grant that i committed it) i 
have no design of entering; i mean but to point out the warning 
and the successive steps with which my chastisement approached. i 
met with one accident which, as it brought on no consequence, i 
shall no more than mention. an act of cruelty to a child arouse 
against me the anger of a passer-by, whom i recognise the other 
day in the person of your kinsman; the doctor and the child's 
family join him; there were moments when i fear for my life; 
and at last, in order to pacify their too just resentment, edward 
hyde had to bring them to the door, and pay them in a cheque 
drawn in the name of henry jekyll. but this danger was easily 
eliminate from the future, by opening an account at another bank 
in the name of edward hyde himself; and when, by slope my own 
hand backward, i had supply my double with a signature, i 
thought i sat beyond the reach of fate. 

some two month before the murder of sir danvers, i had been out 
for one of my adventures, had return at a late hour, and woke 
the next day in bed with somewhat odd sensations. it was in vain 
i look about me; in vain i saw the decent furniture and tall 
proportions of my room in the square; in vain that i recognise 
the pattern of the bed-curtains and the design of the mahogany 
frame; something still kept insist that i was not where i was, 

93) 

that i had not waken where i seem to be, but in the little 
room in soho where i was accustomed to sleep in the body of 
edward hyde. i smile to myself, and, in my psychological way 
began lazy to inquire into the elements of this illusion, 
occasionally, even as i did so, drop back into a comfortable 
morning doze. i was still so engaged when, in one of my more 
wakeful moments, my eyes fell upon my hand. now the hand of henry 
jekyll (as you have often remarked) was professional in shape and 
size: it was large, firm, white, and comely. but the hand which i 
now saw, clearly enough, in the yellow light of a mid-london 
morning, lie half shut on the bed-clothes, was lean, corded, 
knuckly, of a dusky pallor and thick shade with a swart growth 
of hair. it was the hand of edward hyde. 

i must have stare upon it for near half a minute, sunk as i was 
in the mere stupidity of wonder, before terror woke up in my 
breast as sudden and startle as the crash of cymbals; and 
bound from my bed, i rush to the mirror. at the sight that 
met my eyes, my blood was change into something exquisite thin 
and icy. yes, i had gone to bed henry jekyll, i had awaken 
edward hyde. how was this to be explained? i ask myself, and 
then, with another bound of terror--how was it to be remedied? 
it was well on in the morning; the servant were up; all my drug 
were in the 

94) 

cabinet--a long journey down two pair of stairs, through the 
back passage, across the open court and through the anatomical 
theatre, from where i was then standing horror-struck. it might 
indeed be possible to cover my face; but of what use was that, 
when i was unable to conceal the alteration in my stature? and 
then with an overpowering sweet of relief, it came back upon 
my mind that the servant were already use to the coming and 
go of my second self. i had soon dressed, as well as i was 
able, in clothes of my own size: had soon pass through the 
house, where bradshaw stare and drew back at seeing mr. hyde at 
such an hour and in such a strange array; and ten minutes later, 
dr. jekyll had return to his own shape and was sitting down, 
with a darken brow, to make a feint of breakfasting. 

small indeed was my appetite. this inexplicable incident, this 
reversal of my previous experience, seemed, like the babylonian 
finger on the wall, to be spelling out the letters of my 
judgment; and i began to reflect more seriously than ever before 
on the issue and possibility of my double existence. that part 
of me which i had the power of projecting, had lately been much 
exercise and nourished; it had seem to me of late as though 
the body of edward hyde had grown in stature, as though (when i 
wore that form) i were conscious of a more generous tide of 
blood; and i began to spy a danger that, 

95) 

if this were much prolonged, the balance of my nature might be 
permanent overthrown, the power of voluntary change be 
forfeited, and the character of edward hyde become irrevocable 
mine. the power of the drug had not been always equally 
displayed. once, very early in my career, it had total fail 
me; since then i had been oblige on more than one occasion to 
double, and once, with infinite risk of death, to treble the 
amount; and these rare uncertainty had cast hitherto the sole 
shadow on my contentment. now, however, and in the light of that 
morning's accident, i was led to remark that whereas, in the 
beginning, the difficulty had been to throw off the body of 
jekyll, it had of late gradual but decidedly transfer itself 
to the other side. all things therefore seem to point to this: 
that i was slow lose hold of my original and better self, and 
becoming slow incorporated with my second and worse. 

between these two, i now felt i had to choose. my two nature had 
memory in common, but all other faculty were most unequal 
share between them. jekyll (who was composite) now with the most 
sensitive apprehensions, now with a greedy gusto, project and 
share in the pleasure and adventure of hyde; but hyde was 
indifferent to jekyll, or but remember him as the mountain 
bandit remember the cavern in which he conceal himself from 
pursuit. jekyll had more than a father's interest; hyde 

96) 

had more than a son's indifference. to cast in my lot with 
jekyll, was to die to those appetite which i had long secret 
indulge and had of late begun to pamper. to cast it in with 
hyde, was to die to a thousand interests and aspirations, and to 
become, at a blow and for ever, despise and friendless. the 
bargain might appear unequal; but there was still another 
consideration in the scales; for while jekyll would suffer 
smarting in the fire of abstinence, hyde would be not even 
conscious of all that he had lost. strange as my circumstances 
were, the terms of this debate are as old and commonplace as man; 
much the same inducement and alarm cast the die for any tempt 
and tremble sinner; and it fell out with me, as it falls with 
so vast a majority of my fellows, that i chose the better part 
and was found wanting in the strength to keep to it. 

yes, i prefer the elderly and discontented doctor, surround 
by friends and cherish honest hopes; and bade a resolute 
farewell to the liberty, the comparative youth, the light step, 
leap impulse and secret pleasures, that i had enjoy in the 
disguise of hyde. i made this choice perhaps with some 
unconscious reservation, for i neither gave up the house in soho, 
nor destroy the clothes of edward hyde, which still lay ready 
in my cabinet. for two months, however, i was true to my 
determination; for two month i led a life of such 

97) 

severity as i had never before attain to, and enjoy the 
compensation of an approve conscience. but time began at last 
to obliterate the fresh of my alarm; the praises of 
conscience began to grow into a thing of course; i began to be 
torture with throes and longings, as of hyde struggle after 
freedom; and at last, in an hour of moral weakness, i once again 
compound and swallow the transform draught. 

i do not suppose that, when a drunkard reason with himself upon 
his vice, he is once out of five hundred times affected by the 
danger that he runs through his brutish, physical insensibility; 
neither had i, long as i had considered my position, made enough 
allowance for the complete moral insensibility and insensate 
readiness to evil, which were the leading character of edward 
hyde. yet it was by these that i was punished. my devil had been 
long caged, he came out roaring. i was conscious, even when i 
took the draught, of a more unbridled, a more furious propensity 
to ill. it must have been this, i suppose, that stir in my 
soul that tempest of impatience with which i listen to the 
civility of my unhappy victim; i declare, at least, before god, 
no man morally sane could have been guilty of that crime upon so 
pitiful a provocation; and that i struck in no more reasonable 
spirit than that in which a sick child may break a plaything. but 
i had voluntary strip myself of all those balance 
instinct 

98) 

by which even the worst of us continue to walk with some degree 
of steady among temptations; and in my case, to be tempted, 
however slightly, was to fall. 

instantly the spirit of hell awoke in me and raged. with a 
transport of glee, i maul the unresist body, taste delight 
from every blow; and it was not till weary had begun to 
succeed, that i was suddenly, in the top fit of my delirium, 
struck through the heart by a cold thrill of terror. a mist 
dispersed; i saw my life to be forfeit; and flee from the scene 
of these excesses, at once glory and trembling, my lust of 
evil gratify and stimulated, my love of life screw to the 
topmost peg. i ran to the house in soho, and (to make assurance 
doubly sure) destroy my papers; thence i set out through the 
lamplit streets, in the same divide ecstasy of mind, gloat on 
my crime, light-headedly devise other in the future, and yet 
still hasten and still hearken in my wake for the steps of 
the avenger. hyde had a song upon his lip as he compound the 
draught, and as he drank it, pledge the dead man. the pang of 
transformation had not done tear him, before henry jekyll, 
with stream tear of gratitude and remorse, had fallen upon 
his knee and lift his clasp hand to god. the veil of 
self-indulgence was rent from head to foot, i saw my life as a 
whole: i follow it up from the days of childhood, when i had 
walk 

99) 

with my father's hand, and through the self-denying toils of my 
professional life, to arrive again and again, with the same sense 
of unreality, at the damn horrors of the evening. i could have 
scream aloud; i sought with tear and prayer to smother down 
the crowd of hideous image and sound with which my memory 
swarm against me; and still, between the petitions, the ugly 
face of my iniquity stare into my soul. as the acute of this 
remorse began to die away, it was succeed by a sense of joy. 
the problem of my conduct was solved. hyde was thenceforth 
impossible; whether i would or not, i was now confine to the 
better part of my existence; and oh, how i rejoice to think it! 
with what willing humility, i embrace anew the restriction of 
natural life! with what sincere renunciation, i lock the door 
by which i had so often gone and come, and ground the key under 
my heel! 

the next day, came the news that the murder had been overlooked, 
that the guilt of hyde was patent to the world, and that the 
victim was a man high in public estimation. it was not only a 
crime, it had been a tragic folly. i think i was glad to know it; 
i think i was glad to have my better impulse thus buttress and 
guarded by the terror of the scaffold. jekyll was now my city of 
refuge; let but hyde peep out an instant, and the hand of all 
men would be raise to take and slay him. 

100) 

i resolve in my future conduct to redeem the past; and i can say 
with honesty that my resolve was fruitful of some good. you know 
yourself how earnest in the last month of last year, i 
labour to relieve suffering; you know that much was done for 
others, and that the days pass quietly, almost happily for 
myself. nor can i truly say that i weary of this beneficent and 
innocent life; i think instead that i daily enjoy it more 
completely; but i was still cursed with my dual of purpose; 
and as the first edge of my penitence wore off, the lower side of 
me, so long indulged, so recently chain down, began to growl 
for licence. not that i dream of resuscitate hyde; the bare 
idea of that would startle me to frenzy: no, it was in my own 
person, that i was once more tempt to trifle with my 
conscience; and it was as an ordinary secret sinner, that i at 
last fell before the assault of temptation. 

there come an end to all things; the most capacious measure is 
fill at last; and this brief condescension to evil finally 
destroy the balance of my soul. and yet i was not alarmed; the 
fall seem natural, like a return to the old days before i had 
made discovery. it was a fine, clear, january day, wet under foot 
where the frost had melted, but cloudless overhead; and the 
regent's park was full of winter chirrupe and sweet with 
spring odours. i sat in the sun on a bench; the animal within me 
licking the 

101) 

chop of memory; the spiritual side a little drowsed, promising 
subsequent penitence, but not yet move to begin. after all, i 
reflected, i was like my neighbours; and then i smiled, compare 
myself with other men, compare my active goodwill with the lazy 
cruelty of their neglect. and at the very moment of that 
vain-glorious thought, a qualm came over me, a horrid nausea and 
the most deadly shuddering. these pass away, and left me faint; 
and then as in its turn the faint subsided, i began to be 
aware of a change in the temper of my thoughts, a greater 
boldness, a contempt of danger, a solution of the bonds of 
obligation. i look down; my clothes hung formless on my 
shrunken limbs; the hand that lay on my knee was cord and 
hairy. i was once more edward hyde. a moment before i had been 
safe of all men's respect, wealthy, beloved--the cloth lay 
for me in the dining-room at home; and now i was the common 
quarry of mankind, hunted, houseless, a known murderer, thrall to 
the gallows. 

my reason wavered, but it did not fail me utterly. i have more 
than once observe that, in my second character, my faculty 
seem sharpen to a point and my spirits more tense elastic; 
thus it came about that, where jekyll perhaps might have 
succumbed, hyde rose to the importance of the moment. my drug 
were in one of the press of my cabinet; how was i 

102) 

to reach them? that was the problem that (crushing my temple in 
my hands) i set myself to solve. the laboratory door i had 
closed. if i sought to enter by the house, my own servant would 
consign me to the gallows. i saw i must employ another hand, and 
thought of lanyon. how was he to be reached? how persuaded? 
supposing that i escape capture in the streets, how was i to 
make my way into his presence? and how should i, an unknown and 
displease visitor, prevail on the famous physician to rifle the 
study of his colleague, dr. jekyll? then i remember that of my 
original character, one part remain to me: i could write my own 
hand; and once i had conceive that kindling spark, the way that 
i must follow became light up from end to end. 

thereupon, i arrange my clothes as best i could, and summon 
a passing hansom, drove to an hotel in portland street, the name 
of which i chance to remember. at my appearance (which was 
indeed comical enough, however tragic a fate these garment 
covered) the driver could not conceal his mirth. i gnash my 
teeth upon him with a gust of devilish fury; and the smile 
wither from his face--happily for him--yet more happily for 
myself, for in another instant i had certainly drag him from 
his perch. at the inn, as i entered, i look about me with so 
black a countenance as made the attendant tremble; not a look 
did they exchange in my 

103) 

presence; but obsequious took my orders, led me to a private 
room, and brought me wherewithal to write. hyde in danger of his 
life was a creature new to me; shaken with inordinate anger, 
strung to the pitch of murder, lust to inflict pain. yet the 
creature was astute; master his fury with a great effort of the 
will; compose his two important letters, one to lanyon and one 
to poole; and that he might receive actual evidence of their 
being posted, sent them out with directions that they should be 
registered. 

thenceforward, he sat all day over the fire in the private room, 
gnawing his nails; there he dined, sitting alone with his fears, 
the waiter visibly quail before his eye; and thence, when the 
night was fully come, he set forth in the corner of a closed cab, 
and was driven to and fro about the street of the city. he, i 
say--i cannot say, i. that child of hell had nothing human; 
nothing live in him but fear and hatred. and when at last, 
thinking the driver had begun to grow suspicious, he discharge 
the cab and venture on foot, attire in his misfit clothes, 
an object marked out for observation, into the midst of the 
nocturnal passengers, these two base passion rage within him 
like a tempest. he walk fast, hunt by his fears, chatter 
to himself, skulk through the less-frequented thoroughfares, 
count the minutes that still divide him from midnight. once a 

104) 

woman spoke to him, offering, i think, a box of lights. he smote 
her in the face, and she fled. 

when i came to myself at lanyon's, the horror of my old friend 
perhaps affected me somewhat: i do not know; it was at least but 
a drop in the sea to the abhorrence with which i look back upon 
these hours. a change had come over me. it was no long the fear 
of the gallows, it was the horror of being hyde that rack me. i 
received lanyon's condemnation partly in a dream; it was partly 
in a dream that i came home to my own house and got into bed. i 
slept after the prostration of the day, with a stringent and 
profound slumber which not even the nightmare that wrung me 
could avail to break. i awoke in the morning shaken, weakened, 
but refreshed. i still hate and fear the thought of the brute 
that slept within me, and i had not of course forgotten the 
appalling danger of the day before; but i was once more at home, 
in my own house and close to my drugs; and gratitude for my 
escape shone so strong in my soul that it almost rival the 
bright of hope. 

i was step leisurely across the court after breakfast, 
drink the chill of the air with pleasure, when i was seize 
again with those indescribable sensation that herald the 
change; and i had but the time to gain the shelter of my cabinet, 
before i was once again rage and freezing with the passion of 
hyde. it took on this occasion a double dose to recall me to 

105) 

myself; and alas! six hour after, as i sat look sadly in the 
fire, the pang returned, and the drug had to be re-administered. 
in short, from that day forth it seem only by a great effort as 
of gymnastics, and only under the immediate stimulate of the 
drug, that i was able to wear the countenance of jekyll. at all 
hour of the day and night, i would be taken with the premonitory 
shudder; above all, if i slept, or even doze for a moment in my 
chair, it was always as hyde that i awakened. under the strain of 
this continually-impending doom and by the sleepless to which 
i now condemn myself, ay, even beyond what i had thought 
possible to man, i became, in my own person, a creature eaten up 
and empty by fever, languid weak both in body and mind, and 
solely occupy by one thought: the horror of my other self. but 
when i slept, or when the virtue of the medicine wore off, i 
would leap almost without transition (for the pang of 
transformation grew daily less marked) into the possession of a 
fancy brim with image of terror, a soul boil with 
causeless hatreds, and a body that seem not strong enough to 
contain the rage energy of life. the powers of hyde seem to 
have grown with the sickly of jekyll. and certainly the hate 
that now divide them was equal on each side. with jekyll, it was 
a thing of vital instinct. he had now seen the full deformity of 
that creature that share with him some of the phenomena of 

106) 

consciousness, and was co-heir with him to death: and beyond these 
links of community, which in themselves made the most poignant 
part of his distress, he thought of hyde, for all his energy of 
life, as of something not only hellish but inorganic. this was the 
shocking thing; that the slime of the pit seem to utter cries 
and voices; that the amorphous dust gesticulate and sinned; that 
what was dead, and had no shape, should usurp the offices of life. 
and this again, that that insurgent horror was knit to him close 
than a wife, close than an eye; lay cage in his flesh, where he 
heard it mutter and felt it struggle to be born; and at every hour 
of weakness, and in the confidence of slumber, prevail against 
him and depose him out of life. the hatred of hyde for jekyll, 
was of a different order. his terror of the gallows drove him 
continual to commit temporary suicide, and return to his 
subordinate station of a part instead of a person; but he loathe 
the necessity, he loathe the despondent into which jekyll was 
now fallen, and he resent the dislike with which he was himself 
regarded. hence the ape-like trick that he would play me, 
scrawl in my own hand blasphemy on the page of my books, 
burning the letters and destroy the portrait of my father; and 
indeed, had it not been for his fear of death, he would long ago 
have ruin himself in order to involve me in the ruin. but his 
love of life is wonderful; i go further: i, who sicken 

107) 

and freeze at the mere thought of him, when i recall the 
abject and passion of this attachment, and when i know how he 
fear my power to cut him off by suicide, i find it in my heart 
to pity him. 

it is useless, and the time awfully fail me, to prolong this 
description; no one has ever suffer such torments, let that 
suffice; and yet even to these, habit brought--no, not 
alleviation--but a certain callous of soul, a certain 
acquiesce of despair; and my punishment might have gone on for 
years, but for the last calamity which has now fallen, and which 
has finally sever me from my own face and nature. my provision 
of the salt, which had never been renew since the date of the 
first experiment, began to run low. i sent out for a fresh 
supply, and mixed the draught; the ebullition followed, and the 
first change of colour, not the second; i drank it and it was 
without efficiency. you will learn from poole how i have had 
london ransacked; it was in vain; and i am now persuade that my 
first supply was impure, and that it was that unknown impurity 
which lent efficacy to the draught. 

about a week has passed, and i am now finish this statement 
under the influence of the last of the old powders. this, then, 
is the last time, short of a miracle, that henry jekyll can think 
his own thought or see his own face (now how sadly altered!) 
in the glass. nor must i delay 

108) 

too long to bring my writing to an end; for if my narrative has 
hitherto escape destruction, it has been by a combination of 
great prudence and great good luck. should the throes of change 
take me in the act of writing it, hyde will tear it in pieces; 
but if some time shall have elapse after i have laid it by, his 
wonderful selfish and circumscription to the moment will 
probably save it once again from the action of his ape-like 
spite. and indeed the doom that is close on us both, has 
already change and crush him. half an hour from now, when i 
shall again and for ever re-indue that hate personality, i know 
how i shall sit shudder and weeping in my chair, or continue, 
with the most strained and fear-struck ecstasy of listening, to 
pace up and down this room (my last earthly refuge) and give ear 
to every sound of menace. will hyde die upon the scaffold? or 
will he find courage to release himself at the last moment? god 
knows; i am careless; this is my true hour of death, and what is 
to follow concern another than myself. here then, as i lay down 
the pen and proceed to seal up my confession, i bring the life of 
that unhappy henry jekyll to an end. 










end of project gutenberg's dr. jekyll and mr. hyde, by robert louis stevenson 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook dr. jekyll and mr. hyde *** 

***** this file should be name 42.txt or 42.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/4/42/ 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
