the project gutenberg ebook of the trial, by franz kafka 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

** this is a copyright project gutenberg ebook, detail below ** 
** please follow the copyright guidelines in this file. ** 

title: the trial 

author: franz kafka 

translator: david wyllie 

release date: april, 2005 [ebook #7849] 
first posted: may 16, 2003 
last updated: october 18, 2018 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the trial *** 














the trial 
franz kafka 

translate copyright (c) by david wyllie 
translator contact email: dandelion@post.cz 




chapter one 
arrest - conversation with mrs. grubach - then miss bürstner 
preface 
someone must have been telling lie about josef k., he knew he had 
done nothing wrong but, one morning, he was arrested. every day at 
eight in the morning he was brought his breakfast by mrs. grubach's 
cook - mrs. grubach was his landlady - but today she didn't come. that 
had never happen before. k. wait a little while, look from his 
pillow at the old woman who live opposite and who was watch him with 
an inquisitive quite unusual for her, and finally, both hungry and 
disconcerted, rang the bell. there was immediately a knock at the door 
and a man entered. he had never seen the man in this house before. he 
was slim but firm built, his clothes were black and close-fitting, 
with many fold and pockets, buckle and buttons and a belt, all of 
which gave the impression of being very practical but without making it 
very clear what they were actually for. "who are you?" ask k., 
sitting half upright in his bed. the man, however, ignore the question 
as if his arrival simply had to be accepted, and merely replied, "you 
rang?" "anna should have brought me my breakfast," said k. he try to 
work out who the man actually was, first in silence, just through 
observation and by thinking about it, but the man didn't stay still to 
be look at for very long. instead he went over to the door, open it 
slightly, and said to someone who was clearly standing immediately 
behind it, "he wants anna to bring him his breakfast." there was a 
little laughter in the neighbouring room, it was not clear from the 
sound of it whether there were several people laughing. the strange man 
could not have learned anything from it that he hadn't known already, 
but now he said to k., as if making his report "it is not possible." 
"it would be the first time that's happened," said k., as he jump out 
of bed and quick pull on his trousers. "i want to see who that is 
in the next room, and why it is that mrs. grubach has let me be 
disturbed in this way." it immediately occur to him that he needn't 
have said this out loud, and that he must to some extent have 
acknowledge their authority by do so, but that didn't seem important 
to him at the time. that, at least, is how the stranger took it, as he 
said, "don't you think you'd better stay where you are?" "i want 
neither to stay here nor to be spoken to by you until you've introduce 
yourself." "i meant it for your own good," said the stranger and open 
the door, this time without being asked. the next room, which k. 
enter more slow than he had intended, look at first glance exactly 
the same as it had the previous evening. it was mrs. grubach's living 
room, over-filled with furniture, tablecloths, porcelain and 
photographs. perhaps there was a little more space in there than usual 
today, but if so it was not immediately obvious, especially as the main 
difference was the presence of a man sitting by the open window with a 
book from which he now look up. "you should have stay in your room! 
didn't franz tell you?" "and what is it you want, then?" said k., 
look back and forth between this new acquaintance and the one name 
franz, who had remain in the doorway. through the open window he 
notice the old woman again, who had come close to the window opposite 
so that she could continue to see everything. she was showing an 
inquisitive that really made it seem like she was go senile. "i 
want to see mrs. grubach ...," said k., making a movement as if tear 
himself away from the two men - even though they were standing well away 
from him - and want to go. "no," said the man at the window, who 
threw his book down on a coffee table and stood up. "you can't go away 
when you're under arrest." "that's how it seems," said k. "and why am 
i under arrest?" he then asked. "that's something we're not allow to 
tell you. go into your room and wait there. proceedings are underway 
and you'll learn about everything all in good time. it's not really 
part of my job to be friendly towards you like this, but i hope no-one, 
apart from franz, will hear about it, and he's been more friendly 
towards you than he should have been, under the rules, himself. if you 
carry on have as much good luck as you have been with your arrest 
officer then you can reckon on things go well with you." k. want 
to sit down, but then he saw that, apart from the chair by the window, 
there was nowhere anywhere in the room where he could sit. "you'll get 
the chance to see for yourself how true all this is," said franz and 
both men then walk up to k. they were significant big than him, 
especially the second man, who frequent slap him on the shoulder. 
the two of them felt k.'s nightshirt, and said he would now have to wear 
one that was of much lower quality, but that they would keep the 
nightshirt along with his other underclothes and return them to him if 
his case turn out well. "it's better for you if you give us the 
things than if you leave them in the storeroom," they said. "things 
have a tendency to go missing in the storeroom, and after a certain 
amount of time they sell things off, whether the case involved has come 
to an end or not. and case like this can last a long time, especially 
the one that have been coming up lately. they'd give you the money 
they got for them, but it wouldn't be very much as it's not what they're 
offer for them when they sell them that counts, it's how much they get 
slip on the side, and things like that lose their value anyway when 
they get pass on from hand to hand, year after year." k. paid hardly 
any attention to what they were saying, he did not place much value on 
what he may have still possessed or on who decided what happen to 
them. it was much more important to him to get a clear understanding of 
his position, but he could not think clearly while these people were 
here, the second policeman's belly - and they could only be policemen - 
look friendly enough, stick out towards him, but when k. look up 
and saw his dry, boney face it did not seem to fit with the body. his 
strong nose twist to one side as if ignore k. and share an 
understanding with the other policeman. what sort of people were these? 
what were they talk about? what office did they belong to? k. was 
living in a free country, after all, everywhere was at peace, all law 
were decent and were upheld, who was it who dare accost him in his own 
home? he was always inclined to take life as lightly as he could, to 
cross bridge when he came to them, pay no heed for the future, even 
when everything seem under threat. but here that did not seem the 
right thing to do. he could have taken it all as a joke, a big joke set 
up by his colleague at the bank for some unknown reason, or also 
perhaps because today was his thirtieth birthday, it was all possible of 
course, maybe all he had to do was laugh in the policemen's face in some 
way and they would laugh with him, maybe they were tradesmen from the 
corner of the street, they look like they might be - but he was 
nonetheless determined, ever since he first caught sight of the one 
call franz, not to lose any slight advantage he might have had over 
these people. there was a very slight risk that people would later say 
he couldn't understand a joke, but - although he wasn't normally in the 
habit of learning from experience - he might also have had a few 
unimportant occasion in mind when, unlike his more cautious friends, he 
had act with no thought at all for what might follow and had been made 
to suffer for it. he didn't want that to happen again, not this time at 
least; if they were play-acting he would act along with them. 

he still had time. "allow me," he said, and hurried between the 
two policemen through into his room. "he seem sensible enough," he 
heard them say behind him. once in his room, he quick pull open the 
drawer of his writing desk, everything in it was very tidy but in his 
agitation he was unable to find the identification document he was 
look for straight away. he finally found his bicycle permit and was 
about to go back to the policemen with it when it seem to him too 
petty, so he carry on searching until he found his birth certificate. 
just as he got back in the adjoin room the door on the other side 
open and mrs. grubach was about to enter. he only saw her for an 
instant, for as soon as she recognise k. she was clearly embarrassed, 
ask for forgiveness and disappeared, close the door behind her very 
carefully. "do come in," k. could have said just then. but now he stood 
in the middle of the room with his papers in his hand and still look 
at the door which did not open again. he stay like that until he was 
startle out of it by the shout of the policeman who sat at the little 
table at the open window and, as k. now saw, was eat his breakfast. 
"why didn't she come in?" he asked. "she's not allow to," said the 
big policeman. "you're under arrest, aren't you." "but how can i be 
under arrest? and how come it's like this?" "now you're start 
again," said the policeman, dip a piece of butter bread in the 
honeypot. "we don't answer question like that." "you will have to 
answer them," said k. "here are my identification papers, now show me 
yours and i certainly want to see the arrest warrant." "oh, my god!" 
said the policeman. "in a position like yours, and you think you can 
start give orders, do you? it won't do you any good to get us on the 
wrong side, even if you think it will - we're probably more on your side 
that anyone else you know!" "that's true, you know, you'd better 
believe it," said franz, holding a cup of coffee in his hand which he 
did not lift to his mouth but look at k. in a way that was probably 
meant to be full of meaning but could not actually be understood. k. 
found himself, without intend it, in a mute dialogue with franz, but 
then slap his hand down on his papers and said, "here are my identity 
documents." "and what do you want us to do about it?" reply the big 
policeman, loudly. "the way you're carry on, it's worse than a 
child. what is it you want? do you want to get this great, bloody trial 
of yours over with quick by talk about id and arrest warrant with 
us? we're just coppers, that's all we are. junior officer like us 
hardly know one end of an id card from another, all we've got to do with 
you is keep an eye on you for ten hour a day and get paid for it. 
that's all we are. mind you, what we can do is make sure that the high 
official we work for find out just what sort of person it is they're 
go to arrest, and why he should be arrested, before they issue the 
warrant. there's no mistake there. our authority as far as i know, 
and i only know the lowest grades, don't go out look for guilt among 
the public; it's the guilt that draw them out, like it say in the law, 
and they have to send us police officer out. that's the law. where 
d'you think there'd be any mistake there?" "i don't know this law," 
said k. "so much the worse for you, then," said the policeman. "it's 
probably exist only in your heads," said k., he wanted, in some way, to 
insinuate his way into the thought of the policemen, to re-shape those 
thought to his benefit or to make himself at home there. but the 
policeman just said dismissively, "you'll find out when it affect you." 
franz join in, and said, "look at this, willem, he admit he doesn't 
know the law and at the same time insist he's innocent." "you're quite 
right, but we can't get him to understand a thing," said the other. k. 
stop talk with them; do i, he thought to himself, do i really have 
to carry on get tangle up with the chatter of base functionary 
like this? - and they admit themselves that they are of the lowest 
position. they're talk about things of which they don't have the 
slightest understanding, anyway. it's only because of their stupidity 
that they're able to be so sure of themselves. i just need few words 
with someone of the same social standing as myself and everything will 
be incomparable clearer, much clear than a long conversation with 
these two can make it. he walk up and down the free space in the room 
a couple of times, across the street he could see the old woman who, 
now, had pull an old man, much old than herself, up to the window 
and had her arms around him. k. had to put an end to this display, 
"take me to your superior," he said. "as soon as he wants to see you. 
not before," said the policeman, the one call willem. "and now my 
advice to you," he added, "is to go into your room, stay calm, and wait 
and see what's to be done with you. if you take our advice, you won't 
tire yourself out thinking about things to no purpose, you need to pull 
yourself together as there's a lot that's go to require of you. 
you've not behave towards us the way we deserve after being so good to 
you, you forget that we, whatever we are, we're still free men and 
you're not, and that's quite an advantage. but in spite of all that 
we're still willing, if you've got the money, to go and get you some 
breakfast from the café over the road." 

without give any answer to this offer, k. stood still for some 
time. perhaps, if he open the door of the next room or even the front 
door, the two of them would not dare to stand in his way, perhaps that 
would be the simplest way to settle the whole thing, by bring it to a 
head. but maybe they would grab him, and if he were thrown down on the 
ground he would lose all the advantage he, in a certain respect, had 
over them. so he decided on the more certain solution, the way things 
would go in the natural course of events, and went back in his room 
without another word either from him or from the policemen. 

he threw himself down on his bed, and from the dressing table he 
took the nice apple that he had put there the previous evening for his 
breakfast. now it was all the breakfast he had and anyway, as he 
confirmed as soon as he took his first, big bite of it, it was far 
better than a breakfast he could have had through the good will of the 
policemen from the dirty café. he felt well and confident, he had 
fail to go into work at the bank this morning but that could easily be 
excuse because of the relatively high position he held there. should 
he really send in his explanation? he wonder about it. if nobody 
believe him, and in this case that would be understandable, he could 
bring mrs. grubach in as a witness, or even the old pair from across the 
street, who probably even now were on their way over to the window 
opposite. it puzzle k., at least it puzzle him look at it from the 
policemen's point of view, that they had made him go into the room and 
left him alone there, where he had ten different ways of killing 
himself. at the same time, though, he ask himself, this time look 
at it from his own point of view, what reason he could have to do so. 
because those two were sitting there in the next room and had taken his 
breakfast, perhaps? it would have been so pointless to kill himself 
that, even if he had want to, the pointless would have made him 
unable. maybe, if the policemen had not been so obviously limited in 
their mental abilities, it could have been supposed that they had come 
to the same conclusion and saw no danger in leave him alone because of 
it. they could watch now, if they wanted, and see how he went over to 
the cupboard in the wall where he kept a bottle of good schnapps, how he 
first empty a glass of it in place of his breakfast and how he then 
took a second glassful in order to give himself courage, the last one 
just as a precaution for the unlikely chance it would be needed. 

then he was so startle by a shout to him from the other room that 
he struck his teeth against the glass. "the supervise wants to see 
you!" a voice said. it was only the shout that startle him, this curt, 
abrupt, military shout, that he would not have expect from the 
policeman call franz. in itself, he found the order very welcome. 
"at last!" he call back, lock the cupboard and, without delay, 
hurried into the next room. the two policemen were standing there and 
chase him back into his bedroom as if that were a matter of course. 
"what d'you think you're doing?" they cried. "think you're go to see 
the supervise dress in just your shirt, do you? he'd see to it you 
got a right thumping, and us and all!" "let go of me for god's sake!" 
call k., who had already been pushed back as far as his wardrobe, "if 
you accost me when i'm still in bed you can't expect to find me in my 
evening dress." "that won't help you," said the policemen, who always 
became very quiet, almost sad, when k. began to shout, and in that way 
confuse him or, to some extent, brought him to his senses. "ridiculous 
formalities!" he grumbled, as he lift his coat from the chair and kept 
it in both his hand for a little while, as if holding it out for the 
policemen's inspection. they shook their heads. "it's got to be a 
black coat," they said. at that, k. threw the coat to the floor and 
said - without knowing even himself what he meant by it - "well it's not 
go to be the main trial, after all." the policemen laughed, but 
continue to insist, "it's got to be a black coat." "well that's 
alright by me if it make things go any faster," said k. he open the 
wardrobe himself, spent a long time searching through all the clothes, 
and chose his best black suit which had a short jacket that had greatly 
surprise those who knew him, then he also pull out a fresh shirt and 
began, carefully, to get dressed. he secret told himself that he had 
succeed in speeding things up by letting the policemen forget to make 
him have a bath. he watch them to see if they might remember after 
all, but of course it never occur to them, although willem did not 
forget to send franz up to the supervise with the message saying that 
k. was get dressed. 

once he was properly dressed, k. had to pass by willem as he went 
through the next room into the one beyond, the door of which was already 
wide open. k. knew very well that this room had recently been let to a 
typist call 'miss bürstner'. she was in the habit of go out to 
work very early and coming back home very late, and k. had never 
exchange more than a few words of greeting with her. now, her bedside 
table had been pull into the middle of the room to be use as a desk 
for these proceedings, and the supervise sat behind it. he had his 
leg crossed, and had thrown one arm over the backrest of the chair. 

in one corner of the room there were three young people look at 
the photograph belong to miss bürstner that had been put into a 
piece of fabric on the wall. hung up on the handle of the open window 
was a white blouse. at the window across the street, there was the old 
pair again, although now their number had increased, as behind them, and 
far tall than they were, stood a man with an open shirt that show 
his chest and a reddish goatee beard which he squeeze and twist with 
his fingers. "josef k.?" ask the supervisor, perhaps merely to 
attract k.'s attention as he look round the room. k. nodded. "i 
daresay you were quite surprise by all that's been taking place this 
morning," said the supervise as, with both hands, he pushed away the 
few item on the bedside table - the candle and box of matches, a book 
and a pin cushion which lay there as if they were things he would need 
for his own business. "certainly," said k., and he began to feel 
relax now that, at last, he stood in front of someone with some sense, 
someone with whom he would be able to talk about his situation. 
"certainly i'm surprised, but i'm not in any way very surprised." 
"you're not very surprised?" ask the supervisor, as he position the 
candle in the middle of the table and the other things in a group around 
it. "perhaps you don't quite understand me," k. hurried pointed out. 
"what i mean is ..." here k. broke off what he was saying and look 
round for somewhere to sit. "i may sit down, mayn't i?" he asked. 
"that's not usual," the supervise answered. "what i mean is...," said 
k. without delay a second time, "that, yes, i am very surprise but 
when you've been in the world for thirty years already and had to make 
your own way through everything yourself, which has been my lot, then 
you become harden to surprise and don't take them too hard. 
especially not what's happen today." "why especially not what's 
happen today?" "i wouldn't want to say that i see all of this as a 
joke, you seem to have gone to too much trouble making all these 
arrangement for that. everyone in the house must be taking part in it 
as well as all of you, that would be go beyond what could be a joke. 
so i don't want to say that this is a joke." "quite right," said the 
supervisor, look to see how many match were left in the box. "but 
on the other hand," k. went on, look round at everyone there and even 
wish he could get the attention of the three who were look at the 
photographs, "on the other hand this really can't be all that 
important. that follow from the fact that i've been indicted, but 
can't think of the slightest offence for which i could be indicted. 
but even that is all beside the point, the main question is: who is 
issue the indictment? what office is conduct this affair? are you 
officials? none of you is wearing a uniform, unless what you are 
wearing" - here he turn towards franz - "is meant to be a uniform, 
it's actually more of a travel suit. i require a clear answer to 
all these questions, and i'm quite sure that once things have been made 
clear we can take our leave of each other on the best of terms." the 
supervise slam the box of match down on the table. "you're making 
a big mistake," he said. "these gentlemen and i have got nothing to do 
with your business, in fact we know almost nothing about you. we could 
be wearing uniform as proper and exact as you like and your situation 
wouldn't be any the worse for it. as to whether you're on a charge, i 
can't give you any sort of clear answer to that, i don't even know 
whether you are or not. you're under arrest, you're quite right about 
that, but i don't know any more than that. maybe these officer have 
been chit-chatting with you, well if they have that's all it is, chit- 
chat. i can't give you an answer to your questions, but i can give you 
a bit of advice: you'd better think less about us and what's go to 
happen to you, and think a bit more about yourself. and stop making all 
this fuss about your sense of innocence; you don't make such a bad 
impression, but with all this fuss you're damage it. and you ought to 
do a bit less talking, too. almost everything you've said so far has 
been things we could have taken from your behaviour, even if you'd said 
no more than a few words. and what you have said has not exactly been 
in your favour." 

k. stare at the supervisor. was this man, probably younger than 
he was, lecture him like a schoolmaster? was he being punish for 
his honesty with a telling off? and was he to learn nothing about the 
reason for his arrest or those who were arrest him? he became 
somewhat cross and began to walk up and down. no-one stop him do 
this and he pushed his sleeve back, felt his chest, straighten his 
hair, went over to the three men, said, "it make no sense," at which 
these three turn round to face him and came towards him with serious 
expressions. he finally came again to a halt in front of the 
supervisor's desk. "state attorney hasterer is a good friend of mine," 
he said, "can i telephone him?" "certainly," said the supervisor, "but 
i don't know what the point of that will be, i suppose you must have 
some private matter you want to discuss with him." "what the point is?" 
shout k., more disconcert that cross. "who do you think you are? 
you want to see some point in it while you're carry out something as 
pointless as it could be? it's enough to make you cry! these gentlemen 
first accost me, and now they sit or stand about in here and let me be 
haul up in front of you. what point there would be, in telephone a 
state attorney when i'm ostensible under arrest? very well, i won't 
make the telephone call." "you can call him if you want to," said the 
supervisor, stretch his hand out towards the outer room where the 
telephone was, "please, go on, do make your phone call." "no, i don't 
want to any more," said k., and went over to the window. across the 
street, the people were still there at the window, and it was only now 
that k. had gone up to his window that they seem to become uneasy 
about quiet watch what was go on. the old couple want to get 
up but the man behind them calm them down. "we've got some kind of 
audience over there," call k. to the supervisor, quite loudly, as he 
pointed out with his forefinger. "go away," he then call across to 
them. and the three of them did immediately retreat a few steps, the 
old pair even found themselves behind the man who then conceal them 
with the breadth of his body and seemed, go by the movements of his 
mouth, to be saying something incomprehensible into the distance. they 
did not disappear entirely, though, but seem to be wait for the 
moment when they could come back to the window without being noticed. 
"intrusive, thoughtless people!" said k. as he turn back into the 
room. the supervise may have agree with him, at least k. thought that 
was what he saw from the corner of his eye. but it was just as possible 
that he had not even been listen as he had his hand pressed firm 
down on the table and seem to be compare the length of his fingers. 
the two policemen were sitting on a chest cover with a coloured 
blanket, rubbing their knees. the three young people had put their 
hand on their hip and were look round aimlessly. everything was 
still, like in some office that has been forgotten about. "now, 
gentlemen," call out k., and for a moment it seem as if he was 
carry all of them on his shoulders, "it looks like your business with 
me is over with. in my opinion, it's best now to stop wonder about 
whether you're proceeding correct or incorrectly, and to bring the 
matter to a peaceful close with a mutual handshake. if you are of the 
same opinion, then please..." and he walk up to the supervisor's desk 
and held out his hand to him. the supervise raise his eyes, bit his 
lip and look at k.'s outstretched hand; k still believe the 
supervise would do as he suggested. but instead, he stood up, picked 
up a hard round hat that was lay on miss bürstner's bed and put it 
careful onto his head, use both hand as if try on a new hat. 
"everything seem so simple to you, doesn't it," he said to k. as he did 
so, "so you think we should bring the matter to a peaceful close, do 
you. no, no, that won't do. mind you, on the other hand i certainly 
wouldn't want you to think there's no hope for you. no, why should you 
think that? you're simply under arrest, nothing more than that. that's 
what i had to tell you, that's what i've done and now i've seen how 
you've taken it. that's enough for one day and we can take our leave of 
each other, for the time being at least. i expect you'll want to go in 
to the bank now, won't you." "in to the bank?" ask k., "i thought i 
was under arrest." k. said this with a certain amount of defiance as, 
although his handshake had not been accepted, he was feeling more 
independent of all these people, especially since the supervise had 
stood up. he was play with them. if they left, he had decided he 
would run after them and offer to let them arrest him. that's why he 
even repeated, "how can i go in to the bank when i'm under arrest?" "i 
see you've misunderstood me," said the supervise who was already at the 
door. "it's true that you're under arrest, but that shouldn't stop you 
from carry out your job. and there shouldn't be anything to stop you 
carry on with your usual life." "in that case it's not too bad, 
being under arrest," said k., and went up close to the supervisor. "i 
never meant it should be anything else," he replied. "it hardly seem 
to have been necessary to notify me of the arrest in that case," said k., 
and went even closer. the other had also come closer. all of them had 
gather together into a narrow space by the door. "that was my duty," 
said the supervisor. "a silly duty," said k., unyielding. "maybe so," 
reply the supervisor, "only don't let's waste our time talk on like 
this. i had assume you'd be wanting to go to the bank. as you're 
pay close attention to every word i'll add this: i'm not force you 
to go to the bank, i'd just assume you want to. and to make things 
easy for you, and to let you get to the bank with as little fuss as 
possible i've put these three gentlemen, colleague of yours, at your 
disposal." "what's that?" exclaim k., and look at the three in 
astonishment. he could only remember seeing them in their group by the 
photographs, but these characterless, anaemic young people were indeed 
official from his bank, not colleague of his, that was putt it too 
high and it show a gap in the omniscience of the supervisor, but they 
were nonetheless junior member of staff at the bank. how could k. have 
fail to see that? how occupy he must have been with the supervise 
and the policemen not to have recognise these three! rabensteiner, 
with his stiff demeanour and swinging hands, kullich, with his blonde 
hair and deep-set eyes, and kaminer, with his involuntary grin cause by 
chronic muscle spasms. "good morning," said k. after a while, extend 
his hand to the gentlemen as they bowed correct to him. "i didn't 
recognise you at all. so, we'll go into work now, shall we?" the 
gentlemen laugh and nod enthusiastically, as if that was what they 
had been wait for all the time, except that k. had left his hat in 
his room so they all dashed, one after another, into the room to fetch 
it, which cause a certain amount of embarrassment. k. stood where he 
was and watch them through the open double doorway, the last to go, of 
course, was the apathetic rabensteiner who had broken into no more than 
an elegant trot. kaminer got to the hat and k., as he often had to do 
at the bank, forcibly remind himself that the grin was not deliberate, 
that he in fact wasn't able to grin deliberately. at that moment mrs. 
grubach open the door from the hallway into the living room where all 
the people were. she did not seem to feel guilty about anything at all, 
and k., as often before, look down at the belt of her apron which, for 
no reason, cut so deep into her hefty body. once downstairs, k., with 
his watch in his hand, decided to take a taxi - he had already been 
delay by half an hour and there was no need to make the delay any 
longer. kaminer ran to the corner to summon it, and the two other were 
making obvious effort to keep k. divert when kullich pointed to the 
doorway of the house on the other side of the street where the large man 
with the blonde goatee beard appear and, a little embarrass at first 
at letting himself be seen in his full height, step back to the wall 
and leant against it. the old couple were probably still on the stairs. 
k. was cross with kullich for point out this man whom he had already 
seen himself, in fact whom he had been expecting. "don't look at him!" 
he snapped, without notice how odd it was to speak to free men in this 
way. but there was no explanation need anyway as just then the taxi 
arrived, they sat inside and set off. inside the taxi, k. remember 
that he had not notice the supervise and the policemen leave - the 
supervise had stop him notice the three bank staff and now the 
three bank staff had stop him notice the supervisor. this show 
that k. was not very attentive, and he resolve to watch himself more 
careful in this respect. nonetheless, he gave it no thought as he 
twist himself round and leant over onto the rear shelf of the car to 
catch sight of the supervise and the policemen if he could. but he 
turn back round straight away and leant comfortable into the corner of 
the taxi without even have made the effort to see anyone. although it 
did not seem like it, now was just the time when he need some 
encouragement, but the gentlemen seem tired just then, rabensteiner 
look out of the car to the right, kullich to the left and only kaminer 
was there with his grin at k.'s service. it would have been inhumane to 
make fun of that. 

that spring, whenever possible, k. usually spent his evenings 
after work - he usually stay in the office until nine o'clock - with a 
short walk, either by himself or in the company of some of the bank 
officials, and then he would go into a pub where he would sit at the 
regulars' table with mostly old men until eleven. there were, 
however, also exception to this habit, times, for instance, when k. was 
invite by the bank's manager (whom he greatly respect for his 
industry and trustworthiness) to go with him for a ride in his car or to 
eat dinner with him at his large house. k. would also go, once a week, 
to see a girl call elsa who work as a waitress in a wine bar through 
the night until late in the morning. during the daytime she only 
received visitor while still in bed. 

that evening, though, - the day had pass quick with a lot of 
hard work and many respectful and friendly birthday greeting - k. 
want to go straight home. each time he had any small break from the 
day's work he considered, without knowing exactly what he had in mind, 
that mrs. grubach's flat seem to have been put into great disarray by 
the event of that morning, and that it was up to him to put it back 
into order. once order had been restored, every trace of those event 
would have been erase and everything would take its previous course 
once more. in particular, there was nothing to fear from the three bank 
officials, they had immerse themselves back into their paperwork and 
there was no alteration to be seen in them. k. had call each of them, 
separate or all together, into his office that day for no other reason 
than to observe them; he was always satisfy and had always been able 
to let them go again. 

at half past nine that evening, when he arrive back in front of 
the building where he lived, he met a young lad in the doorway who was 
standing there, his leg apart and smoking a pipe. "who are you?" 
immediately ask k., bring his face close to the lad's, as it was 
hard to see in the half light of the landing. "i'm the landlord's son, 
sir," answer the lad, taking the pipe from his mouth and step to 
one side. "the landlord's son?" ask k., and impatient knock on 
the ground with his stick. "did you want anything, sir? would you like 
me to fetch my father?" "no, no," said k., there was something 
forgiving in his voice, as if the boy had harm him in some way and he 
was excuse him. "it's alright," he said then, and went on, but before 
go up the stairs he turn round once more. 

he could have gone directly to his room, but as he want to speak 
with mrs. grubach he went straight to her door and knocked. she was sat 
at the table with a knit stocking and a pile of old stocking in 
front of her. k. apologised, a little embarrass at coming so late, 
but mrs. grubach was very friendly and did not want to hear any apology, 
she was always ready to speak to him, he knew very well that he was her 
best and her favourite tenant. k. look round the room, it look 
exactly as it usually did, the breakfast dishes, which had been on the 
table by the window that morning, had already been clear away. "a 
woman's hand will do many things when no-one's looking," he thought, he 
might himself have smashed all the dishes on the spot but certainly 
would not have been able to carry it all out. he look at mrs. grubach 
with some gratitude. "why are you working so late?" he asked. they 
were now both sitting at the table, and k. now and then sank his hand 
into the pile of stockings. "there's a lot of work to do," she said, 
"during the day i belong to the tenants; if i'm to sort out my own 
things there are only the evenings left to me." "i fear i may have 
cause you some exceptional work today." "how do you mean, mr. k.?" she 
asked, becoming more interested and leave her work in her lap. "i 
mean the men who were here this morning." "oh, i see," she said, and 
went peaceful back to what she was doing, "that was no trouble, not 
especially." k. look on in silence as she took up the knit 
stocking once more. she seem surprise at my mention it, he 
thought, she seem to think it's improper for me to mention it. all the 
more important for me to do so. an old woman is the only person i can 
speak about it with. "but it must have cause some work for you," he 
said then, "but it won't happen again." "no, it can't happen again," she 
agreed, and smile at k. in a way that was almost pained. "do you mean 
that seriously?" ask k. "yes," she said, more gently, "but the 
important thing is you mustn't take it too hard. there are so many 
awful things happening in the world! as you're being so honest with me, 
mr. k., i can admit to you that i listen to a little of what was go 
on from behind the door, and that those two policemen told me one or two 
things as well. it's all to do with your happiness, and that's 
something that's quite close to my heart, perhaps more than it should be 
as i am, after all, only your landlady. anyway, so i heard one or two 
things but i can't really say that it's about anything very serious. 
no. you have been arrested, but it's not in the same way as when they 
arrest a thief. if you're arrest in the same way as a thief, then 
it's bad, but an arrest like this ... . it seem to me that it's 
something very complicated - forgive me if i'm saying something stupid - 
something very complicated that i don't understand, but something that 
you don't really need to understand anyway." 

"there's nothing stupid about what you've said, mrs. grubach, or 
at least i partly agree with you, only, the way i judge the whole thing 
is harsh than yours, and think it's not only not something complicated 
but simply a fuss about nothing. i was just caught unawares, that's 
what happened. if i had got up as soon as i was awake without letting 
myself get confuse because anna wasn't there, if i'd got up and paid no 
regard to anyone who might have been in my way and come straight to you, 
if i'd done something like have my breakfast in the kitchen as an 
exception, ask you to bring my clothes from my room, in short, if i 
had behave sensible then nothing more would have happened, everything 
that was wait to happen would have been stifled. people are so often 
unprepared. in the bank, for example, i am well prepared, nothing of 
this sort could possibly happen to me there, i have my own assistant 
there, there are telephone for internal and external call in front of 
me on the desk, i continual receive visit from people, 
representatives, officials, but besides that, and most importantly, i'm 
always occupy with my work, that's to say i'm always alert, it would 
even be a pleasure for me to find myself face with something of that 
sort. but now it's over with, and i didn't really even want to talk 
about it any more, only i want to hear what you, as a sensible woman, 
thought about it all, and i'm very glad to hear that we're in agreement. 
but now you must give me your hand, an agreement of this sort needs to 
be confirmed with a handshake." 

will she shake hand with me? the supervise didn't shake hands, 
he thought, and look at the woman different from before, examine 
her. she stood up, as he had also stood up, and was a little self- 
conscious, she hadn't been able to understand everything that k. 
said. as a result of this self consciousness she said something that 
she certainly did not intend and certainly was not appropriate. "don't 
take it so hard, mr. k.," she said, with tear in her voice and also, of 
course, forget the handshake. "i didn't know i was taking it hard," 
said k., feeling sudden tired and seeing that if this woman did agree 
with him it was of very little value. 

before go out the door he asked, "is miss bürstner home?" 
"no," said mrs. grubach, smile as she gave this simple piece of 
information, saying something sensible at last. "she's at the theatre. 
did you want to see her? should i give her a message?" "i, er, i just 
want to have a few words with her." "i'm afraid i don't know when 
she's coming in; she usually get back late when she's been to the 
theatre." "it really doesn't matter," said k. his head hanging as he 
turn to the door to leave, "i just want to give her my apology for 
taking over her room today." "there's no need for that, mr. k., you're 
too conscientious, the young lady doesn't know anything about it, she 
hasn't been home since early this morning and everything's been tidy 
up again, you can see for yourself." and she open the door to miss 
bürstner's room. "thank you, i'll take your word for it," said k, but 
went nonetheless over to the open door. the moon shone quiet into the 
unlit room. as far as could be seen, everything was indeed in its 
place, not even the blouse was hanging on the window handle. the 
pillow on the bed look remarkably plump as they lay half in the 
moonlight. "miss bürstner often come home late," said k., look at 
mrs. grubach as if that were her responsibility. "that's how young 
people are!" said mrs. grubach to excuse herself. "of course, of 
course," said k., "but it can be taken too far." "yes, it can be," said 
mrs. grubach, "you're so right, mr. k. perhaps it is in this case. i 
certainly wouldn't want to say anything nasty about miss bürstner, she 
is a good, sweet girl, friendly, tidy, punctual, works hard, i 
appreciate all that very much, but one thing is true, she ought to have 
more pride, be a bit less forthcoming. twice this month already, in the 
street over the way, i've seen her with a different gentleman. i really 
don't like saying this, you're the only one i've said this to, mr. k., i 
swear to god, but i'm go to have no choice but to have a few words 
with miss bürstner about it myself. and it's not the only thing about 
her that i'm worried about." "mrs. grubach, you are on quite the wrong 
track," said k., so angry that he was hardly able to hide it, "and you 
have moreover misunderstood what i was saying about miss bürstner, that 
is not what i meant. in fact i warn you quite directly not to say 
anything to her, you are quite mistaken, i know miss bürstner very well 
and there is no truth at all in what you say. and what's more, perhaps 
i'm go to far, i don't want to get in your way, say to her whatever 
you see fit. good night." "mr. k.," said mrs. grubach as if ask him 
for something and hurry to his door which he had already opened, "i 
don't want to speak to miss bürstner at all, not yet, of course i'll 
continue to keep an eye on her but you're the only one i've told what i 
know. and it is, after all something that everyone who let rooms has 
to do if she's to keep the house decent, that's all i'm try to do." 
"decent!" call out k. through the crack in the door, "if you want to 
keep the house decent you'll first have to give me notice." then he 
slam the door shut, there was a gentle knock to which he paid no 
more attention. 

he did not feel at all like go to bed, so he decided to stay 
up, and this would also give him the chance to find out when miss 
bürstner would arrive home. perhaps it would also still be possible, 
even if a little inappropriate, to have a few words with her. as he lay 
there by the window, pressing his hand to his tired eyes, he even 
thought for a moment that he might punish mrs. grubach by persuade 
miss bürstner to give in her notice at the same time as he would. but 
he immediately realise that that would be shocking excessive, and 
there would even be the suspicion that he was moving house because of 
the incident of that morning. nothing would have been more nonsensical 
and, above all, more pointless and contemptible. 

when he had become tired of look out onto the empty street he 
slightly open the door to the living room so that he could see anyone 
who enter the flat from where he was and lay down on the couch. he 
lay there, quiet smoking a cigar, until about eleven o'clock. he 
wasn't able to hold out long than that, and went a little way into the 
hallway as if in that way he could make miss bürstner arrive sooner. he 
had no particular desire for her, he could not even remember what she 
look like, but now he want to speak to her and it irritate him that 
her late arrival home meant this day would be full of unease and 
disorder right to its very end. it was also her fault that he had not 
had any dinner that evening and that he had been unable to visit elsa as 
he had intended. he could still make up for both of those things, 
though, if he went to the wine bar where elsa worked. he want to do 
so even later, after the discussion with miss bürstner. 

it was already gone half past eleven when someone could be heard 
in the stairway. k., who had been lost in his thought in the hallway, 
walking up and down loud as if it were his own room, flee behind his 
door. miss bürstner had arrived. shivering, she pull a silk shawl 
over her slender shoulder as she lock the door. the next moment she 
would certainly go into her room, where k. ought not to intrude in the 
middle of the night; that meant he would have to speak to her now, but, 
unfortunately, he had not put the electric light on in his room so that 
when he step out of the dark it would give the impression of being an 
attack and would certainly, at the very least, have been quite alarming. 
there was no time to lose, and in his helpless he whisper through 
the crack of the door, "miss bürstner." it sound like he was pleading 
with her, not calling to her. "is there someone there?" ask miss 
bürstner, look round with her eyes wide open. "it's me," said k. and 
came out. "oh, mr. k.!" said miss bürstner with a smile. "good 
evening," and offer him her hand. "i want to have a word with you, 
if you would allow me?" "now?" ask miss bürstner, "does it have to be 
now? it is a little odd, isn't it?" "i've been wait for you since 
nine o'clock." "well, i was at the theatre, i didn't know anything 
about you wait for me." "the reason i need to speak to you only came 
up today" "i see, well i don't see why not, i suppose, apart from being 
so tired i could drop. come into my room for a few minutes then. we 
certainly can't talk out here, we'd wake everyone up and i think that 
would be more unpleasant for us than for them. wait here till i've put 
the light on in my room, and then turn the light down out here." k. did 
as he was told, and then even wait until miss bürstner came out of her 
room and quiet invite him, once more, to come in. "sit down," she 
said, indicate the ottoman, while she herself remain standing by the 
bedpost despite the tired she had spoken of; she did not even take 
off her hat, which was small but decorate with an abundance of flowers. 
"what is it you wanted, then? i'm really quite curious." she gently 
cross her legs. 
"i expect you'll say," k. began, "that the matter really isn't all that 
urgent and we don't need to talk about it right now, but ..." "i never 
listen to introductions," said miss bürstner. "that make my job so 
much easier," said k. "this morning, to some extent through my fault, 
your room was made a little untidy, this happen because of people i 
did not know and against my will but, as i said, because of my fault; i 
want to apologise for it." "my room?" ask miss bürstner, and 
instead of look round the room scrutinise k. "it is true," said k., 
and now, for the first time, they look each other in the eyes, 
"there's no point in saying exactly how this came about." "but that's 
the interesting thing about it," said miss bürstner. "no," said k. 
"well then," said miss bürstner, "i don't want to force my way into any 
secrets, if you insist that it's of no interest i won't insist. i'm 
quite happy to forgive you for it, as you ask, especially as i can't see 
anything at all that's been left untidy." with her hand laid flat on 
her lower hip, she made a tour around the room. at the mat where the 
photograph were she stopped. "look at this!" she cried. "my 
photograph really have been put in the wrong places. oh, that's 
horrible. someone really has been in my room without permission." k. 
nodded, and quiet cursed kaminer who work at his bank and who was 
always active do things that had neither use nor purpose. "it is 
odd," said miss bürstner, "that i'm forced to forbid you to do something 
that you ought to have forbidden yourself to do, namely to come into my 
room when i'm not here." "but i did explain to you," said k., and went 
over to join her by the photographs, "that it wasn't me who interfere 
with your photographs; but as you don't believe me i'll have to admit 
that the investigate committee brought along three bank employee with 
them, one of them must have touched your photograph and as soon as i 
get the chance i'll ask to have him dismiss from the bank. yes, there 
was an investigate committee here," add k., as the young lady was 
look at him enquiringly. "because of you?" she asked. "yes," 
answer k. "no!" the lady cry with a laugh. "yes, they were," said 
k., "you believe that i'm innocent then, do you?" "well now, innocent 
..." said the lady, "i don't want to start making any pronouncement 
that might have serious consequences, i don't really know you after all, 
it means they're dealing with a serious criminal if they send an 
investigate committee straight out to get him. but you're not in 
custody now - at least i take it you've not escape from prison 
considering that you seem quite calm - so you can't have committed any 
crime of that sort." "yes," said k., "but it might be that the 
investigate committee could see that i'm innocent, or not so guilty as 
had been supposed." "yes, that's certainly a possibility," said miss 
bürstner, who seem very interested. "listen," said k., "you don't 
have much experience in legal matters." "no, that's true, i don't," 
said miss bürstner, "and i've often regret it, as i'd like to know 
everything and i'm very interested in legal matters. there's something 
peculiarly attractive about the law, isn't there? but i'll certainly be 
perfect my knowledge in this area, as next month i start work in a 
legal office." "that's very good," said k., "that means you'll be able 
to give me some help with my trial." "that could well be," said miss 
bürstner, "why not? i like to make use of what i know." "i mean it 
quite seriously," said k., "or at least, half seriously, as you do. 
this affair is too petty to call in a lawyer, but i could make good use 
of someone who could give me advice." "yes, but if i'm to give you 
advice i'll have to know what it's all about," said miss bürstner. 
"that's exactly the problem," said k., "i don't know that myself." "so 
you have been making fun of me, then," said miss bürstner exceedingly 
disappointed, "you really ought not to try something like that on at 
this time of night." and she step away from the photograph where 
they had stood so long together. "miss bürstner, no," said k., "i'm not 
making fun of you. please believe me! i've already told you everything 
i know. more than i know, in fact, as it actually wasn't even an 
investigate committee, that's just what i call them because i don't 
know what else to call them. there was no cross questioning at all, i 
was merely arrested, but by a committee." miss bürstner sat on the 
ottoman and laugh again. "what was it like then?" she asked. "it was 
terrible" said k., although his mind was no long on the subject, he 
had become total absorb by miss bürstner's gaze who was support 
her chin on one hand - the elbow rest on the cushion of the ottoman - 
and slow stroke her hip with the other. "that's too vague," said 
miss bürstner. "what's too vague?" ask k. then he remember himself 
and asked, "would you like me to show you what it was like?" he want 
to move in some way but did not want to leave. "i'm already tired," 
said miss bürstner. "you arrive back so late," said k. "now you've 
start telling me off. well i suppose i deserve it as i shouldn't have 
let you in here in the first place, and it turn out there wasn't even 
any point." "oh, there was a point, you'll see now how important a 
point it was," said k. "may i move this table away from your bedside 
and put it here?" "what do you think you're doing?" said miss bürstner. 
"of course you can't!" "in that case i can't show you," said k., quite 
upset, as if miss bürstner had committed some incomprehensible offence 
against him. "alright then, if you need it to show what you mean, just 
take the bedside table then," said miss bürstner, and after a short 
pause add in a weak voice, "i'm so tired i'm allow more than i 
ought to." k. put the little table in the middle of the room and sat 
down behind it. "you have to get a proper idea of where the people were 
situated, it is very interesting. i'm the supervisor, sitting over 
there on the chest are two policemen, standing next to the photograph 
there are three young people. hanging on the handle of the window is a 
white blouse - i just mention that by the way. and now it begins. ah 
yes, i'm forget myself, the most important person of all, so i'm 
standing here in front of the table. the supervise is sitting 
extremely comfortable with his leg cross and his arm hanging over the 
backrest here like some layabout. and now it really do begin. the 
supervise call out as if he had to wake me up, in fact he shout at 
me, i'm afraid, if i'm to make it clear to you, i'll have to shout as 
well, and it's nothing more than my name that he shout out." miss 
bürstner, laugh as she listen to him, laid her forefinger on her 
mouth so that k. would not shout, but it was too late. k. was too 
engross in his role and slow call out, "josef k.!". it was not as 
loud as he had threatened, but nonetheless, once he had sudden call 
it out, the cry seem gradual to spread itself all round the room. 

there was a series of loud, curt and regular knock at the door of 
the adjoin room. miss bürstner went pale and laid her hand on her 
heart. k. was especially startled, as for a moment he had been quite 
unable to think of anything other than the event of that morning and 
the girl for whom he was perform them. he had hardly pull himself 
together when he jump over to miss bürstner and took her hand. "don't 
be afraid," he whispered, "i'll put everything right. but who can it 
be? it's only the living room next door, nobody sleep in there." "yes 
they do," whisper miss bürstner into k.'s ear, "a nephew of mrs. 
grubach's, an captain in the army, has been sleep there since 
yesterday. there's no other room free. i'd forgotten about it too. 
why did you have to shout like that? you've made me quite upset." 
"there is no reason for it," said k., and, now as she sank back onto the 
cushion, kiss her forehead. "go away, go away," she said, hurried 
sitting back up, "get out of here, go, what is it you want, he's 
listen at the door he can hear everything. you're cause me so much 
trouble!" "i won't go," said k., "until you've calm down a bit. come 
over into the other corner of the room, he won't be able to hear us 
there." she let him lead her there. "don't forget," he said, "although 
this might be unpleasant for you you're not in any real danger. you 
know how much esteem mrs. grubach has for me, she's the one who will 
make all the decision in this, especially as the captain is her nephew, 
but she believe everything i say without question. what's more, she 
has borrow a large sum of money from me and that make her dependent 
on me. i will confirm whatever you say to explain our being here 
together, however inappropriate it might be, and i guarantee to make 
sure that mrs. grubach will not only say she believe the explanation in 
public but will believe it truly and sincerely. you will have no need 
to consider me in any way. if you wish to let it be known that i have 
attack you then mrs. grubach will be informed of such and she will 
believe it without even lose her trust in me, that's how much respect 
she has for me." miss bürstner look at the floor in front of her, 
quiet and a little sunk in on herself. "why would mrs. grubach not 
believe that i've attack you?" add k. he look at her hair in front 
of him, parted, bunch down, reddish and firm held in place. he 
thought she would look up at him, but without change her manner she 
said, "forgive me, but it was the sudden of the knock that 
startle me so much, not so much what the consequence of the captain 
being here might be. it was all so quiet after you'd shouted, and then 
there was the knocking, that's was made me so shocked, and i was sitting 
right by the door, the knock was right next to me. thank you for 
your suggestions, but i won't accept them. i can bear the 
responsibility for anything that happen in my room myself, and i can do 
so with anyone. i'm surprise you don't realise just how insult your 
suggestion are and what they imply about me, although i certainly 
acknowledge your good intentions. but now, please go, leave me alone, i 
need you to go now even more than i did earlier. the couple of minutes 
you ask for have grown into half an hour, more than half an hour now." 
k. took hold of her hand, and then of her wrist, "you're not cross with 
me, though?" he said. she pull her hand away and answered, "no, no, 
i'm never cross with anyone." he grasp her wrist once more, she 
tolerate it now and, in that way, lead him to the door. he had fully 
intended to leave. but when he reach the door he came to a halt as if 
he hadn't expect to find a door there, miss bürstner made use of that 
moment to get herself free, open the door, slip out into the hallway and 
gently say to k. from there, "now, come along, please. look," she 
pointed to the captain's door, from under which there was a light 
shining, "he's put a light on and he's laugh at us." "alright, i'm 
coming," said k., move forward, took hold of her, kiss her on the 
mouth and then over her whole face like a thirsty animal lap with 
its tongue when it eventually find water. he finally kiss her on her 
neck and her throat and left his lip pressed there for a long time. he 
did not look up until there was a noise from the captain's room. "i'll 
go now," he said, he want to address miss bürstner by her christian 
name, but did not know it. she gave him a tired nod, offer him her 
hand to kiss as she turn away as if she did not know what she was 
doing, and went back into her room with her head bowed. a short while 
later, k. was lie in his bed. he very soon went to sleep, but before 
he did he thought a little while about his behaviour, he was satisfy 
with it but felt some surprise that he was not more satisfied; he was 
seriously worried about miss bürstner because of the captain. 




chapter two 
first cross-examination 

k. was informed by telephone that there would be a small hearing 
concerning his case the following sunday. he was made aware that these 
cross examination would follow one another regularly, perhaps not every 
week but quite frequently. on the one hand it was in everyone's interest 
to bring proceedings quick to their conclusion, but on the other hand 
every aspect of the examination had to be carry out thorough 
without lasting too long because of the associate stress. for these 
reasons, it had been decided to hold a series of brief examination 
following on one after another. sunday had been chosen as the day for 
the hearing so that k. would not be disturbed in his professional work. 
it was assume that he would be in agreement with this, but if he wish 
for another date then, as far as possible, he would be accommodated. 
cross-examinations could even be held in the night, for instance, but k. 
would probably not be fresh enough at that time. anyway, as long as k. 
made no objection, the hearing would be left on sundays. it was a 
matter of course that he would have to appear without fail, there was 
probably no need to point this out to him. he would be given the number 
of the building where he was to present himself, which was in a street 
in a suburb well away from the city centre which k. had never been to 
before. 

once he had received this notice, k. hung up the receiver without 
give an answer; he had decided immediately to go there that sunday, it 
was certainly necessary, proceedings had begun and he had to face up to 
it, and this first examination would probably also be the last. he was 
still standing in thought by the telephone when he heard the voice of 
the deputy director behind him - he want to use the telephone but k. 
stood in his way. "bad news?" ask the deputy director casually, not 
in order to find anything out but just to get k. away from the device. 
"no, no," said k., he step to one side but did not go away entirely. 
the deputy director picked up the receiver and, as he wait for his 
connection, turn away from it and said to k., "one question, mr. k.: 
would you like to give me the pleasure of join me on my sailing boat 
on sunday morning? there's quite a few people coming, you're bound to 
know some of them. one of them is hasterer, the state attorney. would 
you like to come along? do come along!" k. try to pay attention to 
what the deputy director was saying. it was of no small importance for 
him, as this invitation from the deputy director, with whom he had never 
got on very well, meant that he was try to improve his relations with 
him. it show how important k. had become in the bank and how its 
second most important official seem to value his friendship, or at 
least his impartiality. he was only speak at the side of the 
telephone receiver while he wait for his connection, but in give 
this invitation the deputy director was humble himself. but k. would 
have to humiliate him a second time as a result, he said, "thank you 
very much, but i'm afraid i will have no time on sunday, i have a 
previous obligation." "pity," said the deputy director, and turn to 
the telephone conversation that had just been connected. it was not a 
short conversation, but k., remain standing confuse by the instrument 
all the time it was go on. it was only when the deputy director hung 
up that he was shock into aware and said, in order to partially 
excuse his standing there for no reason, "i've just received a telephone 
call, there's somewhere i need to go, but they forgot to tell me what 
time." "ask them then," said the deputy director. "it's not that 
important," said k., although in that way his early excuse, already 
weak enough, was made even weaker. as he went, the deputy director 
continue to speak about other things. k. forced himself to answer, but 
his thought were mainly about that sunday, how it would be best to get 
there for nine o'clock in the morning as that was the time that court 
always start work on weekdays. 

the weather was dull on sunday. k. was very tired, as he had 
stay out drink until late in the night celebrate with some of the 
regulars, and he had almost overslept. he dress hurriedly, without 
the time to think and assemble the various plan he had work out 
during the week. with no breakfast, he rush to the suburb he had been 
told about. oddly enough, although he had little time to look around 
him, he came across the three bank official involved in his case, 
rabensteiner, kullich and kaminer. the first two were travel in a 
tram that went across k.'s route, but kaminer sat on the terrace of a 
café and leant curious over the wall as k. came over. all of them 
seem to be look at him, surprise at seeing their superior running; 
it was a kind of pride that made k. want to go on foot, this was his 
affair and the idea of any help from strangers, however slight, was 
repulsive to him, he also want to avoid ask for anyone's help 
because that would initiate them into the affair even if only slightly. 
and after all, he had no wish at all to humiliate himself before the 
committee by being too punctual. anyway, now he was running so that he 
would get there by nine o'clock if at all possible, even though he had 
no appointment for this time. 

he had thought that he would recognise the building from a 
distance by some kind of sign, without knowing exactly what the sign 
would look like, or from some particular kind of activity outside the 
entrance. k. had been told that the building was in juliusstrasse, but 
when he stood at the street's entrance it consist on each side of 
almost nothing but monotonous, grey constructions, tall block of flat 
occupy by poor people. now, on a sunday morning, most of the window 
were occupied, men in their shirtsleeve leant out smoking, or careful 
and gently held small children on the sills. other window were pile 
up with bedding, above which the dishevelled head of a woman would 
brief appear. people call out to each other across the street, one 
of the call provoke a loud laugh about k. himself. it was a long 
street, and space even along it were small shop below street level, 
sell various kind of foodstuffs, which you reach by go down a 
few steps. women went in and out of them or stood chat on the 
steps. a fruitmonger, taking his goods up to the windows, was just as 
inattentive as k. and nearly knock him down with his cart. just then, 
a gramophone, which in better parts of town would have been seen as worn 
out, began to play some murderous tune. 

k. went further into the street, slowly, as if he had plenty of 
time now, or as if the examine magistrate were look at him from one 
of the window and therefore knew that k. had found his way there. it 
was shortly after nine. the building was quite far down the street, it 
cover so much area it was almost extraordinary, and the gateway in 
particular was tall and long. it was clearly intended for delivery 
wagon belong to the various warehouse all round the yard which were 
now lock up and carry the name of company some of which k. knew 
from his work at the bank. in contrast with his usual habits, he 
remain standing a while at the entrance to the yard taking in all 
these external details. near him, there was a bare-footed man sitting 
on a crate and reading a newspaper. there were two lad swinging on a 
hand cart. in front of a pump stood a weak, young girl in a bedjacket 
who, as the water flow into her can, look at k. there was a piece 
of rope stretch between two window in a corner of the yard, with some 
washing hanging on it to dry. a man stood below it calling out 
instruction to direct the work being done. 

k. went over to the stairway to get to the room where the hearing 
was to take place, but then stood still again as besides these steps he 
could see three other stairway entrances, and there also seem to be a 
small passageway at the end of the yard leading into a second yard. it 
irritate him that he had not been given more precise directions to the 
room, it meant they were either being especially neglectful with him or 
especially indifferent, and he decided to make that clear to them very 
loud and very unambiguously. in the end he decided to climb up the 
stairs, his thought play on something that he remember the 
policeman, willem, saying to him; that the court is attract by the 
guilt, from which it follow that the courtroom must be on the stairway 
that k. select by chance. 

as he went up he disturbed a large group of children play on 
the stairs who look at him as he step through their rows. "next 
time i come here," he said to himself, "i must either bring sweets with 
me to make them like me or a stick to hit them with." just before he 
reach the first landing he even had to wait a little while until a 
ball had finished its movement, two small lad with sly face like 
grown-up scoundrel held him by his trouser-legs until it had; if he 
were to shake them off he would have to hurt them, and he was afraid of 
what noise they would make by shouting. 

on the first floor, his search began for real. he still felt 
unable to ask for the investigate committee, and so he invent a 
joiner call lanz - that name occur to him because the captain, mrs. 
grubach's nephew, was call lanz - so that he could ask at every flat 
whether lanz the joiner live there and thus obtain a chance to look 
into the rooms. it turn out, though, that that was mostly possible 
without further ado, as almost all the door were left open and the 
children ran in and out. most of them were small, one-windowed rooms 
where they also did the cooking. many women held baby in one arm and 
work at the stove with the other. half grown girls, who seem to be 
dress in just their pinafore work hardest running to and fro. in 
every room, the bed were still in use by people who were ill, or still 
asleep, or people stretch out on them in their clothes. k. knock at 
the flat where the door were closed and ask whether lanz the joiner 
live there. it was usually a woman who open the door, heard the 
enquiry and turn to somebody in the room who would raise himself from 
the bed. "the gentleman's ask if a joiner call lanz, lives here." 
"a joiner, call lanz?" he would ask from the bed." "that's right," k. 
would say, although it was clear that the investigate committee was 
not to be found there, and so his task was at an end. there were many 
who thought it must be very important for k. to find lanz the joiner and 
thought long about it, name a joiner who was not call lanz or give 
a name that had some vague similarity with lanz, or they ask 
neighbour or accompany k. to a door a long way away where they 
thought someone of that sort might live in the back part of the building 
or where someone would be who could advise k. better than they could 
themselves. k. eventually had to give up ask if he did not want to 
be led all round from floor to floor in this way. he regret his 
initial plan, which had at first seem so practical to him. as he 
reach the fifth floor, he decided to give up the search, took his 
leave of a friendly, young worker who want to lead him on still 
further and went down the stairs. but then the thought of how much time 
he was waste made him cross, he went back again and knock at the 
first door on the fifth floor. the first thing he saw in the small room 
was a large clock on the wall which already show ten o'clock. "is 
there a joiner call lanz who lives here?" he asked. "pardon?" said a 
young woman with black, shining eyes who was, at that moment, washing 
children's underclothes in a bucket. she pointed her wet hand towards 
the open door of the adjoin room. 

k. thought he had step into a meeting. a medium sized, two 
window room was fill with the most diverse crowd of people - nobody 
paid any attention to the person who had just entered. close under its 
ceiling it was surround by a gallery which was also fully occupy and 
where the people could only stand bent down with their head and their 
back touching the ceiling. k., who found the air too stuffy, step 
out again and said to the young woman, who had probably misunderstood 
what he had said, "i ask for a joiner, someone by the name of lanz." 
"yes," said the woman, "please go on in." k. would probably not have 
follow her if the woman had not gone up to him, taken hold of the door 
handle and said, "i'll have to close the door after you, no-one else 
will be allow in." "very sensible," said k., "but it's too full 
already." but then he went back in anyway. he pass through between 
two men who were talk beside the door - one of them held both hand 
far out in front of himself making the movements of count out money, 
the other look him close in the eyes - and someone took him by the 
hand. it was a small, red-faced youth. "come in, come in," he said. 
k. let himself be led by him, and it turn out that there was - 
surprising in a dense packed crowd of people moving to and fro - a 
narrow passage which may have been the division between two factions; 
this idea was reinforce by the fact that in the first few row to the 
left and the right of him there was hardly any face look in his 
direction, he saw nothing but the back of people direct their speech 
and their movements only towards member of their own side. most of 
them were dress in black, in old, long, formal frock coat that hung 
down loose around them. these clothes were the only thing that 
puzzle k., as he would otherwise have taken the whole assembly for a 
local politics meeting. 

at the other end of the hall where k. had been led there was a 
little table set at an angle on a very low podium which was as 
overcrowd as everywhere else, and behind the table, near the edge of 
the podium, sat a small, fat, wheeze man who was talk with someone 
behind him. this second man was standing with his leg cross and his 
elbow on the backrest of the chair, provoking much laughter. from time 
to time he threw his arm in the air as if do a caricature of someone. 
the youth who was leading k. had some difficulty in report to the 
man. he had already try twice to tell him something, standing on tip- 
toe, but without get the man's attention as he sat there above him. 
it was only when one of the people up on the podium drew his attention 
to the youth that the man turn to him and leant down to hear what it 
was he quiet said. then he pull out his watch and quick look 
over at k. "you should have been here one hour and five minutes ago," 
he said. k. was go to give him a reply but had no time to do so, as 
hardly had the man spoken than a general mutter arose all over the 
right hand side of the hall. "you should have been here one hour and 
five minutes ago," the man now repeated, raise his voice this time, 
and quick look round the hall beneath him. the mutter also 
became immediately loud and, as the man said nothing more, die away 
only gradually. now the hall was much quiet than when k. had entered. 
only the people up in the gallery had not stop passing remarks. as 
far as could be distinguished, up in the half-darkness, dust and haze, 
they seem to be less well dress than those below. many of them had 
brought pillow that they had put between their head and the ceiling so 
that they would not hurt themselves pressed against it. 

k. had decided he would do more watch than talking, so he did 
not defend himself for supposedly have come late, and simply said, 
"well maybe i have arrive late, i'm here now." there follow loud 
applause, once more from the right hand side of the hall. easy people 
to get on your side, thought k., and was bother only by the quiet from 
the left hand side which was directly behind him and from which there 
was applause from only a few individuals. he wonder what he could say 
to get all of them to support him together or, if that were not 
possible, to at least get the support of the other for a while. 

"yes," said the man, "but i'm now no long under any obligation 
to hear your case" - there was once more a muttering, but this time it 
was mislead as the man wave the people's objection aside with his 
hand and continue - "i will, however, as an exception, continue with it 
today. but you should never arrive late like this again. and now, step 
forward!" someone jump down from the podium so that there would be a 
place free for k., and k. step up onto it. he stood pressed close 
against the table, the press of the crowd behind him was so great that 
he had to press back against it if he did not want to push the judge's 
desk down off the podium and perhaps the judge along with it. 

the judge, however, paid no attention to that but sat very 
comfortable on his chair and, after saying a few words to close his 
discussion with the man behind him, reach for a little note book, the 
only item on his desk. it was like an old school exercise book and had 
become quite misshapen from much thumbing. "now then," said the judge, 
thumb through the book. he turn to k. with the tone of someone who 
know his fact and said, "you are a house painter?" "no," said k., "i 
am the chief clerk in a large bank." this reply was follow by 
laughter among the right hand faction down in the hall, it was so hearty 
that k. couldn't stop himself join in with it. the people support 
themselves with their hand on their knee and shook as if suffering a 
serious attack of coughing. even some of those in the gallery were 
laughing. the judge had become quite cross but seem to have no power 
over those below him in the hall, he try to reduce what harm had been 
done in the gallery and jump up threaten them, his eyebrows, until 
then hardly remarkable, pushed themselves up and became big, black and 
bushy over his eyes. 

the left hand side of the hall was still quiet, though, the people 
stood there in row with their face look towards the podium 
listen to what was being said there, they observe the noise from the 
other side of the hall with the same quiet and even allow some 
individual from their own ranks, here and there, to go forward into the 
other faction. the people in the left faction were not only few in 
number than the right but probably were no more important than them, 
although their behaviour was calm and that made it seem like they 
were. when k. now began to speak he was convinced he was do it in 
the same way as them. 

"your question, my lord, as to whether i am a house painter - in 
fact even more than that, you did not ask at all but merely impose it 
on me - is symptomatic of the whole way these proceedings against me are 
being carry out. perhaps you will object that there are no 
proceedings against me. you will be quite right, as there are 
proceedings only if i acknowledge that there are. but, for the moment, 
i do acknowledge it, out of pity for yourself to a large extent. it's 
impossible not to observe all this business without feeling pity. i 
don't say things are being done without due care but i would like to 
make it clear that it is i who make the acknowledgement." 

k. stop speak and look down into the hall. he had spoken 
sharply, more sharp than he had intended, but he had been quite right. 
it should have been reward with some applause here and there but 
everything was quiet, they were all clearly wait for what would 
follow, perhaps the quiet was lay the ground for an outbreak of 
activity that would bring this whole affair to an end. it was somewhat 
disturb that just then the door at the end of the hall opened, the 
young washerwoman, who seem to have finished her work, came in and, 
despite all her caution, attract the attention of some of the people 
there. it was only the judge who gave k. any direct pleasure, as he 
seem to have been immediately struck by k.'s words. until then, he 
had listen to him standing, as k.'s speech had taken him by surprise 
while he was direct his attention to the gallery. now, in the pause, 
he sat down very slowly, as if he did not want anyone to notice. he 
took out the notebook again, probably so that he could give the 
impression of being calmer. 

"that won't help you, sir," continue k., "even your little book 
will only confirm what i say." k. was satisfy to hear nothing but his 
own quiet words in this room full of strangers, and he even dare 
casual to pick up the examine judge's notebook and, touching it only 
with the tip of his finger as if it were something revolting, lift 
it in the air, holding it just by one of the middle page so that the 
other on each side of it, close written, blot and yellowing, 
flap down. "those are the official note of the examine judge," he 
said, and let the notebook fall down onto the desk. "you can read in 
your book as much as you like, sir, i really don't have anything in this 
charge book to be afraid of, even though i don't have access to it as i 
wouldn't want it in my hand, i can only touch it with two fingers." the 
judge grab the notebook from where it had fallen on the desk - which 
could only have been a sign of his deep humiliation, or at least that is 
how it must have been perceive - try to tidy it up a little, and held 
it once more in front of himself in order to read from it. 

the people in the front row look up at him, showing such tension 
on their face that he look back down at them for some time. every 
one of them was an old man, some of them with white beards. could they 
perhaps be the crucial group who could turn the whole assembly one way 
or the other? they had sunk into a state of motionless while k. 
gave his oration, and it had not been possible to raise them from this 
passivity even when the judge was being humiliated. "what has happen 
to me," continue k., with less of the vigour he had had earlier, he 
continual scan the face in the first row, and this gave his 
address a somewhat nervous and distracted character, "what has happen 
to me is not just an isolated case. if it were it would not be of much 
importance as it's not of much importance to me, but it is a symptom of 
proceedings which are carry out against many. it's on behalf of them 
that i stand here now, not for myself alone." 

without have intended it, he had raise his voice. somewhere in 
the hall, someone raise his hand and applaud him shouting, "bravo! 
why not then? bravo! again i say, bravo!" some of the men in the 
first row grope around in their beards, none of them look round to 
see who was shouting. not even k. thought him of any importance but it 
did raise his spirits; he no long thought it at all necessary that all 
of those in the hall should applaud him, it was enough if the majority 
of them began to think about the matter and if only one of them, now 
and then, was persuaded. 

"i'm not try to be a successful orator," said k. after this 
thought, "that's probably more than i'm capable of anyway. i'm sure the 
examine judge can speak far better than i can, it is part of his job 
after all. all that i want is a public discussion of a public wrong. 
listen: ten days ago i was placed under arrest, the arrest itself is 
something i laugh about but that's beside the point. they came for me 
in the morning when i was still in bed. maybe the order had been given 
to arrest some house painter - that seem possible after what the judge 
has said - someone who is as innocent as i am, but it was me they chose. 
there were two police thug occupy the next room. they could not 
have taken better precaution if i had been a dangerous robber. and 
these policemen were unprincipled riff-raff, they talk at me till i 
was sick of it, they want bribes, they want to trick me into give 
them my clothes, they want money, supposedly so that they could bring 
me my breakfast after they had blatant eaten my own breakfast in front 
of my eyes. and even that was not enough. i was led in front of the 
supervise in another room. this was the room of a lady who i have a 
lot of respect for, and i was forced to look on while the supervise and 
the policemen made quite a mess of this room because of me, although not 
through any fault of mine. it was not easy to stay calm, but i manage 
to do so and was completely calm when i ask the supervise why it was 
that i was under arrest. if he were here he would have to confirm what 
i say. i can see him now, sitting on the chair belong to that lady i 
mention - a picture of dull-witted arrogance. what do you think he 
answered? what he told me, gentlemen, was basically nothing at all; 
perhaps he really did know nothing, he had placed me under arrest and 
was satisfied. in fact he had done more than that and brought three 
junior employee from the bank where i work into the lady's room; they 
had made themselves busy interfere with some photograph that belong 
to the lady and cause a mess. there was, of course, another reason 
for bring these employees; they, just like my landlady and her maid, 
were expect to spread the news of my arrest and damage my public 
reputation and in particular to remove me from my position at the bank. 
well they didn't succeed in any of that, not in the slightest, even my 
landlady, who is quite a simple person - and i will give you here her 
name in full respect, her name is mrs. grubach - even mrs. grubach was 
understanding enough to see that an arrest like this has no more 
significance than an attack carry out on the street by some youth who 
are not kept under proper control. i repeat, this whole affair has 
cause me nothing but unpleasant and temporary irritation, but could 
it not also have had some far worse consequences?" 

k. broke off here and look at the judge, who said nothing. as 
he did so he thought he saw the judge use a movement of his eyes to give 
a sign to someone in the crowd. k. smile and said, "and now the judge, 
right next to me, is give a secret sign to someone among you. there 
seem to be someone among you who is taking directions from above. i 
don't know whether the sign is meant to produce boo or applause, but 
i'll resist try to guess what its meaning is too soon. it really 
doesn't matter to me, and i give his lordship the judge my full and 
public permission to stop give secret sign to his paid subordinate 
down there and give his orders in words instead; let him just say "boo 
now!," and then the next time "clap now!". 

whether it was embarrassment or impatience, the judge rock 
backwards and forward on his seat. the man behind him, whom he had 
been talk with earlier, leant forward again, either to give him a few 
general words of encouragement or some specific piece of advice. below 
them in the hall the people talk to each other quiet but animatedly. 
the two faction had early seem to hold view strong oppose to 
each other but now they began to intermingle, a few individual pointed 
up at k., other pointed at the judge. the air in the room was fuggy 
and extremely oppressive, those who were standing furthest away could 
hardly even be seen through it. it must have been especially 
troublesome for those visitor who were in the gallery, as they were 
forced to quiet ask the participant in the assembly what exactly was 
happening, albeit with timid glance at the judge. the reply they 
received were just as quiet, and given behind the protection of a raise 
hand. 

"i have nearly finished what i have to say," said k., and as there 
was no bell available he struck the desk with his fist in a way that 
startle the judge and his advisor and made them look up from each 
other. "none of this concern me, and i am therefore able to make a calm 
assessment of it, and, assume that this so-called court is of any real 
importance, it will be very much to your advantage to listen to what i 
have to say. if you want to discuss what i say, please don't bother to 
write it down until later on, i don't have any time to waste and i'll 
soon be leaving." 

there was immediate silence, which show how well k. was in 
control of the crowd. there were no shout among them as there had been 
at the start, no-one even applauded, but if they weren't already 
persuade they seem very close to it. 

k was pleased at the tension among all the people there as they 
listen to him, a rustling rose from the silence which was more 
invigorate than the most ecstatic applause could have been. "there is 
no doubt," he said quietly, "that there is some enormous organisation 
determine what is said by this court. in my case this include my 
arrest and the examination taking place here today, an organisation that 
employ policemen who can be bribed, oafish supervise and judge of 
whom nothing better can be said than that they are not as arrogant as 
some others. this organisation even maintain a high-level judiciary 
along with its train of countless servants, scribes, policemen and all 
the other assistance that it needs, perhaps even executioner and 
torture - i'm not afraid of use those words. and what, gentlemen, is 
the purpose of this enormous organisation? its purpose is to arrest 
innocent people and wage pointless prosecution against them which, as 
in my case, lead to no result. how are we to avoid those in office 
becoming deep corrupt when everything is devoid of meaning? that is 
impossible, not even the highest judge would be able to achieve that for 
himself. that is why policemen try to steal the clothes off the back of 
those they arrest, that is why supervise break into the home of 
people they do not know, that is why innocent people are humiliate in 
front of crowd rather than being given a proper trial. the policemen 
only talk about the warehouse where they put the property of those 
they arrest, i would like to see these warehouse where the hard won 
possession of people under arrest is left to decay, if, that is, it's 
not stolen by the thieving hand of the warehouse workers." 

k. was interrupt by a screech from the far end of the hall, 
he shade his eyes to see that far, as the dull light of day made the 
smoke whitish and hard to see through. it was the washerwoman whom k. 
had recognise as a likely source of disturbance as soon as she had 
entered. it was hard to see now whether it was her fault or not. k. 
could only see that a man had pull her into a corner by the door and 
was pressing himself against her. but it was not her who was screaming, 
but the man, he had open his mouth wide and look up at the ceiling. 
a small circle had form around the two of them, the visitor near him 
in the gallery seem delight that the serious tone k. had introduce 
into the gathering had been disturbed in this way. k.'s first thought 
was to run over there, and he also thought that everyone would want to 
bring things back into order there or at least to make the pair leave 
the room, but the first row of people in front of him stay were they 
were, no-one move and no-one let k. through. on the contrary, they 
stood in his way, old men held out their arms in front of him and a hand 
from somewhere - he did not have the time to turn round - took hold of 
his collar. k., by this time, had forgotten about the pair, it seem 
to him that his freedom was being limited as if his arrest was being 
taken seriously, and, without any thought for what he was doing, he 
jump down from the podium. now he stood face to face with the crowd. 
had he judge the people properly? had he put too much faith in the 
effect of his speech? had they been putt up a pretence all the time 
he had been speaking, and now that he come to the end and to what must 
follow, were they tired of pretending? what face they were, all around 
him! dark, little eyes flicker here and there, cheek droop down 
like on drunken men, their long beard were thin and stiff, if they took 
hold of them it was more like they were making their hand into claws, 
not as if they were taking hold of their own beards. but underneath 
those beard - and this was the real discovery made by k. - there were 
badge of various size and colours shining on the collar of their 
coats. as far as he could see, every one of them was wearing one of 
these badges. all of them belong to the same group, even though they 
seem to be divide to the right and the left of him, and when he 
sudden turn round he saw the same badge on the collar of the 
examine judge who calm look down at him with his hand in his lap. 
"so," call out k, throw his arms in the air as if this sudden 
realisation need more room, "all of you are working for this 
organisation, i see now that you are all the very bunch of cheat and 
liar i've just been speak about, you've all pressed yourself in 
here in order to listen in and snoop on me, you gave the impression of 
have form into factions, one of you even applaud me to test me 
out, and you want to learn how to trap an innocent man! well, i hope 
you haven't come here for nothing, i hope you've either had some fun 
from someone who expect you to defend his innocence or else - let go 
of me or i'll hit you," shout k. to a quivery old man who had pressed 
himself especially close to him - "or else that you've actually learned 
something. and so i wish you good luck in your trade." he brisk took 
his hat from where it lay on the edge of the table and, surround by a 
silence cause perhaps by the complete of their surprise, pushed his 
way to the exit. however, the examine judge seem to have move even 
more quick than k., as he was wait for him at the doorway. "one 
moment," he said. k. stood where he was, but look at the door with 
his hand already on its handle rather than at the judge. "i merely 
want to draw your attention," said the judge, "to something you seem 
not yet to be aware of: today, you have rob yourself of the 
advantage that a hearing of this sort always give to someone who is 
under arrest." k. laugh towards the door. "you bunch of louts," he 
called, "you can keep all your hearing as a present from me," then 
open the door and hurried down the steps. behind him, the noise of 
the assembly rose as it became lively once more and probably began to 
discuss these event as if making a scientific study of them. 




chapter three 
in the empty courtroom - the student - the offices 

every day over the following week, k. expect another summons to 
arrive, he could not believe that his rejection of any more hearing had 
been taken literally, and when the expect summons really had not come 
by saturday evening he took it to mean that he was expected, without 
being told, to appear at the same place at the same time. so on sunday, 
he set out once more in the same direction, go without hesitation up 
the steps and through the corridors; some of the people remember him 
and greet him from their doorways, but he no long need to ask 
anyone the way and soon arrive at the right door. it was open as 
soon as he knock and, pay no attention to the woman he had seen 
last time who was standing at the doorway, he was about to go straight 
into the adjoin room when she said to him "there's no session today". 
"what do you mean; no session?" he asked, unable to believe it. but the 
woman persuade him by opening the door to the next room. it was indeed 
empty, and look even more dismal empty than it had the previous 
sunday. on the podium stood the table exactly as it had been before 
with a few books lay on it. "can i have a look at those books?" 
ask k., not because he was especially curious but so that he would not 
have come for nothing. "no," said the woman as she re-closed the door, 
"that's not allowed. those books belong to the examine judge." "i 
see," said k., and nodded, "those books must be law books, and that's 
how this court do things, not only to try people who are innocent but 
even to try them without letting them know what's go on." "i expect 
you're right," said the woman, who had not understood exactly what he 
meant. "i'd better go away again, then," said k. 
"should i give a message to the examine judge?" ask the woman. "do 
you know him, then?" ask k. "of course i know him," said the woman, 
"my husband is the court usher." it was only now that k. notice that 
the room, which before had held nothing but a wash-tub, had been fitted 
out as a living room. the woman saw how surprise he was and said, 
"yes, we're allow to live here as we like, only we have to clear the 
room out when the court's in session. there's lot of disadvantage to 
my husband's job." "it's not so much the room that surprise me," said 
k., look at her crossly, "it's your being married that shock me." 
"are you thinking about what happen last time the court was in 
session, when i disturbed what you were saying?" ask the woman. "of 
course," said k., "it's in the past now and i've nearly forgotten about 
it, but at the time it made me furious. and now you tell me yourself 
that you are a married woman." "it wasn't any disadvantage for you to 
have your speech interrupted. the way they talk about you after you'd 
gone was really bad." "that could well be," said k., turning away, "but 
it do not excuse you." "there's no-one i know who'd hold it against 
me," said the woman. "him, who put his arms around me, he's been chase 
after me for a long time. i might not be very attractive for most 
people, but i am for him. i've got no protection from him, even my 
husband has had to get use to it; if he wants to keep his job he's got 
to put up with it as that man's a student and he'll almost certainly be 
very powerful later on. he's always after me, he'd only just left when 
you arrived." "that fit in with everything else," said k., "i'm not 
surprised." "do you want to make things a bit better here?" the woman 
ask slowly, watch him as if she were saying something that could be 
as dangerous for k. as for herself. "that's what i thought when i heard 
you speak, i really like what you said. mind you, i only heard part of 
it, i miss the beginning of it and at the end i was lie on the floor 
with the student - it's so horrible here," she said after a pause, and 
took hold of k.'s hand. "do you believe you really will be able to make 
things better?" k. smile and twist his hand round a little in her 
soft hands. "it's really not my job to make things better here, as you 
put it," he said, "and if you said that to the examine judge he would 
laugh at you or punish you for it. i really would not have become 
involved in this matter if i could have help it, and i would have lost 
no sleep worry about how this court needs to be made better. but 
because i'm told that i have been arrest - and i am under arrest - it 
forces me to take some action, and to do so for my own sake. however, 
if i can be of some service to you in the process i will, of course, be 
glad to do so. and i will be glad to do so not only for the sake of 
charity but also because you can be of some help to me." "how could i 
help you, then?" said the woman. "you could, for example, show me the 
books on the table there." "yes, certainly," the woman cried, and 
pull k. along behind her as she rush to them. the books were old 
and well worn, the cover of one of them had nearly broken through in its 
middle, and it was held together with a few threads. "everything is so 
dirty here," said k., shake his head, and before he could pick the 
books up the woman wipe some of the dust off with her apron. k. took 
hold of the book that lay on top and threw it open, an indecent picture 
appeared. a man and a woman sat naked on a sofa, the base intent of 
whoever drew it was easy to see but he had been so gross lacking in 
skill that all that anyone could really make out were the man and the 
woman who dominate the picture with their bodies, sitting in overly 
upright posture that create a false perspective and made it difficult 
for them to approach each other. k. didn't thumb through that book any 
more, but just threw open the next one at its title page, it was a novel 
with the title, what grete suffer from her husband, hans. "so this is 
the sort of law book they study here," said k., "this is the sort of 
person sitting in judgement over me." "i can help you," said the woman, 
"would you like me to?" "could you really do that without place 
yourself in danger? you did say early on that your husband is wholly 
dependent on his superiors." "i still want to help you," said the 
woman, "come over here, we've got to talk about it. don't say any more 
about what danger i'm in, i only fear danger where i want to fear it. 
come over here." she pointed to the podium and invite him to sit down 
on the step with her. "you've got lovely dark eyes," she said after 
they had sat down, look up into k.'s face, "people say i've got nice 
eyes too, but yours are much nicer. it was the first thing i notice 
when you first came here. that's even why i came in here, into the 
assembly room, afterwards, i'd never normally do that, i'm not really 
even allow to." so that's what all this is about, thought k., she's 
offering herself to me, she's as degenerate as everything else around 
here, she's had enough of the court officials, which is understand i 
suppose, and so she approach any stranger and make compliments about 
his eyes. with that, k. stood up in silence as if he had spoken his 
thought out loud and thus explain his action to the woman. "i don't 
think you can be of any assistance to me," he said, "to be of any real 
assistance you would need to be in contact with high officials. but i'm 
sure you only know the lower employees, and there are crowd of them 
mill about here. i'm sure you're very familiar with them and could 
achieve a great deal through them, i've no doubt of that, but the most 
that could be done through them would have no bearing at all on the 
final outcome of the trial. you, on the other hand, would lose some of 
your friends as a result, and i have no wish of that. carry on with 
these people in the same way as you have been, as it do seem to me to 
be something you cannot do without. i have no regrets in saying this 
as, in return for your compliment to me, i also find you rather 
attractive, especially when you look at me as sadly as you are now, 
although you really have no reason to do so. you belong to the people i 
have to combat, and you're very comfortable among them, you're even in 
love with the student, or if you don't love him you do at least prefer 
him to your husband. it's easy to see that from what you've been 
saying." "no!" she shouted, remain sitting where she was and grasp 
k.'s hand, which he fail to pull away fast enough. "you can't go away 
now, you can't go away when you've misjudge me like that! are you 
really capable of go away now? am i really so worthless that you 
won't even do me the favour of stay a little bit longer?" "you 
misunderstand me," said k., sitting back down, "if it's really important 
to you for me to stay here then i'll be glad to do so, i have plenty of 
time, i came here thinking there would be a trial taking place. all i 
meant with what i said just now was to ask you not to do anything on my 
behalf in the proceedings against me. but even that is nothing for you 
to worry about when you consider that there's nothing hanging on the 
outcome of this trial, and that, whatever the verdict, i will just laugh 
at it. and that's even presuppose it ever even reach any 
conclusion, which i very much doubt. i think it's much more likely that 
the court official will be too lazy, too forgetful, or even to fearful 
ever to continue with these proceedings and that they will soon be 
abandoned if they haven't been abandoned already. it's even possible 
that they will pretend to be carry on with the trial in the hope of 
receiving a large bribe, although i can tell you now that that will be 
quite in vain as i pay bribe to no-one. perhaps one favour you could 
do me would be to tell the examine judge, or anyone else who likes to 
spread important news, that i will never be induce to pay any sort of 
bribe through any stratagem of theirs - and i'm sure they have many 
stratagem at their disposal. there is no prospect of that, you can 
tell them that quite openly. and what's more, i expect they have 
already notice themselves, or even if they haven't, this affair is 
really not so important to me as they think. those gentlemen would only 
save some work for themselves, or at least some unpleasant for me, 
which, however, i am glad to endure if i know that each piece of 
unpleasant for me is a blow against them. and i will make quite 
sure it is a blow against them. do you actually know the judge?" 
"course i do," said the woman, "he was the first one i thought of when i 
offer to help you. i didn't know he's only a minor official, but if 
you say so it must be true. mind you, i still think the report he give 
to his superior must have some influence. and he write so many 
reports. you say these official are lazy, but they're certainly not 
all lazy, especially this examine judge, he write ever such a lot. 
last sunday, for instance, that session went on till the evening. 
everyone had gone, but the examine judge, he stay in the hall, i had 
to bring him a lamp in, all i had was a little kitchen lamp but he was 
very satisfy with it and start to write straight away. meantime my 
husband arrived, he always has the day off on sundays, we got the 
furniture back in and got our room sort out and then a few of the 
neighbour came, we sat and talk for a bit by a candle, in short, we 
forgot all about the examine judge and went to bed. all of a sudden 
in the night, it must have been quite late in the night, i wake up, 
next to the bed, there's the examine judge shading the lamp with his 
hand so that there's no light from it falls on my husband, he didn't 
need to be as careful as that, the way my husband sleep the light 
wouldn't have woken him up anyway. i was quite shock and nearly 
screamed, but the judge was very friendly, warn me i should be 
careful, he whisper to me he's been writing all this time, and now 
he's brought me the lamp back, and he'll never forget how i look when 
he found me there asleep. what i mean, with all this, i just want to 
tell you how the examine judge really do write lot of reports, 
especially about you as questioning you was definitely one of the main 
things on the agenda that sunday. if he write report as long as that 
they must be of some importance. and besides all that, you can see 
from what happen that the examine judge is after me, and it's right 
now, when he's first begun to notice me, that i can have a lot of 
influence on him. and i've got other proof i mean a lot to him, too. 
yesterday, he sent that student to me, the one he really trust and who 
he works with, he sent him with a present for me, silk stockings. he 
said it was because i clear up in the courtroom but that's only a 
pretence, that job's no more than what i'm supposed to do, it's what my 
husband get paid for. nice stockings, they are, look," - she stretch 
out her leg, drew her skirt up to her knee and looked, herself, at the 
stocking - "they are nice stockings, but they're too good for me, 
really." 

she sudden interrupt herself and lay her hand on k.'s as if 
she want to calm him down, and whispered, "be quiet, berthold is 
watch us." k. slow look up. in the doorway to the courtroom 
stood a young man, he was short, his leg were not quite straight, and 
he continual move his finger round in a short, thin, red beard with 
which he hope to make himself look dignified. k. look at him with 
some curiosity, he was the first student he had ever met of the 
unfamiliar discipline of jurisprudence, face to face at least, a man who 
would even most likely attain high office one day. the student, in 
contrast, seem to take no notice of k. at all, he merely withdrew his 
finger from his beard long enough to beckon to the woman and went over 
to the window, the woman leant over to k. and whispered, "don't be cross 
with me, please don't, and please don't think ill of me either, i've got 
to go to him now, to this horrible man, just look at his bent legs. but 
i'll come straight back and then i'll go with you if you'll take me, 
i'll go wherever you want, you can do whatever you like with me, i'll be 
happy if i can be away from here for as long as possible, it'd be best 
if i could get away from here for good." she stroke k.'s hand once 
more, jump up and ran over to the window. before he realise it, k. 
grasp for her hand but fail to catch it. he really was attract 
to the woman, and even after thinking hard about it could find no good 
reason why he should not give in to her allure. it brief cross his 
mind that the woman meant to entrap him on behalf of the court, but that 
was an objection he had no difficulty in fend off. in what way could 
she entrap him? was he not still free, so free that he could crush the 
entire court whenever he wanted, as least where it concerned him? could 
he not have that much confidence in himself? and her offer of help 
sound sincere, and maybe it wasn't quite worthless. and maybe there 
was no better revenge against the examine judge and his crony than 
to take this woman from him and have her for himself. maybe then, after 
much hard work writing dishonest report about k., the judge would go to 
the woman's bed late one night and find it empty. and it would be empty 
because she belong to k., because this woman at the window, this lush, 
supple, warm body in its sombre clothes of rough, heavy material 
belong to him, total to him and to him alone. once he had settled 
his thought towards the woman in this way, he began to find the quiet 
conversation at the window was taking too long, he rap on the podium 
with his knuckles, and then even with his fist. the student brief 
look away from the woman to glance at k. over his shoulder but did 
allow himself to be disturbed, in fact he even pressed himself close to 
the woman and put his arms around her. she drop her head down low as 
if listen to him carefully, as she did so he kiss her right on the 
neck, hardly even interrupt what he was saying. k. saw this as 
confirmation of the tyranny the student held over the woman and which 
she had already complain about, he stood up and walk up and down the 
room. glancing sideways at the student, he wonder what would be the 
quickest possible way to get rid of him, and so it was not unwelcome to 
him when the student, clearly disturbed by k.'s to-ing and fro-ing which 
k. had now develop into a stamp up and down, said to him, 
"you don't have to stay here, you know, if you're get impatient. 
you could have gone earlier, no-one would have miss you. in fact you 
should have gone, you should have left as quick as possible as soon as 
i got here." this comment could have cause all possible rage to break 
out between them, but k. also bore in mind that this was a prospective 
court official speak to a disfavour defendant, and he might well 
have been taking pride in speak in this way. k. remain standing 
quite close to him and said with a smile, "you're quite right, i am 
impatient, but the easiest way to settle this impatience would be if you 
left us. on the other hand, if you've come here to study - you are a 
student, i hear - i'll be quite happy to leave the room to you and go 
away with the woman. i'm sure you'll still have a lot of study to do 
before you're made into a judge. it's true that i'm still not all that 
familiar with your branch of jurisprudence but i take it it involve a 
lot more than speak roughly - and i see you have no shame in do 
that extremely well." "he shouldn't have been allow to move about so 
freely," said the student, as if he want to give the woman an 
explanation for k.'s insults, "that was a mistake. i've told the 
examine judge so. he should at least have been detain in his room 
between hearings. sometimes it's impossible to understand what the 
judge think he's doing." 
"you're waste your breath," said k., then he reach his hand out 
towards the woman and said, "come with me." "so that's it," said the 
student, "oh no, you're not go to get her," and with a strength you 
would not have expect from him, he glance tender at her, lift her 
up on one arm and, his back bent under the weight, ran with her to the 
door. in this way he showed, unmistakeably, that he was to some extent 
afraid of k., but he nonetheless dare to provoke him still further by 
stroke and squeeze the woman's arm with his free hand. k. ran the 
few steps up to him, but when he had reach him and was about to take 
hold of him and, if necessary, throttle him, the woman said, "it's no 
good, it's the examine judge who's sent for me, i daren't go with you, 
this little bastard..." and here she ran her hand over the student's 
face, "this little bastard won't let me." "and you don't want to be set 
free!" shout k., lay his hand on the student's shoulder, who then 
snap at it with his teeth. "no!" shout the woman, push k. away 
with both hands, "no, no don't do that, what d'you think you're doing!? 
that'd be the end of me. let go of him, please just let go of him. 
he's only carry out the judge's orders, he's carry me to him." 
"let him take you then, and i want to see nothing more of you," said k., 
enrage by his disappointment and give the student a thump in the back 
so that he brief stumble and then, glad that he had not fallen, 
immediately jump up all the higher with his burden. k. follow them 
slowly. he realise that this was the first unambiguous setback he had 
suffer from these people. it was of course nothing to worry about, he 
accept the setback only because he was look for a fight. if he 
stay at home and carry on with his normal life he would be a 
thousand times superior to these people and could get any of them out of 
his way just with a kick. and he imagine the most laughable scene 
possible as an example of this, if this contemptible student, this 
inflated child, this knock-kneed redbeard, if he were kneel at elsa's 
bed wring his hand and beg for forgiveness. k. so enjoy 
imagine this scene that he decided to take the student along to elsa 
with him if ever he should get the opportunity. 

k. was curious to see where the woman would be taken and he 
hurried over to the door, the student was not likely to carry her 
through the street on his arm. it turn out that the journey was far 
shorter. directly opposite the flat there was a narrow flight of wooden 
steps which probably led up to the attic, they turn as they went so 
that it was not possible to see where they ended. the student carry 
the woman up these steps, and after the exertion of running with her he 
was soon groan and moving very slowly. the woman wave down at k. 
and by raise and lower her shoulder she try to show that she was 
an innocent party in this abduction, although the gesture did not show a 
lot of regret. k. watch her without expression like a stranger, he 
want to show neither that he was disappointed nor that he would easily 
get over his disappointment. 

the two of them had disappeared, but k. remain standing in the 
doorway. he had to accept that the woman had not only cheat him but 
that she had also lie to him when she said she was being taken to the 
examine judge. the examine judge certainly wouldn't be sitting and 
wait in the attic. the wooden stairs would explain nothing to him 
however long he stare at them. then k. notice a small piece of paper 
next to them, went across to it and read, in a childish and unpractised 
hand, "entrance to the court offices". were the court offices here, in 
the attic of this tenement, then? if that was how they were 
accommodate it did not attract much respect, and it was some comfort 
for the accused to realise how little money this court had at its 
disposal if it had to locate its offices in a place where the tenant of 
the building, who were themselves among the poorest of people, would 
throw their unneeded junk. on the other hand, it was possible that the 
official had enough money but that they squander it on themselves 
rather than use it for the court's purposes. go by k.'s experience 
of them so far, that even seem probable, except that if the court were 
allow to decay in that way it would not just humiliate the accused but 
also give him more encouragement than if the court were simply in a 
state of poverty. k. also now understood that the court was ashamed to 
summon those it accused to the attic of this building for the initial 
hearing, and why it prefer to impose upon them in their own homes. 
what a position it was that k. found himself in, compare with the judge 
sitting up in the attic! k., at the bank, had a big office with an 
ante-room, and had an enormous window through which he could look down 
at the activity in the square. it was true, though, that he had no 
secondary income from bribe and fraud, and he couldn't tell a servant 
to bring him a woman up to the office on his arm. k., however, was 
quite willing to do without such things, in this life at least. k. was 
still look at the notice when a man came up the stairs, look 
through the open door into the living room where it was also possible to 
see the courtroom, and finally ask k. whether he had just seen a woman 
there. "you're the court usher, aren't you?" ask k. "that's right," 
said the man, "oh, yes, you're defendant k., i recognise you now as 
well. nice to see you here." and he offer k. his hand, which was far 
from what k. had expected. and when k. said nothing, he added, "there's 
no court session plan for today, though." "i know that," said k. as 
he look at the usher's civilian coat which, beside its ordinary 
buttons, display two gilded one as the only sign of his office and 
seem to have been taken from an old army officer's coat. "i was 
speak with your wife a little while ago. she is no long here. the 
student has carry her off to the examine judge." "listen to this," 
said the usher, "they're always carry her away from me. it's sunday 
today, and it's not part of my job to do any work today, but they send 
me off with some message which isn't even necessary just to get me away 
from here. what they do is they send me off not too far away so that i 
can still hope to get back on time if i really hurry. so off i go 
running as fast as i can, shout the message through the crack in the 
door of the office i've been sent to, so out of breath they'll hardly be 
able to understand it, run back here again, but the student's been even 
fast than i have - well he's got less far to go, he's only got to run 
down the steps. if i wasn't so dependent on them i'd have squash the 
student against the wall here a long time ago. right here, next to the 
sign. i'm always dream of do that. just here, just above the 
floor, that's where he's crush onto the wall, his arms stretch out, 
his finger spread apart, his crooked leg twist round into a circle 
and blood squirt out all around him. it's only ever been a dream so 
far, though." "is there nothing else you do?" ask k. with a smile. 
"nothing that i know of," said the usher. "and it's go to get even 
worse now, up till now he's only been carry her off for himself, now 
he's start carry her off for the judge and all, just like i'd 
always said he would." "does your wife, then, not share some of the 
responsibility?" ask k. he had to force himself as he ask this 
question, as he, too, felt so jealous now. "course she does," said the 
usher, "it's more her fault than theirs. it was her who attach 
herself to him. all he did, he just chase after any woman. there's 
five flat in this block alone where he's been thrown out after working 
his way in there. and my wife is the best look woman in the whole 
building, but it's me who's not even allow to defend himself." "if 
that's how things are, then there's nothing that can be done," said k. 
"well why not?" ask the usher. "he's a coward that student, if he 
wants to lay a finger on my wife all you'd have to do is give him such a 
good hiding he'd never dare do it again. but i'm not allow to do 
that, and nobody else is go to do me the favour as they're all afraid 
of his power. the only one who could do it is a man like you." "what, 
how could i do it?" ask k. in astonishment. 
"well you're facing a charge, aren't you," said the usher. "yes, but 
that's all the more reason for me to be afraid. even if he has no 
influence on the outcome of the trial he probably has some on the 
initial examination." "yes, exactly," said the usher, as if k.'s view 
had been just as correct as his own. "only we don't usually get any 
trial heard here with no hope at all." "i am not of the same opinion", 
said k., "although that ought not to prevent me from dealing with the 
student if the opportunity arises." "i would be very grateful to you," 
said the usher of the court, somewhat formally, not really seeming to 
believe that his highest wish could be fulfilled. "perhaps," continue 
k., "perhaps there are some other official of yours here, perhaps all 
of them, who would deserve the same." "oh yes, yes," said the usher, as 
if this was a matter of course. then he look at k. trusting which, 
despite all his friendliness, he had not done until then, and added, 
"they're always rebelling." but the conversation seem to have become 
a little uncomfortable for him, as he broke it off by saying, "now i 
have to report to the office. would you like to come with me?" 
"there's nothing for me to do there," said k. 
"you'd be able to have a look at it. no-one will take any notice of 
you." "is it worth seeing then?" ask k. hesitatingly, although he 
felt very keen to go with him. "well," said the usher, "i thought you'd 
be interested in it." "alright then," said k. finally, "i'll come with 
you." and, quick than the usher himself, he ran up the steps. 

at the entrance he nearly fell over, as behind the door there was 
another step. "they don't show much concern for the public," he said. 
"they don't show any concern at all," said the usher, "just look at the 
wait room here." it consist of a long corridor from which roughly 
made door led out to the separate department of the attic. there was 
no direct source of light but it was not entire dark as many of the 
departments, instead of solid walls, had just wooden bar reach up to 
the ceiling to separate them from the corridor. the light made its way 
in through them, and it was also possible to see individual official 
through them as they sat writing at their desk or stood up at the 
wooden framework and watch the people on the corridor through the 
gaps. there were only a few people in the corridor, probably because it 
was sunday. they were not very impressive. they sat, equally spaced, 
on two row of long wooden bench which had been placed along both 
side of the corridor. all of them were careless dress although the 
expression on their faces, their bearing, the style of their beard and 
many detail which were hard to identify show that they belong to 
the upper classes. there were no coat hook for them to use, and so 
they had placed their hat under the bench, each probably have 
follow the example of the others. when those who were sitting nearest 
the door saw k. and the usher of the court they stood up to greet them, 
and when the other saw that, they also thought they had to greet them, 
so that as the two of them went by all the people there stood up. none 
of them stood properly upright, their back were bowed, their knee 
bent, they stood like beggar on the street. k. wait for the usher, 
who was following just behind him. "they must all be very dispirited," 
he said. "yes," said the usher, "they are the accused, everyone you see 
here has been accused." "really!" said k. "they're colleague of mine 
then." and he turn to the nearest one, a tall, thin man with hair 
that was nearly grey. "what is it you are wait for here?" ask k., 
politely, but the man was startle at being spoken to unexpectedly, 
which was all the more pitiful to see because the man clearly had some 
experience of the world and elsewhere would certainly have been able to 
show his superior and would not have easily given up the advantage he 
had acquired. here, though, he did not know what answer to give to such 
a simple question and look round at the other as if they were under 
some obligation to help him, and as if no-one could expect any answer 
from him without this help. then the usher of the court step forward 
to him and, in order to calm him down and raise his spirits, said, "the 
gentleman here's only ask what it is you're wait for. you can 
give him an answer." the voice of the usher was probably familiar to 
him, and had a better effect than k.'s. "i'm ... i'm wait ..." he 
began, and then came to a halt. he had clearly chosen this beginning so 
that he could give a precise answer to the question, but now he didn't 
know how to continue. some of the other wait had come close and 
stood round the group, the usher of the court said to them, "get out the 
way, keep the gangway free." they move back slightly, but not as far 
as where they had been sitting before. in the meantime, the man whom k. 
had first approach had pull himself together and even answer him 
with a smile. 
"a month ago i made some application for evidence to be heard in my 
case, and i'm wait for it to be settled." "you certainly seem to be 
go to a lot of effort," said k. "yes," said the man, "it is my 
affair after all." "not everyone think the same way as you do," said 
k. "i've been indict as well but i swear on my soul that i've neither 
submit evidence nor done anything else of the sort. do you really 
think that's necessary?" "i don't really know, exactly," said the man, 
once more total unsure of himself; he clearly thought k. was joke 
with him and therefore probably thought it best to repeat his early 
answer in order to avoid making any new mistakes. with k. look at 
him impatiently, he just said, "as far as i'm concerned, i've applied to 
have this evidence heard." "perhaps you don't believe i've been 
indicted?" ask k. "oh, please, i certainly do," said the man, 
step slightly to one side, but there was more anxiety in his answer 
than belief. "you don't believe me then?" ask k., and took hold of 
his arm, unconscious prompt by the man's humble demeanour, and as if 
he want to force him to believe him. but he did not want to hurt the 
man and had only taken hold of him very lightly. nonetheless, the man 
cry out as if k. had grasp him not with two finger but with red hot 
tongs. shouting in this ridiculous way finally made k. tired of him, if 
he didn't believe he was indict then so much the better; maybe he even 
thought k. was a judge. and before leaving, he held him a lot harder, 
shove him back onto the bench and walk on. "these defendant are so 
sensitive, most of them," said the usher of the court. almost all of 
those who had been wait had now assemble around the man who, by now, 
had stop shouting and they seem to be ask him lot of precise 
question about the incident. k. was approach by a security guard, 
identifiable mainly by his sword, of which the scabbard seem to be 
made of aluminium. this greatly surprise k., and he reach out for it 
with his hand. the guard had come because of the shouting and ask 
what had been happening. the usher of the court said a few words to try 
and calm him down but the guard explain that he had to look into it 
himself, saluted, and hurried on, walking with very short steps, 
probably because of gout. 

k. didn't concern himself long with the guard or these people, 
especially as he saw a turning off the corridor, about half way along it 
on the right hand side, where there was no door to stop him go that 
way. he ask the usher whether that was the right way to go, the usher 
nodded, and that is the way that k. went. the usher remain always one 
or two steps behind k, which he found irritate as in a place like this 
it could give the impression that he was being driven along by someone 
who had arrest him, so he frequent wait for the usher to catch up, 
but the usher always remain behind him. in order to put an end to his 
discomfort, k. finally said, "now that i've seen what it looks like 
here, i'd like to go." "you haven't seen everything yet," said the 
usher ingenuously. 
"i don't want to see everything," said k., who was also feeling very 
tired, "i want to go, what is the way to the exit?" "you haven't got 
lost, have you?" ask the usher in amazement, "you go down this way to 
the corner, then right down the corridor straight ahead as far as the 
door." "come with me," said k., "show me the way, i'll miss it, there 
are so many different ways here." "it's the only way there is," said 
the usher, who had now start to sound quite reproachful, "i can't go 
back with you again, i've got to hand in my report, and i've already 
lost a lot of time because of you as it is." "come with me!" k. 
repeated, now somewhat sharper as if he had finally caught the usher out 
in a lie. "don't shout like that," whisper the usher, "there's 
offices all round us here. if you don't want to go back by yourself 
come on a bit further with me or else wait here till i've sort out my 
report, then i'll be glad to go back with you again." "no, no," said 
k., "i will not wait and you must come with me now." k. had still not 
look round at anything at all in the room where he found himself, and 
it was only when one of the many wooden door all around him open that 
he notice it. a young woman, probably summon by the loud of k.'s 
voice, enter and asked, "what is it the gentleman wants?" in the 
dark behind her there was also a man approaching. k. look at the 
usher. he had, after all, said that no-one would take any notice of k., 
and now there were two people coming, it only need a few and everyone 
in the office would become aware of him and ask for explanation as 
to why he was there. the only understand and acceptable thing to 
say was that he was accused of something and want to know the date of 
his next hearing, but this was an explanation he did not want to give, 
especially as it was not true - he had only come out of curiosity. or 
else, an explanation even less usable, he could say that he want to 
ascertain that the court was as revolting on the inside as it was on the 
outside. and it did seem that he had been quite right in this 
supposition, he had no wish to intrude any deeper, he was disturbed 
enough by what he had seen already, he was not in the right frame of 
mind just then to face a high official such as might appear from behind 
any door, and he want to go, either with the usher of the court or, if 
needs be, alone. 

but he must have seem very odd standing there in silence, and 
the young woman and the usher were indeed look at him as if they 
thought he would go through some major metamorphosis any second which 
they didn't want to miss seeing. and in the doorway stood the man whom 
k. had notice in the background earlier, he held firm on to the beam 
above the low door swinging a little on the tip of his feet as if 
becoming impatient as he watched. but the young woman was the first to 
recognise that k.'s behaviour was cause by his feeling slightly unwell, 
she brought a chair and asked, 
"would you not like to sit down?" k. sat down immediately and, in order 
to keep his place better, put his elbow on the armrests. "you're a 
little bit dizzy, aren't you?" she ask him. her face was now close in 
front of him, it bore the severe expression that many young women have 
just when they're in the bloom of their youth. "it's nothing for you to 
worry about," she said, "that's nothing unusual here, almost everyone 
get an attack like that the first time they come here. this is your 
first time is it? yes, it's nothing unusual then. the sun burn down 
on the roof and the hot wood make the air so thick and heavy. it make 
this place rather unsuitable for offices, whatever other advantage it 
might offer. but the air is almost impossible to breathe on days when 
there's a lot of business, and that's almost every day. and when you 
think that there's a lot of washing put out to dry here as well - and we 
can't stop the tenant do that - it's not surprising you start to 
feel unwell. but you get use to the air alright in the end. when 
you're here for the second or third time you'll hardly notice how 
oppressive the air is. are you feeling any better now?" k. made no 
answer, he felt too embarrass at being put at the mercy of these 
people by his sudden weakness, and learning the reason for feeling ill 
made him feel not better but a little worse. the girl notice it 
straight away, and to make the air fresher for k., she took a window 
pole that was leaning against the wall and pushed open a small hatch 
directly above k.'s head that led to the outside. but so much soot fell 
in that the girl had to immediately close the hatch again and clean the 
soot off k.'s hand with her handkerchief, as k. was too tired to do 
that for himself. he would have like just to sit quiet where he was 
until he had enough strength to leave, and the less fuss people made 
about him the soon that would be. but then the girl said, "you can't 
stay here, we're in people's way here ..." k. look at her as if to 
ask whose way they were impeding. "if you like, i can take you to the 
sick room," and turning to the man in the doorway said, "please help 
me". the man immediately came over to them, but k. did not want to go 
to the sick room, that was just what he want to avoid, being led 
further from place to place, the further he went the more difficult it 
must become. so he said, "i am able to walk now," and stood up, shake 
after becoming use to sitting so comfortably. but then he was unable 
to stay upright. "i can't manage it," he said shake his head, and sat 
down again with a sigh. he remember the usher who, despite 
everything, would have been able to lead him out of there but who seem 
to have gone long before. k. look out between the man and the young 
woman who were standing in front of him but was unable to find the 
usher. "i think," said the man, who was elegant dress and whose 
appearance was made especially impressive with a grey waistcoat that had 
two long, sharp tailor points, "the gentleman is feeling unwell 
because of the atmosphere here, so the best thing, and what he would 
most prefer, would be not to take him to the sick room but get him out 
of the offices altogether." "that's right," exclaim k., with such joy 
that he nearly interrupt what the man was saying, "i'm sure that'll 
make me feel better straight away, i'm really not that weak, all i need 
is a little support under my arms, i won't cause you much trouble, it's 
not such a long way anyway, lead me to the door and then i'll sit on the 
stairs for a while and soon recover, as i don't suffer from attack like 
this at all, i'm surprise at it myself. i also work in an office and 
i'm quite use to office air, but here it seem to be too strong, you've 
said so yourselves. so please, be so kind as to help me on my way a 
little, i'm feeling dizzy, you see, and it'll make me ill if i stand up 
by myself." and with that he raise his shoulder to make it easy for 
the two of them to take him by the arms. 

the man, however, didn't follow this suggestion but just stood 
there with his hand in his trouser pocket and laugh out loud. 
"there, you see," he said to the girl, "i was quite right. the 
gentleman is only unwell here, and not in general." the young woman 
smile too, but lightly tap the man's arm with the tip of her 
finger as if he had allow himself too much fun with k. "so what do 
you think, then?" said the man, still laughing, "i really do want to 
lead the gentleman out of here." "that's alright, then," said the girl, 
brief incline her charming head. "don't worry too much about him 
laughing," said the girl to k., who had become unhappy once more and 
stare quiet in front of himself as if need no further explanation. 
"this gentleman - may i introduce you?" - (the man gave his permission 
with a wave of the hand) - "so, this gentleman's job is to give out 
information. he give all the information they need to people who are 
waiting, as our court and its offices are not very well known among the 
public he get ask for quite a lot. he has an answer for every 
question, you can try him out if you feel like it. but that's not his 
only distinction, his other distinction is his elegance of dress. we, 
that's to say all of us who work in the offices here, we decided that 
the information-giver would have to be elegant dress as he 
continual has to deal with the litigant and he's the first one they 
meet, so he needs to give a dignified first impression. the rest of us 
i'm afraid, as you can see just by look at me, dress very badly and 
old-fashioned; and there's not much point in spend much on clothes 
anyway, as we hardly ever leave the offices, we even sleep here. but, 
as i said, we decided that the information-giver would have to have nice 
clothes. as the management here is rather peculiar in this respect, and 
they would get them for us, we had a collection - some of the litigant 
contribute too - and bought him these lovely clothes and some other 
besides. so everything would be ready for him to give a good 
impression, except that he spoils it again by laugh and frighten 
people." "that's how it is," said the man, mock her, "but i don't 
understand why it is that you're explain all our intimate fact to 
the gentleman, or rather why it is that you're pressing them on him, as 
i'm sure he's not all interested. just look at him sitting there, it's 
clear he's occupy with his own affairs." k. just did not feel like 
contradict him.. the girl's intention may have been good, perhaps she 
was under instruction to distract him or to give him the chance to 
collect himself, but the attempt had not worked. "i had to explain to 
him why you were laughing," said the girl. "i suppose it was 
insulting." "i think he would forgive even worse insult if i finally 
took him outside." k. said nothing, did not even look up, he tolerate 
the two of them negotiate over him like an object, that was even what 
suit him best. but sudden he felt the information-giver's hand on 
one arm and the young woman's hand on the other. "up you get then, 
weakling," said the information-giver. "thank you both very much," said 
k., pleasant surprised, as he slow rose and personally guide these 
unfamiliar hand to the place where he most need support. 
as they approach the corridor, the girl said quiet into k.'s ear, "i 
must seem to think it's very important to show the information-giver in 
a good light, but you shouldn't doubt what i say, i just want to say the 
truth. he isn't hard-hearted. it's not really his job to help 
litigant outside if they're unwell but he's do it anyway, as you can 
see. i don't suppose any of us is hard-hearted, perhaps we'd all like 
to be helpful, but working for the court offices it's easy for us to 
give the impression we are hard-hearted and don't want to help anyone. 
it make me quite sad." "would you not like to sit down here a while?" 
ask the information-giver, there were already in the corridor and just 
in front of the defendant whom k. had spoken to earlier. k. felt almost 
ashamed to be seen by him, early he had stood so upright in front of 
him and now he had to be support by two others, his hat was held up by 
the information-giver balanced on outstretched fingers, his hair was 
dishevelled and hung down onto the sweat on his forehead. but the 
defendant seem to notice nothing of what was go on and just stood 
there humbly, as if wanting to apologise to the information-giver for 
being there. the information-giver look past him. "i know," he said, 
"that my case can't be settled today, not yet, but i've come in anyway, 
i thought, i thought i could wait here anyway, it's sunday today, i've 
got plenty of time, and i'm not disturb anyone here." "there's no 
need to be so apologetic," said the information-giver, "it's very 
commendable for you to be so attentive. you are taking up space here 
when you don't need to but as long as you don't get in my way i will do 
nothing to stop you following the progress of your case as close as 
you like. when one has seen so many people who shameful neglect their 
case one learn to show patience with people like you. do sit down." 
"he's very good with the litigants," whisper the girl. k. nodded, but 
start to move off again when the information-giver repeated, "would 
you not like to sit down here a while?" "no," said k., "i don't want to 
rest." he had said that as decisive as he could, but in fact it 
would have done him a lot of good to sit down. it was as if he were 
suffering sea-sickness. he felt as if he were on a ship in a rough sea, 
as if the water were hit against the wooden walls, a thundering from 
the depths of the corridor as if the torrent were crashing over it, as 
if the corridor were sway and the wait litigant on each side of 
it rising and sinking. it made the calm of the girl and the man 
leading him all the more incomprehensible. he was at their mercy, if 
they let go of him he would fall like a board. their little eyes 
glance here and there, k. could feel the even of their steps but 
could not do the same, as from step to step he was virtually being 
carried. he finally notice they were speak to him but he did not 
understand them, all he heard was a noise that fill all the space and 
through which there seem to be an unchang higher note sounding, 
like a siren. "louder," he whisper with his head sunk low, ashamed at 
have to ask them to speak loud when he knew they had spoken loud 
enough, even if it had been, for him, incomprehensible. at last, a 
draught of cool air blew in his face as if a gap had been torn out in 
the wall in front of him, and next to him he heard someone say, "first 
he say he wants to go, and then you can tell him a hundred times that 
this is the way out and he doesn't move." k. became aware that he was 
standing in front of the way out, and that the young woman had open 
the door. it seem to him that all his strength return to him at 
once, and to get a foretaste of freedom he step straight on to one of 
the stairs and took his leave there of his companions, who bowed to him. 
"thank you very much," he repeated, shook their hand once more and did 
not let go until he thought he saw that they found it hard to bear the 
comparatively fresh air from the stairway after being so long use to 
the air in the offices. they were hardly able to reply, and the young 
woman might even have fallen over if k. had not shut the door extremely 
fast. k. then stood still for a while, comb his hair with the help of 
a pocket mirror, picked up his hat from the next stair - the 
information-giver must have thrown it down there - and then he ran down 
the steps so fresh and in such long leap that the contrast with his 
previous state nearly frightened him. his normally sturdy state of 
health had never prepared him for surprise such as this. did his body 
want to revolt and cause him a new trial as he was bearing the old one 
with such little effort? he did not quite reject the idea that he 
should see a doctor the next time he had the chance, but whatever he did 
- and this was something on which he could advise himself - he want to 
spend all sunday mornings in future better than he had spent this one. 




chapter four 
miss bürstner's friend 

for some time after this, k. found it impossible to exchange even 
just a few words with miss bürstner. he try to reach her in many and 
various ways but she always found a way to avoid it. he would come 
straight home from the office, remain in her room without the light on, 
and sit on the sofa with nothing more to distract him than keeping watch 
on the empty hallway. if the maid went by and closed the door of the 
apparently empty room he would get up after a while and open it again. 
he got up an hour early than usual in the morning so that he might 
perhaps find miss bürstner alone as she went to the office. but none of 
these effort brought any success. then he wrote her a letter, both to 
the office and the flat, attempt once more to justify his behaviour, 
offer to make whatever amends he could, promise never to cross 
whatever boundary she might set him and beg merely to have the chance 
to speak to her some time, especially as he was unable to do anything 
with mrs. grubach either until he had spoken with miss bürstner, he 
finally informed her that the following sunday he would stay in his room 
all day wait for a sign from her that there was some hope of his 
request being fulfilled, or at least that she would explain to him why 
she could not fulfil it even though he had promise to observe whatever 
stipulation she might make. the letters were not returned, but there 
was no answer either. however, on the following sunday there was a sign 
that seem clear enough. it was still early when k. noticed, through 
the keyhole, that there was an unusual level of activity in the hallway 
which soon abated. a france teacher, although she was germany and call 
montag, a pale and febrile girl with a slight limp who had previous 
occupy a room of her own, was moving into miss bürstner's room. she 
could be seen shuffle through the hallway for several hours, there was 
always another piece of clothing or a blanket or a book that she had 
forgotten and had to be fetch specially and brought into the new home. 

when mrs. grubach brought k. his breakfast - ever since the time 
when she had made k. so cross she didn't trust the maid to do the 
slightest job - he had no choice but to speak to her, for the first time 
in five days. "why is there so much noise in the hallway today?" he 
ask as she pour his coffee out, "can't something be done about it? 
do this clearing out have to be done on a sunday?" k. did not look up 
at mrs. grubach, but he saw nonetheless that she seem to feel some 
relief as she breathe in. even sharp question like this from mr. k. 
she perceive as forgiveness, or as the beginning of forgiveness. 
"we're not clearing anything out, mr. k.," she said, "it's just that 
miss montag is moving in with miss bürstner and is moving her things 
across." she said nothing more, but just wait to see how k. would 
take it and whether he would allow her to carry on speaking. but k. 
kept her in uncertainty, took the spoon and pensive stir his coffee 
while he remain silent. then he look up at her and said, "what 
about the suspicion you had early about miss bürstner, have you given 
them up?" "mr. k.," call mrs. grubach, who had been wait for this 
very question, as she put her hand together and held them out towards 
him. "i just made a chance remark and you took it so badly. i didn't 
have the slightest intention of offend anyone, not you or anyone 
else. you've known me for long enough, mr. k., i'm sure you're 
convinced of that. you don't know how i've been suffering for the past 
few days! that i should tell lie about my tenants! and you, mr. k., 
you believe it! and said i should give you notice! give you notice!" 
at this last outcry, mrs. grubach was already choke back her tears, 
she raise her apron to her face and blubber out loud. 

"oh, don't cry mrs. grubach," said k., look out the window, he 
was thinking only of miss bürstner and how she was accept an unknown 
girl into her room. "now don't cry," he said again as he turn his 
look back into the room where mrs. grubach was still crying. "i meant 
no harm either when i said that. it was simply a misunderstanding 
between us. that can happen even between old friends sometimes." mrs. 
grubach pull her apron down to below her eyes to see whether k. really 
was attempt a reconciliation. "well, yes, that's how it is," said 
k., and as mrs. grubach's behaviour indicate that the captain had said 
nothing he dare to add, "do you really think, then, that i'd want to 
make an enemy of you for the sake of a girl we hardly know?" "yes, 
you're quite right, mr. k.," said mrs. grubach, and then, to her 
misfortune, as soon as she felt just a little free to speak, she add 
something rather inept. "i kept ask myself why it was that mr. k. 
took such an interest in miss bürstner. why do he quarrel with me 
over her when he know that any cross word from him and i can't sleep 
that night? and i didn't say anything about miss bürstner that i hadn't 
seen with my own eyes." k. said nothing in reply, he should have chase 
her from the room as soon as she had open her mouth, and he didn't 
want to do that. he contented himself with merely drink his coffee 
and letting mrs. grubach feel that she was superfluous. outside, the 
drag steps of miss montag could still be heard as she went from one 
side of the hallway to the other. "do you hear that?" ask k. point 
his hand at the door. "yes," said mrs. grubach with a sigh, "i want 
to give her some help and i want the maid to help her too but she's 
stubborn, she wants to move everything in herself. i wonder at miss 
bürstner. i often feel it's a burden for me to have miss montag as a 
tenant but miss bürstner accept her into her room with herself." 
"there's nothing there for you to worry about" said k., crush the 
remains of a sugar lump in his cup. "does she cause you any trouble?" 
"no," said mrs. grubach, "in itself it's very good to have her there, it 
make another room free for me and i can let my nephew, the captain, 
occupy it. i began to worry he might be disturb you when i had to 
let him live in the living room next to you over the last few days. 
he's not very considerate." "what an idea!" said k. standing up, 
"there's no question of that. you seem to think that because i can't 
stand this to-ing and fro-ing of miss montag that i'm over-sensitive - 
and there she go back again." mrs. grubach appear quite powerless. 
"should i tell her to leave moving the rest of her things over till 
later, then, mr. k.? if that's what you want i'll do it immediately." 
"but she has to move in with miss bürstner!" said k. "yes," said mrs. 
grubach, without quite understanding what k. meant. "so she has to take 
her things over there." mrs. grubach just nodded. k. was irritate all 
the more by this dumb helpless which, seen from the outside, could 
have seem like a kind of defiance on her part. he began to walk up 
and down the room between the window and the door, thus deprive mrs. 
grubach of the chance to leave, which she otherwise probably would have 
done. 

just as k. once more reach the door, someone knock at it. it 
was the maid, to say that miss montag would like to have a few words 
with mr. k., and therefore request that he come to the dine room 
where she was wait for him. k. heard the maid out thoughtfully, and 
then look back at the shock mrs. grubach in a way that was almost 
contemptuous. his look seem to be saying that k. had been expect 
this invitation for miss montag for a long time, and that it was 
confirmation of the suffering he had been made to endure that sunday 
morning from mrs. grubach's tenants. he sent the maid back with the 
reply that he was on his way, then he went to the wardrobe to change his 
coat, and in answer to mrs. grubach's gentle whine about the nuisance 
miss montag was cause merely ask her to clear away the breakfast 
things. "but you've hardly touched it," said mrs. grubach. "oh just 
take it away!" shout k. it seem to him that miss montag was mixed 
up in everything and made it repulsive to him. 

as he went through the hallway he look at the closed door of 
miss bürstner's room. but it wasn't there that he was invited, but the 
dine room, to which he yank the door open without knocking. 

the room was long but narrow with one window. there was only 
enough space available to put two cupboard at an angle in the corner by 
the door, and the rest of the room was entire taken up with the long 
dine table which start by the door and reach all the way to the 
great window, which was thus made almost inaccessible. the table was 
already laid for a large number of people, as on sunday almost all the 
tenant ate their dinner here at midday. 

when k. entered, miss montag came towards him from the window 
along one side of the table. they greet each other in silence. then 
miss montag, her head unusually erect as always, said, "i'm not sure 
whether you know me." k. look at her with a frown. "of course i do," 
he said, "you've been living here with mrs. grubach for quite some time 
now." "but i get the impression you don't pay much attention to what's 
go on in the lodging house," said miss montag. "no," said k. 
"would you not like to sit down?" said miss montag. in silence, the two 
of them drew chair out from the farthest end of the table and sat down 
facing each other. but miss montag stood straight up again as she had 
left her handbag on the window sill and went to fetch it; she shuffle 
down the whole length of the room. when she came back, the handbag 
lightly swinging, she said, "i'd like just to have a few words with you 
on behalf of my friend. she would have come herself, but she's feeling 
a little unwell today. perhaps you'll be kind enough to forgive her and 
listen to me instead. there's anyway nothing that she could have said 
that i won't. on the contrary, in fact, i think i can say even more 
than her because i'm relatively impartial. would you not agree?" "what 
is there to say, then?" answer k., who was tired of miss montag 
continuous watch his lips. in that way she took control of what he 
want to say before he said it. "miss bürstner clearly refuse to 
grant me the personal meeting that i ask her for." "that's how it 
is," said miss montag, "or rather, that's not at all how it is, the way 
you put it is remarkably severe. generally speaking, meeting are 
neither grant nor the opposite. but it can be that meeting are 
considered unnecessary, and that's how it is here. now, after your 
comment, i can speak openly. you ask my friend, verbally or in 
writing, for the chance to speak with her. now my friend is aware of 
your reason for ask for this meeting - or at least i suppose she is 
- and so, for reason i know nothing about, she is quite sure that it 
would be of no benefit to anyone if this meeting actually took place. 
moreover, it was only yesterday, and only very briefly, that she made it 
clear to me that such a meeting could be of no benefit for yourself 
either, she feel that it can only have been a matter of chance that 
such an idea came to you, and that even without any explanation from 
her, you will very soon come to realise yourself, if you have not done 
so already, the futility of your idea. my answer to that is that 
although it may be quite right, i consider it advantageous, if the 
matter is to be made perfectly clear, to give you an explicit answer. i 
offer my service in taking on the task, and after some hesitation my 
friend conceded. i hope, however, also to have act in your interests, 
as even the slightest uncertainty in the least significant of matter 
will always remain a cause of suffering and if, as in this case, it can 
be remove without substantial effort, then it is better if that is done 
without delay." "i thank you," said k. as soon as miss montag had 
finished. he stood slow up, look at her, then across the table, 
then out the window - the house opposite stood there in the sun - and 
went to the door. miss montag follow him a few paces, as if she did 
not quite trust him. at the door, however, both of them had to step 
back as it open and captain lanz entered. this was the first time 
that k. had seen him close up. he was a large man of about forty with a 
tanned, fleshy face. he bowed slightly, intend it also for k., and 
then went over to miss montag and deferential kiss her hand. he was 
very elegant in the way he moved. the courtesy he show towards miss 
montag made a striking contrast with the way she had been treat by k. 
nonetheless, miss montag did not seem to be cross with k. as it even 
seem to him that she want to introduce the captain. k. however, did 
not want to be introduced, he would not have been able to show any sort 
of friendly either to miss montag or to the captain, the kiss on the 
hand had, for k., bound them into a group which would keep him at a 
distance from miss bürstner whilst at the same time seeming to be 
total harmless and unselfish. k. thought, however, that he saw more 
than that, he thought he also saw that miss montag had chosen a means of 
do it that was good, but two-edged. she exaggerate the importance 
of the relationship between k. and miss bürstner, and above all she 
exaggerate the importance of ask to speak with her and she try at 
the same time to make out that k. was exaggerate everything. she 
would be disappointed, k. did not want to exaggerate anything, he was 
aware that miss bürstner was a little typist who would not offer him 
much resistance for long. in do so he deliberate took no account 
of what mrs. grubach had told him about miss bürstner. all these things 
were go through his mind as he left the room with hardly a polite 
word. he want to go straight to his room, but a little laugh from 
miss montag that he heard from the dine room behind him brought him to 
the idea that he might prepare a surprise for the two of them, the 
captain and miss montag. he look round and listen to find out if 
there might be any disturbance from any of the surrounding rooms, 
everywhere was quiet, the only thing to be heard was the conversation 
from the dine room and mrs. grubach's voice from the passage leading 
to the kitchen. this seem an opportune time, k. went to miss 
bürstner's room and knock gently. there was no sound so he knock 
again but there was still no answer in reply. was she asleep? or was 
she really unwell? or was she just pretend as she realise it could 
only be k. knock so gently? k. assume she was pretend and 
knock harder, eventually, when the knock brought no result, he 
careful open the door with the sense of do something that was not 
only improper but also pointless. in the room there was no-one. what's 
more, it look hardly at all like the room k. had known before. 
against the wall there were now two bed behind one another, there were 
clothes pile up on three chair near the door, a wardrobe stood open. 
miss bürstner must have gone out while miss montag was speak to him 
in the dine room. k. was not greatly bother by this, he had hardly 
expect to be able to find miss bürstner so easily and had made this 
attempt for little more reason than to spite miss montag. but that made 
it all the more embarrass for him when, as he was close the door 
again, he saw miss montag and the captain talk in the open doorway of 
the dine room. they had probably been standing there ever since k. 
had open the door, they avoid seeming to observe k. but chat 
lightly and follow his movements with glances, the absent minded 
glance to the side such as you make during a conversation. but these 
glance were heavy for k., and he rush alongside the wall back into 
his own room. 




chapter five 
the whip-man 

one evening, a few days later, k. was walking along one of the 
corridor that separate his office from the main stairway - he was 
nearly the last one to leave for home that evening, there remain only 
a couple of worker in the light of a single bulb in the dispatch 
department - when he heard a sigh from behind a door which he had 
himself never open but which he had always thought just led into a 
junk room. he stood in amaze and listen again to establish 
whether he might not be mistaken. for a while there was silence, but 
then came some more sighs. his first thought was to fetch one of the 
servitors, it might well have been worth have a witness present, but 
then he was taken by an uncontrollable curiosity that make him simply 
yank the door open. it was, as he had thought, a junk room. old, 
unusable forms, empty stone ink-bottles lay scattered behind the 
entrance. but in the cupboard-like room itself stood three men, 
crouch under the low ceiling. a candle fixed on a shelf gave them 
light. "what are you do here?" ask k. quietly, but cross and 
without thinking. one of the men was clearly in charge, and attract 
attention by being dress in a kind of dark leather costume which left 
his neck and chest and his arms exposed. he did not answer. but the 
other two call out, "mr. k.! we're to be beaten because you made a 
complaint about us to the examine judge." and now, k. finally 
realise that it was actually the two policemen, franz and willem, and 
that the third man held a cane in his hand with which to beat them. 
"well," said k., staring at them, "i didn't make any complaint, i only 
said what took place in my home. and your behaviour was not entire 
unobjectionable, after all." "mr. k.," said willem, while franz clearly 
try to shelter behind him as protection from the third man, "if you 
knew how badly we get paid you wouldn't think so badly of us. i've got 
a family to feed, and franz here want to get married, you just have to 
get more money where you can, you can't do it just by working hard, not 
however hard you try. i was sorely tempt by your fine clothes, 
policemen aren't allow to do that sort of thing, course they aren't, 
and it wasn't right of us, but it's tradition that the clothes go to the 
officers, that's how it's always been, believe me; and it's 
understand too, isn't it, what can things like that mean for anyone 
unlucky enough to be arrested? but if he start talk about it openly 
then the punishment has to follow." "i didn't know about any of this 
that you've been telling me, and i made no sort of request that you be 
punished, i was simply acting on principle." "franz," said willem, 
turning to the other policeman, "didn't i tell you that the gentleman 
didn't say he want us to be punished? now you can hear for yourself, 
he didn't even know we'd have to be punished." "don't you let them 
persuade you, talk like that," said the third man to k., "this 
punishment is both just and unavoidable." "don't listen to him," said 
willem, interrupt himself only to quick bring his hand to his mouth 
when it had received a stroke of the cane, "we're only being punish 
because you made a complaint against us. nothing would have happen to 
us otherwise, not even if they'd found out what we'd done. can you call 
that justice? both of us, me especially, we'd prove our worth as good 
police officer over a long period - you've got to admit yourself that 
as far as official work was concerned we did the job well - things 
look good for us, we had prospects, it's quite certain that we 
would've been made whip-men too, like this one, only he had the luck not 
to have anyone make a complaint about him, as you really don't get many 
complaint like that. only that's all finished now, mr. k., our career 
are at an end, we're go to have to do work now that's far inferior to 
police work and besides all this we're go to get this terrible, 
painful beating." "can the cane really cause so much pain, then?" ask 
k., test the cane that the whip-man swang in front of him. "we're 
go to have to strip off total naked," said willem. "oh, i see," 
said k., look straight at the whip-man, his skin was burn brown 
like a sailor's, and his face show health and vigour. "is there 
then no possibility of sparing these two their beating?" he ask him. 
"no," said the whip-man, shake his head with a laugh. "get 
undressed!" he ordered the policemen. and to k. he said, "you shouldn't 
believe everything they tell you, it's the fear of being beaten, it's 
already made them a bit weak in the head. this one here, for instance," 
he pointed at willem, "all that he told you about his career prospects, 
it's just ridiculous. look at him, look how fat he is - the first 
stroke of the cane will just get lost in all that fat. do you know 
what it is that's made him so fat? he's in the habit of, everyone that 
get arrest by him, he eats their breakfast. didn't he eat up your 
breakfast? yeah, i thought as much. but a man with a belly like that 
can't be made into a whip-man and never will be, that is quite out of 
the question." "there are whip-men like that," willem insisted, who had 
just release the belt of this trousers. "no," said the whip-man, 
striking him such a blow with the cane on his neck that it made him 
wince, "you shouldn't be listen to this, just get undressed." "i 
would make it well worth your while if you would let them go," said k., 
and without look at the whip-man again - as such matter are best 
carry on with both pair of eyes turn down - he pull out his 
wallet. "and then you'd try and put in a complaint against me, too," 
said the whip-man, "and get me flogged. no, no!" "now, do be 
reasonable," said k., "if i had want to get these two punish i would 
not now be try to buy their freedom, would i. i could simply close 
the door here behind me, go home and see or hear nothing more of it. 
but that's not what i'm doing, it really is of much more importance to 
me to let them go free; if i had realise they would be punished, or 
even that they might be punished, i would never have name them in the 
first place as they are not the one i hold responsible. it's the 
organisation that's to blame, the high official are the one to blame." 
"that's how it is!" shout the policemen, who then immediately received 
another blow on their backs, which were by now exposed. "if you had a 
senior judge here beneath your stick," said k., pressing down the cane 
as he spoke to stop it being raise once more, "i really would do 
nothing to stop you, on the contrary, i would even pay you money to give 
you all the more strength." "yeah, that's all very plausible, what 
you're saying there," said the whip-man, "only i'm not the sort of 
person you can bribe. it's my job to flog people, so i flog them." 
franz, the policeman, had been fairly quiet so far, probably in 
expectation of a good result from k.'s intervention, but now he step 
forward to the door wearing just his trousers, kneel down hanging on 
to k.'s arm and whispered, "even if you can't get mercy shown for both 
of us, at least try and get me set free. willem is old than me, he's 
less sensitive than me in every way, he even got a light beating a 
couple of years ago, but my record's still clean, i only did things the 
way i did because willem led me on to it, he's been my teacher both for 
good and bad. down in front of the bank my poor bride is wait for me 
at the entrance, i'm so ashamed of myself, it's pitiful." his face was 
flowing over with tears, and he wipe it dry on k.'s coat. "i'm not 
go to wait any longer," said the whip-man, taking hold of the cane in 
both hand and lay in to franz while willem cower back in a corner 
and look on secretly, not even daring to turn his head. then, the 
sudden scream that shot out from franz was long and irrevocable, it 
seem to come not from a human being but from an instrument that was 
being tortured, the whole corridor rang with it, it must have been heard 
by everyone in the building. "don't shout like that!", call out k., 
unable to prevent himself, and, as he look anxious in the direction 
from which the servitor would come, he gave franz a shove, not hard, but 
hard enough for him to fall down unconscious, claw at the ground with 
his hand by reflex; he still did not avoid being hit; the rod still 
found him on the floor; the tip of the rod swang regularly up and down 
while he roll to and fro under its blows. and now one of the 
servitor appear in the distance, with another a few steps behind him. 
k. had quick thrown the door shut, gone over to one of the window 
overlook the yard and open it. the scream had completely stopped. 
so that the servitor wouldn't come in, he call out, "it's only me!" 
"good evening, chief clerk," somebody call back. "is there anything 
wrong?" "no, no," answer k., "it's only a dog yelp in the yard." 
there was no sound from the servitor so he added, "you can go back to 
what you were doing." he did not want to become involved with a 
conversation with them, and so he leant out of the window. a little 
while later, when he look out in the corridor, they had already gone. 
now, k. remain at the window, he did not dare go back into the junk 
room, and he did not want to go home either. the yard he look down 
into was small and rectangular, all around it were offices, all the 
window were now dark and only those at the very top caught a reflection 
of the moon. k try hard to see into the dark of one corner of the 
yard, where a few handcart had been left behind one another. he felt 
anguish at not have been able to prevent the flogging, but that was 
not his fault, if franz had not scream like that - clearly it must 
have cause a great deal of pain but it's important to maintain control 
of oneself at important moments - if franz had not scream then it was 
at least highly probable that k. would have been able to dissuade the 
whip-man. if all the junior officer were contemptible why would the 
whip-man, whose position was the most inhumane of all, be any exception, 
and k. had notice very clearly how his eyes had lit up when he saw the 
banknotes, he had obviously only seem serious about the flogging to 
raise the level of the bribe a little. and k. had not been ungenerous, 
he really had want to get the policemen freed; if he really had now 
begun to do something against the degeneracy of the court then it was a 
matter of course that he would have to do something here as well. but 
of course, it became impossible for him to do anything as soon as franz 
start screaming. k. could not possibly have let the junior bank 
staff, and perhaps even all sort of other people, come along and catch 
him by surprise as he haggle with those people in the junk room. 
nobody could really expect that sort of sacrifice of him. if that had 
been his intention then it would almost have been easier, k. would have 
taken his own clothes off and offer himself to the whip-man in the 
policemen's place. the whip-man would certainly not have accept this 
substitute anyway, as in that way he would have seriously violate his 
duty without gain any benefit. he would most likely have violate 
his duty twice over, as court employee were probably under orders not 
to cause any harm to k. while he was facing charges, although there may 
have been special conditions in force here. however things stood, k. 
was able to do no more than throw the door shut, even though that would 
still do nothing to remove all the danger he faced. it was regrettable 
that he had given franz a shove, and it could only be excuse by the 
heat of the moment. 

in the distance, he heard the steps of the servitors; he did not 
want them to be too aware of his presence, so he closed the window and 
walk towards the main staircase. at the door of the junk room he 
stop and listen for a little while. all was silent. the two 
policemen were entire at the whip-man's mercy; he could have beaten 
them to death. k. reach his hand out for the door handle but drew it 
sudden back. he was no long in any position to help anyone, and the 
servitor would soon be back; he did, though, promise himself that he 
would raise the matter again with somebody and see that, as far as it 
was in his power, those who really were guilty, the high official whom 
nobody had so far dare point out to him, received their due punishment. 
as he went down the main stairway at the front of the bank, he look 
careful round at everyone who was passing, but there was no girl to be 
seen who might have been wait for somebody, not even within some 
distance from the bank. franz's claim that his bride was wait for 
him was thus shown to be a lie, albeit one that was forgivable and 
intended only to elicit more sympathy. 

the policemen were still on k.'s mind all through the following 
day; he was unable to concentrate on his work and had to stay in his 
office a little long than the previous day so that he could finish it. 
on the way home, as he pass by the junk room again, he open its door 
as if that had been his habit. instead of the dark he expected, he 
saw everything unchanged from the previous evening, and did not know how 
he should respond. everything was exactly the same as he had seen it 
when he had open the door the previous evening. the form and 
bottle of ink just inside the doorway, the whip-man with his cane, the 
two policemen, still undressed, the candle on the shelf, and the two 
policemen began to wail and call out "mr. k.!" k. slam the door 
immediately shut, and even thump on it with his fist as if that would 
shut it all the firmer. almost in tears, he ran to the servitor 
working quiet at the copy machine. "go and get that junk room 
clear out!" he shouted, and, in amazement, they stop what they were 
doing. "it should have been done long ago, we're sink in dirt!" they 
would be able to do the job the next day, k. nodded, it was too late in 
the evening to make them do it there and then as he had originally 
intended. he sat down brief in order to keep them near him for a 
little longer, look through a few of the copy to give the impression 
that he was check them and then, as he saw that they would not dare 
to leave at the same time as himself, went home tired and with his mind 
numb. 




chapter six 
k.'s uncle - leni 

one afternoon - k. was very busy at the time, get the post 
ready - k.'s uncle karl, a small country land owner, came into the room, 
push his way between two of the staff who were bring in some 
papers. k. had long expect his uncle to appear, but the sight of him 
now shock k. far less than the prospect of it had done a long time 
before. his uncle was bound to come, k. had been sure of that for about 
a month. he already thought at the time he could see how his uncle 
would arrive, slightly bowed, his batter panama hat in his left hand, 
his right hand already stretch out over the desk long before he was 
close enough as he rush careless towards k. knock over everything 
that was in his way. k.'s uncle was always in a hurry, as he suffer 
from the unfortunate belief that he had a number of things to do while he 
was in the big city and had to settle all of them in one day - his 
visit were only ever for one day - and at the same time thought he 
could not forgo any conversation or piece of business or pleasure that 
might arise by chance. uncle karl was k.'s former guardian, and so k. 
was duty-bound to help him in all of this as well as to offer him a bed 
for the night. 'i'm haunt by a ghost from the country', he would say. 

as soon as they had greet each other - k. had invite him to sit 
in the armchair but uncle karl had no time for that - he said he want 
to speak brief with k. in private. "it is necessary," he said with a 
tired gulp, "it is necessary for my peace of mind." k. immediately 
sent the junior staff from the room and told them to let no-one in. 
"what's this that i've been hearing, josef?" cry k.'s uncle when they 
were alone, as he sat on the table shove various papers under himself 
without look at them to make himself more comfortable. k. said 
nothing, he knew what was coming, but, sudden relieved from the effort 
of the work he had been doing, he gave way to a pleasant lassitude and 
look out the window at the other side of the street. from where he 
sat, he could see just a small, triangular section of it, part of the 
empty wall of house between two shop windows. "you're staring out the 
window!" call out his uncle, raise his arms, "for god's sake, josef, 
give me an answer! is it true, can it really be true?" "uncle karl," 
said k., wrench himself back from his daydreaming, "i really don't 
know what it is you want of me." "josef," said his uncle in a warning 
tone, "as far as i know, you've always told the truth. am i to take 
what you've just said as a bad sign?" "i think i know what it is you 
want," said k. obediently, "i expect you've heard about my trial." 
"that's right," answer his uncle with a slow nod, "i've heard about 
your trial." "who did you hear it from, then?" ask k. "erna wrote to 
me," said his uncle, "she doesn't have much contact with you, it's true, 
you don't pay very much attention to her, i'm afraid to say, but she 
learned about it nonetheless. i got her letter today and, of course, i 
came straight here. and for no other reason, but it seem to me that 
this is reason enough. i can read you out the part of the letter that 
concern you." he drew the letter out from his wallet. "here it is. 
she writes; 'i have not seen josef for a long time, i was in the bank 
last week but josef was so busy that they would not let me through; i 
wait there for nearly an hour but then i had to go home as i had my 
piano lesson. i would have like to have spoken to him, maybe there 
will be a chance another time. he sent me a big box of chocolate for 
my name-day, that was very nice and attentive of him. i forgot to tell 
you about it when i wrote, and i only remember now that you ask me about 
it. chocolate, as i am sure you are aware, disappear straight away in 
this lodging house, almost as soon as you know somebody has given you 
chocolate it is gone. but there is something else i want to tell you 
about josef. like i said, they would not let me through to see him at 
the bank because he was negotiate with some gentleman just then. 
after i had been wait quiet for quite a long time i ask one of 
the staff whether his meeting would last much longer. he said it might 
well do, as it was probably about the legal proceedings, he said, that 
were being conduct against him. i ask what sort of legal 
proceedings it was that were being conduct against the chief clerk, 
and whether he was not making some mistake, but he said he was not 
making any mistake, there were legal proceedings underway and even that 
they were about something quite serious, but he did not know any more 
about it. he would have like to have been of some help to the chief 
clerk himself, as the chief clerk was a gentleman, good and honest, but 
he did not know what it was he could do and merely hope there would be 
some influential gentlemen who would take his side. i'm sure that is 
what will happen and that everything will turn out for the best in the 
end, but in the mean time things do not look at all good, and you can 
see that from the mood of the chief clerk himself. of course, i did not 
place too much importance on this conversation, and even did my best to 
put the bank clerk's mind at rest, he was quite a simple man. i told 
him he was not to speak to anyone else about this, and i think it is all 
just a rumour, but i still think it might be good if you, dear father, 
if you look into the matter the next time you visit. it will be easy 
for you to find out more detail and, if it is really necessary, to do 
something about it through the great and influential people you know. 
but if it is not necessary, and that is what seem most likely, then at 
least your daughter will soon have the chance to embrace you and i look 
forward to it.' - she's a good child," said k.'s uncle when he had 
finished reading, and wipe a few tear from his eyes. k. nodded. with 
all the different disrupt he had had recently he had completely 
forgotten about erna, even her birthday, and the story of the chocolate 
had clearly just been invent so that he wouldn't get in trouble with 
his aunt and uncle. it was very touching, and even the theatre tickets, 
which he would regularly send her from then on, would not be enough to 
repay her, but he really did not feel, now, that it was right for him 
to visit her in her lodgings and hold conversation with a little, 
eighteen year old schoolgirl. "and what do you have to say about that?" 
ask his uncle, who had forgotten all his rush and excitement as he read 
the letter, and seem to be about to read it again. "yes, uncle," said 
k., "it is true." "true!" call out his uncle. "what is true? how can 
this be true? what sort of trial is it? not a criminal trial, i hope?" 
"it's a criminal trial," answer k. "and you sit quiet here while 
you've got a criminal trial round your neck?" shout his uncle, get 
ever louder. "the more calm i am, the better it will be for the 
outcome," said k. in a tired voice, "don't worry." "how can i help 
worrying?!" shout his uncle, "josef, my dear josef, think about 
yourself, about your family, think about our good name! up till now, 
you've always been our pride, don't now become our disgrace. i don't 
like the way you're behaving," he said, look at k. with his head at 
an angle, "that's not how an innocent man behave when he's accused of 
something, not if he's still got any strength in him. just tell me what 
it's all about so that i can help you. it's something to do with the 
bank, i take it?" "no," said k. as he stood up, "and you're speak 
too loud, uncle, i expect one of the staff is listen at the door and 
i find that rather unpleasant. it's best if we go somewhere else, then 
i can answer all your questions, as far as i can. and i know very well 
that i have to account to the family for what i do." "you certainly 
do!" his uncle shouted, "quite right, you do. now just get a move on, 
josef, hurry up now!" "i still have a few document i need to prepare," 
said k., and, use the intercom, he summon his deputy who enter a 
few moments later. k.'s uncle, still angry and excited, gesture with 
his hand to show that k. had summon him, even though there was no need 
whatever to do so. k. stood in front of the desk and explain to the 
young man, who listen calm and attentive, what would need to be done 
that day in his absence, speak in a calm voice and making use of 
various documents. the presence of k.'s uncle while this was go on 
was quite disturbing; he did not listen to what was being said, but at 
first he stood there with eyes wide open and nervous biting his lips. 
then he began to walk up and down the room, stop now and then at the 
window, or stood in front of a picture always making various 
exclamation such as, "that is total incomprehensible to me!" or "now 
just tell me, what are you supposed to make of that?!" the young man 
pretended to notice nothing of this and listen to k.'s instruction 
through to the end, he made a few notes, bowed to both k. and his uncle 
and then left the room. k.'s uncle had turn his back to him and was 
look out the window, bunch up the curtains with his outstretched 
hands. the door had hardly closed when he call out, "at last! now 
that he's stop jump about we can go too!" once they were in the 
front hall of the bank, where several member of staff were standing 
about and where, just then, the deputy director was walking across, 
there was unfortunately no way of stopping k.'s uncle from continual 
ask question about the trial. "now then, josef," he began, lightly 
acknowledge the bow from those around them as they passed, "tell me 
everything about this trial; what sort of trial is it?" k. made a few 
comment which convey little information, even laugh a little, and 
it was only when they reach the front steps that he explain to his 
uncle that he had not want to talk openly in front of those people. 
"quite right," said his uncle, "but now start talking." with his head 
to one side, and smoking his cigar in short, impatient draughts, he 
listened. "first of all, uncle," said k., "it's not a trial like you'd 
have in a normal courtroom." "so much the worse," said his uncle. 
"how's that?" ask k., look at him. "what i mean is, that's for the 
worse," he repeated. they were standing on the front steps of the bank; 
as the doorkeeper seem to be listen to what they were saying k. 
drew his uncle down further, where they were absorb into the bustle of 
the street. his uncle took k.'s arm and stop ask question with 
such urgent about the trial, they walk on for a while in silence. 
"but how did all this come about?" he eventually asked, stopping 
abrupt enough to startle the people walking behind, who had to avoid 
walking into him. "things like this don't come all of a sudden, they 
start develop a long time beforehand, there must have been warning 
sign of it, why didn't you write to me? you know i'd do anything for 
you, to some extent i am still your guardian, and until today that's 
something i was proud of. i'll still help you, of course i will, only 
now, now that the trial is already underway, it make it very difficult. 
but whatever; the best thing now is for you to take a short holiday 
stay with us in the country. you've lost weight, i can see that now. 
the country life will give you strength, that will be good, there's 
bound to be a lot of hard work ahead of you. but besides that it'll be 
a way of get you away from the court, to some extent. here they've 
got every means of showing the powers at their disposal and they're 
automatic bound to use them against you; in the country they'll 
either have to delegate authority to different body or just have to 
try and bother you by letter, telegram or telephone. and that's bound 
to weaken the effect, it won't release you from them but it'll give you 
room to breathe." "you could forbid me to leave," said k., who had been 
drawn slightly into his uncle's way of thinking by what he had been 
saying. "i didn't think you would do it," said his uncle thoughtfully, 
"you won't suffer too much loss of power by moving away." k. grasp 
his uncle under the arm to prevent him stopping still and said, "i 
thought you'd think all this is less important than i do, and now you're 
taking it so hard." "josef," call his uncle try to disentangle 
himself from him so that he could stop walking, but k. did not let go, 
"you've completely changed, you use to be so astute, are you lose it 
now? do you want to lose the trial? do you realise what that would 
mean? that would mean you would be simply destroyed. and that everyone 
you know would be pull down with you or at the very least humiliated, 
disgrace right down to the ground. josef, pull yourself together. the 
way you're so indifferent about it, it's driving me mad. look at you 
i can almost believe that old saying: 'having a trial like that means 
lose a trial like that'." "my dear uncle," said k., "it won't do any 
good to get excited, it's no good for you to do it and it'd be no good 
for me to do it. the case won't be won by get excited, and please 
admit that my practical experience count for something, just as i have 
always and still do respect your experience, even when it surprise me. 
you say that the family will also be affected by this trial; i really 
can't see how, but that's beside the point and i'm quite willing to 
follow your instruction in all of this. only, i don't see any 
advantage in stay in the country, not even for you, as that would 
indicate flight and a sense of guilt. and besides, although i am more 
subject to persecution if i stay in the city i can also press the matter 
forward better here." "you're right," said his uncle in a tone that 
seem to indicate they were finally coming close to each other, "i 
just made the suggestion because, as i saw it, if you stay in the city 
the case will be put in danger by your indifference to it, and i thought 
it was better if i did the work for you. but will you push things 
forward yourself with all your strength, if so, that will naturally be 
far better." "we're agree then," said k. "and do you have any 
suggestion for what i should do next?" "well, naturally i'll have to 
think about it," said his uncle, "you must bear in mind that i've been 
living in the country for twenty years now, almost without a break, you 
lose your ability to deal with matter like this. but i do have some 
important connection with several people who, i expect, know their way 
around these things better than i do, and to contact them is a matter of 
course. out there in the country i've been get out of condition, 
i'm sure you're already aware of that. it's only at times like this 
that you notice it yourself. and this affair of yours came largely 
unexpected, although, oddly enough, i had expect something of the sort 
after i'd read erna's letter, and today when i saw your face i knew it 
with almost total certainty. but all that is by the by, the important 
thing now is, we have no time to lose." even while he was still 
speaking, k.'s uncle had stood on tiptoe to summon a taxi and now he 
pull k. into the car behind himself as he call out an address to the 
driver. "we're go now to see dr. huld, the lawyer," he said, "we 
were at school together. i'm sure you know the name, don't you? no? 
well that is odd. he's got a very good reputation as a defence 
barrister and for working with the poor. but i esteem him especially as 
someone you can trust." "it's alright with me, whatever you do," said 
k., although he was made uneasy by the rush and urgent way his uncle 
was dealing with the matter. it was not very encouraging, as the 
accused, be to taken to a lawyer for poor people. "i didn't know," he 
said, "that you could take on a lawyer in matter like this." "well of 
course you can," said his uncle, "that go without saying. why 
wouldn't you take on a lawyer? and now, so that i'm properly instruct 
in this matter, tell me what's been happening so far." k. instantly 
began telling his uncle about what had been happening, holding nothing 
back - being completely open with him was the only way that k. could 
protest at his uncle's belief that the trial was a great disgrace. he 
mention miss bürstner's name just once and in passing, but that did 
nothing to diminish his open about the trial as miss bürstner had no 
connection with it. as he spoke, he look out the window and saw how, 
just then, they were get close to the suburb where the court 
offices were. he drew this to his uncle's attention, but he did not 
find the coincidence especially remarkable. the taxi stop in front 
of a dark building. k.'s uncle knock at the very first door at ground 
level; while they wait he smiled, showing his big teeth, and 
whispered, "eight o'clock; not the usual sort of time to be visiting a 
lawyer, but huld won't mind it from me." two large, black eyes appear 
in the spy-hatch in the door, they stare at the two visitor for a 
while and then disappeared; the door, however, did not open. k. and his 
uncle confirmed to each other the fact that they had seen the two eyes. 
"a new maid, afraid of strangers," said k.'s uncle, and knock again. 
the eyes appear once more. this time they seem almost sad, but the 
open gas flame that burn with a hiss close above their head gave off 
little light and that may have merely create an illusion. "open the 
door," call k.'s uncle, raise his fist against it, "we are friends 
of dr. huld, the lawyer!" "dr. huld is ill," whisper someone behind 
them. in a doorway at the far end of a narrow passage stood a man in 
his dressing gown, give them this information in an extremely quiet 
voice. k.'s uncle, who had already been made very angry by the long 
wait, turn abrupt round and retorted, "ill? you say he's ill?" and 
strode towards the gentleman in a way that seem almost threatening, as 
if he were the illness himself. "they've open the door for you, now," 
said the gentleman, point at the door of the lawyer. he pull his 
dressing gown together and disappeared. the door had indeed been 
opened, a young girl - k. recognise the dark, slightly bulge eyes - 
stood in the hallway in a long white apron, holding a candle in her 
hand. "next time, open up sooner!" said k.'s uncle instead of a 
greeting, while the girl made a slight curtsey. "come along, josef," he 
then said to k. who was slow moving over towards the girl. "dr. huld 
is unwell," said the girl as k.'s uncle, without stopping, rush 
towards one of the doors. k. continue to look at the girl in amaze 
as she turn round to block the way into the living room, she had a 
round face like a puppy's, not only the pale cheek and the chin were 
round but the temple and the hairline were too. "josef!" call his 
uncle once more, and he ask the girl, "it's trouble with his heart, is 
it?" "i think it is, sir," said the girl, who by now had found time to 
go ahead with the candle and open the door into the room. in one corner 
of the room, where the light of the candle did not reach, a face with a 
long beard look up from the bed. "leni, who's this coming in?" ask 
the lawyer, unable to recognise his guest because he was dazzle by the 
candle. "it's your old friend, albert," said k.'s uncle. "oh, albert," 
said the lawyer, fall back onto his pillow as if this visit meant he 
would not need to keep up appearances. "is it really as bad as that?" 
ask k.'s uncle, sitting on the edge of the bed. "i don't believe it 
is. it's a recurrence of your heart trouble and it'll pass over like 
the other times." "maybe," said the lawyer quietly, "but it's just as 
much trouble as it's ever been. i can hardly breathe, i can't sleep at 
all and i'm get weak by the day." "i see," said k.'s uncle, 
pressing his panama hat firm against his knee with his big hand. 
"that is bad news. but are you get the right sort of care? and 
it's so depress in here, it's so dark. it's a long time since i was 
last here, but it seem to me friendly then. even your young lady 
here doesn't seem to have much life in her, unless she's just 
pretending." the maid was still standing by the door with the candle; 
as far as could be made out, she was watch k. more than she was 
watch his uncle even while the latter was still speak about her. 
k. leant against a chair that he had pushed near to the girl. "when 
you're as ill as i am," said the lawyer, "you need to have peace. i 
don't find it depressing." after a short pause he added, "and leni 
looks after me well, she's a good girl." but that was not enough to 
persuade k.'s uncle, he had visibly taken against his friend's care 
and, even though he did not contradict the invalid, he persecute her 
with his scowl as she went over to the bed, put the candle on the 
bedside table and, leaning over the bed, made a fuss of him by tidy 
the pillows. k.'s uncle nearly forgot the need to show any 
consideration for the man who lay ill in bed, he stood up, walk up and 
down behind the carer, and k. would not have been surprise if he had 
grab hold of her skirt behind her and drag her away from the bed. 
k. himself look on calmly, he was not even disappointed at finding the 
lawyer unwell, he had been able to do nothing to oppose the enthusiasm 
his uncle had develop for the matter, he was glad that this enthusiasm 
had now been distracted without his have to do anything about it. his 
uncle, probably simply wish to be offensive to the lawyer's 
attendant, then said, "young lady, now please leave us alone for a 
while, i have some personal matter to discuss with my friend." dr. 
huld's care was still leant far over the invalid's bed and smooth 
out the cloth covering the wall next to it, she merely turn her head 
and then, in striking contrast with the anger that first stop k.'s 
uncle from speak and then let the words out in a gush, she said very 
quietly, "you can see that dr. huld is so ill that he can't discuss any 
matter at all." it was probably just for the sake of convenience that 
she had repeated the words spoken by k.'s uncle, but an onlooker might 
even have perceive it as mock him and he, of course, jump up as if 
he had just been stabbed. "you damn ...," in the first gurgle of 
his excitement his words could hardly be understood, k. was startle 
even though he had been expect something of the sort and ran to his 
uncle with the intention, no doubt, of close his mouth with both his 
hands. fortunately, though, behind the girl, the invalid raise himself 
up, k.'s uncle made an ugly face as if swallow something disgust 
and then, somewhat calmer, said, "we have naturally not lost our senses, 
not yet; if what i am ask for were not possible i would not be ask 
for it. now please, go!" the care stood up straight by the bed 
directly facing k.'s uncle, k. thought he notice that with one hand she 
was stroke the lawyer's hand. "you can say anything in front of 
leni," said the invalid, in a tone that was unmistakable imploring. 
"it's not my business," said k.'s uncle, "and it's not my secrets." and 
he twist himself round as if wanting to go into no more negotiation 
but give himself a little more time to think. "whose business is it 
then?" ask the lawyer in an exhaust voice as he leant back again. 
"my nephew's," said k.'s uncle, "and i've brought him along with me." 
and he introduce him, "chief clerk josef k." "oh!" said the invalid, 
now with much more life in him, and reach out his hand towards k. "do 
forgive me, i didn't notice you there at all." then he then said to his 
carer, "leni, go," stretch his hand out to her as if this were a 
farewell that would have to last for a long time. this time the girl 
offer no resistance. "so you," he finally said to k.'s uncle, who had 
also calm down and step closer, "you haven't come to visit me 
because i'm ill but you've come on business." the lawyer now look so 
much strong that it seem the idea of being visit because he was 
ill had somehow made him weak, he remain support himself of one 
elbow, which must have been rather tiring, and continual pull at a 
lock of hair in the middle of his beard. "you already look much 
better," said k.'s uncle, "now that that witch has gone outside." he 
interrupt himself, whispered, "i bet you she's listening!" and sprang 
over to the door. but behind the door there was no-one, k.'s uncle came 
back not disappointed, as her not listen seem to him worse than if 
she had been, but probably somewhat embittered. "you're mistaken about 
her," said the lawyer, but did nothing more to defend her; perhaps that 
was his way of indicate that she did not need defending. but in a 
tone that was much more committed he went on, "as far as your nephew's 
affair are concerned, this will be an extremely difficult undertaking 
and i'd count myself lucky if my strength last out long enough for it; 
i'm greatly afraid it won't do, but anyway i don't want to leave 
anything untried; if i don't last out you can always get somebody else. 
to be honest, this matter interests me too much, and i can't bring 
myself to give up the chance of taking some part in it. if my heart 
do total give out then at least it will have found a worthy affair 
to fail in." k. believe he understood not a word of this entire 
speech, he look at his uncle for an explanation but his uncle sat on 
the bedside table with the candle in his hand, a medicine bottle had 
roll off the table onto the floor, he nod to everything the lawyer 
said, agree to everything, and now and then look at k. urge him to 
show the same compliance. maybe k.'s uncle had already told the lawyer 
about the trial. but that was impossible, everything that had happen 
so far spoke against it. so he said, 
"i don't understand ..." "well, maybe i've misunderstood what you've 
been saying," said the lawyer, just as astonish and embarrass as k. 
"perhaps i've been go too fast. what was it you want to speak to 
me about? i thought it was to do with your trial." "of course it is," 
said k.'s uncle, who then ask k., "so what is it you want?" "yes, but 
how is it that you know anything about me and my case?" ask k. "oh, i 
see," said the lawyer with a smile. "i am a lawyer, i move in court 
circles, people talk about various different case and the more 
interesting one stay in your mind, especially when they concern the 
nephew of a friend. there's nothing very remarkable about that." "what 
is it you want, then?" ask k.'s uncle once more, "you seem so uneasy 
about it" "you move in this court's circles?" ask k. "yes," said the 
lawyer. "you're ask question like a child," said k.'s uncle. "what 
circle should i move in, then, if not with member of my own 
discipline?" the lawyer added. it sound so indisputable that k. gave 
no answer at all. "but you work in the high court, not that court in 
the attic," he had want to say but could not bring himself to actually 
utter it. "you have to realise," the lawyer continued, in a tone as if 
he were explain something obvious, unnecessary and incidental, "you 
have to realise that i also derive great advantage for my client from 
mix with those people, and do so in many different ways, it's not 
something you can keep talk about all the time. i'm at a bit of a 
disadvantage now, of course, because of my illness, but i still get 
visit from some good friends of mine at the court and i learn one or 
two things. it might even be that i learn more than many of those who 
are in the best of health and spend all day in court. and i'm receiving 
a very welcome visit right now, for instance." and he pointed into a 
dark corner of the room. "where?" ask k., almost uncouth in his 
surprise. he look round uneasily; the little candle gave off far too 
little light to reach as far as the wall opposite. and then, something 
did indeed begin to move there in the corner. in the light of the 
candle held up by k.'s uncle an elderly gentleman could be seen sitting 
beside a small table. he had been sitting there for so long without 
being notice that he could hardly have been breathing. now he stood up 
with a great deal of fuss, clearly unhappy that attention had been drawn 
to him. it was as if, by flap his hand about like short wings, he 
hope to deflect any introduction and greetings, as if he want on no 
account to disturb the other by his presence and seem to be exhort 
them to leave him back in the dark and forget about his being there. 
that, however, was something that could no long be grant him. "you 
took us by surprise, you see," said the lawyer in explanation, 
cheerful indicate to the gentleman that he should come closer, 
which, slowly, hesitatingly, look all around him, but with a certain 
dignity, he did. "the office director - oh, yes, forgive me, i haven't 
introduce you - this is my friend albert k., this is his nephew, the 
chief clerk josef k., and this is the office director - so, the office 
director was kind enough to pay me a visit. it's only possible to 
appreciate just how valuable a visit like this is if you've been let 
into the secret of what a pile of work the office director has heap 
over him. well, he came anyway, we were have a peaceful chat, as far 
as i was able when i'm so weak, and although we hadn't told leni she 
mustn't let anyone in as we weren't expect anyone, we still would 
rather have remain alone, but then along came you, albert, thumping 
your fist on the door, the office director move over into the corner 
pull his table and chair with him, but now it turn out we might 
have, that is, if that's what you wish, we might have something to 
discuss with each other and it would be good if we can all come back 
together again. - office director ...," he said with his head on one 
side, point with a humble smile to an armchair near the bed. "i'm 
afraid i'll only be able to stay a few minutes more," smile the office 
director as he spread himself out in the armchair and look at the 
clock. "business calls. but i wouldn't want to miss the chance of 
meeting a friend of my friend." he inclined his head slightly toward 
k.'s uncle, who seem very happy with his new acquaintance, but he was 
not the sort of person to express his feelings of deference and 
respond to the office director's words with embarrassed, but loud, 
laughter. a horrible sight! k. was able to quiet watch everything as 
nobody paid any attention to him, the office director took over as 
leader of the conversation as seem to be his habit once he had been 
call forward, the lawyer listen attentive with his hand to his 
ear, his initial weakness have perhaps only had the function of 
driving away his new visitors, k.'s uncle serve as candle-bearer - 
balance the candle on his thigh while the office director frequent 
glance nervous at it - and was soon free of his embarrassment and was 
quick enchant not only by the office director's speak manner but 
also by the gentle, wave hand-movements with which he accompany it. 
k., leaning against the bedpost, was total ignore by the office 
director, perhaps deliberately, and serve the old man only as audience. 
and besides, he had hardly any idea what the conversation was about and 
his thought soon turn to the care assistant and the ill treatment she 
had suffer from his uncle. soon after, he began to wonder whether he 
had not seen the office director somewhere before, perhaps among the 
people who were at his first hearing. he may have been mistaken, but 
thought the office director might well have been among the old gentlemen 
with the thin beard in the first row. 

there was then a noise that everyone heard from the hallway as if 
something of porcelain were being broken. "i'll go and see what's 
happened," said k., who slow left the room as if give the other the 
chance to stop him. he had hardly step into the hallway, finding his 
bearings in the dark with his hand still firm holding the door, 
when another small hand, much small than k.'s own, placed itself on 
his and gently shut the door. it was the care who had been wait 
there. "nothing has happened," she whisper to him, "i just threw a 
plate against the wall to get you out of there." "i was thinking about 
you, as well," reply k. uneasily. "so much the better," said the 
carer. "come with me". a few steps along, they came to a frost glass 
door which the care open for him. "come in here," she said. it was 
clearly the lawyer's office, fitted out with old, heavy furniture, as 
far as could be seen in the moonlight which now illuminate just a 
small, rectangular section of the floor by each of the three big 
windows. "this way," said the carer, point to a dark trunk with a 
carved, wooden backrest. when he had sat down, k. continue to look 
round the room, it was a large room with a high ceiling, the client of 
this lawyer for the poor must have felt quite lost in it. k. thought he 
could see the little steps with which visitor would approach the 
massive desk. but then he forgot about all of this and had eyes only 
for the care who sat very close beside him, almost pressing him against 
the armrest. "i did think," she said "you would come out here to me by 
yourself without me have to call you first. it was odd. first you stare 
at me as soon as you come in, and then you keep me waiting. and you 
ought to call me leni, too," she add quick and suddenly, as if no 
moment of this conversation should be lost. "gladly," said k. "but as 
for its being odd, leni, that's easy to explain. firstly, i had to 
listen to what the old men were saying and couldn't leave without a good 
reason, but second i'm not a bold person, if anything i'm quite shy, 
and you, leni, you didn't really look like you could be won over in one 
stroke, either." "that's not it," said leni, lay one arm on the 
armrest and look at k., "you didn't like me, and i don't suppose you 
like me now, either." "liking wouldn't be very much," said k., 
evasively. "oh!" she exclaim with a smile, thus making use of k.'s 
comment to gain an advantage over him. so k. remain silent for a 
while. by now, he had become use to the dark in the room and was 
able to make out various fixture and fittings. he was especially 
impress by a large picture hanging to the right of the door, he leant 
forward in order to see it better. it depict a man wearing a judge's 
robes; he was sitting on a lofty throne gilded in a way that shone forth 
from the picture. the odd thing about the picture was that this judge 
was not sitting there in dignified calm but had his left arm pressed 
against the back and armrest, his right arm, however, was completely 
free and only grasp the armrest with his hand, as if about to jump up 
any moment in vigorous outrage and make some decisive comment or even to 
pass sentence. the accused was probably meant to be imagine at the 
foot of the steps, the top one of which could be seen in the picture, 
cover with a yellow carpet. "that might be my judge," said k., 
point to the picture with one finger. "i know him," said leni 
look up at the picture, "he come here quite often. that picture is 
from when he was young, but he can never have look anything like it, 
as he's tiny, minute almost. but despite that, he had himself made to 
look big in the picture as he's madly vain, just like everyone round 
here. but even i'm vain and that make me very unhappy that you don't 
like me." k. reply to that last comment merely by embrace leni and 
drawing her towards him, she lay her head quiet on his shoulder. to 
the rest of it, though, he said, "what rank is he?" "he's an examine 
judge," she said, taking hold of the hand with which k. held her and 
play with his fingers. "just an examine judge once again," said k. 
in disappointment, "the senior official keep themselves hidden. but 
here he is sitting on a throne." "that's all just made up," said leni 
with her face bent over k.'s hand, "really he's sitting on a kitchen 
chair with an old horse blanket fold over it. but do you have to be 
always thinking about your trial?" she add slowly. "no, not at all," 
said k., "i probably even think too little about it." "that's not the 
mistake you're making," said leni, "you're too unyielding, that's what 
i've heard." "who said that?" ask k., he felt her body against his 
chest and look down on her rich, dark, tightly-bound hair. "i'd be 
saying too much if i told you that," answer leni. "please don't ask 
for names, but do stop making these mistake of yours, stop being so 
unyielding, there's nothing you can do to defend yourself from this 
court, you have to confess. so confess to them as soon as you get the 
chance. it's only then that they give you the chance to get away, not 
till then. only, without help from outside even that's impossible, but 
you needn't worry about get this help as i want to help you myself." 
"you understand a lot about this court and what sort of trick are 
needed," said k. as he lift her, since she was pressing in much too 
close to him, onto his lap. "that's alright, then," she said, and made 
herself comfortable on his lap by smooth out her skirt and adjust 
her blouse. then she hung both her arms around his neck, leant back and 
took a long look at him. "and what if i don't confess, could you not 
help me then?" ask k. to test her out. i'm accumulate women to help 
me, he thought to himself almost in amazement, first miss bürstner, then 
the court usher's wife, and now this little care assistant who seem to 
have some incomprehensible need for me. the way she sit on my lap as 
if it were her proper place! "no," answer leni, slow shake her 
head, "i couldn't help you then. but you don't want my help anyway, it 
means nothing to you, you're too stubborn and won't be persuaded." 
then, after a while she asked, "do you have a lover?" "no," said k. 
"oh, you must have," she said. "well, i have really," said k. "just 
think, i've even betray her while i'm carry her photograph with 
me." leni insist he show her a photograph of elsa, and then, hunch 
on his lap, studied the picture closely. the photograph was not one 
that had been taken while elsa was pose for it, it show her just 
after she had been in a wild dance such as she like to do in wine bars, 
her skirt was still flung out as she span round, she had placed her 
hand on her firm hip and, with her neck held taut, look to one side 
with a laugh; you could not see from the picture whom her laugh was 
intended for. "she's very tight laced," said leni, point to the 
place where she thought this could be seen. "i don't like her, she's 
clumsy and crude. but maybe she's gentle and friendly towards you, 
that's the impression you get from the picture. big, strong girl like 
that often don't know how to be anything but gentle and friendly. would 
she be capable of sacrifice herself for you, though?" "no," said k., 
"she isn't gentle or friendly, and nor would she be capable of 
sacrifice herself for me. but i've never yet ask any of those 
things of her. i've never look at this picture as close as you." 
"you can't think much of her, then," said leni. "she can't be your lover 
after all." "yes she is," said k., "i'm not go to take my word back 
on that." "well she might be your lover now, then," said leni, "but you 
wouldn't miss her much if you lost her or if you exchange her for 
somebody else, me for instance." "that is certainly conceivable," said 
k. with a smile, "but she do have one major advantage over you, she 
know nothing about my trial, and even if she did she wouldn't think 
about it. she wouldn't try to persuade me to be less unyielding." "well 
that's no advantage," said leni. "if she's got no advantage other than 
that, i can keep on hoping. has she got any bodily defects?" "'bodily 
defects'?" ask k. "yeah," said leni, "as i do have a bodily defect, 
just a little one. look." she spread the middle and ring finger of 
her right hand apart from each other. between those finger the flap of 
skin connect them reach up almost as far as the top joint of the 
little finger. in the darkness, k. did not see at first what it was she 
want to show him, so she led his hand to it so that he could feel. 
"what a freak of nature," said k., and when he had taken a look at the 
whole hand he added, "what a pretty claw!" leni look on with a kind 
of pride as k. repeatedly open and closed her two finger in 
amazement, until, finally, he brief kiss them and let go. "oh!" she 
immediately exclaimed, "you kiss me!" hurriedly, and with her mouth 
open, she clamber up k.'s lap with her knees. he was almost aghast as 
he look up at her, now that she was so close to him there was a 
bitter, irritate smell from her, like pepper, she grasp his head, 
leant out over him, and bit and kiss his neck, even biting into his 
hair. "i've taken her place!" she exclaim from time to time. "just 
look, now you've taken me instead of her!" just then, her knee slip 
out and, with a little cry, she nearly fell down onto the carpet, k. 
try to hold her by putt his arms around her and was pull down 
with her. "now you're mine," she said. her last words to him as he 
left were, "here's the key to the door, come whenever you want", and she 
plant an undirected kiss on his back. when he step out the front 
door there was a light rain falling, he was about to go to the middle of 
the street to see if he could still glimpse leni at the window when k.'s 
uncle leapt out of a car that k., thinking of other things, had not seen 
wait outside the building. he took hold of k. by both arms and 
shove him against the door as if he want to nail him to it. "young 
man," he shouted, "how could you do a thing like that?! things were 
go well with this business of yours, now you've cause it terrible 
damage. you slip off with some dirty, little thing who, moreover, is 
obviously the lawyer's beloved, and stay away for hours. you don't even 
try to find an excuse, don't try to hide anything, no, you're quite open 
about it, you run off with her and stay there. and meanwhile we're 
sitting there, your uncle who's go to such effort for you, the lawyer 
who needs to be won over to your side, and above all the office 
director, a very important gentleman who is in direct command of your 
affair in its present stage. we want to discuss how best to help you, 
i had to handle the lawyer very carefully, he had to handle the office 
director carefully, and you had most reason of all to at least give me 
some support. instead of which you stay away. eventually we couldn't 
keep up the pretence any longer, but these are polite and highly capable 
men, they didn't say anything about it so as to spare my feelings but in 
the end not even they could continue to force themselves and, as they 
couldn't speak about the matter in hand, they became silent. we sat 
there for several minutes, listen to see whether you wouldn't finally 
come back. all in vain. in the end the office director stood up, as he 
had stay far long than he had originally intended, made his 
farewell, look at me in sympathy without being able to help, he wait 
at the door for a long time although it's more than i can understand why 
he was being so good, and then he went. i, of course, was glad he'd 
gone, i'd been holding my breath all this time. all this had even more 
affect on the lawyer lie there ill, when i took my leave of him, the 
good man, he was quite unable to speak. you have probably contribute 
to his total collapse and so brought the very man who you are dependent 
on close to his death. and me, your own uncle, you leave me here in 
the rain - just feel this, i'm wet right through - wait here for 
hours, sick with worry." 




chapter seven 
lawyer - manufacturer - painter 

one winter morning - snow was fall in the dull light outside - 
k. was sitting in his office, already extremely tired despite the early 
hour. he had told the servitor he was engaged in a major piece of work 
and none of the junior staff should be allow in to see him, so he 
would not be disturbed by them at least. but instead of working he 
turn round in his chair, slow move various item around his desk, 
but then, without being aware of it, he lay his arm stretch out on the 
desk top and sat there immobile with his head sunk down on his chest. 

he was no long able to get the thought of the trial out of his 
head. he had often wonder whether it might not be a good idea to work 
out a written defence and hand it in to the court. it would contain a 
short description of his life and explain why he had act the way he 
had at each event that was in any way important, whether he now 
considered he had act well or ill, and his reason for each. there 
was no doubt of the advantage a written defence of this sort would have 
over rely on the lawyer, who was anyway not without his shortcomings. 
k. had no idea what action the lawyer was taking; it was certainly not 
a lot, it was more than a month since the lawyer had summon him, and 
none of the previous discussion had given k. the impression that this 
man would be able to do much for him. most importantly, he had ask 
him hardly any questions. and there were so many question here to be 
asked. ask question were the most important thing. k. had the 
feeling that he would be able to ask all the question need here 
himself. the lawyer, in contrast, did not ask question but did all the 
talk himself or sat silent facing him, leant forward slightly over 
the desk, probably because he was hard of hearing, pull on a strand of 
hair in the middle of his beard and look down at the carpet, perhaps 
at the very spot where k. had lain with leni. now and then he would 
give k. some vague warning of the sort you give to children. his 
speech were as pointless as they were boring, and k. decided that when 
the final bill came he would pay not a penny for them. once the lawyer 
thought he had humiliate k. sufficiently, he usually start something 
that would raise his spirits again. he had already, he would then say, 
won many such cases, partly or in whole, case which may not really have 
been as difficult as this one but which, on the face of it, had even 
less hope of success. he had a list of these case here in the drawer - 
here he would tap on one or other of the drawers in his desk - but 
could, unfortunately, not show them to k. as they dealt with official 
secrets. nonetheless, the great experience he had acquire through all 
these case would, of course, be of benefit to k. he had, of course, 
begun work straight away and was nearly ready to submit the first 
documents. they would be very important because the first impression 
made by the defence will often determine the whole course of the 
proceedings. unfortunately, though, he would still have to make it 
clear to k. that the first document submit are sometimes not even 
read by the court. they simply put them with the other document and 
point out that, for the time being, questioning and observing the 
accused are much more important than anything written. if the applicant 
become insistent, then they add that before they come to any decision, 
as soon as all the material has been brought together, with due regard, 
of course, to all the documents, then these first document to have been 
submit will also be checked over. but unfortunately, even this is 
not usually true, the first document submit are usually mislaid or 
lost completely, and even if they do keep them right to the end they are 
hardly read, although the lawyer only knew about this from rumour. this 
is all very regrettable, but not entire without its justifications. 
but k. should not forget that the trial would not be public, if the 
court deem it necessary it can be made public but there is no law that 
say it has to be. as a result, the accused and his defence don't have 
access even to the court records, and especially not to the indictment, 
and that means we generally don't know - or at least not precisely - 
what the first document need to be about, which means that if they do 
contain anything of relevance to the case it's only by a lucky 
coincidence. if anything about the individual charge and the reason 
for them come out clearly or can be guess at while the accused is 
being questioned, then it's possible to work out and submit document 
that really direct the issue and present proof, but not before. 
conditions like this, of course, place the defence in a very 
unfavourable and difficult position. but that is what they intend. in 
fact, defence is not really allow under the law, it's only tolerated, 
and there is even some dispute about whether the relevant parts of the 
law imply even that. so strict speaking, there is no such thing as a 
counsel acknowledge by the court, and anyone who come before this 
court as counsel is basically no more than a barrack room lawyer. the 
effect of all this, of course, is to remove the dignity of the whole 
procedure, the next time k. is in the court offices he might like to 
have a look in at the lawyers' room, just so that he's seen it. he 
might well be quite shock by the people he see assemble there. the 
room they've been allocated, with its narrow space and low ceiling, will 
be enough to show what contempt the court has for these people. the 
only light in the room come through a little window that is so high up 
that, if you want to look out of it, you first have to get one of your 
colleague to support you on his back, and even then the smoke from the 
chimney just in front of it will go up your nose and make your face 
black. in the floor of this room - to give yet another example of the 
conditions there - there is a hole that's been there for more than a 
year, it's not so big that a man could fall through, but it is big 
enough for your foot to disappear through it. the lawyers' room is on 
the second floor of the attic; if your foot do go through it will hang 
down into the first floor of the attic underneath it, and right in the 
corridor where the litigant are waiting. it's no exaggeration when 
lawyer say that conditions like that are a disgrace. complaint to the 
management don't have the slightest effect, but the lawyer are strict 
forbidden to alter anything in the room at their own expense. but even 
treat the lawyer in this way has its reasons. they want, as far as 
possible, to prevent any kind of defence, everything should be made the 
responsibility of the accused. not a bad point of view, basically, but 
nothing could be more mistaken than to think from that that lawyer are 
not necessary for the accused in this court. on the contrary, there is 
no court where they are less need than here. this is because 
proceedings are generally kept secret not only from the public but also 
from the accused. only as far as that is possible, of course, but it is 
possible to a very large extent. and the accused doesn't get to see the 
court record either, and it's very difficult to infer what's in the 
court record from what's been said during questioning base on them, 
especially for the accused who is in a difficult situation and is face 
with every possible worry to distract him. this is when the defence 
begins. counsel for the defence are not normally allow to be present 
while the accused is being questioned, so afterwards, and if possible 
still at the door of the interview room, he has to learn what he can 
about it from him and extract whatever he can that might be of use, even 
though what the accused has to report is often very confused. but that 
is not the most important thing, as there's really not a lot that can be 
learned in this way, although in this, as with anything else, a 
competent man will learn more than another. nonetheless, the most 
important thing is the lawyer's personal connections, that's where the 
real value of taking counsel lies. now k. will most likely have already 
learned from his own experience that, among its very lowest orders, the 
court organisation do have its imperfections, the court is strict 
closed to the public, but staff who forget their duty or who take bribe 
do, to some extent, show where the gap are. this is where most lawyer 
will push their way in, this is where bribe are paid and information 
extracted, there have even, in early times at least, been incident 
where document have been stolen. there's no deny that some 
surprising favourable result have been attain for the accused in 
this way, for a limited time, and these petty advocate then strut to 
and fro on the basis of them and attract new clients, but for the 
further course of the proceedings it signify either nothing or nothing 
good. the only things of real value are honest personal contacts, 
contact with higher officials, albeit higher official of the lower 
grades, you understand. that is the only way the progress of the trial 
can be influenced, hardly noticeable at first, it's true, but from then 
on it become more and more visible. there are, of course, not many 
lawyer who can do this, and k. has made a very good choice in this 
matter. there were probably no more than one or two who had as many 
contact as dr. huld, but they don't bother with the company of the 
lawyers' room and have nothing to do with it. this means they have all 
the less contact with the court officials. it is not at all necessary 
for dr. huld to go to the court, wait in the ante-rooms for the 
examine judge to turn up, if they turn up, and try to achieve 
something which, according to the judges' mood is usually more apparent 
than real and most often not even that. no, k. has seen for himself 
that the court officials, including some who are quite high up, come 
forward without being asked, are glad to give information which is fully 
open or at least easy to understand, they discuss the next stage in the 
proceedings, in fact in some case they can be won over and are quite 
willing to adopt the other person's point of view. however, when this 
happens, you should never trust them too far, as however firm they may 
have declared this new point of view in favour of the defendant they 
might well go straight back to their offices and write a report for the 
court that say just the opposite, and might well be even hard on the 
defendant than the original view, the one they insist they've been fully 
dissuade from. and, of course, there's no way of defend yourself 
from this, something said in private is indeed in private and cannot 
then be use in public, it's not something that make it easy for the 
defence to keep those gentlemen's favour. on the other hand, it's also 
true that the gentlemen don't become involved with the defence - which 
will of course be done with great expertise - just for philanthropic 
reason or in order to be friendly, in some respects it would be true 
to say that they, too, have it allocate to them. this is where the 
disadvantage of a court structure that, right from the start, 
stipulate that all proceedings take place in private, come into force. 
in normal, mediocre trial its official have contact with the public, 
and they're very well equip for it, but here they don't; normal 
trial run their course all by themselves, almost, and just need a nudge 
here and there; but when they're face with case that are especially 
difficult they're as lost as they often are with one that are very 
simple; they're forced to spend all their time, day and night, with 
their laws, and so they don't have the right feel for human 
relationships, and that's a serious shortcoming in case like this. 
that's when they come for advice to the lawyer, with a servant behind 
them carry the document which normally are kept so secret. you 
could have seen many gentlemen at this window, gentlemen of whom you 
would least expect it, staring out this window in despair on the street 
below while the lawyer is at his desk study the document so that he 
can give them good advice. and at times like that it's also possible to 
see how exceptional seriously these gentlemen take their profession 
and how they are thrown into great confusion by difficulty which it's 
just not in their nature to overcome. but they're not in an easy 
position, to regard their position as easy would be to do them an 
injustice. the different ranks and hierarchy of the court are 
endless, and even someone who know his way around them cannot always 
tell what's go to happen. but even for the junior officials, the 
proceedings in the courtroom are usually kept secret, so they are 
hardly able to see how the case they work with proceed, court affair 
appear in their range of vision often without their knowing where they 
come from and they move on further without their learning where they go. 
so civil servant like this are not able to learn the things you can 
learn from study the successive stage that individual trial go 
through, the final verdict or the reason for it. they're only allow 
to deal with that part of the trial which the law allocate them, and 
they usually know less about the result of their work after it's left 
them than the defence does, even though the defence will usually stay in 
contact with the accused until the trial is nearly at its end, so that 
the court official can learn many useful things from the defence. 
bearing all this in mind, do it still surprise k. that the official 
are irritate and often express themselves about the litigant in 
unflattere ways - which is an experience share by everyone. all the 
official are irritated, even when they appear calm. this cause many 
difficulty for the junior advocates, of course. there is a story, for 
instance, that has very much the ring of truth about it. it go like 
this: one of the old officials, a good and peaceful man, was dealing 
with a difficult matter for the court which had become very confused, 
especially thanks to the contribution from the lawyers. he had been 
study it for a day and a night without a break - as these official 
are indeed hard working, no-one works as hard as they do. when it was 
nearly morning, and he had been working for twenty-four hour with 
probably very little result, he went to the front entrance, wait there 
in ambush, and every time a lawyer try to enter the building he would 
throw him down the steps. the lawyer gather together down in front 
of the steps and discuss with each other what they should do; on the 
one hand they had actually no right to be allow into the building so 
that there was hardly anything that they could legal do to the 
official and, as i've already mentioned, they would have to be careful 
not to set all the official against them. on the other hand, any day 
not spent in court is a day lost for them and it was a matter of some 
importance to force their way inside. in the end, they agree that they 
would try to tire the old man out. one lawyer after another was sent 
out to run up the steps and let himself be thrown down again, offering 
what resistance he could as long as it was passive resistance, and his 
colleague would catch him at the bottom of the steps. that went on for 
about an hour until the old gentleman, who was already exhaust from 
working all night, was very tired and went back to his office. those 
who were at the bottom of the steps could not believe it at first, so 
they sent somebody out to go and look behind the door to see if there 
really was no-one there, and only then did they all gather together and 
probably didn't even dare to complain, as it's far from being the 
lawyers' job to introduce any improvement in the court system, or even 
to want to. even the most junior lawyer can understand the relationship 
there to some extent, but one significant point is that almost every 
defendant, even very simple people, begin to think of suggestion for 
improve the court as soon as his proceedings have begun, many of them 
often even spend time and energy on the matter that could be spent far 
better elsewhere. the only right thing to do is to learn how to deal 
with the situation as it is. even if it were possible to improve any 
detail of it - which is anyway no more than superstitious nonsense - the 
best that they could achieve, although do themselves incalculable 
harm in the process, is that they will have attract the special 
attention of the official for any case that come up in the future, and 
the official are always ready to seek revenge. never attract attention 
to yourself! stay calm, however much it go against your character! 
try to gain some insight into the size of the court organism and how, to 
some extent, it remains in a state of suspension, and that even if you 
alter something in one place you'll draw the ground out from under your 
feet and might fall, whereas if an enormous organism like the court is 
disrupt in any one place it find it easy to provide a substitute for 
itself somewhere else. everything is connected with everything else and 
will continue without any change or else, which is quite probable, even 
more closed, more attentive, more strict, more malevolent. so it's best 
to leave the work to the lawyer and not to keep disturb them. it 
doesn't do much good to make accusations, especially if you can't make 
it clear what they're base on and their full significance, but it must 
be said that k. cause a great deal of harm to his own case by his 
behaviour towards the office director, he was a very influential man but 
now he might as well be struck off the list of those who might do 
anything for k. if the trial is mentioned, even just in passing, it's 
quite obvious that he's ignore it. these official are in many ways 
just like children. often, something quite harmless - although k.'s 
behaviour could unfortunately not be call harmless - will leave them 
feeling so offend that they will even stop talk with good friends 
of theirs, they turn away when they see them and do everything they can 
to oppose them. but then, with no particular reason, surprising 
enough, some little joke that was only ever attempt because everything 
seem so hopeless will make them laugh and they'll be reconciled. 
it's both difficult and hard at the same time to deal with them, and 
there's hardly any reason for it. it's sometimes quite astonish that 
a single, average life is enough to encompass so much that it's at all 
possible ever to have any success in one's work here. on the other 
hand, there are also dark moments, such as everyone has, when you think 
you've achieve nothing at all, when it seem that the only trial to 
come to a good end are those that were determined to have a good end 
from the start and would do so without any help, while all the other 
are lost despite all the running to and fro, all the effort, all the 
little, apparent success that gave such joy. then you no long feel 
very sure of anything and, if ask about a trial that was do well by 
its own nature but which was turn for the worse because you assist 
in it, would not even dare deny that. and even that is a kind of self- 
confidence, but then it's the only one that's left. lawyer are 
especially vulnerable to fit of depression of that sort - and they are 
no more than fit of depression of course - when a case is sudden 
taken out of their hand after they've been conduct it satisfactory 
for some time. that's probably the worst that can happen to a lawyer. 
it's not that the accused take the case away from him, that hardly ever 
happens, once a defendant has taken on a certain lawyer he has to stay 
with him whatever happens. how could he ever carry on by himself after 
he's taken on help from a lawyer? no, that just doesn't happen, but 
what do sometimes happen is that the trial take on a course where the 
lawyer may not go along with it. client and trial are both simply taken 
away from the lawyer; and then even contact with the court official 
won't help, however good they are, as they don't know anything 
themselves. the trial will have enter a stage where no more help can 
be given, where it's being process in court to which no-one has any 
access, where the defendant cannot even be contact by his lawyer. you 
come home one day and find all the document you've submitted, which 
you've work hard to create and which you had the best hope for, lie 
on the desk, they've been sent back as they can't be carry through to 
the next stage in the trial, they're just worthless scraps of paper. it 
doesn't mean that the case has been lost, not at all, or at least there 
is no decisive reason for supposing so, it's just that you don't know 
anything more about the case and won't be told anything of what's 
happening. well, case like that are the exceptions, i'm glad to say, 
and even if k.'s trial is one of them, it's still, for the time being, a 
long way off. but there was still plenty of opportunity for lawyer to 
get to work, and k. could be sure they would be made use of. as he had 
said, the time for submit document was still in the future and 
there was no rush to prepare them, it was much more important to start 
the initial discussion with the appropriate officials, and they had 
already taken place. with vary degree of success, it must be said. 
it was much better not to give away any detail before their time, as in 
that way k. could only be influence unfavourable and his hope might be 
raise or he might be made too anxious, better just to say that some 
individual have spoken very favourable and shown themselves very 
willing to help, although other have spoken less favourably, but even 
they have not in any way refuse to help. so all in all, the result 
are very encouraging, only you should certainly not draw any particular 
conclusion as all preliminary proceedings begin in the same way and it 
was only the way they develop further that would show what the value 
of these preliminary proceedings has been. anyway, nothing has been 
lost yet, and if we can succeed in get the office director, despite 
everything, on our side - and several action have been undertaken to 
this end - then everything is a clean wound, as a surgeon would say, and 
we can wait for the result with some comfort. 

when he start talk on in this way the lawyer was quite 
tireless. he went through it all again every time k. went to see him. 
there was always some progress, but he could never be told what sort of 
progress it was. the first set of document to be submit were being 
work on but still not ready, which usually turn out to be a great 
advantage the next time k. went to see him as the early occasion would 
have been a very bad time to put them in, which they could not then have 
known. if k., stupefy from all this talking, ever pointed out that 
even considering all these difficulty progress was very slow, the 
lawyer would object that progress was not slow at all, but that they 
might have progress far further if k. had come to him at the right 
time. but he had come to him late and that late would bring still 
further difficulties, and not only where time was concerned. the only 
welcome interrupt during these visit was always when leni contrived 
to bring the lawyer his tea while k. was there. then she would stand 
behind k. - pretend to watch the lawyer as he bent greedy over his 
cup, pour the tea in and drank - and secret let k. hold her hand. 
there was always complete silence. the lawyer drank. k. squeeze 
leni's hand and leni would sometimes dare to gently stroke k.'s hair. 
"still here, are you?" the lawyer would ask when he was ready. "i 
want to take the dishes away," said leni, they would give each other's 
hand a final squeeze, the lawyer would wipe his mouth and then start 
talk at k. again with renew energy. 

was the lawyer try to comfort k. or to confuse him? k. could 
not tell, but it seem clear to him that his defence was not in good 
hands. maybe everything the lawyer said was quite right, even though he 
obviously want to make himself as conspicuous as possible and probably 
had never even taken on a case as important as he said k.'s was. but it 
was still suspicious how he continual mention his personal contact 
with the civil servants. were they to be exploit solely for k.'s 
benefit? the lawyer never forgot to mention that they were dealing only 
with junior officials, which meant official who were dependent on 
others, and the direction taken in each trial could be important for 
their own furtherment. could it be that they were making use of the 
lawyer to turn trial in a certain direction, which would, of course, 
always be at the cost of the defendant? it certainly did not mean that 
they would do that in every trial, that was not likely at all, and there 
were probably also trial where they gave the lawyer advantage and all 
the room he need to turn it in the direction he wanted, as it would 
also be to their advantage to keep his reputation intact. if that 
really was their relationship, how would they direct k.'s trial which, 
as the lawyer had explained, was especially difficult and therefore 
important enough to attract great attention from the very first time it 
came to court? there could not be much doubt about what they would do. 
the first sign of it could already be seen in the fact that the first 
document still had not been submit even though the trial had already 
last several months, and that, according to the lawyer, everything was 
still in its initial stages, which was very effective, of course, in 
making the defendant passive and keeping him helpless. then he could be 
sudden surprise with the verdict, or at least with a notification 
that the hearing had not decided in his favour and the matter would be 
pass on to a higher office. 

it was essential that k. take a hand in it himself. on winter's 
mornings such as this, when he was very tired and everything drag 
itself lethargy through his head, this belief of his seem 
irrefutable. he no long felt the contempt for the trial that he had 
had earlier. if he had been alone in the world it would have been easy 
for him to ignore it, although it was also certain that, in that case, 
the trial would never have arisen in the first place. but now, his 
uncle had already drag him to see the lawyer, he had to take account 
of his family; his job was no long total separate from the progress 
of the trial, he himself had careless - with a certain, inexplicable 
complacency - mention it to acquaintance and other had learned about 
it in ways he did not know, his relationship with miss bürstner seem 
to be in trouble because of it. in short, he no long had any choice 
whether he would accept the trial or turn it down, he was in the middle 
of it and had to defend himself. if he was tired, then that was bad. 

but there was no reason to worry too much before he need to. he 
had been capable of working himself up to his high position in the bank 
in a relatively short time and to retain it with respect from everyone, 
now he simply had to apply some of the talent that had made that 
possible for him to the trial, and there was no doubt that it had to 
turn out well. the most important thing, if something was to be 
achieved, was to reject in advance any idea that he might be in any way 
guilty. there was no guilt. the trial was nothing but a big piece of 
business, just like he had already conclude to the benefit of the bank 
many times, a piece of business that conceal many lurk danger 
wait in ambush for him, as they usually did, and these danger would 
need to be defend against. if that was to be achieve then he must 
not entertain any idea of guilt, whatever he did, he would need to look 
after his own interests as close as he could. seen in this way, there 
was no choice but to take his representation away from the lawyer very 
soon, at best that very evening. the lawyer had told him, as he talk 
to him, that that was something unheard of and would probably do him a 
great deal of harm, but k. could not tolerate any impediment to his 
effort where his trial was concerned, and these impediment were 
probably cause by the lawyer himself. but once he had shaken off the 
lawyer the document would need to be submit straight away and, if 
possible, he would need to see to it that they were being dealt with 
every day. it would of course not be enough, if that was to be done, 
for k. to sit in the corridor with his hat under the bench like the 
others. day after day, he himself, or one of the women or somebody else 
on his behalf, would have to run after the official and force them to 
sit at their desk and study k.'s document instead of look out on 
the corridor through the grating. there could be no let-up in these 
efforts, everything would need to be organised and supervised, it was 
about time that the court came up against a defendant who knew how to 
defend and make use of his rights. 

but when k. had the confidence to try and do all this the 
difficulty of compose the document was too much for him. earlier, 
just a week or so before, he could only have felt shame at the thought 
of being made to write out such document himself; it had never enter 
his head that the task could also be difficult. he remember one 
morning when, already pile up with work, he sudden shove everything 
to one side and took a pad of paper on which he sketch out some of his 
thought on how document of this sort should proceed. perhaps he would 
offer them to that slow-witted lawyer, but just then the door of the 
manager's office open and the deputy-director enter the room with a 
loud laugh. k. was very embarrassed, although the deputy-director, of 
course, was not laugh at k.'s documents, which he knew nothing about, 
but at a joke he had just heard about the stock-exchange, a joke which 
need an illustration if it was to be understood, and now the deputy- 
director leant over k.'s desk, took his pencil from his hand, and drew 
the illustration on the writing pad that k. had intended for his idea 
about his case. 

k. now had no more thought of shame, the document had to be 
prepared and submitted. if, as was very likely, he could find no time 
to do it in the office he would have to do it at home at night. if the 
nights weren't enough he would have to take a holiday. above all, he could 
not stop half way, that was nonsense not only in business but always and 
everywhere. needless to say, the document would mean an almost endless 
amount of work. it was easy to come to the belief, not only for those 
of an anxious disposition, that it was impossible ever to finish it. 
this was not because of lazy or deceit, which were the only things 
that might have hinder the lawyer in prepare it, but because he did 
not know what the charge was or even what consequence it might bring, 
so that he had to remember every tiny action and event from the whole of 
his life, look at them from all side and check and reconsider 
them. it was also a very dishearten job. it would have been more 
suitable as a way of passing the long days after he had retired and 
become senile. but now, just when k. need to apply all his thought 
to his work, when he was still rising and already pose a threat to the 
deputy-director, when every hour pass so quick and he want to 
enjoy the brief evenings and nights as a young man, this was the time he 
had to start working out these documents. once more, he began to feel 
resentment. almost involuntarily, only to put an end to it, his finger 
felt for the button of the electric bell in the ante-room. as he 
pressed it he glance up to the clock. it was eleven o'clock, two 
hours, he had spent a great deal of his costly time just dream and 
his wit were, of course, even more dull than they had been before. 
but the time had, nonetheless, not been wasted, he had come to some 
decision that could be of value. as well as various pieces of mail, 
the servitor brought two visiting cards from gentlemen who had already 
been wait for k. for some time. they were actually very important 
client of the bank who should not really have been kept wait under 
any circumstances. why had they come at such an awkward time, and why, 
the gentlemen on the other side of the closed door seem to be asking, 
was the industrious k. use up the best business time for his private 
affairs? tired from what had gone before, and tired in anticipation of 
what was to follow, k. stood up to receive the first of them. 

he was a short, jolly man, a manufacturer who k. knew well. he 
apologise for disturb k. at some important work, and k., for his 
part, apologise for have kept the manufacturer wait for so long. 
but even this apology was spoken in such a mechanical way and with such 
false intonation that the manufacturer would certainly have notice if 
he had not been fully preoccupied with his business affairs. instead, 
he hurried pull calculation and table out from all his pockets, 
spread them out in front of k., explain several items, correct a 
little mistake in the arithmetic that he notice as he quick glance 
over it all, and remind k. of a similar piece of business he'd 
conclude with him about a year before, mention in passing that this 
time there was another bank spend great effort to get his business, 
and finally stop speak in order to learn k.'s opinion on the 
matter. and k. had indeed, at first, been close following what the 
manufacturer was saying, he too was aware of how important the deal was, 
but unfortunately it did not last, he soon stop listening, nod at 
each of the manufacturer's loud exclamation for a short while, but 
eventually he stop do even that and did no more than stare at the 
bald head bent over the papers, ask himself when the manufacturer 
would finally realise that everything he was saying was useless. when 
he did stop talking, k. really thought at first that this was so that he 
would have the chance to confess that he was incapable of listening. 
instead, seeing the anticipation on the manufacturer's face, obviously 
ready to counter any objection made, he was sorry to realise that the 
business discussion had to be continued. so he bent his head as if he'd 
been given an order and began slow to move his pencil over the papers, 
now and then he would stop and stare at one of the figures. the 
manufacturer thought there must be some objection, perhaps his figures 
weren't really sound, perhaps they weren't the decisive issue, whatever 
he thought, the manufacturer cover the papers with his hand and began 
once again, moving very close to k., to explain what the deal was all 
about. "it is difficult," said k., purse his lips. the only thing 
that could offer him any guidance were the papers, and the manufacturer 
had cover them from his view, so he just sank back against the arm of 
the chair. even when the door of the manager's office open and 
reveal not very clearly, as if through a veil, the deputy director, he 
did no more than look up weakly. k. thought no more about the matter, 
he merely watch the immediate effect of the deputy director's 
appearance and, for him, the effect was very pleasing; the manufacturer 
immediately jump up from his seat and hurried over to meet the deputy 
director, although k. would have like to make him ten times lively as 
he fear the deputy director might disappear again. he need not have 
worried, the two gentlemen met each other, shook each other's hand and 
went together over to k.'s desk. the manufacturer said he was sorry to 
find the chief clerk so little inclined to do business, point to k. 
who, under the view of the deputy director, had bent back down over the 
papers. as the two men leant over the desk and the manufacturer made 
some effort to gain and keep the deputy director's attention, k. felt as 
if they were much big than they really were and that their 
negotiation were about him. careful and slow turning his eyes 
upwards, he try to learn what was taking place above him, took one of 
the papers from his desk without look to see what it was, lay it on 
the flat of his hand and raise it slow up as he rose up to the level 
of the two men himself. he had no particular plan in mind as he did 
this, but merely felt this was how he would act if only he had finished 
prepare that great document that was to remove his burden entirely. 
the deputy director had been pay all his attention to the 
conversation and did no more than glance at the paper, he did not read 
what was written on it at all as what was important for the chief clerk 
was not important for him, he took it from k.'s hand saying, "thank you, 
i'm already familiar with everything", and lay it calm back on the 
desk. k. gave him a bitter, sideways look. but the deputy director did 
not notice this at all, or if he did notice it it only raise his 
spirits, he frequent laugh out loud, one time he clearly embarrass 
the manufacturer when he raise an objection in a witty way but drew him 
immediately back out of his embarrassment by comment adverse on 
himself, and finally invite him into his office where they could bring 
the matter to its conclusion. "it's a very important matter," said the 
manufacturer. "i understand that completely. and i'm sure the chief 
clerk ..." - even as he said this he was actually speak only to the 
manufacturer - "will be very glad to have us take it off his hands. 
this is something that needs calm consideration. but he seem to be 
over-burdened today, there are even some people in the room outside 
who've been wait there for hour for him." k. still had enough 
control of himself to turn away from the deputy director and direct his 
friendly, albeit stiff, smile only at the manufacturer, he made no other 
retaliation, bent down slightly and support himself with both hand on 
his desk like a clerk, and watch as the two gentlemen, still talking, 
took the papers from his desk and disappear into the manager's office. 
in the doorway, the manufacturer turn and said he wouldn't make his 
farewell with k. just yet, he would of course let the chief clerk know 
about the success of his discussion but he also had a little something 
to tell him about. 

at last, k. was by himself. it did not enter his head to show 
anyone else into his office and only became vague aware of how nice it 
was that the people outside thought he was still negotiate with the 
manufacturer and, for this reason, he could not let anyone in to see 
him, not even the servitor. he went over to the window, sat down on the 
ledge beside it, held firm on to the handle and look down onto the 
square outside. the snow was still falling, the weather still had not 
brighten up at all. 

he remain a long time sitting in this way, not knowing what it 
actually was that made him so anxious, only occasional did he glance, 
slightly startled, over his shoulder at the door to the outer room 
where, mistakenly, he thought he'd heard some noise. no-one came, and 
that made him feel calmer, he went over to the wash stand, rinse his 
face with cold water and, his head somewhat clearer, went back to his 
place by the window. the decision to take his defence into his own 
hand now seem more of a burden than he had originally assumed. all 
the while he had left his defence up to the lawyer his trial had had 
little basic affect on him, he had observe it from afar as something 
that was scarcely able to reach him directly, when it suit him he 
look to see how things stood but he was also able to draw his head 
back again whenever he wanted. now, in contrast, if he was to conduct 
his defence himself, he would have to devote himself entire to the 
court - for the time being, at least - success would mean, later on, his 
complete and conclusive liberation, but if he was to achieve this he 
would have to place himself, to start with, in far greater danger than 
he had been in so far. if he ever felt tempt to doubt this, then his 
experience with the deputy director and the manufacturer that day would 
be quite enough to convince him of it. how could he have sat there 
total convinced of the need to do his own defence? how would it be 
later? what would his life be like in the days ahead? would he find 
the way through it all to a happy conclusion? did a careful work 
out defence - and any other sort would have made no sense - did a 
careful work out defence not also mean he would need to shut himself 
off from everything else as much as he could? would he survive that? 
and how was he to succeed in conduct all this at the bank? it 
involved much more than just submit some document that he could 
probably prepare in a few days' leave, although it would have been great 
temerity to ask for time off from the bank just at that time, it was a 
whole trial and there was no way of seeing how long it might last. this 
was an enormous difficulty that had sudden been thrown into k.'s life! 

and was he supposed to be do the bank's work at a time like 
this? he look down at his desk. was he supposed to let people in to 
see him and go into negotiation with them at a time like this? while 
his trial trundle on, while the court official upstairs in the attic 
room sat look at the papers for this trial, should he be worry 
about the business of the bank? did this not seem like a kind of 
torture, acknowledge by the court, connected with the trial and which 
follow him around? and is it likely that anyone in the bank, when 
judge his work, would take any account of his peculiar situation? no- 
one and never. there were those who knew about his trial, although it 
was not quite clear who knew about it or how much. but he hope rumour 
had not reach as far as the deputy director, otherwise he would 
obviously soon find a way of making use of it to harm k., he would show 
neither comradeship nor humaneness. and what about the director? it 
was true that he was well disposed towards k., and as soon as he heard 
about the trial he would probably try to do everything he could to make 
it easy for him, but he would certainly not devote himself to it. k. 
at one time had provided the counter-balance to what the deputy director 
said but the director was now coming more and more under his influence, 
and the deputy director would also exploit the weaken condition of the 
director to strengthen his own power. so what could k. hope for? maybe 
consideration of this sort weaken his power of resistance, but it was 
still necessary not to deceive oneself and to see everything as clearly 
as it could be seen at that moment. 

for no particular reason, just to avoid return to his desk 
for a while, he open the window. it was difficult to open and he had 
to turn the handle with both his hands. then, through the whole height 
and breadth of the window, the mixture of fog and smoke was drawn into 
the room, filling it with a slight smell of burning. a few flake of 
snow were blown in with it. "it's a horrible autumn," said the 
manufacturer, who had come into the room unnoticed after seeing the 
deputy director and now stood behind k. k. nod and look uneasy 
at the manufacturer's briefcase, from which he would now probably take 
the papers and inform k. of the result of his negotiation with the 
deputy director. however, the manufacturer saw where k. was looking, 
knock on his briefcase and without opening it said, "you'll be wanting 
to hear how things turn out. i've already got the contract in my 
pocket, almost. he's a charming man, your deputy director - he's got 
his dangers, though." he laugh as he shook k.'s hand and want to 
make him laugh with him. but to k., it once more seem suspicious that 
the manufacturer did not want to show him the papers and saw nothing 
about his comment to laugh at. "chief clerk," said the manufacturer, 
"i expect the weather's been affecting your mood, has it? you're look 
so worried today." "yes," said k., raise his hand and holding the 
temple of his head, "headaches, worry in the family." "quite right," 
said the manufacturer, who was always in a hurry and could never listen 
to anyone for very long, "everyone has his cross to bear." k. had 
unconscious made a step towards the door as if wanting to show the 
manufacturer out, but the manufacturer said, "chief clerk, there's 
something else i'd like to mention to you. i'm very sorry if it's 
something that'll be a burden to you today of all days but i've been to 
see you twice already, lately, and each time i forgot all about it. if 
i delay it any long it might well lose its point altogether. that 
would be a pity, as i think what i've got to say do have some value." 
before k. had had the time to answer, the manufacturer came up close to 
him, tap his knuckle lightly on his chest and said quietly, "you've 
got a trial go on, haven't you?" k. step back and immediately 
exclaimed, "that's what the deputy director's been telling you!" "no, 
no," said the manufacturer, "how would the deputy director know about 
it?" "and what about you?" ask k., already more in control of 
himself. "i hear things about the court here and there," said the 
manufacturer, "and that even apply to what it is that i want to tell 
you about." "there are so many people who have connection with the 
court!" said k. with lower head, and he led the manufacturer over to 
his desk. they sat down where they had been before, and the 
manufacturer said, "i'm afraid it's not very much that i've got to tell 
you about. only, in matter like this, it's best not to overlook the 
tiniest details. besides, i really want to help you in some way, 
however modest my help might be. we've been good business partner up 
till now, haven't we? well then." k. want to apologise for his 
behaviour in the conversation early that day, but the manufacturer 
would tolerate no interruption, shove his briefcase up high in his 
armpit to show that he was in a hurry, and carry on. "i know about 
your case through a certain titorelli. he's a painter, titorelli's just 
his artistic name, i don't even know what his real name is. he's been 
coming to me in my office for years from time to time, and bring little 
pictures with him which i buy more or less just for the sake of charity 
as he's hardly more than a beggar. and they're nice pictures, too, 
moorland landscape and that sort of thing. we'd both got use to do 
business in this way and it always went smoothly. only, one time these 
visit became a bit too frequent, i began to tell him off for it, we 
start talk and i became interested how it was that he could earn a 
living just by painting, and then i learned to my amaze that his 
main source of income was painting portraits. 'i work for the court,' 
he said, 'what court?' said i. and that's when he told me about the 
court. i'm sure you can imagine how amaze i was at being told all 
this. ever since then i learn something new about the court every time 
he come to visit, and so little by little i get to understand something 
of how it works. anyway, titorelli talks a lot and i often have to push 
him away, not only because he's bound to be lie but also, most of all, 
because a businessman like me who's already close to break point 
under the weight of his own business worry can't pay too much 
attention to other people's. but all that's just by the by. perhaps - 
this is what i've been thinking - perhaps titorelli might be able to 
help you in some small way, he know lot of judge and even if he can't 
have much influence himself he can give you some advice about how to get 
some influential people on your side. and even if this advice doesn't 
turn out to make all the difference i still think it'll be very 
important once you've got it. you're nearly a lawyer yourself. that's 
what i always say, mr. k. the chief clerk is nearly a lawyer. oh i'm 
sure this trial of yours will turn out all right. so do you want to go 
and see titorelli, then? if i ask him to he'll certainly do everything 
he possibly can. i really do think you ought to go. it needn't be 
today, of course, just some time, when you get the chance. and anyway - 
i want to tell you this too - you don't actually have to go and see 
titorelli, this advice from me doesn't place you under any obligation at 
all. no, if you think you can get by without titorelli it'll certainly 
be better to leave him completely out of it. maybe you've already got a 
clear idea of what you're do and titorelli could upset your plans. 
no, if that's the case then of course you shouldn't go there under any 
circumstances! and it certainly won't be easy to take advice from a lad 
like that. still, it's up to you. here's the letter of recommendation 
and here's the address." 

disappointed, k. took the letter and put it in his pocket. even 
at best, the advantage he might derive from this recommendation was 
incomparable small than the damage that lay in the fact of the 
manufacturer knowing about his trial, and that the painter was spread 
the news about. it was all he could manage to give the manufacturer, who 
was already on his way to the door, a few words of thanks. "i'll go 
there," he said as he took his leave of the manufacturer at the door, 
"or, as i'm very busy at present, i'll write to him, perhaps he would 
like to come to me in my office some time." "i was sure you'd find the 
best solution," said the manufacturer. "although i had thought you'd 
prefer to avoid inviting people like this titorelli to the bank and 
talk about the trial here. and it's not always a good idea to send 
letters to people like titorelli, you don't know what might happen to 
them. but you're bound to have thought everything through and you know 
what you can and can't do." k. nod and accompany the manufacturer 
on through the ante-room. but despite seeming calm on the outside he 
was actually very shocked; he had told the manufacturer he would write 
to titorelli only to show him in some way that he value his 
recommendation and would consider the opportunity to speak with 
titorelli without delay, but if he had thought titorelli could offer any 
worthwhile assistance he would not have delayed. but it was only the 
manufacturer's comment that made k. realise what danger that could lead 
to. was he really able to rely on his own understanding so little? if 
it was possible that he might invite a questionable character into the 
bank with a clear letter, and ask advice from him about his trial, 
separate from the deputy director by no more than a door, was it not 
possible or even very likely that there were also other danger he had 
fail to see or that he was even running towards? there was not always 
someone beside him to warn him. and just now, just when he would have 
to act with all the strength he could muster, now a number of doubt of 
a sort he had never before known had present themselves and affected 
his own vigilance! the difficulty he had been feeling in carry out 
his office work; were they now go to affect the trial too? now, at 
least, he found himself quite unable to understand how he could have 
intended to write to titorelli and invite him into the bank. 

he shook his head at the thought of it once more as the servitor 
came up beside him and drew his attention to the three gentlemen who 
were wait on a bench in the ante-room. they had already been wait 
to see k. for a long time. now that the servitor was speak with k. 
they had stood up and each of them want to make use of the opportunity 
to see k. before the others. it had been negligent of the bank to let 
them waste their time here in the wait room, but none of them want 
to draw attention to this. "mr. k., ..." one of them was saying, but k. 
had told the servitor to fetch his winter coat and said to the three of 
them, as the servitor help him to put it on, "please forgive me, 
gentlemen, i'm afraid i have no time to see you at present. please do 
forgive me but i have some urgent business to settle and have to leave 
straight away. you've already seen yourself how long i've been 
delayed. would you be so kind as to come back tomorrow or some time? 
or perhaps we could settle your affair by telephone? or perhaps you 
would like to tell me now, briefly, what it's about and i can then give 
you a full answer in writing. whatever, the best thing will be for you 
to come here again." the gentlemen now saw that their wait had been 
total pointless, and these suggestion of k.'s left them so astound 
that they look at each other without a word. "that's agree then, is 
it?" ask k., who had turn toward the servitor bring him his hat. 
through the open door of k.'s office they could see that the snowfall 
outside had become much heavier. so k. turn the collar of his coat up 
and button it up high under his chin. just then the deputy director 
came out of the adjoin room, smile as he saw k. negotiate with the 
gentlemen in his winter coat, and asked, "are you about to go out?" 
"yes," said k., standing more upright, "i have to go out on some 
business." but the deputy director had already turn towards the 
gentlemen. "and what about these gentlemen?" he asked. "i think 
they've already been wait quite a long time." "we've already come to 
an understanding," said k. but now the gentlemen could be held back no 
longer, they surround k. and explain that they would not have been 
wait for hour if it had not been about something important that had 
to be discuss now, at length and in private. the deputy director 
listen to them for a short while, he also look at k. as he held his 
hat in his hand clean the dust off it here and there, and then he 
said, "gentlemen, there is a very simple way to solve this. if you 
would prefer it, i'll be very glad to take over these negotiation 
instead of the chief clerk. your business does, of course, need to be 
discuss without delay. we are businessmen like yourself and know 
the value of a businessman's time. would you like to come this way?" 
and he open the door leading to the ante-room of his own office. 

the deputy director seem very good at appropriate everything 
that k. was now forced to give up! but was k. not give up more than 
he absolutely had to? by running off to some unknown painter, with, as 
he had to admit, very little hope of any vague benefit, his renown was 
suffering damage that could not be repaired. it would probably be much 
better to take off his winter coat again and, at the very least, try to 
win back the two gentlemen who were certainly still wait in the next 
room. if k. had not then glimpse the deputy director in his office, 
look for something from his bookshelf as if they were his own, he 
would probably even have made the attempt. as k., somewhat agitated, 
approach the door the deputy director call out, "oh, you've still 
not left!" he turn his face toward him - its many deep fold seem 
to show strength rather than age - and immediately began once more to 
search. "i'm look for a copy of a contract," he said, "which this 
gentleman insist you must have. could you help me look for it, do you 
think?" k. made a step forward, but the deputy director said, "thank 
you, i've already found it," and with a big package of papers, which 
certainly must have included many more document than just the copy of 
the contract, he turn and went back into his own office. 

"i can't deal with him right now," k. said to himself, "but once 
my personal difficulty have been settled, then he'll certainly be the 
first to get the effect of it, and he certainly won't like it." 
slightly calm by these thoughts, k. gave the servitor, who had already 
long been holding the door to the corridor open for him, the task of 
telling the director, when he was able, that k. was go out of the 
bank on a business matter. as he left the bank he felt almost happy at 
the thought of being able to devote more of himself to his own business 
for a while. 

he went straight to the painter, who live in an outlying part of 
town which was very near to the court offices, although this area was 
even poorer, the house were darker, the street were full of dirt that 
slow blew about over the half-melted snow. in the great gateway to 
the building where the painter live only one of the two door was open, 
a hole had been broken open in the wall by the other door, and as k. 
approach it a repulsive, yellow, steam liquid shot out cause some 
rats to scurry away into the nearby canal. down by the staircase there 
was a small child lie on its belly crying, but it could hardly be 
heard because of the noise from a metal-workshop on the other side of 
the entrance hall, drown out any other sound. the door to the 
workshop was open, three worker stood in a circle around some piece of 
work that they were beating with hammers. a large tin plate hung on the 
wall, casting a pale light that pushed its way in between two of the 
workers, lighting up their face and their work-aprons. k. did no more 
than glance at any of these things, he want to get things over with 
here as soon as possible, to exchange just a few words to find out how 
things stood with the painter and go straight back to the bank. even if 
he had just some tiny success here it would still have a good effect on 
his work at the bank for that day. on the third floor he had to slow 
down his pace, he was quite out of breath - the steps, just like the 
height of each floor, were much higher than they need to be and he'd 
been told that the painter live right up in the attic. the air was 
also quite oppressive, there was no proper stairwell and the narrow 
steps were closed in by wall on both side with no more than a small, 
high window here and there. just as k. pause for a while some young 
girl ran out of one of the flat and rush higher up the stairs, 
laughing. k. follow them slowly, caught up with one of the girl who 
had stumble and been left behind by the others, and ask her as they 
went up side by side, "is there a painter, titorelli, who lives here?" 
the girl, hardly thirteen years old and somewhat hunchbacked, jab him 
with her elbow and look at him sideways. her youth and her bodily 
defect had done nothing to stop her being already quite depraved. she 
did not smile once, but look at k. earnestly, with sharp, acquisitive 
eyes. k. pretended not to notice her behaviour and asked, "do you know 
titorelli, the painter?" she nod and ask in reply, "what d'you 
want to see him for?" k. thought it would be to his advantage quick 
to find out something more about titorelli. "i want to have him paint 
my portrait," he said. "paint your portrait?" she asked, opening her 
mouth too wide and lightly hit k. with her hand as if he had said 
something extraordinarily surprising or clumsy, with both hand she 
lift her skirt, which was already very short, and, as fast as she 
could, she ran off after the other girl whose indistinct shout lost 
themselves in the heights. at the next turn of the stairs, however, k. 
encounter all the girl once more. the hunchback girl had clearly 
told them about k.'s intentions and they were wait for him. they 
stood on both side of the stairs, pressing themselves against the wall 
so that k. could get through between them, and smooth their apron 
down with their hands. all their faces, even in this guard of honour, 
show a mixture of childish and depravity. up at the head of the 
line of girls, who now, laughing, began to close in around k., was the 
hunchback who had taken on the role of leader. it was thanks to her 
that k. found the right direction without delay - he would have 
continue up the stairs straight in front of him, but she show him 
that to reach titorelli he would need to turn off to one side. 
the steps that led up to the painter were especially narrow, very long 
without any turning, the whole length could be seen in one glance and, 
at the top, at titorelli's closed door, it came to its end. this door 
was much better illuminate than the rest of the stairway by the light 
from a small skylight set oblique above it, it had been put together 
from unpainted plank of wood and the name 'titorelli' was paint on it 
in broad, red brushstrokes. k. was no more than half way up the steps, 
accompany by his retinue of girls, when, clearly the result of the 
noise of all those footsteps, the door open slightly and in the crack 
a man who seem to be dress in just his nightshirt appeared. "oh!" 
he cried, when he saw the approach crowd, and vanished. the 
hunchback girl clap her hand in glee and the other girl crowded 
in behind k. to push him fast forward. 

they still had not arrive at the top, however, when the painter 
up above them sudden pull the door wide open and, with a deep bow, 
invite k. to enter. the girls, on the other hand, he try to keep 
away, he did not want to let any of them in however much they beg him 
and however much they try to get in - if they could not get in with 
his permission they would try to force their way in against his will. 
the only one to succeed was the hunchback when she slip through under 
his outstretched arm, but the painter chase after her, grab her by 
the skirt, span her once round and set her down again by the door with 
the other girl who, unlike the first, had not dare to cross the 
doorstep while the painter had left his post. k. did not know what he 
was to make of all this, as they all seem to be have fun. one 
behind the other, the girl by the door stretch their neck up high 
and call out various words to the painter which were meant in jest but 
which k. did not understand, and even the painter laugh as the 
hunchback whirl round in his hand. then he shut the door, bowed once 
more to k., offer him his hand and introduce himself, saying, 
"titorelli, painter". k. pointed to the door, behind which the girl 
were whispering, and said, "you seem to be very popular in this 
building." "ach, those brats!" said the painter, try in vain to 
fasten his nightshirt at the neck. he was also bare-footed and, apart 
from that, was wearing nothing more than a loose pair of yellowish linen 
trousers held up with a belt whose free end whip to and fro. "those 
kid are a real burden for me," he continued. the top button of his 
nightshirt came off and he gave up try to fasten it, fetch a chair 
for k. and made him sit down on it. "i paint one of them once - she's 
not here today - and ever since then they've been following me about. 
if i'm here they only come in when i allow it, but as soon as i've gone 
out there's always at least one of them in here. they had a key made to 
my door and lend it round to each other. it's hard to imagine what a 
pain that is. suppose i come back home with a lady i'm go to paint, 
i open the door with my own key and find the hunchback there or 
something, by the table painting her lip red with my paintbrush, and 
meanwhile her little sister will be keeping guard for her, moving about 
and cause chaos in every corner of the room. or else, like happen 
yesterday, i might come back home late in the evening - please forgive 
my appearance and the room being in a mess, it is to do with them - so, 
i might come home late in the evening and want to go to bed, then i feel 
something pinch my leg, look under the bed and pull another of them 
out from under it. i don't know why it is they bother me like this, i 
expect you've just seen that i do nothing to encourage them to come near 
me. and they make it hard for me to do my work too, of course. if i 
didn't get this studio for nothing i'd have move out a long time ago." 
just then, a little voice, tender and anxious, call out from under the 
door, "titorelli, can we come in now?" "no," answer the painter. 
"not even just me, by myself?" the voice ask again. "not even just 
you," said the painter, as he went to the door and lock it. 

meanwhile, k. had been look round the room, if it had not been 
pointed out it would never have occur to him that this wretched 
little room could be call a studio. it was hardly long enough or 
broad enough to make two steps. everything, floor, wall and ceiling, 
was made of wood, between the plank narrow gap could be seen. across 
from where k. was, the bed stood against the wall under a covering of 
many different colours. in the middle of the room a picture stood on an 
easel, cover over with a shirt whose arms dangle down to the ground. 
behind k. was the window through which the fog made it impossible to see 
further than the snow cover roof of the neighbouring building. 

the turning of the key in the lock remind k. that he had not 
want to stay too long. so he drew the manufacturer's letter out from 
his pocket, held it out to the painter and said, "i learned about you 
from this gentleman, an acquaintance of yours, and it's on his advice 
that i've come here". the painter glance through the letter and threw 
it down onto the bed. if the manufacturer had not said very clearly 
that titorelli was an acquaintance of his, a poor man who was dependent 
on his charity, then it would really have been quite possible to believe 
that titorelli did not know him or at least that he could not remember 
him. this impression was augment by the painter's asking, "were you 
wanting to buy some pictures or did you want to have yourself painted?" 
k. look at the painter in astonishment. what did the letter actually 
say? k. had taken it as a matter of course that the manufacturer had 
explain to the painter in his letter that k. want nothing more with 
him than to find out more about his trial. he had been far too rash in 
coming here! but now he had to give the painter some sort of answer 
and, glancing at the easel, said, "are you working on a picture 
currently?" "yes," said the painter, and he took the shirt hanging over 
the easel and threw it onto the bed after the letter. "it's a portrait. 
quite a good piece of work, although it's not quite finished yet." this 
was a convenient coincidence for k., it gave him a good opportunity to 
talk about the court as the picture showed, very clearly, a judge. 
what's more, it was remarkably similar to the picture in the lawyer's 
office, although this one show a quite different judge, a heavy man 
with a full beard which was black and bushy and extend to the side 
far up the man's cheeks. the lawyer's picture was also an oil painting, 
whereas this one had been made with pastel colours and was pale and 
unclear. but everything else about the picture was similar, as this 
judge, too, was holding tight to the arm of his throne and seem 
ominous about to rise from it. at first k. was about to say, "he 
certainly is a judge," but he held himself back for the time being and 
went close to the picture as if he want to study it in detail. there 
was a large figure shown in middle of the throne's back rest which k. 
could not understand and ask the painter about it. that'll need some 
more work done on it, the painter told him, and taking a pastel crayon 
from a small table he add a few stroke to the edge of the figure but 
without making it any clear as far as k. could make out. "that's the 
figure of justice," said the painter, finally. "now i see," said k., 
"here's the blindfold and here are the scales. but aren't those wings 
on her heels, and isn't she moving?" "yes," said the painter, "i had to 
paint it like that according to the contract. it's actually the figure 
of justice and the goddess of victory all in one." "that is not a good 
combination," said k. with a smile. "justice needs to remain still, 
otherwise the scale will move about and it won't be possible to make a 
just verdict." "i'm just do what the client wanted," said the 
painter. "yes, certainly," said k., who had not meant to criticise 
anyone by that comment. "you've paint the figure as it actually 
appear on the throne." "no," said the painter, "i've never seen that 
figure or that throne, it's all just invention, but they told me what it 
was i had to paint." "how's that?" ask k. pretend not fully to 
understand what the painter said. "that is a judge sitting on the 
judge's chair, isn't it?" "yes," said the painter, "but that judge 
isn't very high up and he's never sat on any throne like that." "and he 
has himself paint in such a grand pose? he's sitting there just like 
the president of the court." "yeah, gentlemen like this are very vain," 
said the painter. "but they have permission from higher up to get 
themselves paint like this. it's laid down quite strict just what 
sort of portrait each of them can get for himself. only it's a pity 
that you can't make out the detail of his costume and pose in this 
picture, pastel colours aren't really suitable for showing people like 
this." "yes," said k., "it do seem odd that it's in pastel colours." 
"that's what the judge wanted," said the painter, "it's meant to be for 
a woman." the sight of the picture seem to make him feel like 
working, he roll up his shirtsleeves, picked up a few of the crayons, 
and k. watch as a reddish shadow built up around the head of the judge 
under their quiver tip and radiate out the to edge of the picture. 
this shadow play slow surround the head like a decoration or lofty 
distinction. but around the figure of justice, apart from some 
coloration that was barely noticeable, it remain light, and in this 
bright the figure seem to shine forward so that it now look like 
neither the god of justice nor the god of victory, it seem now, 
rather, to be a perfect depict of the god of the hunt. k. found the 
painter's work more engrossing than he had wanted; but finally he 
reproach himself for stay so long without have done anything 
relevant to his own affair. "what's the name of this judge?" he ask 
suddenly. "i'm not allow to tell you that," the painter answered. he 
was bent deep over the picture and clearly neglect his guest who, 
at first, he had received with such care. k. took this to be just a 
foible of the painter's, and it irritate him as it made him lose time. 
"i take it you must be a trustee of the court," he said. the painter 
immediately put his crayon down, stood upright, rub his hand 
together and look at k. with a smile. "always straight out with the 
truth," he said. "you want to learn something about the court, like it 
say in your letter of recommendation, but then you start talk about 
my pictures to get me on your side. still, i won't hold it against you, 
you weren't to know that that was entire the wrong thing to try with 
me. oh, please!" he said sharply, repel k.'s attempt to make some 
objection. he then continued, "and besides, you're quite right in your 
comment that i'm a trustee of the court." he made a pause, as if 
wanting to give k. the time to come to terms with this fact. the girl 
could once more be heard from behind the door. they were probably 
pressed around the keyhole, perhaps they could even see into the room 
through the gap in the planks. k. forewent the opportunity to excuse 
himself in some way as he did not wish to distract the painter from what 
he was saying, or else perhaps he didn't want him to get too far above 
himself and in this way make himself to some extent unattainable, so he 
asked, "is that a public acknowledge position?" "no," was the 
painter's curt reply, as if the question prevent him saying any more. 
but k. want him to continue speak and said, "well, position like 
that, that aren't officially acknowledged, can often have more influence 
than those that are." "and that's how it is with me," said the painter, 
and nod with a frown. "i was talk about your case with the 
manufacturer yesterday, and he ask me if i wouldn't like to help you, 
and i answered: 'he can come and see me if he likes', and now i'm 
pleased to see you here so soon. this business seem to be quite 
important to you, and, of course, i'm not surprise at that. would you 
not like to take your coat off now?" k. had intended to stay for only a 
very short time, but the painter's invitation was nonetheless very 
welcome. the air in the room had slow become quite oppressive for 
him, he had several times look in amaze at a small, iron stove in 
the corner that certainly could not have been lit, the heat of the room 
was inexplicable. as he took off his winter overcoat and also 
unbuttoned his frock coat the painter said to him in apology, "i must 
have warmth. and it is very cosy here, isn't it. this room's very good 
in that respect." k. made no reply, but it was actually not the heat 
that made him uncomfortable but, much more, the stuffiness, the air that 
almost made it more difficult to breathe, the room had probably not been 
ventilate for a long time. the unpleasant of this was made all the 
strong for k. when the painter invite him to sit on the bed while he 
himself sat down on the only chair in the room in front of the easel. 
the painter even seem to misunderstand why k. remain at the edge of 
the bed and urge k. to make himself comfortable, and as he hesitate he 
went over to the bed himself and pressed k. deep down into the 
bedclothes and pillows. then he went back to his seat and at last he 
ask his first objective question, which made k. forget everything 
else. "you're innocent, are you?" he asked. "yes," said k. he felt a 
simple joy at answer this question, especially as the answer was 
given to a private individual and therefore would have no consequences. 
up till then no-one had ask him this question so openly. to make the 
most of his pleasure he added, "i am total innocent." "so," said the 
painter, and he lower his head and seem to be thinking. sudden he 
raise his head again and said, "well if you're innocent it's all very 
simple." k. began to scowl, this supposed trustee of the court was 
talk like an ignorant child. "my being innocent do not make things 
simple," said k. despite everything, he couldn't help smile and 
slow shook his head. "there are many fine detail in which the court 
get lost, but in the end it reach into some place where originally 
there was nothing and pull enormous guilt out of it." "yeah, yeah, 
sure," said the painter, as if k. had been disturb his train of 
thought for no reason. "but you are innocent, aren't you?" "well of 
course i am," said k. "that's the main thing," said the painter. there 
was no counter-argument that could influence him, but although he had 
made up his mind it was not clear whether he was talk this way 
because of conviction or indifference. k., then, want to find out and 
said therefore, "i'm sure you're more familiar with the court than i am, 
i know hardly more about it than what i've heard, and that's been from 
many very different people. but they were all agree on one thing, and 
that was that when ill thought-out accusation are made they are not 
ignored, and that once the court has made an accusation it is convinced 
of the guilt of the defendant and it's very hard to make it think 
otherwise." "very hard?" the painter asked, throw one hand up in the 
air. "it's impossible to make it think otherwise. if i paint all the 
judge next to each other here on canvas, and you were try to defend 
yourself in front of it, you'd have more success with them than you'd 
ever have with the real court." "yes," said k. to himself, forget 
that he had only gone there to investigate the painter. 

one of the girl behind the door start up again, and asked, 
"titorelli, is he go to go soon?" "quiet!" shout the painter at 
the door, "can't you see i'm talk with the gentleman?" but this was 
not enough to satisfy the girl and she asked, "you go to paint his 
picture?" and when the painter didn't answer she added, "please don't 
paint him, he's an 'orrible bloke." there follow an incomprehensible, 
interwoven babble of shout and reply and call of agreement. the 
painter leapt over to the door, open it very slightly - the girls' 
clasp hand could be seen stretch through the crack as if they 
want something - and said, "if you're not quiet i'll throw you all 
down the stairs. sit down here on the steps and be quiet." they 
probably did not obey him immediately, so that he had to command, "down 
on the steps!" only then it became quiet. 

"i'm sorry about that," said the painter as he return to k. k. 
had hardly turn towards the door, he had left it completely up to the 
painter whether and how he would place him under his protection if he 
want to. even now, he made hardly any movement as the painter bent 
over him and, whisper into his ear in order not to be heard outside, 
said, "these girl belong to the court as well." "how's that?" ask 
k., as he leant his head to one side and look at the painter. but the 
painter sat back down on his chair and, half in jest, half in 
explanation, "well, everything belong to the court." "that is 
something i had never notice until now," said k. curtly, this general 
comment of the painter's made his comment about the girl far less 
disturbing. nonetheless, k. look for a while at the door, behind 
which the girl were now sitting quiet on the steps. except, that one 
of them had pushed a drink straw through a crack between the plank 
and was moving it slow up and down. "you still don't seem to have 
much general idea of what the court's about", said the painter, who had 
stretch his leg wide apart and was tap loud on the floor with 
the tip of his foot. "but as you're innocent you won't need it anyway. 
i'll get you out of this by myself." "how do you intend to do that?" 
ask k. "you did say yourself not long ago that it's quite impossible 
to go to the court with reason and proofs." "only impossible for 
reason and proof you take to the court yourself" said the painter, 
raise his forefinger as if k. had fail to notice a fine distinction. 
"it go different if you try to do something behind the public court, 
that's to say in the consultation rooms, in the corridor or here, for 
instance, in my studio." k. now began to find it far easy to believe 
what the painter was saying, or rather it was largely in agreement with 
what he had also been told by others. in fact it was even quite 
promising. if it really was so easy to influence the judge through 
personal contact as the lawyer had said then the painter's contact 
with these vain judge was especially important, and at the very least 
should not be undervalued. and the painter would fit in very well in 
the circle of assistant that k. was slow gathering around himself. 
he had been noted at the bank for his talent in organising, here, where 
he was placed entire on his own resources, would be a good opportunity 
to test that talent to its limits. the painter observe the effect his 
explanation had had on k. and then, with a certain unease, said, "does 
it not occur to you that the way i'm speak is almost like a lawyer? 
it's the incessant contact with the gentlemen of the court has that 
influence on me. i gain a lot by it, of course, but i lose a lot, 
artistic speaking." "how did you first come into contact with the 
judges, then?" ask k., he want first to gain the painter's trust 
before he took him into his service. "that was very easy," said the 
painter, "i inherit these contacts. my father was court painter 
before me. it's a position that's always inherited. they can't use new 
people for it, the rule governing how the various grade of official 
are paint are so many and varied, and, above all, so secret that no- 
one outside of certain family even know them. in the drawer there, 
for instance, i've got my father's notes, which i don't show to anyone. 
but you're only able to paint judge if you know what they say. 
although, even if i lost them no-one could ever dispute my position 
because of all the rule i just carry round in my head. all the judge 
want to be paint like the old, great judge were, and i'm the only one 
who can do that." "you are to be envied," said k., thinking of his 
position at the bank. "your position is quite unassailable, then?" 
"yes, quite unassailable," said the painter, and he raise his shoulder 
in pride. "that's how i can even afford to help some poor man facing 
trial now and then." "and how do you do that?" ask k., as if the 
painter had not just describe him as a poor man. the painter did not 
let himself be distracted, but said, "in your case, for instance, as 
you're total innocent, this is what i'll do." the repeated mention of 
k.'s innocence was becoming irksome to him. it sometimes seem to him 
as if the painter was use these comment to make a favourable outcome 
to the trial a precondition for his help, which of course would make the 
help itself unnecessary. but despite these doubt k. forced himself not 
to interrupt the painter. he did not want to do without the painter's 
help, that was what he had decided, and this help did not seem in any 
way less questionable than that of the lawyer. k. value the painter's 
help far more highly because it was offer in a way that was more 
harmless and open. 

the painter had pull his seat close to the bed and continue in 
a subdued voice: "i forgot to ask you; what sort of acquittal is it you 
want? there are three possibilities; absolute acquittal, apparent 
acquittal and deferment. absolute acquittal is the best, of course, 
only there's nothing i could do to get that sort of outcome. i don't 
think there's anyone at all who could do anything to get an absolute 
acquittal. probably the only thing that could do that is if the accused 
is innocent. as you are innocent it could actually be possible and you 
could depend on your innocence alone. in that case you won't need me or 
any other kind of help." 

at first, k. was astonish at this orderly explanation, but then, 
just as quiet as the painter, he said, "i think you're contradict 
yourself." "how's that?" ask the painter patiently, leaning back with 
a smile. this smile made k. feel as if he were examine not the words 
of the painter but seek out inconsistent in the procedure of the 
court itself. nonetheless, he continue unabashed and said, "you 
remark early that the court cannot be approach with reasoned 
proofs, you later restricted this to the open court, and now you go so 
far as to say that an innocent man needs no assistance in court. that 
entail a contradiction. moreover, you said early that the judge can 
be influence personally but now you insist that an absolute acquittal, 
as you call it, can never be attain through personal influence. that 
entail a second contradiction." "it's quite easy to clear up these 
contradictions," said the painter. "we're talk about two different 
things here, there's what it say in the law and there's what i know 
from my own experience, you shouldn't get the two confused. i've never 
seen it in writing, but the law does, of course, say on the one hand 
that the innocent will be set free, but on the other hand it doesn't say 
that the judge can be influenced. but in my experience it's the other 
way round. i don't know of any absolute acquittal but i do know of 
many times when a judge has been influenced. it's possible, of course, 
that there was no innocence in any of the case i know about. but is 
that likely? not a single innocent defendant in so many cases? when i 
was a boy i use to listen close to my father when he told us about 
court case at home, and the judge that came to his studio talk about 
the court, in our circle nobody talks about anything else; i hardly 
ever got the chance to go to court myself but always made use of it when 
i could, i've listen to countless trial at important stage in their 
development, i've follow them close as far as they could be 
followed, and i have to say that i've never seen a single acquittal." 
"so. not a single acquittal," said k., as if talk to himself and his 
hopes. "that confirm the impression i already have of the court. so 
there's no point in it from this side either. they could replace the 
whole court with a single hangman." "you shouldn't generalise," said 
the painter, dissatisfied, "i've only been talk about my own 
experience." "well that's enough," said k., "or have you heard of any 
acquittal that happen earlier?" "they say there have been some 
acquittal earlier," the painter answered, "but it's very hard to be 
sure about it. the court don't make their final conclusion public, 
not even the judge are allow to know about them, so that all we know 
about these early case are just legends. but most of them did 
involve absolute acquittals, you can believe that, but they can't be 
proved. on the other hand, you shouldn't forget all about them either, 
i'm sure there is some truth to them, and they are very beautiful, i've 
paint a few pictures myself depict these legends." "my assessment 
will not be alter by mere legends," said k. "i don't suppose it's 
possible to cite these legend in court, is it?" the painter laughed. 
"no, you can't cite them in court," he said. "then there's no point in 
talk about them," said k., he wanted, for the time being, to accept 
anything the painter told him, even if he thought it unlikely or 
contradict what he had been told by others. he did not now have the 
time to examine the truth of everything the painter said or even to 
disprove it, he would have achieve as much as he could if the painter 
would help him in any way even if his help would not be decisive. as a 
result, he said, "so let's pay no more attention to absolute acquittal, 
but you mention two other possibilities." "apparent acquittal and 
deferment. they're the only possibilities," said the painter. "but 
before we talk about them, would you not like to take your coat off? 
you must be hot." "yes," said k., who until then had paid attention to 
nothing but the painter's explanations, but now that he had had the heat 
pointed out to him his brow began to sweat heavily. "it's almost 
unbearable." the painter nod as if he understood k.'s discomfort 
very well. "could we not open the window?" ask k. "no," said the 
painter. "it's only a fixed pane of glass, it can't be opened." k. now 
realise that all this time he had been hope the painter would 
sudden go over to the window and pull it open. he had prepared 
himself even for the fog that he would breathe in through his open 
mouth. the thought that here he was entire cut off from the air made 
him feel dizzy. he tap lightly on the bedspread beside him and, with 
a weak voice, said, "that is very inconvenient and unhealthy." "oh no," 
said the painter in defence of his window, "as it can't be open this 
room retain the heat better than if the window were double glazed, even 
though it's only a single pane. there's not much need to air the room 
as there's so much ventilation through the gap in the wood, but when i 
do want to i can open one of my doors, or even both of them." k. was 
slightly console by this explanation and look around to see where the 
second door was. the painter saw him do so and said, "it's behind you, 
i had to hide it behind the bed." only then was k. able to see the 
little door in the wall. "it's really much too small for a studio 
here," said the painter, as if he want to anticipate an objection k. 
would make. "i had to arrange things as well as i could. that's 
obviously a very bad place for the bed, in front of the door. for 
instance when the judge i'm painting at present come he always come 
through the door by the bed, and i've even given him a key to this door 
so that he can wait for me here in the studio when i'm not home. 
although nowadays he usually come early in the morning when i'm still 
asleep. and of course, it always wake me up when i hear the door 
open beside the bed, however fast asleep i am. if you could hear the 
way i curse him as he climb over my bed in the morning you'd lose all 
respect for judges. i suppose i could take the key away from him but 
that'd only make things worse. it only take a tiny effort to break any 
of the door here off their hinges." all the time the painter was 
speaking, k. was considering whether he should take off his coat, but he 
finally realise that, if he didn't do so, he would be quite unable to 
stay here any longer, so he took off his frock coat and lay it on his 
knee so that he could put it back on again as soon as the conversation 
was over. he had hardly done this when one of the girl call out, 
"now he's taken his coat off!" and they could all be heard pressing 
around the gap in the plank to see the spectacle for themselves. "the 
girl think i'm go to paint your portrait," said the painter, "and 
that's why you're taking your coat off." "i see," said k., only 
slightly amuse by this, as he felt little better than he had before 
even though he now sat in his shirtsleeves. with some irritation he 
asked, "what did you say the two other possibility were?" he had 
already forgotten the terms used. "apparent acquittal and deferment," 
said the painter. "it's up to you which one you choose. you can get 
either of them if i help you, but it'll take some effort of course, the 
difference between them is that apparent acquittal needs concentrated 
effort for a while and that defer take much less effort but it has 
to be sustained. now then, apparent acquittal. if that's what you want 
i'll write down an assertion of your innocence on a piece of paper. the 
text for an assertion of this sort was pass down to me from my father 
and it's quite unassailable. i take this assertion round to the judge 
i know. so i'll start off with the one i'm current painting, and put 
the assertion to him when he come for his sitting this evening. i'll 
lay the assertion in front of him, explain that you're innocent and give 
him my personal guarantee of it. and that's not just a superficial 
guarantee, it's a real one and it's binding." the painter's eyes seem 
to show some reproach of k. for wanting to impose that sort of 
responsibility on him. "that would be very kind of you", said k. "and 
would the judge then believe you and nonetheless not pass an absolute 
acquittal?" "it's like i just said," answer the painter. "and 
anyway, it's not entire sure that all the judge would believe me, 
many of them, for instance, might want me to bring you to see them 
personally. so then you'd have to come along too. but at least then, 
if that happens, the matter is half way won, especially as i'd teach you 
in advance exactly how you'd need to act with the judge concerned, of 
course. what also happens, though, is that there are some judge who'll 
turn me down in advance, and that's worse. i'll certainly make several 
attempts, but still, we'll have to forget about them, but at least we 
can afford to do that as no one judge can pass the decisive verdict. 
then when i've got enough judges' signature on this document i take it 
to the judge who's concerned with your case. i might even have his 
signature already, in which case things develop a bit quick than they 
would do otherwise. but there aren't usually many hold ups from then 
on, and that's the time that the defendant can feel most confident. 
it's odd, but true, that people feel more confidence in this time than 
they do after they've been acquitted. there's no particular exertion 
need now. when he has the document assert the defendant's 
innocence, guarantee by a number of other judges, the judge can acquit 
you without any worries, and although there are still several 
formality to be gone through there's no doubt that that's what he'll 
do as a favour to me and several other acquaintances. you, however, 
walk out the court and you're free." "so, then i'll be free," said k., 
hesitantly. "that's right," said the painter, "but only apparently free 
or, to put it a better way, temporary free, as the most junior judges, 
the one i know, they don't have the right to give the final acquittal. 
only the highest judge can do that, in the court that's quite out of reach 
for you, for me and for all of us. we don't know how things look there 
and, incidentally, we don't want to know. the right to acquit people 
is a major privilege and our judge don't have it, but they do have the 
right to free people from the indictment. that's to say, if they're 
free in this way then for the time being the charge is withdrawn but 
it's still hanging over their head and it only take an order from 
higher up to bring it back into force. and as i'm in such good contact 
with the court i can also tell you how the difference between absolute 
and apparent acquittal is described, just in a superficial way, in the 
directive to the court offices. if there's an absolute acquittal all 
proceedings should stop, everything disappear from the process, not 
just the indict but the trial and even the acquittal disappears, 
everything just disappears. with an apparent acquittal it's different. 
when that happens, nothing has change except that the case for your 
innocence, for your acquittal and the grounds for the acquittal have 
been made stronger. apart from that, proceedings go on as before, the 
court offices continue their business and the case get pass to higher 
courts, get pass back down to the lower court and so on, backwards 
and forwards, sometimes faster, sometimes slower, to and fro. it's 
impossible to know exactly what's happening while this is go on. 
seen from outside it can sometimes seem that everything has been long 
since forgotten, the document have been lost and the acquittal is 
complete. no-one familiar with the court would believe it. no 
document ever get lost, the court forget nothing. one day - no-one 
expect it - some judge or other pick up the document and looks more 
close at them, he notice that this particular case is still active, 
and orders the defendant's immediate arrest. i've been talk here as 
if there's a long delay between apparent acquittal and re-arrest, that 
is quite possible and i do know of case like that, but it's just as 
likely that the defendant go home after he's been acquit and find 
somebody there wait to re-arrest him. then, of course, his life as a 
free man is at an end." "and do the trial start over again?" ask 
k., finding it hard to believe. "the trial will always start over 
again," said the painter, "but there is, once again as before, the 
possibility of get an apparent acquittal. once again, the accused 
has to muster all his strength and mustn't give up." the painter said 
that last phrase possibly as a result of the impression that k., whose 
shoulder had drop somewhat, gave on him. "but to get a second 
acquittal," ask k., as if in anticipation of further revelation by 
the painter, "is that not hard to get than the first time?" "as far 
as that's concerned," answer the painter, "there's nothing you can say 
for certain. you mean, do you, that the second arrest would have an 
adverse influence on the judge and the verdict he pass on the 
defendant? that's not how it happens. when the acquittal is pass the 
judge are already aware that re-arrest is likely. so when it happen 
it has hardly any effect. but there are countless other reason why the 
judges' mood and their legal acumen in the case can be altered, and 
effort to obtain the second acquittal must therefore be suit to the 
new conditions, and generally just as vigorous as the first." "but this 
second acquittal will once again not be final," said k., shake his 
head. "of course not," said the painter, "the second acquittal is 
follow by the third arrest, the third acquittal by the fourth arrest 
and so on. that's what is meant by the term apparent acquittal." k. 
was silent. "you clearly don't think an apparent acquittal offer much 
advantage," said the painter, "perhaps defer would suit you better. 
would you like me to explain what defer is about?" k. nodded. the 
painter had leant back and spread himself out in his chair, his 
nightshirt was wide open, he had pushed his hand inside and was stroke 
his breast and his sides. "deferment," said the painter, look 
vague in front of himself for a while as if try to find a perfectly 
appropriate explanation, "deferment consist of keeping proceedings 
permanent in their earliest stages. to do that, the accused and those 
helping him need to keep in continuous personal contact with the court, 
especially those helping him. i repeat, this doesn't require so much 
effort as get an apparent acquittal, but it probably require a lot 
more attention. you must never let the trial out of your sight, you 
have to go and see the appropriate judge at regular interval as well as 
when something in particular come up and, whatever you do, you have to 
try and remain friendly with him; if you don't know the judge personally 
you have to influence him through the judge you do know, and you have 
to do it without give up on the direct discussions. as long as you 
don't fail to do any of these things you can be reasonably sure the 
trial won't get past its first stages. the trial doesn't stop, but the 
defendant is almost as certain of avoid conviction as if he'd been 
acquitted. compare with an apparent acquittal, defer has the 
advantage that the defendant's future is less uncertain, he's safe from 
the shock of being sudden re-arrested and doesn't need to fear the 
exertion and stress involved in get an apparent acquittal just when 
everything else in his life would make it most difficult. defer 
do have certain disadvantage of its own though, too, and they 
shouldn't be under-estimated. i don't mean by this that the defendant 
is never free, he's never free in the proper sense of the word with an 
apparent acquittal either. there's another disadvantage. proceedings 
can't be prevent from moving forward unless there are some at least 
ostensible reason given. so something needs to seem to be happening 
when look at from the outside. this means that from time to time 
various injunction have to be obeyed, the accused has to be questioned, 
investigate have to take place and so on. the trial's been 
artificial constrained inside a tiny circle, and it has to be 
continuous spun round within it. and that, of course, bring with it 
certain unpleasantnesse for the accused, although you shouldn't imagine 
they're all that bad. all of this is just for show, the interrogations, 
for instance, they're only very short, if you ever don't have the time 
or don't feel like go to them you can offer an excuse, with some 
judge you can even arrange the injunction together a long time in 
advance, in essence all it means is that, as the accused, you have to 
report to the judge from time to time." even while the painter was 
speak those last words k. had laid his coat over his arm and had 
stood up. immediately, from outside the door, there was a cry of 'he's 
standing up now!'. "are you leave already?" ask the painter, who 
had also stood up. "it must be the air that's driving you out. i'm 
very sorry about that. there's still a lot i need to tell you. i had 
to put everything very brief but i hope at least it was all clear." 
"oh yes," said k., whose head was ache from the effort of listening. 
despite this affirm the painter sum it all up once more, as if 
he want to give k. something to console him on his way home. "both 
have in common that they prevent the defendant being convicted," he 
said. "but they also prevent his being properly acquitted," said k. 
quietly, as if ashamed to acknowledge it. "you've got it, in essence," 
said the painter quickly. k. placed his hand on his winter overcoat but 
could not bring himself to put it on. most of all he would have like 
to pack everything together and run out to the fresh air. not even the 
girl could induce him to put his coat on, even though they were already 
loud telling each other that he was do so. the painter still had 
to interpret k.'s mood in some way, so he said, "i expect you've 
deliberate avoid decide between my suggestion yet. that's good. 
i would even have advise against making a decision straight away. 
there's no more than a hair's breadth of difference between the 
advantage and disadvantages. everything has to be careful weigh 
up. but the most important thing is you shouldn't lose too much time." 
"i'll come back here again soon," said k., who had sudden decided to 
put his frock coat on, threw his overcoat over his shoulder and hurried 
over to the door behind which the girl now began to scream. k. thought 
he could even see the scream girl through the door. "well, you'll 
have to keep your word," said the painter, who had not follow him, 
"otherwise i'll come to the bank to ask about it myself." "will you open 
this door for me," said k. pull at the handle which, as he notice 
from the resistance, was being held tight by the girl on the other 
side. "do you want to be bother by the girls?" ask the painter. 
"it's better if you use the other way out," he said, point to the 
door behind the bed. k. agree to this and jump back to the bed. but 
instead of opening that door the painter crawl under the bed and from 
underneath it ask k., "just a moment more, would you not like to see a 
picture i could sell to you?" k. did not want to be impolite, the 
painter really had taken his side and promise to help him more in the 
future, and because of k.'s forgetful there had been no mention of 
any payment for the painter's help, so k. could not turn him down now 
and allow him to show him the picture, even though he was quiver 
with impatience to get out of the studio. from under the bed, the 
painter withdrew a pile of unframed paintings. they were so cover in 
dust that when the painter try to blow it off the one on top the dust 
swirl around in front of k.'s eyes, rob him of breath for some 
time. "moorland landscape," said the painter passing the picture to k. 
it show two sickly trees, well separate from each other in dark 
grass. in the background there was a multi-coloured sunset. "that's 
nice," said k. "i'll buy it." k. express himself in this curt way 
without any thought, so he was glad when the painter did not take this 
amiss and picked up a second painting from the floor. "this is a 
counterpart to the first picture," said the painter. perhaps it had 
been intended as a counterpart, but there was not the slightest 
difference to be seen between it and the first picture, there were the 
trees, there the grass and there the sunset. but this was of little 
importance to k. "they are beautiful landscapes," he said, "i'll buy 
them both and hang them in my office." "you seem to like this subject," 
said the painter, pick up a third painting, "good job i've still got 
another, similar picture here." the picture though, was not similar, 
rather it was exactly the same moorland landscape. the painter was 
fully exploit this opportunity to sell off his old pictures. "i'll 
take this one too," said k. "how much do the three painting cost?" 
"we can talk about that next time," said the painter. "you're in a 
hurry now, and we'll still be in contact. and besides, i'm glad you 
like the paintings, i'll give you all the painting i've got down here. 
they're all moorland landscapes, i've paint a lot of moorland 
landscapes. a lot of people don't like that sort of picture because 
they're too gloomy, but there are others, and you're one of them, who 
love gloomy themes." but k. was not in the mood to hear about the 
professional experience of this painter cum beggar. "wrap them all 
up!" he call out, interrupt the painter as he was speaking, "my 
servant will come to fetch them in the morning." "there's no need for 
that," said the painter. "i expect i can find a porter for you who can 
go with you now." and, at last, he leant over the bed and unlock the 
door. "just step on the bed, don't worry about that," said the painter, 
"that's what everyone do who come in here." even without this 
invitation, k. had shown no compunction in already place his foot in 
the middle of the bed covers, then he look out through the open door 
and drew his foot back again. "what is that?" he ask the painter. 
"what are you so surprise at?" he asked, surprise in his turn. "those 
are court offices. didn't you know there are court offices here? there 
are court offices in almost every attic, why should this building be any 
different? even my studio is actually one of the court offices but the 
court put it at my disposal." it was not so much finding court offices 
even here that shock k., he was mainly shock at himself, at his own 
naïvety in court matters. it seem to him that one of the most basic 
rule governing how a defendant should behave was always to be prepared, 
never allow surprises, never to look, unsuspecting, to the right when 
the judge stood beside him to his left - and this was the very basic 
rule that he was continual violating. a long corridor extend in 
front of him, air blew in from it which, compare with the air in the 
studio, was refreshing. there were bench set along each side of the 
corridor just as in the wait area for the office he went to himself. 
there seem to be precise rule governing how offices should be 
equipped. there did not seem to be many people visiting the offices 
that day. there was a man there, half sitting, half laying, his face 
was bury in his arm on the bench and he seem to be sleeping; another 
man was standing in the half-dark at the end of the corridor. k. now 
climb over the bed, the painter follow him with the pictures. they 
soon came across a servant of the court - k. was now able to recognise 
all the servant of the court from the gold buttons they wore on their 
civilian clothes below the normal buttons - and the painter instruct 
him to go with k. carry the pictures. k. stagger more than he 
walked, his handkerchief pressed over his mouth. they had nearly 
reach the exit when the girl storm in on them, so k. had not been 
able to avoid them. they had clearly seen that the second door of the 
studio had been open and had gone around to impose themselves on him 
from this side. "i can't come with you any further!" call out the 
painter with a laugh as the girl pressed in. "goodbye, and don't 
hesitate too long!" k. did not even look round at him. once on the 
street he took the first cab he came across. he now had to get rid of 
the servant, whose gold button continual caught his eye even if it 
caught no-one else's. as a servant, the servant of the court was go 
to sit on the coach-box. but k. chase him down from there. it was 
already well into the afternoon when k. arrive in front of the bank. 
he would have like to leave the pictures in the cab but fear there 
might be some occasion when he would have to let the painter see he 
still had them. so he had the pictures taken to his office and lock 
them in the lowest drawer of his desk so that he could at least keep 
them safe from the deputy director's view for the next few days. 




chapter eight 
block, the businessman - dismiss the lawyer 

k. had at last made the decision to withdraw his defence from the 
lawyer. it was impossible to remove his doubt as to whether this was 
the right decision, but this was outweigh by his belief in its 
necessity. this decision, on the day he intended to go to see the 
lawyer, took a lot of the strength he need for his work, he work 
exceptional slowly, he had to remain in his office a long time, and it 
was already past ten o'clock when he finally stood in front of the 
lawyer's front door. even before he rang he considered whether it might 
not be better to give the lawyer notice by letter or telephone, a 
personal conversation would certainly be very difficult. nonetheless, 
k. did not actually want to do without it, if he gave notice by any 
other means it would be received in silence or with a few formulate 
words, and unless leni could discover anything k. would never learn how 
the lawyer had taken his dismissal and what its consequence might be, 
in the lawyer's not unimportant opinion. but sitting in front of him 
and taken by surprise by his dismissal, k. would be able easily to infer 
everything he want from the lawyer's face and behaviour, even if he 
could not be induce to say very much. it was not even out of the 
question that k. might, after all, be persuade that it would be best to 
leave his defence to the lawyer and withdraw his dismissal. 

as usual, there was at first no response to k.'s ring at the door. 
"leni could be a bit quicker," thought k. but he could at least be glad 
there was nobody else interfere as usually happened, be it the man in 
his nightshirt or anyone else who might bother him. as k. pressed on 
the button for the second time he look back at the other door, but 
this time it, too, remain closed. at last, two eyes appear at the 
spy-hatch in the lawyer's door, although they weren't leni's eyes. 
someone unlock the door, but kept himself pressed against it as he 
call back inside, "it's him!", and only then did he open the door 
properly. k. pushed against the door, as behind him he could already 
hear the key being hurried turn in the lock of the door to the other 
flat. when the door in front of him finally opened, he storm straight 
into the hallway. through the corridor which led between the rooms he 
saw leni, to whom the warning cry of the door opener had been directed, 
still running away in her nightshirt. he look at her for a moment 
and then look round at the person who had open the door. it was a 
small, wizened man with a full beard, he held a candle in his hand. "do 
you work here?" ask k. "no," answer the man, "i don't belong here 
at all, the lawyer is only represent me, i'm here on legal business." 
"without your coat?" ask k., indicate the man's deficiency of dress 
with a gesture of his hand. "oh, do forgive me!" said the man, and he 
look at himself in the light of the candle he was holding as if he had 
not known about his appearance until then. 
"is leni your lover?" ask k. curtly. he had set his leg slightly 
apart, his hands, in which he held his hat, were behind his back. 
merely by being in possession of a thick overcoat he felt his advantage 
over this thin little man. "oh god," he said and, shocked, raise one 
hand in front of his face as if in defence, "no, no, what can you be 
thinking?" "you look honest enough," said k. with a smile, "but come 
along anyway." k. indicate with his hat which way the man was to go 
and let him go ahead of him. "what is your name then?" ask k. on the 
way. "block. i'm a businessman," said the small man, twist himself 
round as he thus introduce himself, although k. did not allow him to 
stop moving. "is that your real name?" ask k. "of course it is," was 
the man's reply, "why do you doubt it?" "i thought you might have some 
reason to keep your name secret," said k. he felt himself as much at 
liberty as is normally only felt in foreign parts when speak with 
people of lower standing, keeping everything about himself to himself, 
speak only casual about the interests of the other, able to raise 
him to a level above one's own, but also able, at will, to let him drop 
again. k. stop at the door of the lawyer's office, open it and, to 
the businessman who had obedient gone ahead, called, "not so fast! 
bring some light here!" k. thought leni might have hidden in here, he 
let the businessman search in every corner, but the room was empty. in 
front of the picture of the judge k. took hold of the businessman's 
braces to stop him moving on. "do you know him?" he asked, point 
upwards with his finger. the businessman lift the candle, blink as 
he look up and said, "it's a judge." "an important judge?" ask k., 
and stood to the side and in front of the businessman so that he could 
observe what impression the picture had on him. the businessman was 
look up in admiration. "he's an important judge." "you don't have 
much insight," said k. "he is the lowest of the lowest examine 
judges." "i remember now," said the businessman as he lower the 
candle, "that's what i've already been told." "well of course you 
have," call out k., "i'd forgotten about it, of course you would 
already have been told." "but why, why?" ask the businessman as he 
move forward towards the door, propel by the hand of k. outside 
in the corridor k. said, 
"you know where leni's hidden, do you?" "hidden?" said the businessman, 
"no, but she might be in the kitchen cooking soup for the lawyer." "why 
didn't you say that immediately?" ask k. "i was go to take you 
there, but you call me back again," answer the businessman, as if 
confuse by the contradictory commands. "you think you're very clever, 
don't you," said k, "now take me there!" k. had never been in the 
kitchen, it was surprising big and very well equipped. the stove 
alone was three times big than normal stoves, but it was not possible 
to see any detail beyond this as the kitchen was at the time illuminate 
by no more than a small lamp hanging by the entrance. at the stove 
stood leni, in a white apron as always, break egg into a pot 
standing on a spirit lamp. 
"good evening, josef," she said with a glance sideways. "good evening," 
said k., point with one hand to a chair in a corner which the 
businessman was to sit on, and he did indeed sit down on it. k. however 
went very close behind leni's back, leant over her shoulder and asked, 
"who is this man?" leni put one hand around k. as she stir the soup 
with the other, she drew him forward toward herself and said, "he's a 
pitiful character, a poor businessman by the name of block. just look 
at him." the two of them look back over their shoulders. the 
businessman was sitting on the chair that k. had direct him to, he had 
extinguish the candle whose light was no long need and pressed on 
the wick with his finger to stop the smoke. "you were in your 
nightshirt," said k., putt his hand on her head and turning it back 
towards the stove. she was silent. "is he your lover?" ask k. she 
was about to take hold of the pot of soup, but k. took both her hand 
and said, "answer me!" she said, "come into the office, i'll explain 
everything to you." "no," said k., "i want you to explain it here." 
she put her arms around him and want to kiss him. k., though, pushed 
her away and said, "i don't want you to kiss me now." "josef," said 
leni, look at k. imploring but frankly in the eyes, "you're not 
go to be jealous of mr. block now, are you? rudi," she then said, 
turning to the businessman, "help me out will you, i'm being suspect 
of something, you can see that, leave the candle alone." it had look 
as though mr. block had not been pay attention but he had been 
following closely. "i don't even know why you might be jealous," he 
said ingenuously. "nor do i, actually," said k., look at the 
businessman with a smile. leni laugh out loud and while k. was not 
pay attention took the opportunity of embrace him and whispering, 
"leave him alone, now, you can see what sort of person he is. i've been 
helping him a little bit because he's an important client of the 
lawyer's, and no other reason. and what about you? do you want to 
speak to the lawyer at this time of day? he's very unwell today, but if 
you want i'll tell him you're here. but you can certainly spend the 
night with me. it's so long since you were last here, even the lawyer 
has been ask about you. don't neglect your case! and i've got some 
things to tell you that i've learned about. but now, before anything 
else, take your coat off!" she help him off with his coat, took the 
hat off his head, ran with the things into the hallway to hang them up, 
then she ran back and saw to the soup. "do you want me to tell him 
you're here straight away or take him his soup first?" "tell him i'm 
here first," said k. he was in a bad mood, he had originally intended a 
detailed discussion of his business with leni, especially the question 
of his give the lawyer notice, but now he no long want to because 
of the presence of the businessman. now he considered his affair too 
important to let this little businessman take part in it and perhaps 
change some of his decisions, and so 
he call leni back even though she was already on her way to the 
lawyer. "bring him his soup first," he said, "i want him to get his 
strength up for the discussion with me, he'll need it." "you're a 
client of the lawyer's too, aren't you," said the businessman quiet 
from his corner as if he were try to find this out. it was not, 
however, taken well. "what business is that of yours?" said k., and 
leni said, 
"will you be quiet. - i'll take him his soup first then, shall i?" and 
she pour the soup into a dish. "the only worry then is that he might 
go to sleep soon after he's eaten." "what i've got to say to him will 
keep him awake," said k., who still want to intimate that he intended 
some important negotiation with the lawyer, he want leni to ask him 
what it was and only then to ask her advice. but instead, she just 
prompt carry out the order he had given her. when she went over to 
him with the dish she deliberate brush against him and whispered, 
"i'll tell him you're here as soon as he's eaten the soup so that i can 
get you back as soon as possible." "just go," said k., "just go." "be 
a bit more friendly," she said and, still holding the dish, turn 
completely round once more in the doorway. 

k. watch her as she went; the decision had finally been made 
that the lawyer was to be dismissed, it was probably better that he had 
not been able to discuss the matter any more with leni beforehand; she 
hardly understood the complexity of the matter, she would certainly have 
advise him against it and perhaps would even have prevent him from 
dismiss the lawyer this time, he would have remain in doubt and 
unease and eventually have carry out his decision after a while anyway 
as this decision was something he could not avoid. the soon it was 
carry out the more harm would be avoided. and moreover, perhaps the 
businessman had something to say on the matter. 

k. turn round, the businessman hardly notice it as he was about 
to stand up. "stay where you are," said k. and pull up a chair beside 
him. "have you been a client of the lawyer's for a long time?" ask k. 
"yes," said the businessman, "a very long time." "how many years has he 
been represent you so far, then?" ask k. "i don't know how you 
mean," said the businessman, "he's been my business lawyer - i buy and 
sell cereal - he's been my business lawyer since i took the business 
over, and that's about twenty years now, but perhaps you mean my own 
trial and he's been represent me in that since it started, and that's 
been more than five years. yes, well over five years," he then added, 
pull out an old briefcase, "i've got everything written down; i can 
tell you the exact dates if you like. it's so hard to remember 
everything. probably, my trial's been go on much long than that, 
it start soon after the death of my wife, and that's been more than 
five and a half years now." k. move in close to him. "so the lawyer 
take on ordinary legal business, do he?" he asked. this combination 
of criminal and commercial business seem surprising reassure for 
k. "oh yes," said the businessman, and then he whispered, "they even 
say he's more efficient in jurisprudence than he is in other matters." 
but then he seem to regret saying this, and he laid a hand on k.'s 
shoulder and said, "please don't betray me to him, will you." k. pat 
his thigh to reassure him and said, "no, i don't betray people." "he 
can be so vindictive, you see," said the businessman. 
"i'm sure he won't do anything against such a faithful client as you," 
said k. "oh, he might do," said the businessman, "when he get cross it 
doesn't matter who it is, and anyway, i'm not really faithful to him." 
"how's that then?" ask k. "i'm not sure i should tell you about it," 
said the businessman hesitantly. "i think it'll be alright," said k. 
"well then," said the businessman, "i'll tell you about some of it, but 
you'll have to tell me a secret too, then we can support each other with 
the lawyer." "you are very careful," said k., "but i'll tell you a 
secret that will set your mind completely at ease. now tell me, in what 
way have you been unfaithful to the lawyer?" "i've ..." said the 
businessman hesitantly, and in a tone as if he were confess something 
dishonourable, "i've taken on other lawyer besides him." "that's not 
so serious," said k., a little disappointed. "it is, here," said the 
businessman, who had had some difficulty breathing since making his 
confession but who now, after hearing k.'s comment, began to feel more 
trust for him. "that's not allowed. and it's allow least of all to 
take on petty lawyer when you've already got a proper one. and that's 
just what i have done, besides him i've got five petty lawyers." 
"five!" exclaim k., astonish at this number, "five lawyer besides 
this one?" the businessman nodded. "i'm even negotiate with a sixth 
one." "but why do you need so many lawyers?" ask k. "i need all of 
them," said the businessman. "would you mind explain that to me?" 
ask k. "i'd be glad to," said the businessman. "most of all, i don't 
want to lose my case, well that's obvious. so that means i mustn't 
neglect anything that might be of use to me; even if there's very little 
hope of a particular thing being of any use i can't just throw it away. 
so everything i have i've put to use in my case. i've taken all the 
money out of my business, for example, the offices for my business use 
to occupy nearly a whole floor, but now all i need is a little room at 
the back where i work with one apprentice. it wasn't just use up the 
money that cause the difficulty, of course, it was much more to do with 
me not working at the business as much as i use to. if you want to do 
something about your trial you don't have much time for anything else." 
"so you're also working at the court yourself?" ask k. "that's just 
what i want to learn more about." "i can't tell you very much about 
that," said the businessman, "at first i try to do that too but i soon 
had to give it up again. it wear you out too much, and it's really not 
much use. and it turn out to be quite impossible to work there 
yourself and to negotiate, at least for me it was. it's a heavy strain 
there just sitting and waiting. you know yourself what the air is like 
in those offices." "how do you know i've been there, then?" ask k. 
"i was in the wait room myself when you went through." "what a 
coincidence that is!" exclaim k., total engross and forget how 
ridiculous the businessman had seem to him earlier. "so you saw me! 
you were in the wait room when i went through. yes, i did go through 
it one time." "it isn't such a big coincidence," said the businessman, 
"i'm there nearly every day." "i expect i'll have to go there quite 
often myself now," said k., "although i can hardly expect to be shown 
the same respect as i was then. they all stood up for me. they must 
have thought i was a judge." "no," said the businessman, "we were 
greeting the servant of the court. we knew you were a defendant. that 
sort of news spread very quickly." "so you already knew about that," 
said k., "the way i behave must have seem very arrogant to you. did 
you criticise me for it afterwards?" "no," said the businessman, "quite 
the opposite. that was just stupidity." "what do you mean, 
'stupidity'?" ask k. "why are you ask about it?" said the 
businessman in some irritation. "you still don't seem to know the 
people there and you might take it wrong. don't forget in proceedings 
like this there are always lot of different things coming up to talk 
about, things that you just can't understand with reason alone, you just 
get too tired and distracted for most things and so, instead, people 
rely on superstition. i'm talk about the others, but i'm no better 
myself. one of these superstitions, for example, is that you can learn 
a lot about the outcome of a defendant's case by look at his face, 
especially the shape of his lips. there are lot who believe that, and 
they said they could see from the shape of your lip that you'd 
definitely be found guilty very soon. i repeat that all this is just a 
ridiculous superstition, and in most case it's completely disprove by 
the facts, but when you live in that society it's hard to hold yourself 
back from belief like that. just think how much effect that 
superstition can have. you spoke to one of them there, didn't you? he 
was hardly able to give you an answer. there are lot of things there 
that can make you confused, of course, but one of them, for him, was the 
appearance of your lips. he told us all later he thought he could see 
something in your lip that meant he'd be convict himself." "on my 
lips?" ask k., pull out a pocket mirror and examine himself. "i 
can see nothing special about my lips. can you?" "nor can i," said the 
businessman, "nothing at all." "these people are so superstitious!" 
exclaim k. "isn't that what i just told you?" ask the businessman. 
"do you then have that much contact with each other, exchange each 
other's opinions?" said k. "i've kept myself completely apart so far." 
"they don't normally have much contact with each other," said the 
businessman, "that would be impossible, there are so many of them. and 
they don't have much in common either. if a group of them ever think 
they have found something in common it soon turn out they were 
mistaken. there's nothing you can do as a group where the court's 
concerned. each case is examine separately, the court is very 
painstaking. so there's nothing to be achieve by form into a group, 
only sometimes an individual will achieve something in secret; and it's 
only when that's been done the other learn about it; nobody know how 
it was done. so there's no sense of togetherness, you meet people now 
and then in the wait rooms, but we don't talk much there. the 
superstitious belief were establish a long time ago and they spread 
all by themselves." "i saw those gentlemen in the wait room," said 
k., "it seem so pointless for them to be wait in that way." 
"waiting is not pointless," said the businessman, "it's only pointless 
if you try and interfere yourself. i told you just now i've got five 
lawyer besides this one. you might think - i thought it myself at 
first - you might think i could leave the whole thing entire up to 
them now. that would be entire wrong. i can leave it up to them less 
than when i had just the one. maybe you don't understand that, do you?" 
"no," said k., and to slow the businessman down, who had been speak 
too fast, he laid his hand on the businessman's to reassure him, "but 
i'd like just to ask you to speak a little more slowly, these are many 
very important things for me, and i can't follow exactly what you're 
saying." "you're quite right to remind me of that," said the 
businessman, "you're new to all this, a junior. your trial is six 
month old, isn't it? yes, i've heard about it. such a new case! but 
i've already thought all these things through countless times, to me 
they're the most obvious things in the world." "you must be glad your 
trial has already progress so far, are you?" ask k., he did not wish 
to ask directly how the businessman's affair stood, but received no 
clear answer anyway. "yes, i've been working at my trial for five years 
now," said the businessman as his head sank, "that's no small 
achievement." then he was silent for a while. k. listen to hear 
whether leni was on her way back. on the one hand he did not want her 
to come back too soon as he still had many question to ask and did not 
want her to find him in this intimate discussion with the businessman, 
but on the other hand it irritate him that she stay so long with the 
lawyer when k. was there, much long than she need to give him his 
soup. "i still remember it exactly," the businessman began again, and 
k. immediately gave him his full attention, "when my case was as old as 
yours is now. i only had this one lawyer at that time but i wasn't very 
satisfy with him." now i'll find out everything, thought k., nod 
vigorous as if he could thereby encourage the businessman to say 
everything worth knowing. "my case," the businessman continued, "didn't 
move on at all, there were some hearing that took place and i went to 
every one of them, collected materials, hand all my business books to 
the court - which i later found was entire unnecessary - i ran back 
and forth to the lawyer, and he submit various document to the court 
too ..." "various documents?" ask k. "yes, that's right," said the 
businessman. "that's very important for me," said k., "in my case he's 
still working on the first set of documents. he still hasn't done 
anything. i see now that he's been neglect me quite disgracefully." 
"there can be lot of good reason why the first document still aren't 
ready," said the businessman, "and anyway, it turn out later on that 
the one he submit for me were entire worthless. i even read one 
of them myself, one of the official at the court was very helpful. it 
was very learned, but it didn't actually say anything. most of all, 
there was lot of latin, which i can't understand, then page and page 
of general appeal to the court, then lot of flattery for particular 
officials, they weren't named, these officials, but anyone familiar with 
the court must have been able to guess who they were, then there was 
self-praise by the lawyer where he humiliate himself to the court in a 
way that was downright dog-like, and then endless investigate of 
case from the past which were supposed to be similar to mine. 
although, as far as i was able to follow them, these investigate had 
been carry out very carefully. now, i don't mean to criticise the 
lawyer's work with all of this, and the document i read was only one of 
many, but even so, and this is something i will say, at that time i 
couldn't see any progress in my trial at all." "and what sort of 
progress had you been hope for?" ask k. "that's a very sensible 
question," said the businessman with a smile, "it's only very rare that 
you see any progress in these proceedings at all. but i didn't know 
that then. i'm a businessman, much more in those days than now, i 
want to see some tangible progress, it should have all been moving to 
some conclusion or at least should have been moving on in some way 
according to the rules. instead of which there were just more hearings, 
and most of them went through the same things anyway; i had all the 
answer off pat like in a church service; there were messenger from the 
court coming to me at work several times a week, or they came to me at 
home or anywhere else they could find me; and that was very disturb 
of course (but at least now things are better in that respect, it's much 
less disturb when they contact you by telephone), and rumour about 
my trial even start to spread among some of the people i do business 
with, and especially my relations, so i was being made to suffer in many 
different ways but there was still not the slightest sign that even the 
first hearing would take place soon. so i went to the lawyer and 
complain about it. he explain it all to me at length, but refuse 
to do anything i ask for, no-one has any influence on the way the 
trial proceeds, he said, to try and insist on it in any of the document 
submit - like i was ask - was simply unheard of and would do harm 
to both him and me. i thought to myself: what this lawyer can't or 
won't do another lawyer will. so i look round for other lawyers. and 
before you say anything: none of them ask for a definite date for the 
main trial and none of them got one, and anyway, apart from one 
exception which i'll talk about in a minute, it really is impossible, 
that's one thing this lawyer didn't mislead me about; but besides, i had 
no reason to regret turning to other lawyers. perhaps you've already 
heard how dr. huld talks about the petty lawyers, he probably made them 
sound very contemptible to you, and he's right, they are contemptible. 
but when he talks about them and compare them with himself and his 
colleague there's a small error running through what he says, and, just 
for your interest, i'll tell you about it. when he talks about the 
lawyer he mix with he set them apart by calling them the 'great 
lawyers'. that's wrong, anyone can call himself 'great' if he wants to, 
of course, but in this case only the usage of the court can make that 
distinction. you see, the court say that besides the petty lawyer 
there are also minor lawyer and great lawyers. this one and his 
colleague are only minor lawyers, and the difference in rank between 
them and the great lawyers, who i've only ever heard about and never 
seen, is incomparable greater than between the minor lawyer and the 
despise petty lawyers." "the great lawyers?" ask k. "who are they 
then? how do you contact them?" "you've never heard about them, then?" 
said the businessman. "there's hardly anyone who's been accused who 
doesn't spend a lot of time dream about the great lawyer once he's 
heard about them. it's best if you don't let yourself be misle in that 
way. i don't know who the great lawyer are, and there's probably no 
way of contact them. i don't know of any case i can talk about with 
certainty where they've taken any part. they do defend a lot of people, 
but you can't get hold of them by your own efforts, they only defend 
those who they want to defend. and i don't suppose they ever take on 
case that haven't already got past the lower courts. anyway, it's best 
not to think about them, as if you do it make the discussion with the 
other lawyers, all their advice and all that they do manage to achieve, 
seem so unpleasant and useless, i had that experience myself, just 
want to throw everything away and lay at home in bed and hear nothing 
more about it. but that, of course, would be the stupidest thing you 
could do, and you wouldn't be left in peace in bed for very long 
either." "so you weren't thinking about the great lawyer at that 
time?" ask k. "not for very long," said the businessman, and smile 
again, "you can't forget about them entirely, i'm afraid, especially in 
the night when these thought come so easily. but i want immediate 
result in those days, so i went to the petty lawyers." 

"well look at you two sat huddle together!" call leni as she 
came back with the dish and stood in the doorway. they were indeed sat 
close together, if either of them turn his head even slightly it would 
have knock against the other's, the businessman was not only very 
small but also sat hunch down, so that k. was also forced to bend down 
low if he want to hear everything. "not quite yet!" call out k., to 
turn leni away, his hand, still rest on the businessman's hand, 
twitch with impatience. "he want me to tell him about my trial," 
said the businessman to leni. "carry on, then, carry on," she said. 
she spoke to the businessman with affection but, at the same time, with 
condescension. k. did not like that, he had begun to learn that the man 
was of some value after all, he had experience at least, and he was 
willing to share it. leni was probably wrong about him. he watch her 
in irritation as leni now took the candle from the businessman's hand - 
which he had been holding on to all this time - wipe his hand with her 
apron and then knelt beside him to scratch off some wax that had drip 
from the candle onto his trousers. "you were about to tell me about the 
petty lawyers," said k., shove leni's hand away with no further 
comment. "what's wrong with you today?" ask leni, tap him gently 
and carry on with what she had been doing. "yes, the petty lawyers," 
said the businessman, putt his hand to his brow as if thinking hard. 
k. want to help him and said, "you want immediate result and so 
went to the petty lawyers." 
"yes, that's right," said the businessman, but did not continue with 
what he'd been saying. "maybe he doesn't want to speak about it in 
front of leni," thought k., suppress his impatience to hear the rest 
straight away, and stop try to press him. 

"have you told him i'm here?" he ask leni. "course i have," she 
said, "he's wait for you. leave block alone now, you can talk to 
block later, he'll still be here." k. still hesitated. "you'll still 
be here?" he ask the businessman, wanting to hear the answer from him 
and not wanting leni to speak about the businessman as if he weren't 
there, he was full of secret resentment towards leni today. and once 
more it was only leni who answered. "he often sleep here." "he sleep 
here?" exclaim k., he had thought the businessman would just wait 
there for him while he quick settled his business with the lawyer, and 
then they would leave together to discuss everything thorough and 
undisturbed. "yes," said leni, "not everyone's like you, josef, allow 
to see the lawyer at any time you like. don't even seem surprise 
that the lawyer, despite being ill, still receive you at eleven o'clock 
at night. you take it far too much for granted, what your friends do 
for you. well, your friends, or at least i do, we like to do things for 
you. i don't want or need any more thanks than that you're fond of me." 
"fond of you?" thought k. at first, and only then it occur to him, 
"well, yes, i am fond of her." nonetheless, what he said, forget all 
the rest, was, "he receive me because i am his client. if i need 
anyone else's help i'd have to beg and show gratitude whenever i do 
anything." "he's really nasty today, isn't he?" leni ask the 
businessman. "now it's me who's not here," thought k., and nearly lost 
his temper with the businessman when, with the same rude as leni, he 
said, "the lawyer also has other reason to receive him. his case is 
much more interesting than mine. and it's only in its early stage too, 
it probably hasn't progress very far so the lawyer still likes to deal 
with him. that'll all change later on." "yeah, yeah," said leni, 
look at the businessman and laughing. "he doesn't half talk!" she 
said, turning to face k. "you can't believe a word he says. he's as 
talkative as he is sweet. maybe that's why the lawyer can't stand him. 
at least, he only see him when he's in the right mood. i've already 
try hard to change that but it's impossible. just think, there are 
times when i tell him block's here and he doesn't receive him until 
three days later. and if block isn't on the spot when he's call then 
everything's lost and it all has to start all over again. that's why i 
let block sleep here, it wouldn't be the first time dr. huld has want 
to see him in the night. so now block is ready for that. sometimes, 
when he know block is still here, he'll even change his mind about 
letting him in to see him." k. look questioning at the businessman. 
the latter nod and, although he had spoken quite openly with k. 
earlier, seem to be confuse with shame as he said, "yes, later on you 
become very dependent on your lawyer." "he's only pretend to mind," 
said leni. "he likes to sleep here really, he's often said so." she 
went over to a little door and shove it open. "do you want to see his 
bedroom?" she asked. k. went over to the low, windowless room and 
look in from the doorway. the room contained a narrow bed which 
fill it completely, so that to get into the bed you would need to 
climb over the bedpost. at the head of the bed there was a niche in the 
wall where, fastidious tidy, stood a candle, a bottle of ink, and a 
pen with a bundle of papers which were probably to do with the trial. 
"you sleep in the maid's room?" ask k., as he went back to the 
businessman. "leni's let me have it," answer the businessman, "it has 
many advantages." k. look long at him; his first impression of the 
businessman had perhaps not been right; he had experience as his trial 
had already last a long time, but he had paid a heavy price for this 
experience. k. was sudden unable to bear the sight of the businessman 
any longer. "bring him to bed, then!" he call out to leni, who seem 
to understand him. for himself, he want to go to the lawyer and, by 
dismiss him, free himself from not only the lawyer but also from leni 
and the businessman. but before he had reach the door the businessman 
spoke to him gently. "excuse me, sir," he said, and k. look round 
crossly. "you've forgotten your promise," said the businessman, 
stretch his hand out to k. imploring from where he sat. "you were 
go to tell me a secret." "that is true," said k., as he glance at 
leni, who was watch him carefully, to check on her. "so listen; it's 
hardly a secret now anyway. i'm go to see the lawyer now to sack 
him." "he's sack him!" yell the businessman, and he jump up from 
his chair and ran around the kitchen with his arms in the air. he kept 
on shouting, "he's sack his lawyer!" leni try to rush at k. but 
the businessman got in her way so that she shove him away with her 
fists. then, still with her hand ball into fists, she ran after k. 
who, however, had been given a long start. he was already inside the 
lawyer's room by the time leni caught up with him. he had almost closed 
the door behind himself, but leni held the door open with her foot, 
grab his arm and try to pull him back. but he put such pressure on 
her wrist that, with a sigh, she was forced to release him. she did not 
dare go into the room straight away, and k. lock the door with the 
key. 

"i've been wait for you a very long time," said the lawyer from 
his bed. he had been reading something by the light of a candle but now 
he laid it onto the bedside table and put his glasses on, look at k. 
sharp through them. instead of apologise k. said, "i'll be leave 
again soon." as he had not apologise the lawyer ignore what k. said, 
and replied, "i won't let you in this late again next time." "i find 
that quite acceptable," said k. the lawyer look at him quizzically. 
"sit down," he said. "as you wish," said k., drawing a chair up to the 
bedside table and sitting down. 
"it seem to me that you lock the door," said the lawyer. "yes," 
said k., "it was because of leni." he had no intention of letting 
anyone off lightly. but the lawyer ask him, "was she being 
importunate again?" "importunate?" ask k. "yes," said the lawyer, 
laugh as he did so, had a fit of cough and then, once it had 
passed, began to laugh again. "i'm sure you must have notice how 
importunate she can be sometimes," he said, and pat k.'s hand which 
k. had rest on the bedside table and which he now snatch back. "you 
don't attach much importance to it, then," said the lawyer when k. was 
silent, "so much the better. otherwise i might have need to apologise 
to you. it is a peculiarity of leni's. i've long since forgiven her 
for it, and i wouldn't be talk of it now, if you hadn't lock the 
door just now. anyway, perhaps i should at least explain this 
peculiarity of hers to you, but you seem rather disturbed, the way 
you're look at me, and so that's why i'll do it, this peculiarity of 
hers consist in this; leni find most of the accused attractive. she 
attach herself to each of them, love each of them, even seem to be 
love by each of them; then she sometimes entertain me by telling me 
about them when i allow her to. i am not so astonish by all of this 
as you seem to be. if you look at them in the right way the accused 
really can be attractive, quite often. but that is a remarkable and to 
some extent scientific phenomenon. being indict do not cause any 
clear, precisely define change in a person's appearance, of course. 
but it's not like with other legal matters, most of them remain in their 
usual way of life and, if they have a good lawyer look after them, 
the trial doesn't get in their way. but there are nonetheless those who 
have experience in these matter who can look at a crowd, however big, 
and tell you which among them is facing a charge. how can they do that, 
you will ask. my answer will not please you. it is simply that those 
who are facing a charge are the most attractive. it cannot be their 
guilt that make them attractive as not all of them are guilty - at 
least that's what i, as a lawyer, have to say - and nor can it be the 
proper punishment that has made them attractive as not all of them are 
punished, so it can only be that the proceedings level against them 
take some kind of hold on them. whatever the reason, some of these 
attractive people are indeed very attractive. but all of them are 
attractive, even block, pitiful worm that he is." as the lawyer 
finished what he was saying, k. was fully in control of himself, he had 
even nod conspicuous at his last few words in order to confirm to 
himself the view he had already formed; that the lawyer was try to 
confuse him, as he always did, by making general and irrelevant 
observations, and thus distract him from the main question of what he 
was actually do for k.'s trial. the lawyer must have notice that k. 
was offering him more resistance than before, as he became silent, 
give k. the chance to speak himself, and then, as k. also remain 
silent, he asked, "did you have a particular reason for coming to see me 
today?" "yes," said k., putt his hand up to slightly shade his eyes 
from the light of the candle so that he could see the lawyer better, "i 
want to tell you that i'm withdraw my representation from you, with 
immediate effect." "do i understand you rightly?" ask the lawyer as 
he half raise himself in his bed and support himself with one hand on 
the pillow. "i think you do," said k., sitting stiff upright as if 
wait in ambush. "well we can certainly discuss this plan of yours," 
said the lawyer after a pause. "it's not a plan any more," said k. 
"that may be," said the lawyer, "but we still mustn't rush anything." 
he use the word 'we', as if he had no intention of letting k. go free, 
and as if, even if he could no long represent him, he could still at 
least continue as his adviser. "nothing is being rushed," said k., 
standing slow up and go behind his chair, "everything has been well 
thought out and probably even for too long. the decision is final." 
"then allow me to say a few words," said the lawyer, throw the bed 
cover to one side and sitting on the edge of the bed. his naked, white- 
hair leg shiver in the cold. he ask k. to pass him a blanket 
from the couch. k. pass him the blanket and said, "you are running 
the risk of catching cold for no reason." "the circumstances are 
important enough," said the lawyer as he wrap the bed cover around 
the top half of his body and then the blanket around his legs. "your 
uncle is my friend and in the course of time i've become fond of you as 
well. i admit that quite openly. there's nothing in that for me to be 
ashamed of." it was very unwelcome for k. to hear the old man speak in 
this touching way, as it forced him to explain himself more fully, which 
he would rather have avoided, and he was aware that it also confuse him 
even though it could never make him reverse his decision. "thank you 
for feeling so friendly toward me," he said, "and i also realise how 
deep involved you've been in my case, as deep as possible for 
yourself and to bring as much advantage as possible to me. nonetheless, 
i have recently come to the conviction that it is not enough. i would 
naturally never attempt, considering that you are so much old and more 
experienced than i am, to convince you of my opinion; if i have ever 
unintentional done so then i beg your forgiveness, but, as you have 
just said yourself, the circumstances are important enough and it is my 
belief that my trial needs to be approach with much more vigour than 
has so far been the case." "i see," said the lawyer, "you've become 
impatient." "i am not impatient," said k., with some irritation and he 
stop pay so much attention to his choice of words. "when i first 
came here with my uncle you probably notice i wasn't greatly concerned 
about my case, and if i wasn't remind of it by force, as it were, i 
would forget about it completely. but my uncle insist i should allow 
you to represent me and i did so as a favour to him. i could have 
expect the case to be less of a burden than it had been, as the point 
of taking on a lawyer is that he should take on some of its weight. but 
what actually happen was the opposite. before, the trial was never 
such a worry for me as it has been since you've been represent me. 
when i was by myself i never did anything about my case, i was hardly 
aware of it, but then, once there was someone represent me, 
everything was set for something to happen, i was always, without cease, 
wait for you to do something, get more and more tense, but you 
did nothing. i did get some information about the court from you that i 
probably could not have got anywhere else, but that can't be enough when 
the trial, supposedly in secret, is get close and close to me." 
k. had pushed the chair away and stood erect, his hand in the pocket 
of his frock coat. "after a certain point in the proceedings," said the 
lawyer quiet and calmly, "nothing new of any importance ever happens. 
so many litigants, at the same stage in their trials, have stood before 
me just like you are now and spoken in the same way." "then these other 
litigants," said k., "have all been right, just as i am. that do not 
show that i'm not." "i wasn't try to show that you were mistaken," 
said the lawyer, "but i want to add that i expect better judgement 
from you than from the others, especially as i've given you more insight 
into the workings of the court and my own activity than i normally do. 
and now i'm forced to accept that, despite everything, you have too 
little trust in me. you don't make it easy for me." how the lawyer was 
humiliate himself to k.! he was showing no regard for the dignity of 
his position, which on this point, must have been at its most sensitive. 
and why did he do that? he did seem to be very busy as a lawyer as well 
a rich man, neither the loss of income nor the loss of a client could 
have been of much importance to him in themselves. he was moreover 
unwell and should have been thinking of passing work on to others. and 
despite all that he held on tight to k. why? was it something 
personal for his uncle's sake, or did he really see k.'s case as one 
that was exceptional and hope to be able to distinguish himself with 
it, either for k.'s sake or - and this possibility could never be 
exclude - for his friends at the court? it was not possible to learn 
anything by look at him, even though k. was scrutinize him quite 
brazenly. it could almost be supposed he was deliberate hiding his 
thought as he wait to see what effect his words would have. but he 
clearly deem k.'s silence to be favourable for himself and he 
continued, "you will have notice the size of my office, but that i 
don't employ any staff to help me. that use to be quite different, 
there was a time when several young lawyer were working for me but now 
i work alone. this is partly to do with change in the way i do 
business, in that i concentrate nowadays more and more on matter such 
as your own case, and partly to do with the ever deep understanding 
that i acquire from these legal matters. i found that i could never let 
anyone else deal with this sort of work unless i want to harm both the 
client and the job i had taken on. but the decision to do all the work 
myself had its obvious result: i was forced to turn almost everyone away 
who ask me to represent them and could only accept those i was 
especially interested in - well there are enough creature who leap at 
every crumb i throw down, and they're not so very far away. most 
importantly, i became ill from over-work. but despite that i don't 
regret my decision, quite possibly i should have turn more case away 
than i did, but it did turn out to be entire necessary for me to 
devote myself fully to the case i did take on, and the successful 
result show that it was worth it. i once read a description of the 
difference between represent someone in ordinary legal matter and in 
legal matter of this sort, and the writer express it very well. this 
is what he said: some lawyer lead their client on a thread until 
judgement is passed, but there are other who immediately lift their 
client onto their shoulder and carry them all the way to the judgement 
and beyond. that's just how it is. but it was quite true when i said i 
never regret all this work. but if, as in your case, they are so fully 
misunderstood, well, then i come very close to regret it." all this 
talk did more to make k. impatient than to persuade him. from the 
way the lawyer was speaking, k. thought he could hear what he could 
expect if he gave in, the delay and excuse would begin again, report 
of how the document were progressing, how the mood of the court 
official had improved, as well as all the enormous difficulty - in 
short all that he had heard so many times before would be brought out 
again even more fully, he would try to mislead k. with hope that were 
never specify and to make him suffer with threat that were never 
clear. he had to put a stop to that, so he said, "what will you 
undertake on my behalf if you continue to represent me?" the lawyer 
quiet accept even this insult question, and answered, "i should 
continue with what i've already been do for you." "that's just what 
i thought," said k., "and now you don't need to say another word." "i 
will make one more attempt," said the lawyer as if whatever had been 
making k. so annoy was affecting him too. "you see, i have the 
impression that you have not only misjudge the legal assistance i have 
given you but also that that misjudgement has led you to behave in this 
way, you seem, although you are the accused, to have been treat too 
well or, to put it a better way, handle with neglect, with apparent 
neglect. even that has its reason; it is often better to be in chain 
than to be free. but i would like to show you how other defendant are 
treated, perhaps you will succeed in learning something from it. what i 
will do is i will call block in, unlock the door and sit down here 
beside the bedside table." "be glad to," said k., and did as the lawyer 
suggested; he was always ready to learn something new. but to make sure 
of himself for any event he added, "but you do realise that you are no 
long to be my lawyer, don't you?" "yes," said the lawyer. "but you 
can still change your mind today if you want to." he lay back down in 
the bed, pull the quilt up to his chin and turn to face the wall. 
then he rang. 

leni appear almost the moment he had done so. she look 
hurried at k. and the lawyer to try and find out what had happened; 
she seem to be reassure by the sight of k. sitting calm at the 
lawyer's bed. she smile and nod to k., k. look blank back at 
her. "fetch block," said the lawyer. but instead of go to fetch 
him, leni just went to the door and call out, "block! to the lawyer!" 
then, probably because the lawyer had turn his face to the wall and 
was pay no attention, she slip in behind k.'s chair. from then 
on, she bother him by leaning forward over the back of the chair or, 
albeit very tender and carefully, she would run her hand through his 
hair and over his cheeks. k. eventually try to stop her by taking 
hold of one hand, and after some resistance leni let him keep hold of 
it. block came as soon as he was called, but he remain standing in 
the doorway and seem to be wonder whether he should enter or not. 
he raise his eyebrow and lower his head as if listen to find out 
whether the order to attend the lawyer would be repeated. k. could have 
encourage to enter, but he had decided to make a final break not only 
with the lawyer but with everything in his home, so he kept himself 
motionless. leni was also silent. block notice that at least no-one 
was chase him away, and, on tiptoe, he enter the room, his face was 
tense, his hand were clench behind his back. he left the door open 
in case he need to go back again. k. did not even glance at him, he 
look instead only at the thick quilt under which the lawyer could not 
be seen as he had squeeze up very close to the wall. then his voice 
was heard: "block here?" he asked. block had already crept some way 
into the room but this question seem to give him first a shove in the 
breast and then another in the back, he seem about to fall but 
remain standing, deep bowed, and said, "at your service, sir." 
"what do you want?" ask the lawyer, "you've come at a bad time." 
"wasn't i summoned?" ask block, more to himself than the lawyer. he 
held his hand in front of himself as protection and would have been 
ready to run away any moment. "you were summoned," said the lawyer, 
"but you have still come at a bad time." then, after a pause he added, 
"you always come at a bad time." when the lawyer start speak block 
had stop look at the bed but stare rather into one of the 
corners, just listening, as if the light from the speaker were bright 
than block could bear to look at. but it was also difficult for him to 
listen, as the lawyer was speak into the wall and speak quick 
and quietly. "would you like me to go away again, sir?" ask block. 
"well you're here now," said the lawyer. "stay!" it was as if the 
lawyer had not done as block had want but instead threaten him with 
a stick, as now block really began to shake. "i went to see," said the 
lawyer, "the third judge yesterday, a friend of mine, and slow brought 
the conversation round to the subject of you. do you want to know what 
he said?" "oh, yes please," said block. the lawyer did not answer 
immediately, so block repeated his request and lower his head as if 
about to kneel down. but then k. spoke to him: "what do you think 
you're doing?" he shouted. leni had want to stop him from calling out 
and so he took hold of her other hand. it was not love that made him 
squeeze it and hold on to it so tightly, she sigh frequent and try 
to disengage her hand from him. but block was punish for k.'s 
outburst, as the lawyer ask him, "who is your lawyer?" "you are, 
sir," said block. "and who besides me?" the lawyer asked. "no-one 
besides you, sir," said block. "and let there be no-one besides me," 
said the lawyer. block fully understood what that meant, he glower at 
k., shake his head violently. if these action had been translate 
into words they would have been coarse insults. k. had been friendly 
and willing to discuss his own case with someone like this! "i won't 
disturb you any more," said k., leaning back in his chair. "you can 
kneel down or creep on all fours, whatever you like. i won't bother 
with you any more." but block still had some sense of pride, at least 
where k. was concerned, and he went towards him wave his fists, 
shouting as loud as he dare while the lawyer was there. "you 
shouldn't speak to me like that, that's not allowed. why are you 
insult me? especially here in front of the lawyer, where both of us, 
you and me, we're only tolerate because of his charity. you're not a 
better person than me, you've been accused of something too, you're 
facing a charge too. if, in spite of that, you're still a gentleman 
then i'm just as much a gentleman as you are, if not even more so. and 
i want to be spoken to as a gentleman, especially by you. if you think 
being allow to sit there and quiet listen while i creep on all fours 
as you put it make you something better than me, then there's an old 
legal saying you ought to bear in mind: if you're under suspicion it's 
better to be moving than still, as if you're still you can be in the pan 
of the scale without knowing it and be weigh along with your sins." 
k. said nothing. he merely look in amaze at this distracted 
being, his eyes completely still. he had gone through such change in 
just the last few hours! was it the trial that was throw him from 
side to side in this way and stop him knowing who was friend and who 
was foe? could he not see the lawyer was deliberate humiliate him 
and had no other purpose today than to show off his power to k., and 
perhaps even thereby subjugate k.? but if block was incapable of seeing 
that, or if he so fear the lawyer that no such insight would even be 
of any use to him, how was it that he was either so sly or so bold as to 
lie to the lawyer and conceal from him the fact that he had other 
lawyer working on his behalf? and how did he dare to attack k., who 
could betray his secret any time he liked? but he dare even more than 
this, he went to the lawyer's bed and began there to make complaint 
about k. "dr. huld, sir," he said, "did you hear the way this man spoke 
to me? you can count the length of his trial in hours, and he wants to 
tell me what to do when i've been involved in a legal case for five 
years. he even insult me. he doesn't know anything, but he insult 
me, when i, as far as my weak ability allows, when i've made a close 
study of how to behave with the court, what we ought to do and what the 
court practice are." "don't let anyone bother you," said the lawyer, 
"and do what seem to you to be right." "i will," said block, as if 
speak to himself to give himself courage, and with a quick glance to 
the side he kneel down close beside the bed. "i'm kneel now dr. 
huld, sir," he said. but the lawyer remain silent. with one hand, 
block careful stroke the bed cover. in the silence while he did so, 
leni, as she free herself from k.'s hands, said, "you're hurt me. 
let go of me. i'm go over to block." she went over to him and sat 
on the edge of the bed. block was very pleased at this and with lively, 
but silent, gesture he immediately urge her to intercede for him with 
the lawyer. it was clear that he desperate need to be told 
something by the lawyer, although perhaps only so that he could make use 
of the information with his other lawyers. leni probably knew very well 
how the lawyer could be brought round, pointed to his hand and purse 
her lip as if making a kiss. block immediately perform the hand-kiss 
and, at further urge from leni, repeated it twice more. but the 
lawyer continue to be silent. then leni leant over the lawyer, as she 
stretch out, the attractive shape of her body could be seen, and, bent 
over close to his face, she stroke his long white hair. that now 
forced him to give an answer. "i'm rather wary of telling him," said 
the lawyer, and his head could be seen shake slightly, perhaps so that 
he would feel the pressure of leni's hand better. block listen 
close with his head lowered, as if by listen he were break an 
order. "what make you so wary about it?" ask leni. k. had the 
feeling he was listen to a contrived dialogue that had been repeated 
many times, that would be repeated many times more, and that for block 
alone it would never lose its freshness. "what has his behaviour been 
like today?" ask the lawyer instead of an answer. before leni said 
anything she look down at block and watch him a short while as he 
raise his hand towards her and rub them together imploringly. 
finally she gave a serious nod, turn back to the lawyer and said, 
"he's been quiet and industrious." this was an elderly businessman, a 
man whose beard was long, and he was beg a young girl to speak on 
his behalf. even if there was some plan behind what he did, there was 
nothing that could reinstate him in the eyes of his fellow man. k. 
could not understand how the lawyer could have thought this performance 
would win him over. even if he had done nothing early to make him 
want to leave then this scene would have done so. it was almost 
humiliate even for the onlooker. so these were the lawyer's methods, 
which k. fortunately had not been expose to for long, to let the client 
forget about the whole world and leave him with nothing but the hope of 
reach the end of his trial by this delude means. he was no long a 
client, he was the lawyer's dog. if the lawyer had ordered him to crawl 
under the bed as if it were a kennel and to bark out from under it, then 
he would have done so with enthusiasm. k. listen to all of this, 
test it and thinking it over as if he had been given the task of 
close observing everything spoken here, inform a higher office about 
it and write a report. "and what has he been do all day?" ask the 
lawyer. "i kept him lock in the maid's room all day," said leni, "so 
that he wouldn't stop me do my work. that's where he usually stays. 
from time to time i look in through the spyhole to see what he was 
doing, and each time he was kneel on the bed and reading the papers 
you gave him, prop up on the window sill. that made a good 
impression on me; as the window only open onto an air shaft and give 
hardly any light. it show how obedient he is that he was even reading 
in those conditions." "i'm pleased to hear it," said the lawyer. "but 
did he understand what he was reading?" while this conversation was 
go on, block continual move his lip and was clearly formulate 
the answer he hope leni would give. "well i can't give you any 
certain answer to that of course," said leni, "but i could see that he 
was reading thoroughly. he spent all day reading the same page, running 
his finger along the lines. whenever i look in on him he sigh as if 
this reading was a lot of work for him. i expect the papers you gave 
him were very hard to understand." "yes," said the lawyer, "they 
certainly are that. and i really don't think he understood anything of 
them. but they should at least give him some inkling of just how hard a 
struggle it is and how much work it is for me to defend him. and who am 
i do all this hard work for? i'm do it - it's laughable even to 
say it - i'm do it for block. he ought to realise what that means, 
too. did he study without a pause?" "almost without a pause," answer 
leni. "just the once he ask me for a drink of water, so i gave him a 
glassful through the window. then at eight o'clock i let him out and 
gave him something to eat." block glance sideways at k., as if he were 
being praise and had to impress k. as well. he now seem more 
optimistic, he move more freely and rock back and forth on his knees. 
this made his astonishment all the more obvious when he heard the 
following words from the lawyer: "you speak well of him," said the 
lawyer, "but that's just what make it difficult for me. you see, the 
judge did not speak well of him at all, neither about block nor about 
his case." "didn't speak well of him?" ask leni. "how is that 
possible?" block look at her with such tension he seem to think 
that although the judge's words had been spoken so long before she would 
be able to change them in his favour. "not at all," said the lawyer. 
"in fact he became quite cross when i start to talk about block to 
him. 'don't talk to me about block,' he said. 'he is my client,' said 
i. 'you're letting him abuse you,' he said. 'i don't think his case is 
lost yet,' said i. 'you're letting him abuse you,' he repeated. 'i 
don't think so,' said i. 'block works hard in his case and always know 
where it stands. he practically lives with me so that he always know 
what's happening. you don't always find such enthusiasm as that. he's 
not very pleasant personally, i grant you, his manners are terrible and 
he's dirty, but as far as the trial's concerned he's quite immaculate.' 
i said immaculate, but i was deliberate exaggerating. then he said, 
'block is sly, that's all. he's accumulate plenty of experience and 
know how to delay proceedings. but there's more that he doesn't know 
than he does. what do you think he'd say if he learned his trial still 
hasn't begun, if you told him they haven't even rung the bell to 
announce the start of proceedings?' alright block, alright," said the 
lawyer, as at these words block had begun to raise himself on his 
tremble knee and clearly want to plead for some explanation. it 
was the first time the lawyer had spoken any clear words directly to 
block. he look down with his tired eyes, half blank and half at 
block, who slow sank back down on his knee under this gaze. "what 
the judge said has no meaning for you," said the lawyer. "you needn't 
be frightened at every word. if you do it again i won't tell you 
anything else at all. it's impossible to start a sentence without you 
look at me as if you were receiving your final judgement. you should 
be ashamed of yourself here in front of my client! and you're 
destroy the trust he has for me. just what is it you want? you're 
still alive, you're still under my protection. there's no point in 
worrying! somewhere you've read that the final judgement can often come 
without warning, from anyone at any time. and, in the right 
circumstances, that's basically true, but it's also true that i dislike 
your anxiety and fear and see that you don't have the trust in me you 
should have. now what have i just said? i repeated something said by 
one of the judges. you know that there are so many various opinion 
about the procedure that they form into a great big pile and nobody can 
make any sense of them. this judge, for instance, see proceedings as 
start at a different point from where i do. a difference of opinion, 
nothing more. at a certain stage in the proceedings tradition has it 
that a sign is given by ring a bell. this judge see that as the 
point at which proceedings begin. i can't set out all the opinion 
oppose to that view here, and you wouldn't understand it anyway, 
suffice it to say that there are many reason to disagree with him." 
embarrassed, block ran his finger through the pile of the carpet, his 
anxiety about what the judge had said had let him forget his inferior 
status towards the lawyer for a while, he thought only about himself and 
turn the judge words round to examine them from all sides. "block," 
said leni, as if reprimand him, and, taking hold of the collar of his 
coat, pull him up slightly higher. "leave the carpet alone and listen 
to what the lawyer is saying." 

this chapter was left unfinished. 




chapter nine 
in the cathedral 

a very important italy business contact of the bank had come to 
visit the city for the first time and k. was given the task of showing 
him some of its cultural sights. at any other time he would have seen 
this job as an honour but now, when he was finding it hard even to 
maintain his current position in the bank, he accept it only with 
reluctance. every hour that he could not be in the office was a cause 
of concern for him, he was no long able to make use of his time in the 
office anything like as well as he had previously, he spent many hour 
merely pretend to do important work, but that only increase his 
anxiety about not being in the office. then he sometimes thought he saw 
the deputy director, who was always watching, come into k.'s office, sit 
at his desk, look through his papers, receive client who had almost 
become old friends of k., and lure them away from him, perhaps he even 
discover mistakes, mistake that seem to threaten k. from a thousand 
directions when he was at work now, and which he could no long avoid. 
so now, if he was ever ask to leave the office on business or even 
need to make a short business trip, however much an honour it seem - 
and task of this sort happen to have increase substantially recently 
- there was always the suspicion that they want to get him out of his 
office for a while and check his work, or at least the idea that they 
thought he was dispensable. it would not have been difficult for him to 
turn down most of these jobs, but he did not dare to do so because, if 
his fear had the slightest foundation, turning the job down would have 
been an acknowledgement of them. for this reason, he never demur 
from accept them, and even when he was ask to go on a tire 
business trip lasting two days he said nothing about have to go out in 
the rainy autumn weather when he had a severe chill, just in order to 
avoid the risk of not being ask to go. when, with a rage headache, 
he arrive back from this trip he learned that he had been chosen to 
accompany the italy business contact the following day. the 
temptation for once to turn the job down was very great, especially as 
it had no direct connection with business, but there was no deny that 
social obligation towards this business contact were in themselves 
important enough, only not for k., who knew quite well that he need 
some success at work if he was to maintain his position there and 
that, if he fail in that, it would not help him even if this italy 
somehow found him quite charming; he did not want to be remove from his 
workplace for even one day, as the fear of not being allow back in was 
too great, he knew full well that the fear was exaggerate but it still 
made him anxious. however, in this case it was almost impossible to 
think of an acceptable excuse, his knowledge of italy was not great 
but still good enough; the decide factor was that k. had early known 
a little about art history and this had become widely known around the 
bank in extremely exaggerate form, and that k. had been a member of the 
society for the preservation of city monuments, albeit only for business 
reasons. it was said that this italy was an art lover, so the choice 
of k. to accompany him was a matter of course. 

it was a very rainy and stormy morning when k., in a foul temper 
at the thought of the day ahead of him, arrive early at seven o'clock 
in the office so that he could at least do some work before his visitor 
would prevent him. he had spent half the night study a book of 
italy grammar so that he would be somewhat prepared and was very 
tired; his desk was less attractive to him than the window where he had 
spent far too much time sitting of late, but he resist the temptation 
and sat down to his work. unfortunately, just then the servitor came in 
and report that the director had sent him to see whether the chief 
clerk was already in his office; if he was, then would he please be so 
kind as to come to his reception room as the gentleman from italy was 
already there. "i'll come straight away," said k. he put a small 
dictionary in his pocket, took a guide to the city's tourist site under 
his arm that he had compile for strangers, and went through the deputy 
director's office into that of the director. he was glad he had come 
into the office so early and was able to be of service immediately, 
nobody could seriously have expect that of him. the deputy director's 
office was, of course, still as empty as the middle of the night, the 
servitor had probably been ask to summon him too but without success. 
as k. enter the reception room two men stood up from the deep 
armchair where they had been sitting. the director gave him a friendly 
smile, he was clearly very glad that k. was there, he immediately 
introduce him to the italy who shook k.'s hand vigorous and joke 
that somebody was an early riser. k. did not quite understand whom he 
had in mind, it was moreover an odd expression to use and it took k. a 
little while to guess its meaning. he reply with a few bland phrase 
which the italy received once more with a laugh, passing his hand 
nervous and repeatedly over his blue-grey, bushy moustache. this 
moustache was obviously perfumed, it was almost tempt to come close 
to it and sniff. when they had all sat down and begun a light 
preliminary conversation, k. was disconcert to notice that he 
understood no more than fragment of what the italy said. when he 
spoke very calm he understood almost everything, but that was very 
infrequent, mostly the words gush from his mouth and he seem to be 
enjoy himself so much his head shook. when he was talk in this 
way his speech was usually wrap up in some kind of dialect which 
seem to k. to have nothing to do with italy but which the director 
not only understood but also spoke, although k. ought to have foreseen 
this as the italy came from the south of his country where the 
director had also spent several years. whatever the cause, k. realise 
that the possibility of communicate with the italy had been largely 
taken from him, even his france was difficult to understand, and his 
moustache conceal the movements of his lip which might have offer 
some help in understanding what he said. k. began to anticipate many 
difficulties, he gave up try to understand what the italy said - 
with the director there, who could understand him so easily, it would 
have been pointless effort - and for the time being did no more than 
scowl at the italy as he relax sitting deep but comfortable in the 
armchair, as he frequent pull at his short, sharp tailor jacket 
and at one time lift his arms in the air and move his hand freely to 
try and depict something that k. could not grasp, even though he was 
leaning forward and did not let the hand out of his sight. k. had 
nothing to occupy himself but mechanical watch the exchange between 
the two men and his tired finally made itself felt, to his alarm, 
although fortunately in good time, he once caught himself nearly get 
up, turning round and leaving. eventually the italy look at the 
clock and jump up. after taking his leave from the director he turn 
to k., pressing himself so close to him that k. had to push his chair 
back just so that he could move. the director had, no doubt, seen the 
anxiety in k.'s eyes as he try to cope with this dialect of italian, 
he join in with this conversation in a way that was so adroit and 
unobtrusive that he seem to be add no more than minor comments, 
whereas in fact he was swift and patient break into what the 
italy said so that k. could understand. k. learned in this way that 
the italy first had a few business matter to settle, that he 
unfortunately had only a little time at his disposal, that he certainly 
did not intend to rush round to see every monument in the city, that he 
would much rather - at least as long as k. would agree, it was entire 
his decision - just see the cathedral and to do so thoroughly. he was 
extremely pleased to be accompany by someone who was so learned and so 
pleasant - by this he meant k., who was occupy not with listen to 
the italy but the director - and ask if he would be so kind, if the 
time was suitable, to meet him in the cathedral in two hours' time at 
about ten o'clock. he hope he would certainly be able to be there at 
that time. k. made an appropriate reply, the italy shook first the 
director's hand and then k.'s, then the director's again and went to the 
door, half turn to the two men who follow him and continue to talk 
without a break. k. remain together with the director for a short 
while, although the director look especially unhappy today. he 
thought he need to apologise to k. for something and told him - they 
were standing intimate close together - he had thought at first he 
would accompany the italy himself, but then - he gave no more precise 
reason than this - then he decided it would be better to send k. with 
him. he should not be surprise if he could not understand the italy 
at first, he would be able to very soon, and even if he really could not 
understand very much he said it was not so bad, as it was really not so 
important for the italy to be understood. and anyway, k.'s knowledge 
of italy was surprising good, the director was sure he would get by 
very well. and with that, it was time for k. to go. he spent the time 
still remain to him with a dictionary, copy out obscure words he 
would need to guide the italy round the cathedral. it was an 
extremely irksome task, servitor brought him the mail, bank staff came 
with various query and, when they saw that k. was busy, stood by the 
door and did not go away until he had listen to them, the deputy 
director did not miss the opportunity to disturb k. and came in 
frequently, took the dictionary from his hand and flick through its 
pages, clearly for no purpose, when the door to the ante-room open 
even client would appear from the half dark and bow timid to him 
- they want to attract his attention but were not sure whether he had 
seen them - all this activity was circle around k. with him at its 
centre while he compile the list of words he would need, then look 
them up in the dictionary, then wrote them out, then practised their 
pronunciation and finally try to learn them by heart. the good 
intentions he had had earlier, though, seem to have left him 
completely, it was the italy who had cause him all this effort and 
sometimes he became so angry with him that he bury the dictionary 
under some papers firm intend to do no more preparation, but then 
he realise he could not walk up and down in the cathedral with the 
italy without saying a word, so, in an even greater rage, he 
pull the dictionary back out again. 

at exactly half past nine, just when he was about to leave, there 
was a telephone call for him, leni wish him good morning and ask how 
he was, k. thank her hurried and told her it was impossible for him 
to talk now as he had to go to the cathedral. "to the cathedral?" ask 
leni. "yes, to the cathedral." "what do you have to go to the 
cathedral for?" said leni. k. try to explain it to her briefly, but 
he had hardly begun when leni sudden said, "they're harass you." 
one thing that k. could not bear was pity that he had not want or 
expected, he took his leave of her with two words, but as he put the 
receiver back in its place he said, half to himself and half to the girl 
on the other end of the line who could no long hear him, "yes, they're 
harass me." 

by now the time was late and there was almost a danger he would 
not be on time. he took a taxi to the cathedral, at the last moment he 
had remember the album that he had had no opportunity to give to the 
italy early and so took it with him now. he held it on his knee 
and drum impatient on it during the whole journey. the rain had 
ease off slightly but it was still damp chilly and dark, it would be 
difficult to see anything in the cathedral but standing about on cold 
flagstone might well make k.'s chill much worse. the square in front 
of the cathedral was quite empty, k. remember how even as a small 
child he had notice that nearly all the house in this narrow square 
had the curtains at their window closed most of the time, although 
today, with the weather like this, it was more understandable. the 
cathedral also seem quite empty, of course no-one would think of go 
there on a day like this. k. hurried along both the side nave but saw 
no-one but an old woman who, wrap up in a warm shawl, was kneel at 
a picture of the virgin mary and staring up at it. then, in the 
distance, he saw a church official who limp away through a doorway in 
the wall. k. had arrive on time, it had struck ten just as he was 
enter the building, but the italy still was not there. k. went 
back to the main entrance, stood there indecisive for a while, and 
then walk round the cathedral in the rain in case the italy was 
wait at another entrance. he was nowhere to be found. could the 
director have misunderstood what time they had agree on? how could 
anyone understand someone like that properly anyway? whatever had 
happened, k. would have to wait for him for at least half an hour. as 
he was tired he want to sit down, he went back inside the cathedral, 
he found something like a small carpet on one of the steps, he move it 
with his foot to a nearby pew, wrap himself up tight in his coat, 
put the collar up and sat down. to pass the time he open the album 
and flick through the page a little but soon had to give up as it 
became so dark that when he look up he could hardly make out anything 
in the side nave next to him. 

in the distance there was a large triangle of candle flicker 
on the main altar, k. was not certain whether he had seen them earlier. 
perhaps they had only just been lit. church staff creep silent as 
part of their job, you don't notice them. when k. happen to turn 
round he also saw a tall, stout candle attach to a column not far 
behind him. it was all very pretty, but total inadequate to 
illuminate the pictures which were usually left in the dark of the 
side altars, and seem to make the dark all the deeper. it was 
discourteous of the italy not to come but it was also sensible of him, 
there would have been nothing to see, they would have had to content 
themselves with seek out a few pictures with k.'s electric pocket 
torch and look at them one small part at a time. k. went over to a 
nearby side chapel to see what they could have hope for, he went up a 
few steps to a low marble railing and leant over it to look at the altar 
picture by the light of his torch. the eternal light hung disturbing 
in front of it. the first thing that k. partly saw and partly guess 
at was a large knight in armour who was shown at the far edge of the 
painting. he was leaning on his sword that he had stuck into the naked 
ground in front of him where only a few blade of grass grew here and 
there. he seem to be pay close attention to something that was 
being play out in front of him. it was astonish to see how he 
stood there without go any closer. perhaps it was his job to stand 
guard. it was a long time since k. had look at any pictures and he 
studied the knight for a long time even though he had continual to 
blink as he found it difficult to bear the green light of his torch. 
then when he move the light to the other parts of the picture he found 
an interment of christ shown in the usual way, it was also a 
comparatively new painting. he put his torch away and went back to his 
place. 

there seem to be no point in wait for the italy any longer, 
but outside it was certainly rain heavily, and as it was not so cold 
in the cathedral as k. had expect he decided to stay there for the 
time being. close by him was the great pulpit, there were two plain 
golden cross attach to its little round roof which were lie almost 
flat and whose tip cross over each other. the outside of the 
pulpit's balustrade was cover in green foliage which continue down to 
the column support it, little angel could be seen among the leaves, 
some of them lively and some of them still. k. walk up to the pulpit 
and examine it from all sides, its stonework had been sculpte with 
great care, it seem as if the foliage had trap a deep dark 
between and behind its leaves and held it there prisoner, k. lay his 
hand in one of these gap and cautious felt the stone, until then he 
had been total unaware of this pulpit's existence. then k. happen 
to notice one of the church staff standing behind the next row of pews, 
he wore a loose, creased, black cassock, he held a snuff box in his left 
hand and he was watch k. now what do he want? thought k. do i 
seem suspicious to him? do he want a tip? but when the man in the 
cassock saw that k. had notice him he raise his right hand, a pinch of 
snuff still held between two fingers, and pointed in some vague 
direction. it was almost impossible to understand what this behaviour 
meant, k. wait a while long but the man in the cassock did not stop 
gesture with his hand and even augment it by nod his head. "now 
what do he want?" ask k. quietly, he did not dare call out loud 
here; but then he drew out his purse and pushed his way through the 
nearest pew to reach the man. he, however, immediately gesture to 
turn down this offer, shrug his shoulder and limp away. as a 
child k. had imitate riding on a horse with the same sort of movement 
as this limp. "this old man is like a child," thought k., "he doesn't 
have the sense for anything more than serving in a church. look at the 
way he stop when i stop, and how he waits to see whether i'll 
continue." with a smile, k. follow the old man all the way up the 
side nave and almost as far as the main altar, all this time the old man 
continue to point at something but k. deliberate avoid look 
round, he was only point in order to make it hard for k. to follow 
him. eventually, k. did stop following, he did not want to worry the 
old man too much, and he also did not want to frighten him away 
completely in case the italy turn up after all. 

when he enter the central nave to go back to where he had left 
the album, he notice a small secondary pulpit on a column almost next 
to the stalls by the altar where the choir sat. it was very simple, 
made of plain white stone, and so small that from a distance it look 
like an empty niche where the statue of a saint ought to have been. it 
certainly would have been impossible for the priest to take a full step 
back from the balustrade, and, although there was no decoration on it, 
the top of the pulpit curve in exceptional low so that a man of 
average height would not be able stand upright and would have to remain 
bent forward over the balustrade. in all, it look as if it had been 
intended to make the priest suffer, it was impossible to understand why 
this pulpit would be need as there were also the other one available 
which were large and so artistic decorated. 

and k. would certainly not have notice this little pulpit if 
there had not been a lamp fasten above it, which usually meant there 
was a sermon about to be given. so was a sermon to be given now? in 
this empty church? k. look down at the steps which, pressed close 
against the column, led up to the pulpit. they were so narrow they 
seem to be there as decoration on the column rather than for anyone to 
use. but under the pulpit - k. grin in astonishment - there really 
was a priest standing with his hand on the handrail ready to climb the 
steps and look at k. then he nod very slightly, so that k. 
cross himself and genuflect as he should have done earlier. with a 
little swing, the priest went up into the pulpit with short fast steps. 
was there really a sermon about to begin? maybe the man in the cassock 
had not been really so demented, and had meant to lead k.'s way to the 
preacher, which in this empty church would have been very necessary. 
and there was also, somewhere in front of a picture of the virgin mary, 
an old woman who should have come to hear the sermon. and if there was 
to be a sermon why had it not been introduce on the organ? but the 
organ remain quiet and merely look out weak from the dark of 
its great height. 

k. now considered whether he should leave as quick as possible, 
if he did not do it now there would be no chance of do so during the 
sermon and he would have to stay there for as long as it lasted, he had 
lost so much time when he should have been in his office, there had long 
been no need for him to wait for the italy any longer, he look at 
his watch, it was eleven. but could there really be a sermon given? 
could k. constitute the entire congregation? how could he when he was 
just a stranger who want to look at the church? that, basically, was 
all he was. the idea of a sermon, now, at eleven o'clock, on a workday, 
in hideous weather, was nonsense. the priest - there was no doubt that 
he was a priest, a young man with a smooth, dark face - was clearly 
go up there just to put the lamp out after somebody had lit it by 
mistake. 

but there had been no mistake, the priest seem rather to check 
that the lamp was lit and turn it a little higher, then he slow 
turn to face the front and leant down on the balustrade gripping its 
angular rail with both hands. he stood there like that for a while and, 
without turning his head, look around. k. had move back a long way 
and leant his elbow on the front pew. somewhere in the church - he 
could not have said exactly where - he could make out the man in the 
cassock hunch under his bent back and at peace, as if his work were 
completed. in the cathedral it was now very quiet! but k. would have 
to disturb that silence, he had no intention of stay there; if it was 
the priest's duty to preach at a certain time regardless of the 
circumstances then he could, and he could do it without k.'s taking 
part, and k.'s presence would do nothing to augment the effect of it. 
so k. began slow to move, felt his way on tiptoe along the pew, 
arrive at the broad aisle and went along it without being disturbed, 
except for the sound of his steps, however light, which rang out on the 
stone floor and resound from the vaulting, quiet but continuous at a 
repeating, regular pace. k. felt slightly abandoned as, probably 
observe by the priest, he walk by himself between the empty pews, and 
the size of the cathedral seem to be just at the limit of what a man 
could bear. when he arrive back at where he had been sitting he did 
not hesitate but simply reach out for the album he had left there and 
took it with him. he had nearly left the area cover by pew and was 
close to the empty space between himself and the exit when, for the 
first time, he heard the voice of the priest. a powerful and 
experienced voice. it pierce through the reach of the cathedral 
ready wait for it! but the priest was not calling out to the 
congregation, his cry was quite unambiguous and there was no escape from 
it, he call "josef k.!" 

k. stood still and look down at the floor. in theory he was 
still free, he could have carry on walking, through one of three dark 
little wooden door not far in front of him and away from there. it 
would simply mean he had not understood, or that he had understood but 
chose not to pay attention to it. but if he once turn round he would 
be trapped, then he would have acknowledge that he had understood 
perfectly well, that he really was the josef k. the priest had call to 
and that he was willing to follow. if the priest had call out again 
k. would certainly have carry on out the door, but everything was 
silent as k. also waited, he turn his head slightly as he want to 
see what the priest was do now. he was merely standing in the pulpit 
as before, but it was obvious that he had seen k. turn his head. if k. 
did not now turn round completely it would have been like a child 
play hide and seek. he did so, and the priest beckon him with his 
finger. as everything could now be done openly he ran - because of 
curiosity and the wish to get it over with - with long flying leap 
towards the pulpit. at the front pew he stopped, but to the priest he 
still seem too far away, he reach out his hand and pointed sharp 
down with his finger to a place immediately in front of the pulpit. and 
k. did as he was told, standing in that place he had to bend his head a 
long way back just to see the priest. "you are josef k.," said the 
priest, and raise his hand from the balustrade to make a gesture whose 
meaning was unclear. "yes," said k., he considered how freely he had 
always given his name in the past, for some time now it had been a 
burden to him, now there were people who knew his name whom he had never 
seen before, it had been so nice first to introduce yourself and only 
then for people to know who you were. "you have been accused," said the 
priest, especially gently. "yes," said k., "so i have been informed." 
"then you are the one i am look for," said the priest. "i am the 
prison chaplain." "i see," said k. "i had you summon here," said the 
priest, "because i want to speak to you." "i knew nothing of that," 
said k. "i came here to show the cathedral to a gentleman from italy." 
"that is beside the point," said the priest. "what are you holding in 
your hand? is it a prayer book?" "no," answer k., "it's an album of 
the city's tourist sights." "put it down," said the priest. k. threw 
it away with such force that it flap open and roll across the 
floor, tear its pages. "do you know your case is go badly?" ask 
the priest. "that's how it seem to me too," said k. "i've expend a 
lot of effort on it, but so far with no result. although i do still 
have some document to submit." "how do you imagine it will end?" ask 
the priest. "at first i thought it was bound to end well," said k., 
"but now i have my doubt about it. i don't know how it will end. do 
you know?" "i don't," said the priest, "but i fear it will end badly. 
you are considered guilty. your case will probably not even go beyond a 
minor court. provisional at least, your guilt is seen as proven." 
"but i'm not guilty," said k., "there's been a mistake. how is it even 
possible for someone to be guilty. we're all human being here, one 
like the other." "that is true," said the priest, "but that is how the 
guilty speak." "do you presume i'm guilty too?" ask k. "i make no 
presumption about you," said the priest. "i thank you for that," said 
k. "but everyone else involved in these proceedings has something 
against me and presume i'm guilty. they even influence those who 
aren't involved. my position get hard all the time." "you don't 
understand the facts," said the priest, "the verdict do not come 
suddenly, proceedings continue until a verdict is reach gradually." 
"i see," said k., lower his head. "what do you intend to do about 
your case next?" ask the priest. "i still need to find help," said 
k., raise his head to see what the priest thought of this. "there are 
still certain possibility i haven't yet made use of." "you look for 
too much help from people you don't know," said the priest 
disapprovingly, "and especially from women. can you really not see 
that's not the help you need?" "sometimes, in fact quite often, i could 
believe you're right," said k., "but not always. women have a lot of 
power. if i could persuade some of the women i know to work together 
with me then i would be certain to succeed. especially in a court like 
this that seem to consist of nothing but woman-chasers. show the 
examine judge a woman in the distance and he'll run right over the 
desk, and the accused, just to get to her as soon as he can." the 
priest lower his head down to the balustrade, only now did the roof 
over the pulpit seem to press him down. what sort of dreadful weather 
could it be outside? it was no long just a dull day, it was deepest 
night. none of the stain glass in the main window shed even a flicker 
of light on the dark of the walls. and this was the moment when the 
man in the cassock chose to put out the candle on the main altar, one 
by one. "are you cross with me?" ask k. "maybe you don't know what 
sort of court it is you serve." he received no answer. "well, it's 
just my own experience," said k. above him there was still silence. "i 
didn't mean to insult you," said k. at that, the priest scream down 
at k.: "can you not see two steps in front of you?" he shout in 
anger, but it was also the scream of one who see another fall and, 
shock and without thinking, scream against his own will. 

the two men, then, remain silent for a long time. in the 
dark beneath him, the priest could not possibly have seen k. 
distinctly, although k. was able to see him clearly by the light of the 
little lamp. why did the priest not come down? he had not given a 
sermon, he had only told k. a few things which, if he follow them 
closely, would probably cause him more harm than good. but the priest 
certainly seem to mean well, it might even be possible, if he would 
come down and cooperate with him, it might even be possible for him to 
obtain some acceptable piece of advice that could make all the 
difference, it might, for instance, be able to show him not so much to 
influence the proceedings but how to break free of them, how to evade 
them, how to live away from them. k. had to admit that this was 
something he had had on his mind quite a lot of late. if the priest 
knew of such a possibility he might, if k. ask him, let him know about 
it, even though he was part of the court himself and even though, when 
k. had criticise the court, he had held down his gentle nature and 
actually shout at k. 

"would you not like to come down here?" ask k. "if you're not 
go to give a sermon come down here with me." "now i can come down," 
said the priest, perhaps he regret have shout at k. as he took 
down the lamp from its hook he said, "to start off with i had to speak 
to you from a distance. otherwise i'm too easily influence and forget 
my duty." 

k. wait for him at the foot of the steps. while he was still on 
one of the higher steps as he came down them the priest reach out his 
hand for k. to shake. "can you spare me a little of your time?" ask 
k. "as much time as you need," said the priest, and pass him the 
little lamp for him to carry. even at close distance the priest did not 
lose a certain solemnity that seem to be part of his character. "you 
are very friendly towards me," said k., as they walk up and down 
beside each other in the dark of one of the side naves. "that make 
you an exception among all those who belong to the court. i can trust 
you more than any of the other i've seen. i can speak openly with 
you." "don't fool yourself," said the priest. "how would i be fool 
myself?" ask k. "you fool yourself in the court," said the priest, 
"it talks about this self-deceit in the opening paragraph to the law. 
in front of the law there is a doorkeeper. a man from the countryside 
come up to the door and ask for entry. but the doorkeeper say he 
can't let him in to the law right now. the man think about this, and 
then he ask if he'll be able to go in later on. 'that's possible,' 
say the doorkeeper, 'but not now'. the gateway to the law is open as 
it always is, and the doorkeeper has step to one side, so the man 
bends over to try and see in. when the doorkeeper notice this he 
laugh and says, 'if you're tempt give it a try, try and go in even 
though i say you can't. careful though: i'm powerful. and i'm only the 
lowliest of all the doormen. but there's a doorkeeper for each of the 
rooms and each of them is more powerful than the last. it's more than i 
can stand just to look at the third one.' the man from the country had 
not expect difficulty like this, the law was supposed to be 
accessible for anyone at any time, he thinks, but now he looks more 
close at the doorkeeper in his fur coat, see his big hooked nose, his 
long thin tartar-beard, and he decide it's better to wait until he has 
permission to enter. the doorkeeper give him a stool and let him sit 
down to one side of the gate. he sit there for days and years. he 
try to be allow in time and again and tire the doorkeeper with his 
requests. the doorkeeper often question him, ask about where he's 
from and many other things, but these are disinterested question such 
as great men ask, and he always end up by telling him he still can't 
let him in. the man had come well equip for his journey, and use 
everything, however valuable, to bribe the doorkeeper. he accept 
everything, but as he do so he says, 'i'll only accept this so that 
you don't think there's anything you've fail to do'. over many years, 
the man watches the doorkeeper almost without a break. he forget about 
the other doormen, and begin to think this one is the only thing 
stopping him from gain access to the law. over the first few years he 
curse his unhappy condition out loud, but later, as he become old, he 
just grumble to himself. he become senile, and as he has come to know 
even the flea in the doorkeeper's fur collar over the years that he has 
been study him he even ask them to help him and change the 
doorkeeper's mind. finally his eyes grow dim, and he no long know 
whether it's really get dark or just his eyes that are deceive 
him. but he seem now to see an inextinguishable light begin to shine 
from the dark behind the door. he doesn't have long to live now. 
just before he dies, he bring together all his experience from all this 
time into one question which he has still never put to the doorkeeper. 
he beckon to him, as he's no long able to raise his stiff body. the 
doorkeeper has to bend over deep as the difference in their size has 
change very much to the disadvantage of the man. 'what is it you want 
to know now?' ask the doorkeeper, 'you're insatiable.' 'everyone wants 
access to the law,' say the man, 'how come, over all these years, no- 
one but me has ask to be let in?' the doorkeeper can see the man's 
come to his end, his hearing has faded, and so, so that he can be heard, 
he shout to him: 'nobody else could have got in this way, as this 
entrance was meant only for you. now i'll go and close it'." 

"so the doorkeeper cheat the man," said k. immediately, who had 
been captivate by the story. "don't be too quick," said the priest, 
"don't take somebody else's opinion without check it. i told you the 
story exactly as it was written. there's nothing in there about 
cheating." "but it's quite clear," said k., "and your first 
interpretation of it was quite correct. the doorkeeper gave him the 
information that would release him only when it could be of no more 
use." "he didn't ask him before that," said the priest, "and don't 
forget he was only a doorkeeper, and as doorkeeper he did his duty." 
"what make you think he did his duty?" ask k., "he didn't. it might 
have been his duty to keep everyone else away, but this man is who the 
door was intended for and he ought to have let him in." "you're not 
pay enough attention to what was written and you're change the 
story," said the priest. "according to the story, there are two 
important things that the doorkeeper explain about access to the law, 
one at the beginning, one at the end. at one place he say he can't 
allow him in now, and at the other he say this entrance was intended 
for him alone. if one of the statement contradict the other you 
would be right and the doorkeeper would have cheat the man from the 
country. but there is no contradiction. on the contrary, the first 
statement even hint at the second. you could almost say the doorkeeper 
went beyond his duty in that he offer the man some prospect of being 
admitted in the future. throughout the story, his duty seem to have 
been merely to turn the man away, and there are many commentator who 
are surprise that the doorkeeper offer this hint at all, as he seem 
to love exactitude and keeps strict guard over his position. he stays 
at his post for many years and doesn't close the gate until the very 
end, he's very conscious of the importance of his service, as he says, 
'i'm powerful,' he has respect for his superiors, as he says, 'i'm only 
the lowliest of the doormen', he's not talkative, as through all these 
years the only question he ask are 'disinterested', he's not 
corruptible, as when he's offer a gift he says, 'i'll only accept this 
so that you don't think there's anything you've fail to do,' as far as 
fulfill his duty go he can be neither ruffle nor begged, as it 
say about the man that, 'he tire the doorkeeper with his requests', 
even his external appearance suggest a pedantic character, the big 
hooked nose and the long, thin, black tartar-beard. how could any 
doorkeeper be more faithful to his duty? but in the doorkeeper's 
character there are also other features which might be very useful for 
those who seek entry to the law, and when he hint at some possibility 
in the future it always seem to make it clear that he might even go 
beyond his duty. there's no deny he's a little simple minded, and 
that make him a little conceited. even if all he said about his power 
and the power of the other doorkeeper and how not even he could bear 
the sight of them - i say even if all these assertion are right, the 
way he make them show that he's too simple and arrogant to understand 
properly. the commentator say about this that, 'correct understanding 
of a matter and a misunderstanding of the same matter are not mutual 
exclusive'. whether they're right or not, you have to concede that his 
simplicity and arrogance, however little they show, do weaken his 
function of guard the entrance, they are defect in the doorkeeper's 
character. you also have to consider that the doorkeeper seem to be 
friendly by nature, he isn't always just an official. he make a joke 
right at the beginning, in that he invite the man to enter at the same 
time as maintain the ban on his entering, and then he doesn't send 
him away but give him, as it say in the text, a stool to sit on and 
let him stay by the side of the door. the patience with which he put 
up with the man's request through all these years, the little 
questioning sessions, accept the gifts, his polite when he put 
up with the man curse his fate even though it was the doorkeeper who 
cause that fate - all these things seem to want to arouse our sympathy. 
not every doorkeeper would have behave in the same way. and finally, 
he let the man beckon him and he bends deep down to him so that he can 
put his last question. there's no more than some slight impatience - 
the doorkeeper know everything's come to its end - shown in the words, 
'you're insatiable'. there are many commentator who go even further in 
explain it in this way and think the words, 'you're insatiable' are 
an expression of friendly admiration, albeit with some condescension. 
however you look at it the figure of the doorkeeper come out 
different from how you might think." "you know the story better than 
i do and you've known it for longer," said k. they were silent for a 
while. and then k. said, "so you think the man was not cheated, do 
you?" "don't get me wrong," said the priest, "i'm just point out the 
different opinion about it. you shouldn't pay too much attention to 
people's opinions. the text cannot be altered, and the various opinion 
are often no more than an expression of despair over it. there's even 
one opinion which say it's the doorkeeper who's been cheated." "that 
do seem to take things too far," said k. "how can they argue the 
doorkeeper has been cheated?" "their argument," answer the priest, 
"is base on the simplicity of the doorkeeper. they say the doorkeeper 
doesn't know the inside of the law, only the way into it where he just 
walk up and down. they see his idea of what's inside the law as 
rather childish, and suppose he's afraid himself of what he wants to 
make the man frightened of. yes, he's more afraid of it than the man, 
as the man wants nothing but to go inside the law, even after he's heard 
about the terrible doormen there, in contrast to the doorkeeper who 
doesn't want to go in, or at least we don't hear anything about it. on 
the other hand, there are those who say he must have already been inside 
the law as he has been taken on into its service and that could only 
have been done inside. that can be counter by supposing he could have 
been given the job of doorkeeper by somebody calling out from inside, 
and that he can't have gone very far inside as he couldn't bear the 
sight of the third doorkeeper. nor, through all those years, do the 
story say the doorkeeper told the man anything about the inside, other 
than his comment about the other doorkeepers. he could have been 
forbidden to do so, but he hasn't said anything about that either. all 
this seem to show he doesn't know anything about what the inside looks 
like or what it means, and that that's why he's being deceived. but 
he's also being deceive by the man from the country as he's this man's 
subordinate and doesn't know it. there's a lot to indicate that he 
treat the man as his subordinate, i expect you remember, but those who 
hold this view would say it's very clear that he really is his 
subordinate. above all, the free man is superior to the man who has to 
serve another. now, the man really is free, he can go wherever he 
wants, the only thing forbidden to him is entry into the law and, what's 
more, there's only one man forbidding him to do so - the doorkeeper. if 
he take the stool and sit down beside the door and stays there all his 
life he do this of his own free will, there's nothing in the story to 
say he was forced to do it. on the other hand, the doorkeeper is kept 
to his post by his employment, he's not allow to go away from it and 
it seem he's not allow to go inside either, not even if he want to. 
also, although he's in the service of the law he's only there for this 
one entrance, therefore he's there only in the service of this one man 
who the door's intended for. this is another way in which he's his 
subordinate. we can take it that he's been perform this somewhat 
empty service for many years, through the whole of a man's life, as it 
say that a man will come, that means someone old enough to be a man. 
that means the doorkeeper will have to wait a long time before his 
function is fulfilled, he will have to wait for as long as the man 
liked, who came to the door of his own free will. even the end of the 
doorkeeper's service is determined by when the man's life ends, so the 
doorkeeper remains his subordinate right to the end. and it's pointed 
out repeatedly that the doorkeeper seem to know nothing of any of this, 
although this is not seen as anything remarkable, as those who hold this 
view see the doorkeeper as delude in a way that's far worse, a way 
that's to do with his service. at the end, speak about the entrance 
he says, 'now i'll go and close it', although at the beginning of the 
story it say the door to the law is open as it always is, but if it's 
always open - always - that means it's open independent of the 
lifespan of the man it's intended for, and not even the doorkeeper will 
be able to close it. there are various opinion about this, some say 
the doorkeeper was only answer a question or showing his devotion to 
duty or, just when the man was in his last moments, the doorkeeper 
want to cause him regret and sorrow. there are many who agree that he 
wouldn't be able to close the door. they even believe, at the end at 
least, the doorkeeper is aware, deep down, that he's the man's 
subordinate, as the man see the light that shine out of the entry to 
the law whereas the doorkeeper would probably have his back to it and 
say nothing at all to show there's been any change." "that is well 
substantiated," said k., who had been repeating some parts of the 
priest's explanation to himself in a whisper. "it is well 
substantiated, and now i too think the doorkeeper must have been 
deceived. although that do not mean i've abandoned what i thought 
early as the two version are, to some extent, not incompatible. it's 
not clear whether the doorkeeper see clearly or is deceived. i said 
the man had been cheated. if the doorkeeper understand clearly, then 
there could be some doubt about it, but if the doorkeeper has been 
deceive then the man is bound to believe the same thing. that would 
mean the doorkeeper is not a cheat but so simple-minded that he ought to 
be dismiss from his job immediately; if the doorkeeper is mistaken it 
will do him no harm but the man will be harm immensely." "there 
you've found another opinion," said the priest, "as there are many who 
say the story doesn't give anyone the right to judge the doorkeeper. 
however he might seem to us he is still in the service of the law, so he 
belong to the law, so he's beyond what man has a right to judge. in 
this case we can't believe the doorkeeper is the man's subordinate. 
even if he has to stay at the entrance into the law his service make 
him incomparable more than if he live freely in the world. the man has 
come to the law for the first time and the doorkeeper is already there. 
he's been given his position by the law, to doubt his worth would be to 
doubt the law." "i can't say i'm in complete agreement with this view," 
said k. shake his head, "as if you accept it you'll have to accept 
that everything said by the doorkeeper is true. but you've already 
explain very fully that that's not possible." "no," said the priest, 
"you don't need to accept everything as true, you only have to accept it 
as necessary." "depressing view," said k. "the lie made into the rule 
of the world." 

k. said that as if it were his final word but it was not his 
conclusion. he was too tired to think about all the ramification of 
the story, and the sort of thought they led him into were not familiar 
to him, unrealistic things, things better suit for official of the 
court to discuss than for him. the simple story had lost its shape, he 
want to shake it off, and the priest who now felt quite compassionate 
allow this and accept k.'s remark without comment, even though his 
view was certainly very different from k.'s. 

in silence, they carry on walking for some time, k. stay close 
beside the priest without knowing where he was. the lamp in his hand 
had long since gone out. once, just in front of him, he thought he 
could see the statue of a saint by the glitter of the silver on it, 
although it quick disappear back into the darkness. so that he 
would not remain entire dependent on the priest, k. ask him, "we're 
now near the main entrance, are we?" "no," said the priest, "we're a 
long way from it. do you already want to go?" k. had not thought of 
go until then, but he immediately said, 
"yes, certainly, i have to go. i'm the chief clerk in a bank and there 
are people wait for me, i only came here to show a foreign business 
contact round the cathedral." "alright," said the priest offering him 
his hand, "go then." "but i can't find my way round in this dark by 
myself," said k. "go to your left as far as the wall," said the priest, 
"then continue alongside the wall without leave it and you'll find a 
way out." the priest had only gone a few pace from him, but k. was 
already shouting loudly, "please, wait!" "i'm waiting," said the 
priest. "is there anything else you want from me?" ask k. "no," said 
the priest. "you were so friendly to me early on," said k., "and you 
explain everything, but now you abandon me as if i were nothing to 
you." "you have to go," said the priest. 
"well, yes," said k., "you need to understand that." "first, you need 
to understand who i am," said the priest. "you're the prison chaplain," 
said k., and went close to the priest, it was not so important for him 
to go straight back to the bank as he had made out, he could very well 
stay where he was. "so that means i belong to the court," said the 
priest. "so why would i want anything from you? the court doesn't want 
anything from you. it accept you when you come and it let you go when 
you leave." 




chapter ten 
end 

the evening before k.'s thirty-first birthday - it was about nine 
o'clock in the evening, the time when the street were quiet - two men 
came to where he lived. in frock coats, pale and fat, wearing top hat 
that look like they could not be taken off their heads. after some 
brief formality at the door of the flat when they first arrived, the 
same formality were repeated at greater length at k.'s door. he had 
not been notify they would be coming, but k. sat in a chair near the 
door, dress in black as they were, and slow put on new glove which 
stretch tight over his finger and behave as if he were expect 
visitors. he immediately stood up and look at the gentlemen 
inquisitively. "you've come for me then, have you?" he asked. the 
gentlemen nodded, one of them indicate the other with the top hand now 
in his hand. k. told them he had been expect a different visitor. 
he went to the window and look once more down at the dark street. 
most of the window on the other side of the street were also dark 
already, many of them had the curtains closed. in one of the window on 
the same floor where there was a light on, two small children could be 
seen play with each other inside a playpen, unable to move from where 
they were, reach out for each other with their little hands. "some 
ancient, unimportant actor - that's what they've sent for me," said k. 
to himself, and look round once again to confirm this to himself. 
"they want to sort me out as cheap as they can." k. sudden turn 
round to face the two men and asked, "what theatre do you play in?" 
"theatre?" ask one of the gentlemen, turning to the other for 
assistance and pull in the corner of his mouth. the other made a 
gesture like someone who was dumb, as if he were struggle with some 
organism cause him trouble. "you're not properly prepared to answer 
questions," said k. and went to fetch his hat. 

as soon as they were on the stairs the gentlemen want to take 
k.'s arms, but k. said "wait till we're in the street, i'm not ill." 
but they wait only until the front door before they took his arms in a 
way that k. had never experienced before. they kept their shoulder 
close behind his, did not turn their arms in but twist them around the 
entire length of k.'s arms and took hold of his hand with a grasp that 
was formal, experienced and could not be resisted. k. was held stiff 
and upright between them, they form now a single unit so that if any 
one of them had been knock down all of them must have fallen. they 
form a unit of the sort that normally can be form only by matter 
that is lifeless. 

whenever they pass under a lamp k. try to see his companion 
more clearly, as far as was possible when they were pressed so close 
together, as in the dim light of his room this had been hardly possible. 
"maybe they're tenors," he thought as he saw their big double chins. 
the cleanliness of their face disgust him. he could see the hand 
that clean them, passing over the corner of their eyes, rubbing at 
their upper lips, scratch out the crease on those chins. 

when k. notice that, he stopped, which meant the other had to 
stop too; they were at the edge of an open square, devoid of people but 
decorate with flower beds. "why did they send you, of all people!" he 
cry out, more a shout than a question. the two gentleman clearly knew 
no answer to give, they waited, their free arms hanging down, like 
nurse when the patient needs to rest. "i will go no further," said k. 
as if to see what would happen. the gentlemen did not need to make any 
answer, it was enough that they did not loosen their grip on k. and 
try to move him on, but k. resist them. "i'll soon have no need of 
much strength, i'll use all of it now," he thought. he thought of the 
flies that tear their leg off struggle to get free of the flypaper. 
"these gentleman will have some hard work to do". 

just then, miss bürstner came up into the square in front of them 
from the steps leading from a small street at a lower level. it was not 
certain that it was her, although the similarity was, of course, great. 
but it did not matter to k. whether it was certainly her anyway, he just 
became sudden aware that there was no point in his resistance. there 
would be nothing heroic about it if he resisted, if he now cause 
trouble for these gentlemen, if in defend himself he sought to enjoy 
his last glimmer of life. he start walking, which pleased the 
gentlemen and some of their pleasure convey itself to him. now they 
permit him to decide which direction they took, and he decided to 
take the direction that follow the young woman in front of them, not 
so much because he want to catch up with her, nor even because he 
want to keep her in sight for as long as possible, but only so that he 
would not forget the reproach she represent for him. "the only thing 
i can do now," he said to himself, and his thought was confirmed by the 
equal length of his own steps with the steps of the two others, "the 
only thing i can do now is keep my common sense and do what's need 
right till the end. i always want to go at the world and try and do 
too much, and even to do it for something that was not too cheap. that 
was wrong of me. should i now show them i learned nothing from facing 
trial for a year? should i go out like someone stupid? should i let 
anyone say, after i'm gone, that at the start of the proceedings i 
want to end them, and that now that they've end i want to start them 
again? i don't want anyone to say that. i'm grateful they sent these 
unspeaking, uncomprehend men to go with me on this journey, and that 
it's been left up to me to say what's necessary". 

meanwhile, the young woman had turn off into a side street, but 
k. could do without her now and let his companion lead him. all three 
of them now, in complete agreement, went over a bridge in the light of 
the moon, the two gentlemen were willing to yield to each little 
movement made by k. as he move slightly towards the edge and direct 
the group in that direction as a single unit. the moonlight glitter 
and quiver in the water, which divide itself around a small island 
cover in a densely-piled mass of foliage and tree and bushes. 
beneath them, now invisible, there were gravel path with comfortable 
bench where k. had stretch himself out on many summer's days. "i 
didn't actually want to stop here," he said to his companions, shame by 
their compliance with his wishes. behind k.'s back one of them seem 
to quiet criticise the other for the misunderstanding about stopping, 
and then they went on. they went on up through several street where 
policemen were walking or standing here and there; some in the distance 
and then some very close. one of them with a bushy moustache, his hand 
on the grip of his sword, seem to have some purpose in approach 
the group, which was hardly unsuspicious. the two gentlemen stopped, 
the policeman seem about to open his mouth, and then k. drove his 
group forceful forward. several times he look back cautious to 
see if the policeman was following; but when they had a corner between 
themselves and the policeman k. began to run, and the two gentlemen, 
despite being seriously short of breath, had to run with him. 

in this way they quick left the built up area and found 
themselves in the field which, in this part of town, began almost 
without any transition zone. there was a quarry, empty and abandoned, 
near a building which was still like those in the city. here the men 
stopped, perhaps because this had always been their destination or 
perhaps because they were too exhaust to run any further. here they 
release their hold on k., who just wait in silence, and took their 
top hat off while they look round the quarry and wipe the sweat off 
their brow with their handkerchiefs. the moonlight lay everywhere with 
the natural peace that is grant to no other light. 

after exchange a few courtesy about who was to carry out the 
next task - the gentlemen did not seem to have been allocate specific 
function - one of them went to k. and took his coat, his waistcoat, and 
finally his shirt off him. k. made an involuntary shiver, at which the 
gentleman gave him a gentle, reassure tap on the back. then he 
careful fold the things up as if they would still be needed, even if 
not in the near future. he did not want to expose k. to the chilly 
night air without moving though, so he took him under the arm and walk 
up and down with him a little way while the other gentleman look round 
the quarry for a suitable place. when he had found it he made a sign 
and the other gentleman escort him there. it was near the rockface, 
there was a stone lie there that had broken loose. the gentlemen sat 
k. down on the ground, leant him against the stone and settled his head 
down on the top of it. despite all the effort they went to, and despite 
all the co-operation shown by k., his demeanour seem very forced and 
hard to believe. so one of the gentlemen ask the other to grant him a 
short time while he put k. in position by himself, but even that did 
nothing to make it better. in the end they left k. in a position that 
was far from the best of the one they had try so far. then one of 
the gentlemen open his frock coat and from a sheath hanging on a belt 
stretch across his waistcoat he withdrew a long, thin, double-edged 
butcher's knife which he held up in the light to test its sharpness. 
the repulsive courtesy began once again, one of them pass the knife 
over k. to the other, who then pass it back over k. to the first. k. 
now knew it would be his duty to take the knife as it pass from hand 
to hand above him and thrust it into himself. but he did not do it, 
instead he twist his neck, which was still free, and look around. 
he was not able to show his full worth, was not able to take all the 
work from the official bodies, he lack the rest of the strength he 
need and this final shortcoming was the fault of whoever had deny it 
to him. as he look round, he saw the top floor of the building next 
to the quarry. he saw how a light flicker on and the two halves of a 
window open out, somebody, made weak and thin by the height and the 
distance, leant sudden far out from it and stretch his arms out even 
further. who was that? a friend? a good person? somebody who was 
taking part? somebody who want to help? was he alone? was it 
everyone? would anyone help? were there objection that had been 
forgotten? there must have been some. the logic cannot be refuted, but 
someone who wants to live will not resist it. where was the judge he'd 
never seen? where was the high court he had never reached? he raise 
both hand and spread out all his fingers. 

but the hand of one of the gentleman were laid on k.'s throat, 
while the other pushed the knife deep into his heart and twist it 
there, twice. as his eyesight failed, k. saw the two gentlemen cheek by 
cheek, close in front of his face, watch the result. "like a dog!" he 
said, it was as if the shame of it should outlive him. 








end of the project gutenberg ebook of the trial, by franz kafka 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the trial *** 

***** this file should be name 7849-8.txt or 7849-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/7/8/4/7849/ 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

this particular work is one of the few copyright individual works 
included with the permission of the copyright holder. information on 
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use 
impose by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 809 
north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email 
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the 
foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for forty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
