 
the project gutenberg ebook the mystery of udolpho, by ann radcliffe 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the mystery of udolpho 

author: ann radcliffe 

release date: february 28, 2009 [ebook #3268] 
last updated: march 13, 2019 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the mystery of udolpho *** 




produce by karalee coleman, and david widger 



cover 



the mystery of udolpho 



a romance 


intersperse with some pieces of poetry 



by ann radcliffe 



contents 


volume i 
chapter i 
chapter ii 
chapter iii 
chapter iv 
chapter v 
chapter vi 
chapter vii 
chapter viii 
chapter ix 
chapter x 
chapter xi 
chapter xii 
chapter xiii 

volume ii 
chapter i 
chapter ii 
chapter iii 
chapter iv 
chapter v 
chapter vi 
chapter vii 
chapter viii 
chapter ix 
chapter x 
chapter xi 
chapter xii 

volume iii 
chapter i 
chapter ii 
chapter iii 
chapter iv 
chapter v 
chapter vi 
chapter vii 
chapter viii 
chapter ix 
chapter x 
chapter xi 
chapter xii 
chapter xiii 

volume iv 
chapter i 
chapter ii 
chapter iii 
chapter iv 
chapter v 
chapter vi 
chapter vii 
chapter viii 
chapter ix 
chapter x 
chapter xi 
chapter xii 
chapter xiii 
chapter xiv 
chapter xv 
chapter xvi 
chapter xvii 
chapter xviii 
chapter xix 



fate sit on these dark battlements, and frowns, 
and, as the portals open to receive me, 
her voice, in sullen echo through the courts, 
tell of a nameless deed. 




volume 1 



chapter i 
preface 
home is the resort 
of love, of joy, of peace and plenty, where, 
support and supported, polish’d friends 
and dear relations mingle into bliss. 
thomson 


on the pleasant bank of the garonne, in the province of gascony, 
stood, in the year 1584, the château of monsieur st. aubert. from its 
window were seen the pastoral landscape of guienne and gascony 
stretch along the river, gay with luxuriant wood and vine, and 
plantation of olives. to the south, the view was bound by the 
majestic pyrenees, whose summits, veiled in clouds, or exhibit awful 
forms, seen, and lost again, as the partial vapours roll along, were 
sometimes barren, and gleam through the blue tinge of air, and 
sometimes frown with forest of gloomy pine, that swept downward to 
their base. these tremendous precipice were contrast by the soft 
green of the pasture and wood that hung upon their skirts; among 
whose flocks, and herds, and simple cottages, the eye, after have 
scale the cliff above, delight to repose. to the north, and to the 
east, the plain of guienne and languedoc were lost in the mist of 
distance; on the west, gascony was bound by the waters of biscay. 

m. st. aubert love to wander, with his wife and daughter, on the 
margin of the garonne, and to listen to the music that float on its 
waves. he had known life in other form than those of pastoral 
simplicity, have mingle in the gay and in the busy scene of the 
world; but the flatter portrait of mankind, which his heart had 
delineate in early youth, his experience had too sorrowful 
corrected. yet, amidst the change vision of life, his principles 
remain unshaken, his benevolence unchilled; and he retired from the 
multitude “more in _pity_ than in anger,” to scene of simple nature, 
to the pure delight of literature, and to the exercise of domestic 
virtues. 

he was a descendant from the younger branch of an illustrious family, 
and it was designed, that the deficiency of his patrimonial wealth 
should be supply either by a splendid alliance in marriage, or by 
success in the intrigue of public affairs. but st. aubert had too nice 
a sense of honour to fulfil the latter hope, and too small a portion of 
ambition to sacrifice what he call happiness, to the attainment of 
wealth. after the death of his father he married a very amiable woman, 
his equal in birth, and not his superior in fortune. the late monsieur 
st. aubert’s liberality, or extravagance, had so much involved his 
affairs, that his son found it necessary to dispose of a part of the 
family domain, and, some years after his marriage, he sold it to 
monsieur quesnel, the brother of his wife, and retired to a small 
estate in gascony, where conjugal felicity, and parental duties, 
divide his attention with the treasure of knowledge and the 
illuminations of genius. 

to this spot he had been attach from his infancy. he had often made 
excursion to it when a boy, and the impression of delight given to 
his mind by the homely kindness of the grey-headed peasant, to whom it 
was intrusted, and whose fruit and cream never failed, had not been 
obliterate by succeed circumstances. the green pasture along which 
he had so often bound in the exultation of health, and youthful 
freedom—the woods, under whose refreshing shade he had first indulge 
that pensive melancholy, which afterwards made a strong feature of his 
character—the wild walk of the mountains, the river, on whose wave he 
had floated, and the distant plains, which seem boundless as his 
early hopes—were never after remember by st. aubert but with 
enthusiasm and regret. at length he disengaged himself from the world, 
and retired hither, to realise the wish of many years. 

the building, as it then stood, was merely a summer cottage, render 
interesting to a stranger by its neat simplicity, or the beauty of the 
surrounding scene; and considerable addition were necessary to make it 
a comfortable family residence. st. aubert felt a kind of affection for 
every part of the fabric, which he remember in his youth, and would 
not suffer a stone of it to be removed, so that the new building, 
adapt to the style of the old one, form with it only a simple and 
elegant residence. the taste of madame st. aubert was conspicuous in 
its internal finishing, where the same chaste simplicity was observable 
in the furniture, and in the few ornament of the apartments, that 
characterise the manners of its inhabitants. 

the library occupy the west side of the château, and was enrich by 
a collection of the best books in the ancient and modern languages. 
this room open upon a grove, which stood on the brow of a gentle 
declivity, that fell towards the river, and the tall tree gave it a 
melancholy and pleasing shade; while from the window the eye caught, 
beneath the spread branches, the gay and luxuriant landscape 
stretch to the west, and overlook on the left by the bold 
precipice of the pyrenees. adjoin the library was a green-house, 
store with scarce and beautiful plants; for one of the amusement of 
st. aubert was the study of botany, and among the neighbouring 
mountains, which afford a luxurious feast to the mind of the 
naturalist, he often pass the day in the pursuit of his favourite 
science. he was sometimes accompany in these little excursion by 
madame st. aubert, and frequent by his daughter; when, with a small 
osier basket to receive plants, and another fill with cold 
refreshments, such as the cabin of the shepherd did not afford, they 
wander away among the most romantic and magnificent scenes, nor 
suffer the charm of nature’s lowly children to abstract them from 
the observance of her stupendous works. when weary of saunter among 
cliff that seem scarcely accessible but to the steps of the 
enthusiast, and where no track appear on the vegetation, but what the 
foot of the izard had left; they would seek one of those green 
recesses, which so beautiful adorn the bosom of these mountains, 
where, under the shade of the lofty larch, or cedar, they enjoy their 
simple repast, made sweet by the waters of the cool stream, that 
crept along the turf, and by the breath of wild flower and aromatic 
plants, that fringe the rocks, and inlaid the grass. 

adjoin the eastern side of the green-house, look towards the 
plain of languedoc, was a room, which emily call hers, and which 
contained her books, her drawings, her musical instruments, with some 
favourite bird and plants. here she usually exercise herself in 
elegant arts, cultivated only because they were congenial to her taste, 
and in which native genius, assist by the instruction of monsieur 
and madame st. aubert, made her an early proficient. the window of 
this room were particularly pleasant; they descended to the floor, and, 
opening upon the little lawn that surround the house, the eye was led 
between grove of almond, palm-trees, flowering-ash, and myrtle, to the 
distant landscape, where the garonne wandered. 

the peasant of this gay climate were often seen on an evening, when 
the day’s labour was done, dance in group on the margin of the 
river. their sprightly melodies, _debonnaire_ steps, the fanciful 
figure of their dances, with the tasteful and capricious manner in 
which the girl adjust their simple dress, gave a character to the 
scene entire french. 

the front of the château, which, have a southern aspect, open upon 
the grandeur of the mountains, was occupy on the ground floor by a 
rustic hall, and two excellent sitting rooms. the first floor, for the 
cottage had no second story, was laid out in bed-chambers, except one 
apartment that open to a balcony, and which was generally use for a 
breakfast-room. 

in the surrounding ground, st. aubert had made very tasteful 
improvements; yet, such was his attachment to object he had remember 
from his boyish days, that he had in some instance sacrifice taste to 
sentiment. there were two old larch that shade the building, and 
interrupt the prospect; st. aubert had sometimes declared that he 
believe he should have been weak enough to have wept at their fall. in 
addition to these larch he plant a little grove of beech, pine, and 
mountain-ash. on a lofty terrace, form by the swelling bank of the 
river, rose a plantation of orange, lemon, and palm-trees, whose fruit, 
in the cool of evening, breathe delicious fragrance. with these 
were mingle a few tree of other species. here, under the ample shade 
of a plane-tree, that spread its majestic canopy towards the river, st. 
aubert love to sit in the fine evenings of summer, with his wife and 
children, watching, beneath its foliage, the setting sun, the mild 
splendour of its light fade from the distant landscape, till the 
shadow of twilight melt its various features into one tint of sober 
grey. here, too, he love to read, and to converse with madame st. 
aubert; or to play with his children, resign himself to the 
influence of those sweet affections, which are ever attendant on 
simplicity and nature. he has often said, while tear of pleasure 
tremble in his eyes, that these were moments infinite more 
delightful than any pass amid the brilliant and tumultuous scene 
that are court by the world. his heart was occupied; it had, what can 
be so rarely said, no wish for a happiness beyond what it experienced. 
the consciousness of acting right diffuse a serene over his manners, 
which nothing else could impart to a man of moral perception like his, 
and which refined his sense of every surrounding blessing. 

the deepest shade of twilight did not send him from his favourite 
plane-tree. he love the soothe hour, when the last tint of light 
die away; when the stars, one by one, tremble through æther, and are 
reflect on the dark mirror of the waters; that hour, which, of all 
others, inspire the mind with pensive tenderness, and often elevate 
it to sublime contemplation. when the moon shed her soft ray among the 
foliage, he still lingered, and his pastoral supper of cream and fruits 
was often spread beneath it. then, on the still of night, came the 
song of the nightingale, breathing sweetness, and awakening melancholy. 

the first interrupt to the happiness he had known since his 
retirement, were occasion by the death of his two sons. he lost them 
at that age when infantine simplicity is so fascinating; and though, in 
consideration of madame st. aubert’s distress, he restrained the 
expression of his own, and endeavour to bear it, as he meant, with 
philosophy, he had, in truth, no philosophy that could render him calm 
to such losses. one daughter was now his only survive child; and, 
while he watch the unfold of her infant character, with anxious 
fondness, he endeavoured, with unremitting effort, to counteract those 
trait in her disposition, which might hereafter lead her from 
happiness. she had discover in her early years uncommon delicacy of 
mind, warm affections, and ready benevolence; but with these was 
observable a degree of susceptibility too exquisite to admit of lasting 
peace. as she advanced in youth, this sensibility gave a pensive tone 
to her spirits, and a soft to her manner, which add grace to 
beauty, and render her a very interesting object to person of a 
congenial disposition. but st. aubert had too much good sense to prefer 
a charm to a virtue; and had penetration enough to see, that this charm 
was too dangerous to its possessor to be allow the character of a 
blessing. he endeavoured, therefore, to strengthen her mind; to enure 
her to habit of self-command; to teach her to reject the first impulse 
of her feelings, and to look, with cool examination, upon the 
disappointment he sometimes threw in her way. while he instruct her 
to resist first impressions, and to acquire that steady dignity of 
mind, that can alone counterbalance the passions, and bear us, as far 
as is compatible with our nature, above the reach of circumstances, he 
taught himself a lesson of fortitude; for he was often oblige to 
witness, with seeming indifference, the tear and struggle which his 
caution occasion her. 

in person, emily resemble her mother; have the same elegant symmetry 
of form, the same delicacy of features, and the same blue eyes, full of 
tender sweetness. but, lovely as was her person, it was the varied 
expression of her countenance, as conversation awaken the nice 
emotion of her mind, that threw such a captivate grace around her: 

those tend’rer tints, that shun the careless eye, 
and, in the world’s contagious circle, die. 


st. aubert cultivated her understanding with the most scrupulous care. 
he gave her a general view of the sciences, and an exact acquaintance 
with every part of elegant literature. he taught her latin and english, 
chiefly that she might understand the sublime of their best poets. 
she discover in her early years a taste for works of genius; and it 
was st. aubert’s principle, as well as his inclination, to promote 
every innocent means of happiness. “a well-informed mind,” he would 
say, “is the best security against the contagion of folly and of vice. 
the vacant mind is ever on the watch for relief, and ready to plunge 
into error, to escape from the languor of idleness. store it with 
ideas, teach it the pleasure of thinking; and the temptation of the 
world without, will be counteract by the gratification derive from 
the world within. thought, and cultivation, are necessary equally to 
the happiness of a country and a city life; in the first they prevent 
the uneasy sensation of indolence, and afford a sublime pleasure in 
the taste they create for the beautiful, and the grand; in the latter, 
they make dissipation less an object of necessity, and consequently of 
interest.” 

it was one of emily’s earliest pleasure to ramble among the scene of 
nature; nor was it in the soft and glowing landscape that she most 
delighted; she love more the wild wood-walks, that skirt the 
mountain; and still more the mountain’s stupendous recesses, where the 
silence and grandeur of solitude impress a sacred awe upon her heart, 
and lift her thought to the god of heaven and earth. in scene like 
these she would often linger along, wrapt in a melancholy charm, till 
the last gleam of day fade from the west; till the lonely sound of a 
sheep-bell, or the distant bark of a watch-dog, were all that broke on 
the still of the evening. then, the gloom of the woods; the 
tremble of their leaves, at intervals, in the breeze; the bat, 
flit on the twilight; the cottage-lights, now seen, and now 
lost—were circumstances that awaken her mind into effort, and led to 
enthusiasm and poetry. 

her favourite walk was to a little fishing-house, belong to st. 
aubert, in a woody glen, on the margin of a rivulet that descended from 
the pyrenees, and, after foam among their rocks, wound its silent 
way beneath the shades it reflected. above the woods, that screen 
this glen, rose the lofty summit of the pyrenees, which often burst 
bold on the eye through the glade below. sometimes the shatter 
face of a rock only was seen, crown with wild shrubs; or a shepherd’s 
cabin seat on a cliff, overshadow by dark cypress, or wave ash. 
emerge from the deep recess of the woods, the glade open to the 
distant landscape, where the rich pasture and vine-covered slope of 
gascony gradual decline to the plains; and there, on the winding 
shore of the garonne, groves, and hamlets, and villas—their outline 
soften by distance, melt from the eye into one rich harmonious 
tint. 

this, too, was the favourite retreat of st. aubert, to which he 
frequent withdrew from the fervour of noon, with his wife, his 
daughter, and his books; or came at the sweet evening hour to welcome 
the silent dusk, or to listen for the music of the nightingale. 
sometimes, too, he brought music of his own, and awaken every fairy 
echo with the tender accent of his oboe; and often have the tone of 
emily’s voice drawn sweet from the waves, over which they trembled. 

it was in one of these excursion to this spot, that she observe the 
following lines written with a pencil on a part of the wainscot: 

sonnet 

go, pencil! faithful to thy master’s sighs! 
go—tell the goddess of the fairy scene, 
when next her light steps wind these wood-walks green, 
whence all his tears, his tender sorrows, rise; 
ah! paint her form, her soul-illumin’d eyes, 
the sweet expression of her pensive face, 
the light’ning smile, the animate grace— 
the portrait well the lover’s voice supplies; 
speak all his heart must feel, his tongue would say: 
yet ah! not all his heart must sadly feel! 
how oft the flow’ret’s silken leaves conceal 
the drug that steal the vital spark away! 
and who that gaze on that angel-smile, 
would fear its charm, or think it could beguile! 


these lines were not inscribe to any person; emily therefore could not 
apply them to herself, though she was undoubted the nymph of these 
shades. have glance round the little circle of her acquaintance 
without being detain by a suspicion as to whom they could be 
addressed, she was compel to rest in uncertainty; an uncertainty 
which would have been more painful to an idle mind than it was to hers. 
she had no leisure to suffer this circumstance, trifling at first, to 
swell into importance by frequent remembrance. the little vanity it had 
excited (for the incertitude which forbade her to presume upon have 
inspired the sonnet, forbade her also to disbelieve it) pass away, 
and the incident was dismiss from her thought amid her books, her 
studies, and the exercise of social charities. 

soon after this period, her anxiety was awaken by the indisposition 
of her father, who was attack with a fever; which, though not thought 
to be of a dangerous kind, gave a severe shock to his constitution. 
madame st. aubert and emily attend him with unremitting care; but his 
recovery was very slow, and, as he advanced towards health, madame 
seem to decline. 

the first scene he visited, after he was well enough to take the air, 
was his favourite fishing-house. a basket of provisions was sent 
thither, with books, and emily’s lute; for fishing-tackle he had no 
use, for he never could find amusement in torture or destroying. 

after employ himself, for about an hour, in botanizing, dinner was 
served. it was a repast, to which gratitude, for being again permit 
to visit this spot, gave sweetness; and family happiness once more 
smile beneath these shades. monsieur st. aubert converse with unusual 
cheerfulness; every object delight his senses. the refreshing 
pleasure from the first view of nature, after the pain of illness, and 
the confinement of a sick-chamber, is above the conceptions, as well as 
the descriptions, of those in health. the green wood and pastures; the 
flowery turf; the blue concave of the heavens; the balmy air; the 
murmur of the limpid stream; and even the hum of every little insect of 
the shade, seem to revivify the soul, and make mere existence bliss. 

madame st. aubert, reanimate by the cheerful and recovery of her 
husband, was no long sensible of the indisposition which had lately 
oppress her; and, as she saunter along the wood-walks of this 
romantic glen, and converse with him, and with her daughter, she often 
look at them alternate with a degree of tenderness, that fill her 
eyes with tears. st. aubert observe this more than once, and gently 
reprove her for the emotion; but she could only smile, clasp his hand, 
and that of emily, and weep the more. he felt the tender enthusiasm 
steal upon himself in a degree that became almost painful; his 
features assume a serious air, and he could not forbear secret 
sighing—“perhaps i shall some time look back to these moments, as to 
the summit of my happiness, with hopeless regret. but let me not misuse 
them by useless anticipation; let me hope i shall not live to mourn the 
loss of those who are dear to me than life.” 

to relieve, or perhaps to indulge, the pensive temper of his mind, he 
bade emily fetch the lute she knew how to touch with such sweet pathos. 
as she drew near the fishing-house, she was surprise to hear the tone 
of the instrument, which were awaken by the hand of taste, and 
utter a plaintive air, whose exquisite melody engaged all her 
attention. she listen in profound silence, afraid to move from the 
spot, lest the sound of her steps should occasion her to lose a note of 
the music, or should disturb the musician. everything without the 
building was still, and no person appeared. she continue to listen, 
till timid succeed to surprise and delight; a timidity, increase 
by a remembrance of the pencil lines she had formerly seen, and she 
hesitate whether to proceed, or to return. 

while she paused, the music ceased; and, after a momentary hesitation, 
she recollect courage to advance to the fishing-house, which she 
enter with falter steps, and found unoccupied! her lute lay on the 
table; everything seem undisturbed, and she began to believe it was 
another instrument she had heard, till she remembered, that, when she 
follow m. and madame st. aubert from this spot, her lute was left on 
a window seat. she felt alarmed, yet knew not wherefore; the melancholy 
gloom of evening, and the profound still of the place, interrupt 
only by the light tremble of leaves, heighten her fanciful 
apprehensions, and she was desirous of quit the building, but 
perceive herself grow faint, and sat down. as she try to recover 
herself, the pencil lines on the wainscot met her eye; she started, 
as if she had seen a stranger; but, endeavour to conquer the tremor 
of her spirits, rose, and went to the window. to the lines before 
notice she now perceive that other were added, in which her name 
appeared. 

though no long suffer to doubt that they were address to herself, 
she was as ignorant, as before, by whom they could be written. while 
she mused, she thought she heard the sound of a step without the 
building, and again alarmed, she caught up her lute, and hurried away. 
monsieur and madame st. aubert she found in a little path that wound 
along the side of the glen. 

have reach a green summit, shadow by palm-trees, and overlook 
the valley and plain of gascony, they seat themselves on the turf; 
and while their eyes wander over the glorious scene, and they inhale 
the sweet breath of flower and herb that enrich the grass, emily 
play and sung several of their favourite airs, with the delicacy of 
expression in which she so much excelled. 

music and conversation detain them in this enchanting spot, till the 
sun’s last light slept upon the plains; till the white sail that 
glide beneath the mountains, where the garonne wandered, became dim, 
and the gloom of evening stole over the landscape. it was a melancholy 
but not unplease gloom. st. aubert and his family rose, and left the 
place with regret; alas! madame st. aubert knew not that she left it 
for ever. 

when they reach the fishing-house she miss her bracelet, and 
recollect that she had taken it from her arm after dinner, and had 
left it on the table when she went to walk. after a long search, in 
which emily was very active, she was compel to resign herself to the 
loss of it. what made this bracelet valuable to her was a miniature of 
her daughter to which it was attached, esteem a striking resemblance, 
and which had been paint only a few month before. when emily was 
convinced that the bracelet was really gone, she blushed, and became 
thoughtful. that some stranger had been in the fishing-house, during 
her absence, her lute, and the additional lines of a pencil, had 
already informed her: from the purport of these lines it was not 
unreasonable to believe, that the poet, the musician, and the thief 
were the same person. but though the music she had heard, the written 
lines she had seen, and the disappearance of the picture, form a 
combination of circumstances very remarkable, she was irresistible 
restrained from mention them; secret determining, however, never 
again to visit the fishing-house without monsieur or madame st. aubert. 

they return pensive to the château, emily muse on the incident 
which had just occurred; st. aubert reflecting, with placid gratitude, 
on the blessing he possessed; and madame st. aubert somewhat 
disturbed, and perplexed, by the loss of her daughter’s picture. as 
they drew near the house, they observe an unusual bustle about it; the 
sound of voice was distinct heard, servant and horse were seen 
passing between the trees, and, at length, the wheels of a carriage 
roll along. have come within view of the front of the château, a 
landau, with smoking horses, appear on the little lawn before it. st. 
aubert perceive the livery of his brother-in-law, and in the parlour 
he found monsieur and madame quesnel already entered. they had left 
paris some days before, and were on the way to their estate, only ten 
league distant from la vallée, and which monsieur quesnel had 
purchase several years before of st. aubert. this gentleman was the 
only brother of madame st. aubert; but the tie of relationship have 
never been strengthen by congenial of character, the intercourse 
between them had not been frequent. m. quesnel had live altogether in 
the world; his aim had been consequence; splendour was the object of 
his taste; and his address and knowledge of character had carry him 
forward to the attainment of almost all that he had courted. by a man 
of such a disposition, it is not surprising that the virtue of st. 
aubert should be overlooked; or that his pure taste, simplicity, and 
moderate wishes, were considered as mark of a weak intellect, and of 
confine views. the marriage of his sister with st. aubert had been 
mortify to his ambition, for he had design that the matrimonial 
connection she form should assist him to attain the consequence which 
he so much desired; and some offer were made her by person whose rank 
and fortune flatter his warmest hope. but his sister, who was then 
address also by st. aubert, perceived, or thought she perceived, that 
happiness and splendour were not the same, and she did not hesitate to 
forego the last for the attainment of the former. whether monsieur 
quesnel thought them the same, or not, he would readily have sacrifice 
his sister’s peace to the gratification of his own ambition; and, on 
her marriage with st. aubert, express in private his contempt of her 
spiritless conduct, and of the connection which it permitted. madame 
st. aubert, though she conceal this insult from her husband, felt, 
perhaps, for the first time, resentment light in her heart; and, 
though a regard for her own dignity, united with consideration of 
prudence, restrained her expression of this resentment, there was ever 
after a mild reserve in her manner towards m. quesnel, which he both 
understood and felt. 

in his own marriage he did not follow his sister’s example. his lady 
was an italian, and an heiress by birth; and, by nature and education, 
was a vain and frivolous woman. 

they now determined to pass the night with st. aubert; and as the 
château was not large enough to accommodate their servants, the latter 
were dismiss to the neighbouring village. when the first compliments 
were over, and the arrangement for the night made m. quesnel began the 
display of his intelligence and his connections; while st. aubert, who 
had been long enough in retirement to find these topic recommend by 
their novelty, listened, with a degree of patience and attention, which 
his guest mistook for the humility of wonder. the latter, indeed, 
describe the few festivity which the turbulence of that period 
permit to the court of henry the third, with a minuteness, that 
somewhat recompense for his ostentation; but, when he came to speak of 
the character of the duke de joyeuse, of a secret treaty, which he knew 
to be negotiate with the porte, and of the light in which henry of 
navarre was received, m. st. aubert recollect enough of his former 
experience to be assured, that his guest could be only of an inferior 
class of politicians; and that, from the importance of the subject 
upon which he committed himself, he could not be of the rank to which 
he pretended to belong. the opinion deliver by m. quesnel, were such 
as st. aubert forebore to reply to, for he knew that his guest had 
neither humanity to feel, nor discernment to perceive, what is just. 

madame quesnel, meanwhile, was express to madame st. aubert her 
astonishment, that she could bear to pass her life in this remote 
corner of the world, as she call it, and describing, from a wish, 
probably, of exciting envy, the splendour of the balls, banquets, and 
procession which had just been given by the court, in honour of the 
nuptials of the duke de joyeuse with margaretta of lorrain, the sister 
of the queen. she describe with equal minute the magnificence she 
had seen, and that from which she had been excluded; while emily’s 
vivid fancy, as she listen with the ardent curiosity of youth, 
heighten the scene she heard of; and madame st. aubert, look on 
her family, felt, as a tear stole to her eye, that though splendour may 
grace happiness, virtue only can bestow it. 

“it is now twelve years, st. aubert,” said m. quesnel, “since i 
purchase your family estate.”—“somewhere thereabout,” reply st. 
aubert, suppress a sigh. “it is near five years since i have been 
there,” resume quesnel; “for paris and its neighbourhood is the only 
place in the world to live in, and i am so immerse in politics, and 
have so many affair of moment on my hands, that i find it difficult to 
steal away even for a month or two.” st. aubert remain silent, m. 
quesnel proceeded: “i have sometimes wonder how you, who have live 
in the capital, and have been accustomed to company, can exist 
elsewhere;—especially in so remote a country as this, where you can 
neither hear nor see anything, and can in short be scarcely conscious 
of life.” 

“i live for my family and myself,” said st. aubert; “i am now contented 
to know only happiness;—formerly i knew life.” 

“i mean to expend thirty or forty thousand livre on improvements,” 
said m. quesnel, without seeming to notice the words of st. aubert; 
“for i design, next summer, to bring here my friends, the duke de 
durefort and the marquis ramont, to pass a month or two with me.” to 
st. aubert’s enquiry, as to these intended improvements, he replied, 
that he should take down the whole east wing of the château, and raise 
upon the site a set of stables. “then i shall build,” said he, “a 
_salle à manger_, a _salon_, a _salle au commune_, and a number of 
rooms for servants; for at present there is not accommodation for a 
third part of my own people.” 

“it accommodate our father’s household,” said st. aubert, grieve that 
the old mansion was to be thus improved, “and that was not a small 
one.” 

“our notions are somewhat enlarge since those days,” said m. 
quesnel;—“what was then thought a decent style of living would not now 
be endured.” even the calm st. aubert blush at these words, but his 
anger soon yield to contempt. “the ground about the château is 
encumber with trees; i mean to cut some of them down.” 

“cut down the tree too!” said st. aubert. 

“certainly. why should i not? they interrupt my prospects. there is a 
chesnut which spread its branch before the whole south side of the 
château, and which is so ancient that they tell me the hollow of its 
trunk will hold a dozen men. your enthusiasm will scarcely contend that 
there can be either use, or beauty, in such a sapless old tree as 
this.” 

“good god!” exclaim st. aubert, “you surely will not destroy that 
noble chesnut, which has flourish for centuries, the glory of the 
estate! it was in its maturity when the present mansion was built. how 
often, in my youth, have i climb among its broad branches, and sat 
embowered amidst a world of leaves, while the heavy shower has patter 
above, and not a rain drop reach me! how often i have sat with a book 
in my hand, sometimes reading, and sometimes look out between the 
branch upon the wide landscape, and the setting sun, till twilight 
came, and brought the bird home to their little nest among the 
leaves! how often—but pardon me,” add st. aubert, recollect that 
he was speak to a man who could neither comprehend, nor allow his 
feelings, “i am talk of times and feelings as old-fashioned as the 
taste that would spare that venerable tree.” 

“it will certainly come down,” said m. quesnel; “i believe i shall 
plant some lombardy poplar among the clump of chesnut, that i shall 
leave of the avenue; madame quesnel is partial to the poplar, and tell 
me how much it adorn a villa of her uncle, not far from venice.” 

“on the bank of the brenta, indeed,” continue st. aubert, “where its 
spiry form is intermingle with the pine, and the cypress, and where it 
play over light and elegant portico and colonnades, it, 
unquestionably, adorn the scene; but among the giant of the forest, 
and near a heavy gothic mansion—” 

“well, my good sir,” said m. quesnel, “i will not dispute with you. you 
must return to paris before our idea can at all agree. but _à propos_ 
of venice, i have some thought of go thither, next summer; event 
may call me to take possession of that same villa, too, which they tell 
me is the most charming that can be imagined. in that case i shall 
leave the improvement i mention to another year, and i may, perhaps, 
be tempt to stay some time in italy.” 

emily was somewhat surprise to hear him talk of being tempt to 
remain abroad, after he had mention his presence to be so necessary 
at paris, that it was with difficulty he could steal away for a month 
or two; but st. aubert understood the self-importance of the man too 
well to wonder at this trait; and the possibility, that these project 
improvement might be deferred, gave him a hope, that they might never 
take place. 

before they separate for the night, m. quesnel desire to speak with 
st. aubert alone, and they retired to another room, where they remain 
a considerable time. the subject of this conversation was not known; 
but, whatever it might be, st. aubert, when he return to the 
supper-room, seem much disturbed, and a shade of sorrow sometimes 
fell upon his features that alarm madame st. aubert. when they were 
alone she was tempt to enquire the occasion of it, but the delicacy 
of mind, which had ever appear in his conduct, restrained her: she 
considered that, if st. aubert wish her to be acquaint with the 
subject of his concern, he would not wait on her enquiries. 

on the following day, before m. quesnel departed, he had a second 
conference with st. aubert. 

the guests, after dine at the château, set out in the cool of the day 
for epourville, whither they gave him and madame st. aubert a pressing 
invitation, prompt rather by the vanity of display their 
splendour, than by a wish to make their friends happy. 

emily returned, with delight, to the liberty which their presence had 
restrained, to her books, her walks, and the rational conversation of 
m. and madame st. aubert, who seem to rejoice, no less, that they 
were deliver from the shackles, which arrogance and frivolity had 
imposed. 

madame st. aubert excuse herself from share their usual evening 
walk, complain that she was not quite well, and st. aubert and emily 
went out together. 

they chose a walk towards the mountains, intend to visit some old 
pensioner of st. aubert, which, from his very moderate income, he 
contrived to support, though it is probable m. quesnel, with his very 
large one, could not have afford this. 

after distribute to his pensioner their weekly stipends, listen 
patient to the complaint of some, redress the grievance of 
others, and soften the discontent of all, by the look of sympathy, 
and the smile of benevolence, st. aubert return home through the 
woods, 

where, 
at fall of eve the fairy-people throng, 
in various games and revelry to pass 
the summer night, as village story tell. 
thomson 


“the evening gloom of wood was always delightful to me,” said st. 
aubert, whose mind now experienced the sweet calm, which result from 
the consciousness of have done a beneficent action, and which 
dispose it to receive pleasure from every surrounding object. “i 
remember that in my youth this gloom use to call forth to my fancy a 
thousand fairy visions, and romantic images; and, i own, i am not yet 
wholly insensible of that high enthusiasm, which wake the poet’s 
dream: i can linger, with solemn steps, under the deep shades, send 
forward a transform eye into the distant obscurity, and listen with 
thrill delight to the mystic murmur of the woods.” 

“o my dear father,” said emily, while a sudden tear start to her eye, 
“how exactly you describe what i have felt so often, and which i 
thought nobody had ever felt but myself! but hark! here come the 
sweeping sound over the wood-tops;—now it die away;—how solemn the 
still that succeeds! now the breeze swell again. it is like the 
voice of some supernatural being—the voice of the spirit of the woods, 
that watches over them by night. ah! what light is yonder? but it is 
gone. and now it gleam again, near the root of that large chestnut: 
look, sir!” 

“are you such an admirer of nature,” said st. aubert, “and so little 
acquaint with her appearances as not to know that for the glow-worm? 
but come,” add he gaily, “step a little further, and we shall see 
fairies, perhaps; they are often companions. the glow-worm lend his 
light, and they in return charm him with music, and the dance. do you 
see nothing tripping yonder?” 

emily laughed. “well, my dear sir,” said she, “since you allow of this 
alliance, i may venture to own i have anticipate you; and almost dare 
venture to repeat some verse i made one evening in these very woods.” 

“nay,” reply st. aubert, “dismiss the _almost_, and venture quite; 
let us hear what vagary fancy has been play in your mind. if she 
has given you one of her spells, you need not envy those of the 
fairies.” 

“if it is strong enough to enchant your judgment, sir,” said emily, 
“while i disclose her images, i need _not_ envy them. the lines go in a 
sort of tripping measure, which i thought might suit the subject well 
enough, but i fear they are too irregular.” 

the glow-worm. 

how pleasant is the green-wood’s deep-matted shade 
on a mid-summer’s eve, when the fresh rain is o’er; 
when the yellow beam slope, and sparkle thro’ the glade, 
and swift in the thin air the light swallow soar! 

but sweeter, sweet still, when the sun sink to rest, 
and twilight come on, with the fairy so gay 
tripping through the forest-walk, where flow’rs, unprest, 
bow not their tall head beneath their frolic play. 

to music’s softest sound they dance away the hour, 
till moonlight steal down among the tremble leaves, 
and checquer all the ground, and guide them to the bow’r, 
the long haunt bow’r, where the nightingale grieves. 

then no more they dance, till her sad song is done, 
but, silent as the night, to her mourning attend; 
and often as her die note their pity have won, 
they vow all her sacred haunt from mortal to defend. 

when, down among the mountains, sink the ev’ning star, 
and the change moon forsake this shadowy sphere, 
how cheerless would they be, tho’ they fairy are, 
if i, with my pale light, came not near! 

yet cheerless tho’ they’d be, they’re ungrateful to my love! 
for, often when the traveller’s benighted on his way, 
and i glimmer in his path, and would guide him thro’ the grove, 
they bind me in their magic spell to lead him far astray; 

and in the mire to leave him, till the stars are all burnt out, 
while, in strange-looking shapes, they frisk about the ground, 
and, afar in the woods, they raise a dismal shout, 
till i shrink into my cell again for terror of the sound! 

but, see where all the tiny elves come dance in a ring, 
with the merry, merry pipe, and the tabor, and the horn, 
and the timbrel so clear, and the lute with dulcet string; 
then round about the oak they go till peep of the morn. 

down yonder glade two lovers steal, to shun the fairy-queen, 
who frown upon their plight vows, and jealous is of me, 
that yester-eve i light them, along the dewy green, 
to seek the purple flow’r, whose juice from all her spell can free. 

and now, to punish me, she keeps afar her jocund band, 
with the merry, merry pipe, and the tabor, and the lute; 
if i creep near yonder oak she will wave her fairy wand, 
and to me the dance will cease, and the music all be mute. 

o! had i but that purple flow’r whose leaves her charm can foil, 
and knew like fay to draw the juice, and throw it on the wind, 
i’d be her slave no longer, nor the traveller beguile, 
and help all faithful lovers, nor fear the fairy kind! 

but soon the _vapour of the woods_ will wander afar, 
and the fickle moon will fade, and the stars disappear, 
then, cheerless will they be, tho’ they fairy are, 
if i, with my pale light, come not near! 


whatever st. aubert might think of the stanzas, he would not deny his 
daughter the pleasure of believe that he approve them; and, have 
given his commendation, he sunk into a reverie, and they walk on in 
silence. 

a faint erroneous ray, 
glanc’d from th’ imperfect surface of things, 
flung half an image on the strain eye; 
while wave woods, and villages, and streams, 
and rocks, and mountain-tops, that long retain 
the ascend gleam, are all one swimming scene, 
uncertain if beheld. 
thomson. 


st. aubert continue silent till he reach the château, where his wife 
had retired to her chamber. the languor and dejection, that had lately 
oppress her, and which the exertion call forth by the arrival of 
her guest had suspended, now return with increase effect. on the 
following day, symptom of fever appeared, and st. aubert, have sent 
for medical advice, learned, that her disorder was a fever of the same 
nature as that, from which he had lately recovered. she had, indeed, 
taken the infection, during her attendance upon him, and, her 
constitution being too weak to throw out the disease immediately, it 
had lurk in her veins, and occasion the heavy languor of which she 
had complained. st. aubert, whose anxiety for his wife overcame every 
other consideration, detain the physician in his house. he remember 
the feelings and the reflection that had call a momentary gloom upon 
his mind, on the day when he had last visit the fishing-house, in 
company with madame st. aubert, and he now admitted a presentiment, 
that this illness would be a fatal one. but he effectually conceal 
this from her, and from his daughter, whom he endeavour to reanimate 
with hope that her constant assiduity would not be unavailing. the 
physician, when ask by st. aubert for his opinion of the disorder, 
replied, that the event of it depend upon circumstances which he 
could not ascertain. madame st. aubert seem to have form a more 
decided one; but her eyes only gave hint of this. she frequent fixed 
them upon her anxious friends with an expression of pity, and of 
tenderness, as if she anticipate the sorrow that await them, and 
that seem to say, it was for their sake only, for their sufferings, 
that she regret life. on the seventh day, the disorder was at its 
crisis. the physician assume a grave manner, which she observed, and 
took occasion, when her family had once quit the chamber, to tell 
him, that she perceive her death was approaching. “do not attempt to 
deceive me,” said she, “i feel that i cannot long survive. i am 
prepared for the event, i have long, i hope, been prepare for it. 
since i have not long to live, do not suffer a mistaken compassion to 
induce you to flatter my family with false hopes. if you do, their 
affliction will only be the heavy when it arrives: i will endeavour 
to teach them resignation by my example.” 

the physician was affected; he promise to obey her, and told st. 
aubert, somewhat abruptly, that there was nothing to expect. the latter 
was not philosopher enough to restrain his feelings when he received 
this information; but a consideration of the increase affliction which 
the observance of his grief would occasion his wife, enable him, after 
some time, to command himself in her presence. emily was at first 
overwhelm with the intelligence; then, delude by the strength of her 
wishes, a hope sprung up in her mind that her mother would yet recover, 
and to this she pertinacious adhere almost to the last hour. 

the progress of this disorder was marked, on the side of madame st. 
aubert, by patient suffering, and subject wishes. the composure, with 
which she await her death, could be derive only from the retrospect 
of a life governed, as far as human frailty permits, by a consciousness 
of being always in the presence of the deity, and by the hope of a 
higher world. but her piety could not entire subdue the grief of 
parting from those whom she so dearly loved. during these her last 
hours, she converse much with st. aubert and emily, on the prospect of 
futurity, and on other religious topics. the resignation she expressed, 
with the firm hope of meeting in a future world the friends she left in 
this, and the effort which sometimes appear to conceal her sorrow at 
this temporary separation, frequent affected st. aubert so much as to 
oblige him to leave the room. have indulge his tear a while, he 
would dry them and return to the chamber with a countenance compose by 
an endeavour which did but increase his grief. 

never had emily felt the importance of the lessons, which had taught 
her to restrain her sensibility, so much as in these moments, and never 
had she practised them with a triumph so complete. but when the last 
was over, she sunk at once under the pressure of her sorrow, and then 
perceive that it was hope, as well as fortitude, which had hitherto 
support her. st. aubert was for a time too devoid of comfort himself 
to bestow any on his daughter. 



chapter ii 

i could a tale unfold, whose lightest word 
would harrow up thy soul. 
shakespeare 


madame st. aubert was inter in the neighbouring village church; her 
husband and daughter attend her to the grave, follow by a long 
train of the peasantry, who were sincere mourner of this excellent 
woman. 

on his return from the funeral, st. aubert shut himself in his chamber. 
when he came forth, it was with a serene countenance, though pale in 
sorrow. he gave orders that his family should attend him. emily only 
was absent; who, overcome with the scene she had just witnessed, had 
retired to her closet to weep alone. st. aubert follow her thither: 
he took her hand in silence, while she continue to weep; and it was 
some moments before he could so far command his voice as to speak. it 
tremble while he said, “my emily, i am go to prayer with my 
family; you will join us. we must ask support from above. where else 
ought we to seek it—where else can we find it?” 

emily checked her tears, and follow her father to the parlour, where, 
the servant being assembled, st. aubert read, in a low and solemn 
voice, the evening service, and add a prayer for the soul of the 
departed. during this, his voice often faltered, his tear fell upon 
the book, and at length he paused. but the sublime emotion of pure 
devotion gradual elevated his view above this world, and finally 
brought comfort to his heart. 

when the service was ended, and the servant were withdrawn, he 
tender kiss emily, and said, “i have endeavour to teach you, from 
your earliest youth, the duty of self-command; i have pointed out to 
you the great importance of it through life, not only as it preserve 
us in the various and dangerous temptation that call us from rectitude 
and virtue, but as it limit the indulgence which are term virtuous, 
yet which, extend beyond a certain boundary, are vicious, for their 
consequence is evil. all excess is vicious; even that sorrow, which is 
amiable in its origin, become a selfish and unjust passion, if 
indulge at the expence of our duties—by our duty i mean what we owe 
to ourselves, as well as to others. the indulgence of excessive grief 
enervate the mind, and almost incapacitate it for again partake of 
those various innocent enjoyment which a benevolent god design to be 
the sunshine of our lives. my dear emily, recollect and practise the 
precept i have so often given you, and which your own experience has 
so often shown you to be wise. 

“your sorrow is useless. do not receive this as merely a commonplace 
remark, but let reason _therefore_ restrain sorrow. i would not 
annihilate your feelings, my child, i would only teach you to command 
them; for whatever may be the evil result from a too susceptible 
heart, nothing can be hope from an insensible one; that, on the other 
hand, is all vice—vice, of which the deformity is not softened, or the 
effect console for, by any semblance or possibility of good. you know 
my sufferings, and are, therefore, convinced that mine are not the 
light words which, on these occasions, are so often repeated to destroy 
even the source of honest emotion, or which merely display the selfish 
ostentation of a false philosophy. i will show my emily, that i can 
practise what i advise. i have said thus much, because i cannot bear to 
see you waste in useless sorrow, for want of that resistance which is 
due from mind; and i have not said it till now, because there is a 
period when all reasoning must yield to nature; that is past: and 
another, when excessive indulgence, have sunk into habit, weigh down 
the elasticity of the spirits so as to render conquest nearly 
impossible; this is to come. you, my emily, will show that you are 
willing to avoid it.” 

emily smile through her tear upon her father: “dear sir,” said she, 
and her voice trembled; she would have added, “i will show myself 
worthy of being your daughter;” but a mingle emotion of gratitude, 
affection, and grief overcame her. st. aubert suffer her to weep 
without interruption, and then began to talk on common topics. 

the first person who came to condole with st. aubert was a m. barreaux, 
an austere and seemingly unfeeling man. a taste for botany had 
introduce them to each other, for they had frequent met in their 
wanderings among the mountains. m. barreaux had retired from the world, 
and almost from society, to live in a pleasant château, on the skirt 
of the woods, near la vallée. he also had been disappointed in his 
opinion of mankind; but he did not, like st. aubert, pity and mourn for 
them; he felt more indignation at their vices, than compassion for 
their weaknesses. 

st. aubert was somewhat surprise to see him; for, though he had often 
pressed him to come to the château, he had never till now accept the 
invitation; and now he came without ceremony or reserve, enter the 
parlour as an old friend. the claim of misfortune appear to have 
soften down all the rugged and prejudice of his heart. st. 
aubert unhappy, seem to be the sole idea that occupy his mind. it 
was in manners, more than in words, that he appear to sympathise with 
his friends: he spoke little on the subject of their grief; but the 
minute attention he gave them, and the modulate voice, and soften 
look that accompany it, came from his heart, and spoke to theirs. 

at this melancholy period st. aubert was likewise visit by madame 
cheron, his only survive sister, who had been some years a widow, and 
now reside on her own estate near thoulouse. the intercourse between 
them had not been very frequent. in her condolements, words were not 
wanting; she understood not the magic of the look that speak at once 
to the soul, or the voice that sink like balm to the heart: but she 
assured st. aubert that she sincerely sympathise with him, praise the 
virtue of his late wife, and then offer what she considered to be 
consolation. emily wept unceasing while she spoke; st. aubert was 
tranquil, listen to what she said in silence, and then turn the 
discourse upon another subject. 

at parting she pressed him and her niece to make her an early visit. 
“change of place will amuse you,” said she, “and it is wrong to give 
way to grief.” st. aubert acknowledge the truth of these words of 
course; but, at the same time, felt more reluctant than ever to quit 
the spot which his past happiness had consecrated. the presence of his 
wife had sanctify every surrounding scene, and, each day, as it 
gradual soften the acute of his suffering, assist the tender 
enchantment that bound him to home. 

but there were call which must be comply with, and of this kind was 
the visit he paid to his brother-in-law m. quesnel. an affair of an 
interesting nature made it necessary that he should delay this visit no 
longer, and, wish to rouse emily from her dejection, he took her 
with him to epourville. 

as the carriage enter upon the forest that adjoin his paternal 
domain, his eyes once more caught, between the chesnut avenue, the 
turret corner of the château. he sigh to think of what had pass 
since he was last there, and that it was now the property of a man who 
neither revere nor value it. at length he enter the avenue, whose 
lofty tree had so often delight him when a boy, and whose melancholy 
shade was now so congenial with the tone of his spirits. every feature 
of the edifice, distinguished by an air of heavy grandeur, appear 
successive between the branch of the trees—the broad turret, the 
arch gateway that led into the courts, the drawbridge, and the dry 
fossé which surround the whole. 

the sound of carriage wheels brought a troop of servant to the great 
gate, where st. aubert alighted, and from which he led emily into the 
gothic hall, now no long hung with the arms and ancient banner of 
the family. these were displaced, and the oak wainscotting, and beam 
that cross the roof, were paint white. the large table, too, that 
use to stretch along the upper end of the hall, where the master of 
the mansion love to display his hospitality, and whence the peal of 
laughter, and the song of convivial had so often resounded, was now 
removed; even the bench that had surround the hall were no long 
there. the heavy wall were hung with frivolous ornaments, and 
everything that appear denote the false taste and corrupt 
sentiment of the present owner. 

st. aubert follow a gay parisian servant to a parlour, where sat 
mons. and madame quesnel, who received him with a stately politeness, 
and, after a few formal words of condolement, seem to have forgotten 
that they ever had a sister. 

emily felt tear swell into her eyes, and then resentment checked them. 
st. aubert, calm and deliberate, preserve his dignity without assume 
importance, and quesnel was depressed by his presence without exactly 
knowing wherefore. 

after some general conversation, st. aubert request to speak with him 
alone; and emily, being left with madame quesnel, soon learned that a 
large party was invite to dine at the château, and was compel to 
hear that nothing which was past and irremediable ought to prevent the 
festivity of the present hour. 

st. aubert, when he was told that company were expected, felt a mixed 
emotion of disgust and indignation against the insensibility of 
quesnel, which prompt him to return home immediately. but he was 
informed, that madame cheron had been ask to meet him; and, when he 
look at emily, and considered that a time might come when the enmity 
of her uncle would be prejudicial to her, he determined not to incur it 
himself, by conduct which would be resent as indecorous, by the very 
person who now show so little sense of decorum. 

among the visitor assemble at dinner were two italy gentlemen, of 
whom one was name montoni, a distant relation of madame quesnel, a man 
about forty, of an uncommonly handsome person, with features manly and 
expressive, but whose countenance exhibited, upon the whole, more of 
the haughty of command, and the quick of discernment, than of 
any other character. 

signor cavigni, his friend, appear to be about thirty—inferior in 
dignity, but equal to him in penetration of countenance, and superior 
in insinuation of manner. 

emily was shock by the salutation with which madame cheron met her 
father—“dear brother,” said she, “i am concerned to see you look so 
very ill; do, pray, have advice!” st. aubert answered, with a 
melancholy smile, that he felt himself much as usual; but emily’s fear 
made her now fancy that her father look worse than he really did. 

emily would have been amuse by the new character she saw, and the 
varied conversation that pass during dinner, which was serve in a 
style of splendour she had seldom seen before, had her spirits been 
less oppressed. of the guests, signor montoni was lately come from 
italy, and he spoke of the commotion which at that period agitate the 
country; talk of party difference with warmth, and then lament the 
probable consequence of the tumults. his friend spoke with equal 
ardour, of the politics of his country; praise the government and 
prosperity of venice, and boast of its decided superior over all 
the other italy states. he then turn to the ladies, and talk with 
the same eloquence, of parisian fashions, the france opera, and france 
manners; and on the latter subject he did not fail to mingle what is so 
particularly agreeable to france taste. the flattery was not detect 
by those to whom it was addressed, though its effect, in produce 
submissive attention, did not escape his observation. when he could 
disengage himself from the assiduity of the other ladies, he 
sometimes address emily: but she knew nothing of parisian fashions, 
or parisian operas; and her modesty, simplicity, and correct manners 
form a decided contrast to those of her female companions. 

after dinner, st. aubert stole from the room to view once more the old 
chesnut which quesnel talk of cutting down. as he stood under its 
shade, and look up among its branches, still luxuriant, and saw here 
and there the blue sky tremble between them; the pursuit and event 
of his early days crowded fast to his mind, with the figures and 
character of friends—long since gone from the earth; and he now felt 
himself to be almost an insulate being, with nobody but his emily for 
his heart to turn to. 

he stood lost amid the scene of years which fancy call up, till the 
succession closed with the picture of his die wife, and he start 
away, to forget it, if possible, at the social board. 

st. aubert ordered his carriage at an early hour, and emily observed, 
that he was more than usually silent and dejected on the way home; but 
she considered this to be the effect of his visit to a place which 
spoke so eloquent of former times, nor suspect that he had a cause 
of grief which he conceal from her. 

on enter the château she felt more depressed than ever, for she more 
than ever miss the presence of that dear parent, who, whenever she 
had been from home, use to welcome her return with smile and 
fondness; now, all was silent and forsaken. 

but what reason and effort may fail to do, time effects. week after 
week pass away, and each, as it passed, stole something from the 
harsh of her affliction, till it was mellow to that tender 
which the feeling heart cherish as sacred. st. aubert, on the 
contrary, visibly decline in health; though emily, who had been so 
constant with him, was almost the last person who observe it. his 
constitution had never recover from the late attack of the fever, and 
the succeed shock it received from madame st. aubert’s death had 
produce its present infirmity. his physician now ordered him to 
travel; for it was perceptible that sorrow had seize upon his nerves, 
weaken as they had been by the preceding illness; and variety of 
scene, it was probable, would, by amuse his mind, restore them to 
their proper tone. 

for some days emily was occupy in preparation to attend him; and he, 
by endeavour to diminish his expence at home during the journey—a 
purpose which determined him at length to dismiss his domestics. emily 
seldom oppose her father’s wish by question or remonstrances, or 
she would now have ask why he did not take a servant, and have 
represent that his infirm health made one almost necessary. but when, 
on the eve of their departure, she found that he had dismiss jacques, 
francis, and mary, and detain only theresa the old housekeeper, she 
was extremely surprised, and venture to ask his reason for have done 
so. “to save expences, my dear,” he replied—“we are go on an 
expensive excursion.” 

the physician had prescribed the air of languedoc and provence; and st. 
aubert determined, therefore, to travel leisurely along the shore of 
the mediterranean, towards provence. 

they retired early to their chamber on the night before their 
departure; but emily had a few books and other things to collect, and 
the clock had struck twelve before she had finished, or had remember 
that some of her drawing instruments, which she meant to take with her, 
were in the parlour below. as she went to fetch these, she pass her 
father’s room, and, perceive the door half open, conclude that he 
was in his study—for, since the death of madame st. aubert, it had been 
frequent his custom to rise from his restless bed, and go thither to 
compose his mind. when she was below stairs she look into this room, 
but without finding him; and as she return to her chamber, she tap 
at his door, and receiving no answer, step soft in, to be certain 
whether he was there. 

the room was dark, but a light glimmer through some pane of glass 
that were placed in the upper part of a closet-door. emily believe her 
father to be in the closet, and, surprise that he was up at so late an 
hour, apprehend he was unwell, and was go to enquire; but, 
considering that her sudden appearance at this hour might alarm him, 
she remove her light to the staircase, and then step soft to the 
closet. on look through the pane of glass, she saw him seat at a 
small table, with papers before him, some of which he was reading with 
deep attention and interest, during which he often wept and sob 
aloud. emily, who had come to the door to learn whether her father was 
ill, was now detain there by a mixture of curiosity and tenderness. 
she could not witness his sorrow, without being anxious to know the 
subject of; and she therefore continue to observe him in silence, 
conclude that those papers were letters of her late mother. presently 
he knelt down, and with a look so solemn as she had seldom seen him 
assume, and which was mingle with a certain wild expression, that 
partook more of horror than of any other character, he pray silent 
for a considerable time. 

when he rose, a ghastly pale was on his countenance. emily was 
hasty retiring; but she saw him turn again to the papers, and she 
stopped. he took from among them a small case, and from thence a 
miniature picture. the ray of light fell strong upon it, and she 
perceive it to be that of a lady, but not of her mother. 

st. aubert gaze earnest and tender upon his portrait, put it to 
his lips, and then to his heart, and sigh with a convulsive force. 
emily could scarcely believe what she saw to be real. she never knew 
till now that he had a picture of any other lady than her mother, much 
less that he had one which he evidently value so highly; but have 
look repeatedly, to be certain that it was not the resemblance of 
madame st. aubert, she became entire convinced that it was design 
for that of some other person. 

at length st. aubert return the picture to its case; and emily, 
recollect that she was intrude upon his private sorrows, soft 
withdrew from the chamber. 



chapter iii 

o how canst thou renounce the boundless store 
of charm which nature to her vot’ry yields! 
the warble woodland, the resounding shore, 
the pomp of groves, and garniture of fields; 
all that the genial ray of morning gilds, 
and all that echo to the song of even; 
all that the mountain’s shelt’ring bosom shields, 
and all the dread magnificence of heaven; 
o how canst thou renounce, and hope to be forgiven! 
..... 
these charm shall work thy soul’s eternal health, 
and love, and gentleness, and joy, impart. 
the minstrel 


st. aubert, instead of taking the more direct road, that ran along the 
feet of the pyrenee to languedoc, chose one that, winding over the 
heights, afford more extensive view and greater variety of romantic 
scenery. he turn a little out of his way to take leave of m. 
barreaux, whom he found botanize in the wood near his château, and 
who, when he was told the purpose of st. aubert’s visit, express a 
degree of concern, such as his friend had thought it was scarcely 
possible for him to feel on any similar occasion. they part with 
mutual regret. 

“if anything could have tempt me from my retirement,” said m. 
barreaux, “it would have been the pleasure of accompany you on this 
little tour. i do not often offer compliments; you may, therefore, 
believe me, when i say, that i shall look for your return with 
impatience.” 

the traveller proceed on their journey. as they ascend the 
heights, st. aubert often look back upon the château, in the plain 
below; tender image crowded to his mind; his melancholy imagination 
suggest that he should return no more; and though he checked this 
wandering thought, still he continue to look, till the hazy of 
distance blend his home with the general landscape, and st. aubert 
seem to 

drag at each remove a lengthen chain. 


he and emily continue sunk in muse silence for some leagues, from 
which melancholy reverie emily first awoke, and her young fancy, struck 
with the grandeur of the object around, gradual yield to 
delightful impressions. the road now descended into glens, confine by 
stupendous wall of rock, grey and barren, except where shrub fringe 
their summits, or patch of meagre vegetation tint their recesses, 
in which the wild goat was frequent browsing. and now, the way led to 
the lofty cliffs, from whence the landscape was seen extend in all 
its magnificence. 

emily could not restrain her transport as she look over the pine 
forest of the mountain upon the vast plains, that, enrich with 
woods, towns, blush vines, and plantation of almonds, palms, and 
olives, stretch along, till their various colours melt in distance 
into one harmonious hue, that seem to unite earth with heaven. 
through the whole of this glorious scene the majestic garonne wandered; 
descend from its source among the pyrenees, and winding its blue 
wave towards the bay of biscay. 

the rugged of the unfrequented road often oblige the wanderer to 
alight from their little carriage, but they thought themselves ample 
repaid for this inconvenience by the grandeur of the scenes; and, while 
the muleteer led his animal slow over the broken ground, the 
traveller had leisure to linger amid these solitudes, and to indulge 
the sublime reflections, which soften, while they elevate, the heart, 
and fill it with the certainty of a present god! still the enjoyment of 
st. aubert was touched with that pensive melancholy, which give to 
every object a mellow tint, and breathe a sacred charm over all 
around. 

they had provided against part of the evil to be encounter from a 
want of convenient inns, by carry a stock of provisions in the 
carriage, so that they might take refreshment on any pleasant spot, in 
the open air, and pass the nights wherever they should happen to meet 
with a comfortable cottage. for the mind, also, they had provided, by a 
work on botany, written by m. barreaux, and by several of the latin and 
italy poets; while emily’s pencil enable her to preserve some of 
those combinations of forms, which charm her at every step. 

the lonely of the road, where, only now and then, a peasant was 
seen driving his mule, or some mountaineer-children at play among the 
rocks, heighten the effect of the scenery. st. aubert was so much 
struck with it, that he determined, if he could hear of a road, to 
penetrate further among the mountains, and, bend his way rather more 
to the south, to emerge into rousillon, and coast the mediterranean 
along part of that country to languedoc. 

soon after mid-day, they reach the summit of one of those cliffs, 
which, bright with the verdure of palm-trees, adorn, like gems, the 
tremendous wall of the rocks, and which overlook the greater part of 
gascony, and part of languedoc. here was shade, and the fresh water of 
a spring, that, gliding among the turf, under the trees, thence 
precipitate itself from rock to rock, till its dashing murmur were 
lost in the abyss, though its white foam was long seen amid the 
dark of the pine below. 

this was a spot well suit for rest, and the traveller alight to 
dine, while the mule were unhar to browse on the savoury herb 
that enrich this summit. 

it was some time before st. aubert or emily could withdraw their 
attention from the surrounding objects, so as to partake of their 
little repast. seat in the shade of the palms, st. aubert pointed out 
to her observation the course of the rivers, the situation of great 
towns, and the boundary of provinces, which science, rather than the 
eye, enable him to describe. notwithstanding this occupation, when he 
had talk awhile he sudden became silent, thoughtful, and tear 
often swell to his eyes, which emily observed, and the sympathy of 
her own heart told her their cause. the scene before them bore some 
resemblance, though it was on a much grand scale, to a favourite one 
of the late madame st. aubert, within view of the fishing-house. they 
both observe this, and thought how delight she would have been with 
the present landscape, while they knew that her eyes must never, never 
more open upon this world. st. aubert remember the last time of his 
visiting that spot in company with her, and also the mournful 
presage thought which had then arisen in his mind, and were now, 
even thus soon, realised! the recollection subdued him, and he 
abrupt rose from his seat, and walk away to where no eye could 
observe his grief. 

when he returned, his countenance had recover its usual serenity; he 
took emily’s hand, pressed it affectionately, without speaking, and 
soon after call to the muleteer, who sat at a little distance, 
concerning a road among the mountain towards rousillon. michael said, 
there were several that way, but he did not know how far they extended, 
or even whether they were passable; and st. aubert, who did not intend 
to travel after sunset, ask what village they could reach about that 
time. the muleteer calculate that they could easily reach mateau, 
which was in their present road; but that, if they took a road that 
slope more to the south, towards rousillon, there was a hamlet, which 
he thought they could gain before the evening shut in. 

st. aubert, after some hesitation, determined to take the latter 
course, and michael, have finished his meal, and harness his mules, 
again set forward, but soon stopped; and st. aubert saw him do 
homage to a cross, that stood on a rock impending over their way. 
have conclude his devotions, he smack his whip in the air, and, in 
spite of the rough road, and the pain of his poor mules, which he had 
been lately lamenting, rattled, in a full gallop, along the edge of a 
precipice, which it made the eye dizzy to look down. emily was 
terrify almost to fainting; and st. aubert, apprehend still 
greater danger from sudden stopping the driver, was compel to sit 
quietly, and trust his fate to the strength and discretion of the 
mules, who seem to possess a greater portion of the latter quality 
than their master; for they carry the traveller safe into the 
valley, and there stop upon the brink of the rivulet that water 
it. 

leave the splendour of extensive prospects, they now enter this 
narrow valley screen by 

rocks on rocks piled, as if by magic spell, 
here scorch’d by lightnings, there with ivy green. 


the scene of barren was here and there interrupt by the spread 
branch of the larch and cedar, which threw their gloom over the 
cliff, or athwart the torrent that roll in the vale. no living 
creature appeared, except the lizard, scramble among the rocks, and 
often hanging upon points so dangerous, that fancy shrunk from the view 
of them. this was such a scene as _salvator_ would have chosen, had he 
then existed, for his canvas; st. aubert, impress by the romantic 
character of the place, almost expect to see banditti start from 
behind some project rock, and he kept his hand upon the arms with 
which he always travelled. 

as they advanced, the valley opened; its savage features gradual 
softened, and, towards evening, they were among heathy mountains, 
stretch in far perspective, along which the solitary sheep-bell was 
heard, and the voice of the shepherd calling his wandering flock to 
the nightly fold. his cabin, partly shadow by the cork-tree and the 
ilex, which st. aubert observe to flourish in higher regions of the 
air than any other trees, except the fir, was all the human habitation 
that yet appeared. along the bottom of this valley the most vivid 
verdure was spread; and, in the little hollow recess of the 
mountains, under the shade of the oak and chestnut, herd of cattle 
were grazing. group of them, too, were often seen repose on the 
bank of the rivulet, or lave their side in the cool stream, and 
sip its wave. 

the sun was now setting upon the valley; its last light gleam upon 
the water, and heighten the rich yellow and purple tint of the heath 
and broom, that overspread the mountains. st. aubert enquire of 
michael the distance to the hamlet he had mentioned, but the man could 
not with certainty tell; and emily began to fear that he had mistaken 
the road. here was no human being to assist, or direct them; they had 
left the shepherd and his cabin far behind, and the scene became so 
obscure in twilight, that the eye could not follow the distant 
perspective of the valley in search of a cottage, or a hamlet. a glow 
of the horizon still marked the west, and this was of some little use 
to the travellers. michael seem endeavour to keep up his courage 
by singing; his music, however, was not of a kind to disperse 
melancholy; he sung, in a sort of chant, one of the most dismal ditty 
his present auditor had ever heard, and st. aubert at length 
discover it to be a vesper-hymn to his favourite saint. 

they travelled on, sunk in that thoughtful melancholy, with which 
twilight and solitude impress the mind. michael had now end his 
ditty, and nothing was heard but the drowsy murmur of the breeze among 
the woods, and its light flutter, as it blew freshly into the carriage. 
they were at length rouse by the sound of fire-arms. st. aubert call 
to the muleteer to stop, and they listened. the noise was not repeated; 
but presently they heard a rustling among the brakes. st. aubert drew 
forth a pistol, and ordered michael to proceed as fast as possible; who 
had not long obeyed, before a horn sounded, that made the mountain 
ring. he look again from the window, and then saw a young man spring 
from the bush into the road, follow by a couple of dogs. the 
stranger was in a hunter’s dress. his gun was slung across his 
shoulders, the hunter’s horn hung from his belt, and in his hand was a 
small pike, which, as he held it, add to the manly grace of his 
figure, and assist the agile of his steps. 

after a moment’s hesitation, st. aubert again stop the carriage, and 
wait till he came up, that they might enquire concerning the hamlet 
they were in search of. the stranger informed him, that it was only 
half a league distant, that he was go thither himself, and would 
readily show the way. st. aubert thank him for the offer, and, 
pleased with his chevalier-like air and open countenance, ask him to 
take a seat in the carriage; which the stranger, with an 
acknowledgment, declined, add that he would keep pace with the 
mules. “but i fear you will be wretched accommodated,” said he: “the 
inhabitant of these mountain are a simple people, who are not only 
without the luxury of life, but almost destitute of what in other 
place are held to be its necessaries.” 

“i perceive you are not one of its inhabitants, sir,” said st. aubert. 

“no, sir, i am only a wanderer here.” 

the carriage drove on, and the increase dusk made the traveller very 
thankful that they had a guide; the frequent glens, too, that now 
open among the mountains, would likewise have add to their 
perplexity. emily, as she look up one of these, saw something at a 
great distance like a bright cloud in the air. “what light is yonder, 
sir?” said she. 

st. aubert looked, and perceive that it was the snowy summit of a 
mountain, so much higher than any around it, that it still reflect 
the sun’s rays, while those below lay in deep shade. 

at length, the village lights were seen to twinkle through the dusk, 
and, soon after, some cottage were discover in the valley, or rather 
were seen by reflection in the stream, on whose margin they stood, and 
which still gleam with the evening light. 

the stranger now came up, and st. aubert, on further enquiry, found not 
only that there was no inn in the place, but not any sort of house of 
public reception. the stranger, however, offer to walk on, and 
enquire for a cottage to accommodate them; for which further civility 
st. aubert return his thanks, and said, that, as the village was so 
near, he would alight, and walk with him. emily follow slow in the 
carriage. 

on the way, st. aubert ask his companion what success he had had in 
the chase. “not much, sir,” he replied, “nor do i aim at it. i am 
pleased with the country, and mean to saunter away a few week among 
its scenes. my dogs i take with me more for companionship than for 
game. this dress, too, give me an ostensible business, and procure me 
that respect from the people, which would, perhaps, be refuse to a 
lonely stranger, who had no visible motive for coming among them.” 

“i admire your taste,” said st. aubert, “and, if i was a younger man, 
should like to pass a few week in your way exceedingly. i, too, am a 
wanderer, but neither my plan nor pursuit are exactly like yours—i go 
in search of health, as much as of amusement.” st. aubert sighed, and 
paused; and then, seeming to recollect himself, he resumed: “if i can 
hear of a tolerable road, that shall afford decent accommodation, it is 
my intention to pass into rousillon, and along the sea-shore to 
languedoc. you, sir, seem to be acquaint with the country, and can, 
perhaps, give me information on the subject.” 

the stranger said, that what information he could give was entire at 
his service; and then mention a road rather more to the east, which 
led to a town, whence it would be easy to proceed into rousillon. 

they now arrive at the village, and commence their search for a 
cottage, that would afford a night’s lodging. in several, which they 
entered, ignorance, poverty, and mirth seem equally to prevail; and 
the owner eye st. aubert with a mixture of curiosity and timidity. 
nothing like a bed could be found, and he had cease to enquire for 
one, when emily join him, who observe the languor of her father’s 
countenance, and lamented, that he had taken a road so ill provided 
with the comfort necessary for an invalid. other cottages, which they 
examined, seem somewhat less savage than the former, consist of 
two rooms, if such they could be called; the first of these occupy by 
mule and pigs, the second by the family, which generally consist of 
six or eight children, with their parents, who slept on bed of skin 
and dry beech leaves, spread upon a mud floor. here, light was 
admitted, and smoke discharged, through an aperture in the roof; and 
here the scent of spirits (for the travel smugglers, who haunt 
the pyrenees, had made this rude people familiar with the use of 
liquors) was generally perceptible enough. emily turn from such 
scenes, and look at her father with anxious tenderness, which the 
young stranger seem to observe; for, drawing st. aubert aside, he 
made him an offer of his own bed. “it is a decent one,” said he, “when 
compare with what we have just seen, yet such as in other 
circumstances i should be ashamed to offer you.” st. aubert 
acknowledge how much he felt himself oblige by this kindness, but 
refuse to accept it, till the young stranger would take no denial. “do 
not give me the pain of knowing, sir,” said he, “that an invalid, like 
you, lie on hard skins, while i sleep in a bed. besides, sir, your 
refusal wound my pride; i must believe you think my offer unworthy 
your acceptance. let me show you the way. i have no doubt my landlady 
can accommodate this young lady also.” 

st. aubert at length consented, that, if this could be done, he would 
accept his kindness, though he felt rather surprised, that the stranger 
had prove himself so deficient in gallantry, as to administer to the 
repose of an infirm man, rather than to that of a very lovely young 
woman, for he had not once offer the room for emily. but she thought 
not of herself, and the animate smile she gave him, told how much she 
felt herself oblige for the preference of her father. 

on their way, the stranger, whose name was valancourt, step on first 
to speak to his hostess, and she came out to welcome st. aubert into a 
cottage, much superior to any he had seen. this good woman seem very 
willing to accommodate the strangers, who were soon compel to accept 
the only two bed in the place. egg and milk were the only food the 
cottage afforded; but against scarcity of provisions st. aubert had 
provided, and he request valancourt to stay, and partake with him of 
less homely fare; an invitation, which was readily accepted, and they 
pass an hour in intelligent conversation. st. aubert was much pleased 
with the manly frankness, simplicity, and keen susceptibility to the 
grandeur of nature, which his new acquaintance discovered; and, indeed, 
he had often been heard to say, that, without a certain simplicity of 
heart, this taste could not exist in any strong degree. 

the conversation was interrupt by a violent uproar without, in which 
the voice of the muleteer was heard above every other sound. valancourt 
start from his seat, and went to enquire the occasion; but the 
dispute continue so long afterwards, that st. aubert went himself, and 
found michael quarrel with the hostess, because she had refuse to 
let his mule lie in a little room where he and three of her son were 
to pass the night. the place was wretched enough, but there was no 
other for these people to sleep in; and, with somewhat more of delicacy 
than was usual among the inhabitant of this wild tract of country, she 
persist in refuse to let the animal have the same _bed-chamber_ 
with her children. this was a tender point with the muleteer; his 
honour was wound when his mule were treat with disrespect, and he 
would have received a blow, perhaps, with more meekness. he declared 
that his beast were as honest beasts, and as good beasts, as any in 
the whole province; and that they had a right to be well treat 
wherever they went. “they are as harmless as lambs,” said he, “if 
people don’t affront them. i never knew them behave themselves amiss 
above once or twice in my life, and then they had good reason for do 
so. once, indeed, they kick at a boy’s leg that lay asleep in the 
stable, and broke it; but i told them they were out there, and by st. 
anthony! i believe they understood me, for they never did so again.” 

he conclude this eloquent harangue with protesting, that they should 
share with him, go where he would. 

the dispute was at length settled by valancourt, who drew the hostess 
aside, and desire she would let the muleteer and his beast have the 
place in question to themselves, while her son should have the bed of 
skin design for him, for that he would wrap himself in his cloak, 
and sleep on the bench by the cottage door. but this she thought it her 
duty to oppose, and she felt it to be her inclination to disappoint the 
muleteer. valancourt, however, was positive, and the tedious affair was 
at length settled. 

it was late when st. aubert and emily retired to their rooms, and 
valancourt to his station at the door, which, at this mild season, he 
prefer to a close cabin and a bed of skins. st. aubert was somewhat 
surprise to find in his room volumes of homer, horace, and petrarch; 
but the name of valancourt, written in them, told him to whom they 
belonged. 



chapter iv 

in truth he was a strange and wayward wight, 
fond of each gentle, and each dreadful scene, 
in darkness, and in storm he found delight; 
nor less than when on ocean-wave serene 
the southern sun diffus’d his dazzle sheen. 
even sad vicissitude amus’d his soul; 
and if a sigh would sometimes intervene, 
and down his cheek a tear of pity roll, 
a sigh, a tear, so sweet, he wish’d not to control. 
the minstrel 


st. aubert awoke at an early hour, refresh by sleep, and desirous to 
set forward. he invite the stranger to breakfast with him; and, 
talk again of the road, valancourt said, that, some month past, he 
had travelled as far as beaujeu, which was a town of some consequence 
on the way to rousillon. he recommend it to st. aubert to take that 
route, and the latter determined to do so. 

“the road from this hamlet,” said valancourt, “and that to beaujeu, 
part at the distance of about a league and a half from hence; if you 
will give me leave, i will direct your muleteer so far. i must wander 
somewhere, and your company would make this a pleasant ramble than 
any other i could take.” 

st. aubert thankful accept his offer, and they set out together, 
the young stranger on foot, for he refuse the invitation of st. aubert 
to take a seat in his little carriage. 

the road wound along the feet of the mountain through a pastoral 
valley, bright with verdure, and varied with grove of dwarf oak, beech 
and sycamore, under whose branch herd of cattle reposed. the 
mountain-ash too, and the weeping birch, often threw their pendant 
foliage over the steep above, where the scanty soil scarcely conceal 
their roots, and where their light branch wave to every breeze that 
flutter from the mountains. 

the traveller were frequent met at this early hour, for the sun had 
not yet risen upon the valley, by shepherd driving immense flock from 
their fold to feed upon the hills. st. aubert had set out thus early, 
not only that he might enjoy the first appearance of sunrise, but that 
he might inhale the first pure breath of morning, which above all 
things is refreshing to the spirits of the invalid. in these regions it 
was particularly so, where an abundance of wild flower and aromatic 
herb breathe forth their essence on the air. 

the dawn, which soften the scenery with its peculiar grey tint, now 
dispersed, and emily watch the progress of the day, first tremble 
on the tops of the highest cliffs, then touching them with splendid 
light, while their side and the vale below were still wrapt in dewy 
mist. meanwhile, the sullen grey of the eastern cloud began to blush, 
then to redden, and then to glow with a thousand colours, till the 
golden light dart over all the air, touched the lower points of the 
mountain’s brow, and glance in long slope beam upon the valley and 
its stream. all nature seem to have awaken from death into life; 
the spirit of st. aubert was renovated. his heart was full; he wept, 
and his thought ascend to the great creator. 

emily wish to trip along the turf, so green and bright with dew, and 
to taste the full delight of that liberty, which the izard seem to 
enjoy as he bound along the brow of the cliffs; while valancourt 
often stop to speak with the travellers, and with social feeling to 
point out to them the peculiar object of his admiration. st. aubert 
was pleased with him: “here is the real ingenuous and ardour of 
youth,” said he to himself; “this young man has never been at paris.” 

he was sorry when they came to the spot where the road parted, and his 
heart took a more affectionate leave of him than is usual after so 
short an acquaintance. valancourt talk long by the side of the 
carriage; seem more than once to be going, but still lingered, and 
appear to search anxious for topic of conversation to account for 
his delay. at length he took leave. as he went, st. aubert observe him 
look with an earnest and pensive eye at emily, who bowed to him with a 
countenance full of timid sweetness, while the carriage drove on. st. 
aubert, for whatever reason, soon after look from the window, and saw 
valancourt standing upon the bank of the road, rest on his pike with 
fold arms, and following the carriage with his eyes. he wave his 
hand, and valancourt, seeming to awake from his reverie, return the 
salute, and start away. 

the aspect of the country now began to change, and the traveller soon 
found themselves among mountain cover from their base nearly to 
their summit with forest of gloomy pine, except where a rock of 
granite shot up from the vale, and lost its snowy top in the clouds. 
the rivulet, which had hitherto accompany them, now expand into a 
river; and, flowing deep and silent along, reflected, as in a 
mirror, the black of the impending shades. sometimes a cliff was 
seen lift its bold head above the wood and the vapours, that 
float mid-way down the mountains; and sometimes a face of 
perpendicular marble rose from the water’s edge, over which the larch 
threw his gigantic arms, here scathe with lightning, and there 
floating in luxuriant foliage. 

they continue to travel over a rough and unfrequented road, seeing now 
and then at a distance the solitary shepherd, with his dog, stalk 
along the valley, and hearing only the dashing of torrents, which the 
wood conceal from the eye, the long sullen murmur of the breeze, as 
it swept over the pines, or the note of the eagle and the vulture, 
which were seen towering round the beetling cliff. 

often, as the carriage move slow over uneven ground, st. aubert 
alighted, and amuse himself with examine the curious plant that 
grew on the bank of the road, and with which these regions abound; 
while emily, wrapt in high enthusiasm, wander away under the shades, 
listen in deep silence to the lonely murmur of the woods. 

neither village nor hamlet was seen for many leagues; the goat-herd’s 
or the hunter’s cabin, perch among the cliff of the rocks, were the 
only human habitation that appeared. 

the traveller again took their dinner in the open air, on a pleasant 
spot in the valley, under the spread shade of cedars; and then set 
forward towards beaujeu. 

the road now began to descend, and, leave the pine forest behind, 
wound among rocky precipices. the evening twilight again fell over the 
scene, and the traveller were ignorant how far they might yet be from 
beaujeu. st. aubert, however, conjecture that the distance could not 
be very great, and comfort himself with the prospect of travel on 
a more frequent road after reach that town, where he design to 
pass the night. mingle woods, and rocks, and heathy mountain were now 
seen obscure through the dusk; but soon even these imperfect image 
fade in darkness. michael proceed with caution, for he could 
scarcely distinguish the road; his mules, however, seem to have more 
sagacity, and their steps were sure. 

on turning the angle of a mountain, a light appear at a distance, 
that illumine the rocks, and the horizon to a great extent. it was 
evidently a large fire, but whether accidental, or otherwise, there 
were no means of knowing. st. aubert thought it was probably kindle by 
some of the numerous banditti, that infest the pyrenees, and he 
became watchful and anxious to know whether the road pass near this 
fire. he had arms with him, which, on an emergency, might afford some 
protection, though certainly a very unequal one, against a band of 
robbers, so desperate too as those usually were who haunt these wild 
regions. while many reflection rose upon his mind, he heard a voice 
shouting from the road behind, and order the muleteer to stop. st. 
aubert bade him proceed as fast as possible; but either michael, or his 
mule were obstinate, for they did not quit the old pace. horses’ feet 
were now heard; a man rode up to the carriage, still order the 
driver to stop; and st. aubert, who could no long doubt his purpose, 
was with difficulty able to prepare a pistol for his defence, when his 
hand was upon the door of the chaise. the man stagger on his horse, 
the report of the pistol was follow by a groan, and st. aubert’s 
horror may be imagined, when in the next instant he thought he heard 
the faint voice of valancourt. he now himself bade the muleteer stop; 
and, pronounce the name of valancourt, was answer in a voice, that 
no long suffer him to doubt. st. aubert, who instantly alight and 
went to his assistance, found him still sitting on his horse, but 
bleeding profusely, and appear to be in great pain, though he 
endeavour to soften the terror of st. aubert by assurance that he 
was not material hurt, the wound being only in his arm. st. aubert, 
with the muleteer, assist him to dismount, and he sat down on the 
bank of the road, where st. aubert try to bind up his arm, but his 
hand tremble so excessive that he could not accomplish it; and, 
michael being now gone in pursuit of the horse, which, on being 
disengaged from his rider, had gallop off, he call emily to his 
assistance. receiving no answer, he went to the carriage, and found her 
sunk on the seat in a faint fit. between the distress of this 
circumstance and that of leave valancourt bleeding, he scarcely knew 
what he did; he endeavoured, however, to raise her, and call to 
michael to fetch water from the rivulet that flow by the road, but 
michael was gone beyond the reach of his voice. valancourt, who heard 
these calls, and also the repeated name of emily, instantly understood 
the subject of his distress; and, almost forget his own condition, 
he hasten to her relief. she was revive when he reach the 
carriage; and then, understanding that anxiety for him had occasion 
her indisposition, he assured her, in a voice that trembled, but not 
from anguish, that his wound was of no consequence. while he said this 
st. aubert turn round, and perceive that he was still bleeding, the 
subject of his alarm change again, and he hasty form some 
handkerchief into a bandage. this stop the effusion of the blood; 
but st. aubert, dread the consequence of the wound, enquire 
repeatedly how far they were from beaujeu; when, learning that it was 
at two leagues’ distance, his distress increased, since he knew not how 
valancourt, in his present state, would bear the motion of the 
carriage, and perceive that he was already faint from loss of blood. 
when he mention the subject of his anxiety, valancourt entreat that 
he would not suffer himself to be thus alarm on his account, for that 
he had no doubt he should be able to support himself very well; and 
then he talk of the accident as a slight one. the muleteer being now 
return with valancourt’s horse, assist him into the chaise; and, as 
emily was now revived, they move slow on towards beaujeu. 

st. aubert, when he had recover from the terror occasion him by 
this accident, express surprise on seeing valancourt, who explain 
his unexpected appearance by saying, “you, sir, renew my taste for 
society; when you had left the hamlet, it did indeed appear a solitude. 
i determined, therefore, since my object was merely amusement, to 
change the scene; and i took this road, because i knew it led through a 
more romantic tract of mountain than the spot i have left. besides,” 
add he, hesitate for an instant, “i will own, and why should i not? 
that i had some hope of overtake you.” 

“and i have made you a very unexpected return for the compliment,” said 
st. aubert, who lament again the rash which had produce the 
accident, and explain the cause of his late alarm. but valancourt 
seem anxious only to remove from the mind of his companion every 
unpleasant feeling relative to himself; and, for that purpose, still 
struggle against a sense of pain, and try to converse with gaiety. 
emily meanwhile was silent, except when valancourt particularly 
address her, and there was at those times a tremulous tone in his 
voice that spoke much. 

they were now so near the fire, which had long flame at a distance on 
the black of night, that it gleam upon the road, and they could 
distinguish figures moving about the blaze. the way winding still 
nearer, they perceive in the valley one of those numerous band of 
gipsies, which at that period particularly haunt the wild of the 
pyrenees, and live partly by plunder the traveller. emily look 
with some degree of terror on the savage countenance of these people, 
shown by the fire, which heighten the romantic effects of the 
scenery, as it threw a red dusky gleam upon the rocks and on the 
foliage of the trees, leave heavy masses of shade and regions of 
obscurity, which the eye fear to penetrate. 

they were prepare their supper; a large pot stood by the fire, over 
which several figures were busy. the blaze discover a rude kind of 
tent, round which many children and dogs were playing, and the whole 
form a picture highly grotesque. the traveller saw plainly their 
danger. valancourt was silent, but laid his hand on one of st. aubert’s 
pistols; st. aubert drew forth another, and michael was ordered to 
proceed as fast as possible. they pass the place, however, without 
being attacked; the rover being probably unprepared for the 
opportunity, and too busy about their supper to feel much interest, at 
the moment, in anything besides. 

after a league and a half more, pass in darkness, the traveller 
arrive at beaujeu, and drove up to the only inn the place afforded; 
which, though superior to any they had seen since they enter the 
mountains, was bad enough. 

the surgeon of the town was immediately sent for, if a surgeon he could 
be called, who prescribed for horse as well as for men, and shave 
face at least as dexterous as he set bones. after examine 
valancourt’s arm, and perceive that the bullet had pass through the 
flesh without touching the bone, he dress it, and left him with a 
solemn prescription of quiet, which his patient was not inclined to 
obey. the delight of ease had now succeed to pain; for ease may be 
allow to assume a positive quality when contrast with anguish; and, 
his spirits thus reanimated, he wish to partake of the conversation 
of st. aubert and emily, who, release from so many apprehensions, were 
uncommonly cheerful. late as it was, however, st. aubert was oblige to 
go out with the landlord to buy meat for supper; and emily, who, during 
this interval, had been absent as long as she could, upon excuse of 
look to their accommodation, which she found rather better than she 
expected, was compel to return, and converse with valancourt alone. 
they talk of the character of the scene they had passed, of the 
natural history of the country, of poetry, and of st. aubert; a subject 
on which emily always spoke and listen to with peculiar pleasure. 

the traveller pass an agreeable evening; but st. aubert was fatigue 
with his journey; and, as valancourt seem again sensible of pain, 
they separate soon after supper. 

in the morning st. aubert found that valancourt had pass a restless 
night; that he was feverish, and his wound very painful. the surgeon, 
when he dress it, advise him to remain quiet at beaujeu; advice 
which was too reasonable to be rejected. st. aubert, however, had no 
favourable opinion of this practitioner, and was anxious to commit 
valancourt into more skilful hands; but learning, upon enquiry, that 
there was no town within several league which seem more likely to 
afford better advice, he alter the plan of his journey, and 
determined to await the recovery of valancourt, who, with somewhat more 
ceremony than sincerity, made many objection to this delay. 

by order of his surgeon, valancourt did not go out of the house that 
day; but st. aubert and emily survey with delight the environs of the 
town, situated at the feet of the pyrenean alps, that rose, some in 
abrupt precipices, and other swelling with wood of cedar, fir, and 
cypress, which stretch nearly to their highest summits. the cheerful 
green of the beech and mountain-ash was sometimes seen, like a gleam of 
light, amidst the dark verdure of the forest; and sometimes a torrent 
pour its sparkle flood, high among the woods. 

valancourt’s indisposition detain the traveller at beaujeu several 
days, during which interval st. aubert had observe his disposition and 
his talent with the philosophical inquiry so natural to him. he saw a 
frank and generous nature, full of ardour, highly susceptible of 
whatever is grand and beautiful, but impetuous, wild, and somewhat 
romantic. valancourt had known little of the world. his perception 
were clear, and his feelings just; his indignation of an unworthy, or 
his admiration of a generous action, were express in terms of equal 
vehemence. st. aubert sometimes smile at his warmth, but seldom 
checked it, and often repeated to himself, “this young man has never 
been at paris.” a sigh sometimes follow this silent ejaculation. he 
determined not to leave valancourt till he should be perfectly 
recovered; and, as he was now well enough to travel, though not able to 
manage his horse, st. aubert invite him to accompany him for a few 
days in the carriage. this he the more readily did, since he had 
discover that valancourt was of a family of the same name in gascony, 
with whose respectability he was well acquainted. the latter accept 
the offer with great pleasure, and they again set forward among these 
romantic wild about rousillon. 

they travelled leisurely; stopping wherever a scene uncommonly grand 
appeared; frequent alight to walk to an eminence, whither the 
mule could not go, from which the prospect open in greater 
magnificence; and often saunter over hillock cover with lavender, 
wild thyme, juniper, and tamarisc; and under the shades of woods, 
between those bole they caught the long mountain-vista, sublime beyond 
anything that emily had ever imagined. 

st. aubert sometimes amuse himself with botanizing, while valancourt 
and emily stroll on; he point out to her notice the object that 
particularly charm him, and recite beautiful passage from such of 
the latin and italy poet as he had heard her admire. in the pause 
of conversation, when he thought himself not observed, he frequent 
fixed his eyes pensive on her countenance, which express with so 
much animation the taste and energy of her mind; and when he spoke 
again, there was a peculiar tender in the tone of his voice, that 
defeat any attempt to conceal his sentiments. by degree these silent 
pause became more frequent; till emily, only, betray an anxiety to 
interrupt them; and she; who had been hitherto reserved, would now talk 
again, and again, of the wood and the valley and the mountains, to 
avoid the danger of sympathy and silence. 

from beaujeu the road had constant ascended, conduct the 
traveller into the higher regions of the air, where immense glacier 
exhibit their frozen horrors, and eternal snow whiten the summit 
of the mountains. they often pause to contemplate these stupendous 
scenes, and, seat on some wild cliff, where only the ilex or the 
larch could flourish, look over dark forest of fir, and precipice 
where human foot had never wandered, into the glen—so deep, that the 
thunder of the torrent, which was seen to foam along the bottom, was 
scarcely heard to murmur. over these crag rose other of stupendous 
height, and fantastic shape; some shoot into cones; other impending 
far over their base, in huge masses of granite, along whose broken 
ridge was often lodge a weight of snow, that, tremble even to the 
vibration of a sound, threaten to bear destruction in its course to 
the vale. around, on every side, far as the eye could penetrate, were 
seen only form of grandeur—the long perspective of mountain-tops, 
tinge with ethereal blue, or white with snow; valley of ice, and 
forest of gloomy fir. the serene and clear of the air in these 
high regions were particularly delightful to the travellers; it seem 
to inspire them with a fine spirit, and diffuse an indescribable 
complacency over their minds. they had no words to express the sublime 
emotion they felt. a solemn expression characterise the feelings of 
st. aubert; tear often came to his eyes, and he frequent walk away 
from his companions. valancourt now and then spoke, to point to emily’s 
notice some feature of the scene. the thin of the atmosphere, 
through which every object came so distinct to the eye, surprise and 
delude her; who could scarcely believe that objects, which appear so 
near, were, in reality, so distant. the deep silence of these solitude 
was broken only at interval by the scream of the vultures, seen 
cower round some cliff below, or by the cry of the eagle sailing 
high in the air; except when the traveller listen to the hollow 
thunder that sometimes mutter at their feet. while, above, the deep 
blue of the heaven was unobscured by the lightest cloud, half way down 
the mountains, long billow of vapour were frequent seen rolling, now 
wholly excluding the country below, and now opening, and partially 
revealing its features. emily delight to observe the grandeur of 
these cloud as they change in shape and tints, and to watch their 
various effect on the lower world, whose features, partly veiled, were 
continual assume new form of sublimity. 

after traverse these regions for many leagues, they began to descend 
towards rousillon, and features of beauty then mingle with the scene. 
yet the traveller did not look back without some regret to the sublime 
object they had quitted; though the eye, fatigue with the extension 
of its powers, was glad to repose on the verdure of wood and pastures, 
that now hung on the margin of the river below; to view again the 
humble cottage shade by cedars, the playful group of 
mountaineer-children, and the flowery nook that appear among the 
hills. 

as they descended, they saw at a distance, on the right, one of the 
grand pass of the pyrenee into spain, gleam with its battlements 
and tower to the splendour of the setting rays, yellow tops of wood 
colouring the steep below, while far above aspire the snowy points of 
the mountains, still reflect a rosy hue. 

st. aubert began to look out for the little town he had been direct 
to by the people of beaujeu, and where he meant to pass the night; but 
no habitation yet appeared. of its distance valancourt could not assist 
him to judge, for he had never been so far along this chain of alps 
before. there was, however, a road to guide them; and there could be 
little doubt that it was the right one; for, since they had left 
beaujeu, there had been no variety of track to perplex or mislead. 

the sun now gave his last light, and st. aubert bade the muleteer 
proceed with all possible dispatch. he found, indeed, the lassitude of 
illness return upon him, after a day of uncommon fatigue, both of body 
and mind, and he long for repose. his anxiety was not soothe by 
observing a numerous train, consist of men, horses, and loaded 
mules, winding down the steep of an opposite mountain, appear and 
disappear at interval among the woods, so that its numbers could 
not be judge of. something bright, like arms, glance in the setting 
ray, and the military dress was distinguishable upon the men who were 
in the van, and on other scattered among the troop that followed. as 
these wound into the vale, the rear of the party emerge from the 
woods, and exhibit a band of soldiers. st. aubert’s apprehension now 
subsided; he had no doubt that the train before him consist of 
smugglers, who, in convey prohibit goods over the pyrenees, had 
been encountered, and conquer by a party of troops. 

the traveller had linger so long among the sublime scene of these 
mountains, that they found themselves entire mistaken in their 
calculation that they could reach montigny at sunset; but, as they 
wound along the valley, the saw, on a rude alpine bridge, that united 
two lofty crag of the glen, a group of mountaineer-children, amuse 
themselves with drop pebble into a torrent below, and watch the 
stone plunge into the water, that threw up its white spray high in the 
air as it received them, and return a sullen sound, which the echo 
of the mountain prolonged. under the bridge was seen a perspective of 
the valley, with its cataract descend among the rocks, and a cottage 
on a cliff, overshadow with pines. it appeared, that they could not 
be far from some small town. st. aubert bade the muleteer stop, and 
then call to the children to enquire if he was near montigny; but the 
distance, and the roaring of the waters, would not suffer his voice to 
be heard; and the crags, adjoin the bridge, were of such tremendous 
height and steepness, that to have climb either would have been 
scarcely practicable to a person unacquainted with the ascent. st. 
aubert, therefore, did not waste more moments in delay. they continue 
to travel long after twilight had obscure the road, which was so 
broken, that, now thinking it safe to walk than to ride, they all 
alighted. the moon was rising, but her light was yet too feeble to 
assist them. while they step careful on, they heard the 
vesper-bell of a convent. the twilight would not permit them to 
distinguish anything like a building, but the sound seem to come 
from some woods, that overhung an acclivity to the right. valancourt 
propose to go in search of this convent. “if they will not accommodate 
us with a night’s lodging,” said he, “they may certainly inform us how 
far we are from montigny, and direct us towards it.” he was bound 
forward, without wait st. aubert’s reply, when the latter stop 
him. “i am very weary,” said st. aubert, “and wish for nothing so much 
as for immediate rest. we will all go to the convent; your good looks 
would defeat our purpose; but when they see mine and emily’s exhaust 
countenances, they will scarcely deny us repose.” 

as he said this, he took emily’s arm within his, and, telling michael 
to wait awhile in the road with the carriage, they began to ascend 
towards the woods, guide by the bell of the convent. his steps were 
feeble, and valancourt offer him his arm, which he accepted. the moon 
now threw a faint light over their path, and, soon after, enable them 
to distinguish some tower rising above the tops of the woods. still 
following the note of the bell, they enter the shade of those woods, 
light only by the moonbeams, that glide down between the leaves, and 
threw a tremulous uncertain gleam upon the steep track they were 
winding. the gloom and the silence that prevailed, except when the bell 
return upon the air, together with the wild of the surrounding 
scene, struck emily with a degree of fear, which, however, the voice 
and conversation of valancourt somewhat repressed. when they had been 
some time ascending, st. aubert complain of weariness, and they 
stop to rest upon a little green summit, where the tree opened, and 
admitted the moonlight. he sat down upon the turf, between emily and 
valancourt. the bell had now ceased, and the deep repose of the scene 
was undisturbed by any sound, for the low dull murmur of some distant 
torrent might be said to sooth, rather than to interrupt, the silence. 

before them, extend the valley they had quitted; its rocks, and wood 
to the left, just silver by the rays, form a contrast to the deep 
shadow, that involved the opposite cliffs, whose fringe summit only 
were tip with light; while the distant perspective of the valley was 
lost in the yellow mist of moonlight. the traveller sat for some time 
wrapt in the complacency which such scene inspire. 

“these scenes,” said valancourt, at length, “soften the heart, like the 
note of sweet music, and inspire that delicious melancholy which no 
person, who had felt it once, would resign for the gayest pleasures. 
they waken our best and purest feelings, dispose us to benevolence, 
pity, and friendship. those whom i love—i always seem to love more in 
such an hour as this.” his voice trembled, and he paused. 

st. aubert was silent; emily perceive a warm tear fall upon the hand 
he held; she knew the object of his thoughts; hers too had, for some 
time, been occupy by the remembrance of her mother. he seem by an 
effort to rouse himself. “yes,” said he, with a half-suppressed sigh, 
“the memory of those we love—of times for ever past! in such an hour as 
this steal upon the mind, like a strain of distant music in the 
still of night;—all tender and harmonious as this landscape, 
sleep in the mellow moonlight.” after the pause of a moment, st. 
aubert added, “i have always fancied, that i thought with more 
clearness, and precision, at such an hour than at any other, and that 
heart must be insensible in a great degree, that do not soften to its 
influence. but many such there are.” 

valancourt sighed. 

“are there, indeed, many such?” said emily. 

“a few years hence, my emily,” reply st. aubert, “and you may smile 
at the recollection of that question—if you do not weep to it. but 
come, i am somewhat refreshed, let us proceed.” 

have emerge from the woods, they saw, upon a turfy hillock above, 
the convent of which they were in search. a high wall, that surround 
it, led them to an ancient gate, at which they knocked; and the poor 
monk, who open it, conduct them into a small adjoin room, where 
he desire they would wait while he informed the superior of their 
request. in this interval, several friar came in separate to look at 
them; and at length the first monk returned, and they follow him to a 
room, where the superior was sitting in an arm-chair, with a large 
folio volume, print in black letter, open on a desk before him. he 
received them with courtesy, though he did not rise from his seat; and, 
have ask them a few questions, grant their request. after a short 
conversation, formal and solemn on the part of the superior, they 
withdrew to the apartment where they were to sup, and valancourt, whom 
one of the inferior friar civilly desire to accompany, went to seek 
michael and his mules. they had not descended half way down the cliffs, 
before they heard the voice of the muleteer echo far and wide. 
sometimes he call on st. aubert, and sometimes on valancourt; who 
having, at length, convinced him that he had nothing to fear either for 
himself, or his master; and have disposed of him, for the night, in a 
cottage on the skirt of the woods, return to sup with his friends, 
on such sober fare as the monk thought it prudent to set before them. 
while st. aubert was too much indisposed to share it, emily, in her 
anxiety for her father, forgot herself; and valancourt, silent and 
thoughtful, yet never inattentive to them, appear particularly 
solicitous to accommodate and relieve st. aubert, who often observed, 
while his daughter was pressing him to eat, or adjust the pillow she 
had placed in the back of his arm-chair, that valancourt fixed on her a 
look of pensive tenderness, which he was not displease to understand. 

they separate at an early hour, and retired to their respective 
apartments. emily was shown to hers by a nun of the convent, whom she 
was glad to dismiss, for her heart was melancholy, and her attention so 
much abstracted, that conversation with a stranger was painful. she 
thought her father daily declining, and attribute his present fatigue 
more to the feeble state of his frame, than to the difficulty of the 
journey. a train of gloomy idea haunt her mind, till she fell 
asleep. 

in about two hour after, she was awaken by the chime of a bell, 
and then heard quick steps pass along the gallery, into which her 
chamber opened. she was so little accustomed to the manners of a 
convent, as to be alarm by this circumstance; her fears, ever alive 
for her father, suggest that he was very ill, and she rose in haste 
to go to him. have paused, however, to let the person in the gallery 
pass before she open her door, her thoughts, in the mean time, 
recover from the confusion of sleep, and she understood that the bell 
was the call of the monk to prayers. it had now ceased, and, all being 
again still, she forbore to go to st. aubert’s room. her mind was not 
disposed for immediate sleep, and the moonlight, that shone into her 
chamber, invite her to open the casement, and look out upon the 
country. 

it was a still and beautiful night, the sky was unobscured by any 
cloud, and scarce a leaf of the wood beneath tremble in the air. as 
she listened, the midnight hymn of the monk rose soft from a chapel, 
that stood on one of the lower cliffs, a holy strain, that seem to 
ascend through the silence of night to heaven, and her thought 
ascend with it. from the consideration of his works, her mind arose 
to the adoration of the deity, in his goodness and power; wherever she 
turn her view, whether on the sleep earth, or to the vast regions 
of space, glowing with world beyond the reach of human thought, the 
sublime of god, and the majesty of his presence appeared. her eyes 
were fill with tear of awful love and admiration; and she felt that 
pure devotion, superior to all the distinction of human system, which 
lift the soul above this world, and seem to expand it into a noble 
nature; such devotion as can, perhaps, only be experienced, when the 
mind, rescued, for a moment, from the humble of earthly 
considerations, aspire to contemplate his power in the sublime of 
his works, and his goodness in the infinity of his blessings. 

is it not now the hour, 
the holy hour, when to the cloudless height 
of yon star concave climb the full-orbed moon, 
and to this nether world in solemn stillness, 
give sign, that, to the list’ning ear of heaven 
religion’s voice should plead? the very babe 
know this, and, chance awak’d, his little hand 
lift to the gods, and on his innocent couch 
call down a blessing. 
caractacu 


the midnight chant of the monk soon after drop into silence; but 
emily remain at the casement, watch the setting moon, and the 
valley sink into deep shade, and willing to prolong her present 
state of mind. at length she retired to her mattress, and sunk into 
tranquil slumber. 



chapter v 

while in the rosy vale 
love breath’d his infant sighs, from anguish free. 
thomson 


st. aubert, sufficient restore by a night’s repose to pursue his 
journey, set out in the morning, with his family and valancourt, for 
rousillon, which he hope to reach before night-fall. the scenes, 
through which they now passed, were as wild and romantic, as any they 
had yet observed, with this difference, that beauty, every now and 
then, soften the landscape into smiles. little woody recess 
appear among the mountains, cover with bright verdure and flowers; 
or a pastoral valley open its grassy bosom in the shade of the 
cliffs, with flock and herd loiter along the bank of a rivulet, 
that refresh it with perpetual green. st. aubert could not repent the 
have taken this fatigue road, though he was this day, also, 
frequent oblige to alight, to walk along the rugged precipice, and 
to climb the steep and flinty mountain. the wonderful sublime and 
variety of the prospects repaid him for all this, and the enthusiasm, 
with which they were view by his young companions, heighten his 
own, and awaken a remembrance of all the delightful emotion of his 
early days, when the sublime charm of nature were first unveil to 
him. he found great pleasure in converse with valancourt, and in 
listen to his ingenuous remarks. the fire and simplicity of his 
manners seem to render him a characteristic figure in the scene 
around them; and st. aubert discover in his sentiment the just 
and the dignity of an elevated mind, unbiased by intercourse with the 
world. he perceived, that his opinion were formed, rather than 
imbibed; were more the result of thought, than of learning. of the 
world he seem to know nothing; for he believe well of all mankind, 
and this opinion gave him the reflect image of his own heart. 

st. aubert, as he sometimes linger to examine the wild plant in his 
path, often look forward with pleasure to emily and valancourt, as 
they stroll on together; he, with a countenance of animate delight, 
point to her attention some grand feature of the scene; and she, 
listen and observing with a look of tender seriousness, that spoke 
the elevation of her mind. they appear like two lovers who had never 
stray beyond these their native mountains; whose situation had 
secluded them from the frivolity of common life, whose idea were 
simple and grand, like the landscape among which they moved, and who 
knew no other happiness, than in the union of pure and affectionate 
hearts. st. aubert smiled, and sigh at the romantic picture of 
felicity his fancy drew; and sigh again to think, that nature and 
simplicity were so little known to the world, as that their pleasure 
were thought romantic. 

“the world,” said he, pursue this train of thought, “ridicules a 
passion which it seldom feels; its scenes, and its interests, distract 
the mind, deprave the taste, corrupt the heart, and love cannot exist 
in a heart that has lost the meek dignity of innocence. virtue and 
taste are nearly the same, for virtue is little more than active taste, 
and the most delicate affection of each combine in real love. how then 
are we to look for love in great cities, where selfishness, 
dissipation, and insincere supply the place of tenderness, simplicity 
and truth?” 

it was near noon, when the travellers, have arrive at a piece of 
steep and dangerous road, alight to walk. the road wound up an 
ascent, that was clothe with wood, and, instead of following the 
carriage, they enter the refreshing shade. a dewy cool was 
diffuse upon the air, which, with the bright verdure of turf, that 
grew under the trees, the mingle fragrance of flower and of balm, 
thyme, and lavender, that enrich it, and the grandeur of the pines, 
beech, and chestnuts, that overshadow them, render this a most 
delicious retreat. sometimes, the thick foliage exclude all view of 
the country; at others, it admitted some partial catch of the distant 
scenery, which gave hint to the imagination to picture landscape more 
interesting, more impressive, than any that had been present to the 
eye. the wanderer often linger to indulge in these reverie of 
fancy. 

the pause of silence, such as had formerly interrupt the 
conversation of valancourt and emily, were more frequent today than 
ever. valancourt often drop sudden from the most animate 
vivace into fit of deep musing, and there was, sometimes, an 
unaffected melancholy in his smile, which emily could not avoid 
understanding, for her heart was interested in the sentiment it spoke. 

st. aubert was refresh by the shades, and they continue to saunter 
under them, following, as nearly as they could guess, the direction of 
the road, till they perceive that they had total lost it. they had 
continue near the brow of the precipice, allure by the scenery it 
exhibited, while the road wound far away over the cliff above. 
valancourt call loud to michael, but heard no voice, except his 
own, echo among the rocks, and his various effort to regain the 
road were equally unsuccessful. while they were thus circumstanced, 
they perceive a shepherd’s cabin, between the bole of the tree at 
some distance, and valancourt bound on first to ask assistance. when 
he reach it, he saw only two little children, at play, on the turf 
before the door. he look into the hut, but no person was there, and 
the eldest of the boys told him that their father was with his flocks, 
and their mother was gone down into the vale, but would be back 
presently. as he stood, considering what was further to be done, on a 
sudden he heard michael’s voice roaring forth most manful among the 
cliff above, till he made their echo ring. valancourt immediately 
answer the call, and endeavour to make his way through the thicket 
that clothe the steeps, following the direction of the sound. after 
much struggle over bramble and precipices, he reach michael, and at 
length prevail with him to be silent, and to listen to him. the road 
was at a considerable distance from the spot where st. aubert and emily 
were; the carriage could not easily return to the entrance of the wood, 
and, since it would be very fatigue for st. aubert to climb the long 
and steep road to the place where it now stood, valancourt was anxious 
to find a more easy ascent, by the way he had himself passed. 

meanwhile st. aubert and emily approach the cottage, and rest 
themselves on a rustic bench, fasten between two pines, which 
overshadow it, till valancourt, whose steps they had observed, should 
return. 

the eldest of the children desist from his play, and stood still to 
observe the strangers, while the younger continue his little gambols, 
and tease his brother to join in them. st. aubert look with pleasure 
upon this picture of infantine simplicity, till it brought to his 
remembrance his own boys, whom he had lost about the age of these, and 
their lament mother; and he sunk into a thoughtfulness, which emily 
observing, she immediately began to sing one of those simple and lively 
airs he was so fond of, and which she knew how to give with the most 
captivate sweetness. st. aubert smile on her through his tears, took 
her hand and pressed it affectionately, and then try to dissipate the 
melancholy reflection that linger in his mind. 

while she sung, valancourt approached, who was unwill to interrupt 
her, and pause at a little distance to listen. when she had concluded, 
he join the party, and told them, that he had found michael, as well 
as a way, by which he thought they could ascend the cliff to the 
carriage. he pointed to the woody steep above, which st. aubert 
survey with an anxious eye. he was already weary by his walk, and 
this ascent was formidable to him. he thought, however, it would be 
less toilsome than the long and broken road, and he determined to 
attempt it; but emily, ever watchful of his ease, propose that he 
should rest, and dine before they proceed further, valancourt went to 
the carriage for the refreshments deposit there. 

on his return, he propose remove a little higher up the mountain, to 
where the wood open upon a grand and extensive prospect; and thither 
they were prepare to go, when they saw a young woman join the 
children, and caress and weep over them. 

the travellers, interested by her distress, stop to observe her. she 
took the youngest of the children in her arms, and, perceive the 
strangers, hasty dry her tears, and proceed to the cottage. st. 
aubert, on enquiring the occasion of her sorrow, learned that her 
husband, who was a shepherd, and live here in the summer month to 
watch over the flock he led to feed upon these mountains, had lost, on 
the preceding night, his little all. a gang of gipsies, who had for 
some time infest the neighbourhood, had driven away several of his 
master’s sheep. “jacques,” add the shepherd’s wife, “had save a 
little money, and had bought a few sheep with it, and now they must go 
to his master for those that are stolen; and what is worse than all, 
his master, when he come to know how it is, will trust him no long 
with the care of his flocks, for he is a hard man! and then what is to 
become of our children!” 

the innocent countenance of the woman, and the simplicity of her manner 
in relate her grievance, inclined st. aubert to believe her story; 
and valancourt, convinced that it was true, ask eager what was the 
value of the stolen sheep; on hearing which he turn away with a look 
of disappointment. st. aubert put some money into her hand, emily too 
gave something from her little purse, and they walk towards the 
cliff; but valancourt linger behind, and spoke to the shepherd’s 
wife, who was now weeping with gratitude and surprise. he enquire how 
much money was yet wanting to replace the stolen sheep, and found, that 
it was a sum very little short of all he had about him. he was 
perplexed and distressed. “this sum then,” said he to himself, “would 
make this poor family completely happy—it is in my power to give it—to 
make them completely happy! but what is to become of me?—how shall i 
contrive to reach home with the little money that will remain?” for a 
moment he stood, unwill to forego the luxury of raise a family 
from ruin to happiness, yet considering the difficulty of pursue 
his journey with so small a sum as would be left. 

while he was in this state of perplexity, the shepherd himself 
appeared: his children ran to meet him; he took one of them in his 
arms, and, with the other clinging to his coat, came forward with a 
loiter step. his forlorn and melancholy look determined valancourt 
at once; he threw down all the money he had, except a very few louis, 
and bound away after st. aubert and emily, who were proceeding slow 
up the steep. valancourt had seldom felt his heart so light as at this 
moment; his gay spirits dance with pleasure; every object around him 
appear more interesting, or beautiful, than before. st. aubert 
observe the uncommon vivace of his countenance: “what has pleased 
you so much?” said he. “o what a lovely day,” reply valancourt, “how 
bright the sun shines, how pure is this air, what enchanting 
scenery!” “it is indeed enchanting,” said st. aubert, whom early 
experience had taught to understand the nature of valancourt’s present 
feelings. “what pity that the wealthy, who can command such sunshine, 
should ever pass their days in gloom—in the cold shade of selfishness! 
for you, my young friend, may the sun always shine as bright as at 
this moment; may your own conduct always give you the sunshine of 
benevolence and reason united!” 

valancourt, highly flatter by this compliment, could make no reply 
but by a smile of gratitude. 

they continue to wind under the woods, between the grassy knoll of 
the mountain, and, as they reach the shady summit, which he had 
pointed out, the whole party burst into an exclamation. behind the spot 
where they stood, the rock rose perpendicular in a massy wall to a 
considerable height, and then branch out into overhang crags. 
their grey tint were well contrast by the bright hue of the plant 
and wild flowers, that grew in their fracture sides, and were deepen 
by the gloom of the pine and cedars, that wave above. the steep 
below, over which the eye pass abrupt to the valley, were fringe 
with thicket of alpine shrubs; and, lower still, appear the tuft 
tops of the chesnut woods, that clothe their base, among which peep 
forth the shepherd’s cottage, just left by the travellers, with its 
bluish smoke curling high in the air. on every side appear the 
majestic summit of the pyrenees, some exhibit tremendous crag of 
marble, whose appearance was change every instant, as the vary 
lights fell upon their surface; others, still higher, display only 
snowy points, while their lower steep were cover almost invariable 
with forest of pine, larch, and oak, that stretch down to the vale. 
this was one of the narrow valleys, that open from the pyrenee into 
the country of rousillon, and whose green pastures, and cultivated 
beauty, form a decided and wonderful contrast to the romantic grandeur 
that environs it. through a vista of the mountain appear the 
lowland of rousillon, tint with the blue haze of distance, as they 
united with the waters of the mediterranean; where, on a promontory, 
which marked the boundary of the shore, stood a lonely beacon, over 
which were seen circle flight of sea-fowl. beyond, appeared, now and 
then, a steal sail, white with the sunbeam, and whose progress was 
perceive by its approach to the light-house. sometimes, too, was 
seen a sail so distant, that it serve only to mark the line of 
separation between the sky and the waves. 

on the other side of the valley, immediately opposite to the spot where 
the traveller rested, a rocky pass open toward gascony. here no sign 
of cultivation appeared. the rocks of granite, that screen the glen, 
rose abrupt from their base, and stretch their barren points to the 
clouds, unvary with woods, and uncheered even by a hunter’s cabin. 
sometimes, indeed, a gigantic larch threw its long shade over the 
precipice, and here and there a cliff rear on its brow a monumental 
cross, to tell the traveller the fate of him who had venture thither 
before. this spot seem the very haunt of banditti; and emily, as she 
look down upon it, almost expect to see them steal out from some 
hollow cave to look for their prey. soon after an object not less 
terrific struck her,—a gibbet standing on a point of rock near the 
entrance of the pass, and immediately over one of the cross she had 
before observed. these were hieroglyphics that told a plain and 
dreadful story. she forbore to point it out to st. aubert, but it threw 
a gloom over her spirits, and made her anxious to hasten forward, that 
they might with certainty reach rousillon before night-fall. it was 
necessary, however, that st. aubert should take some refreshment, and, 
seating themselves on the short dry turf, they open the basket of 
provisions, while 

by breezy murmur cool’d, 
broad o’er _their_ head the verdant cedar wave, 
and high palmeto lift their graceful shade. 
———_they_ draw 
ethereal soul, there drink revive gale 
profuse breathing from the piney groves, 
and vale of fragrance; there at a distance hear 
the roaring floods, and cataracts. 
thomson 


st. aubert was revive by rest, and by the serene air of this summit; 
and valancourt was so charm with all around, and with the 
conversation of his companions, that he seem to have forgotten he had 
any further to go. have conclude their simple repast, they gave a 
long farewell look to the scene, and again began to ascend. st. aubert 
rejoice when he reach the carriage, which emily enter with him; 
but valancourt, willing to take a more extensive view of the enchanting 
country, into which they were about to descend, than he could do from a 
carriage, loosen his dogs, and once more bound with them along the 
bank of the road. he often quit it for points that promise a wide 
prospect, and the slow pace, at which the mule travelled, allow him 
to overtake them with ease. whenever a scene of uncommon magnificence 
appeared, he hasten to inform st. aubert, who, though he was too much 
tired to walk himself, sometimes made the chaise wait, while emily went 
to the neighbouring cliff. 

it was evening when they descended the lower alps, that bind rousillon, 
and form a majestic barrier round that charming country, leave it 
open only on the east to the mediterranean. the gay tint of 
cultivation once more beautify the landscape; for the lowland were 
coloured with the richest hues, which a luxuriant climate, and an 
industrious people can awaken into life. grove of orange and lemon 
perfume the air, their ripe fruit glowing among the foliage; while, 
slope to the plains, extensive vineyard spread their treasures. 
beyond these, wood and pastures, and mingle town and hamlet 
stretch towards the sea, on whose bright surface gleam many a 
distant sail; while, over the whole scene, was diffuse the purple glow 
of evening. this landscape with the surrounding alps did, indeed, 
present a perfect picture of the lovely and the sublime, of “beauty 
sleep in the lap of horror.” 

the travellers, have reach the plains, proceeded, between hedge of 
flowering myrtle and pomegranate, to the town of arles, where they 
propose to rest for the night. they met with simple, but neat 
accommodation, and would have pass a happy evening, after the toils 
and the delight of this day, had not the approach separation thrown 
a gloom over their spirit. it was st. aubert’s plan to proceed, on the 
morrow, to the border of the mediterranean, and travel along its 
shore into languedoc; and valancourt, since he was now nearly 
recovered, and had no long a pretence for continue with his new 
friends, resolve to leave them here. st. aubert, who was much pleased 
with him, invite him to go further, but did not repeat the invitation, 
and valancourt had resolution enough to forego the temptation of 
accept it, that he might prove himself not unworthy of the favour. 
on the following morning, therefore, they were to part, st. aubert to 
pursue his way to languedoc, and valancourt to explore new scene among 
the mountains, on his return home. during this evening he was often 
silent and thoughtful; st. aubert’s manner towards him was 
affectionate, though grave, and emily was serious, though she made 
frequent effort to appear cheerful. after one of the most melancholy 
evenings they had yet pass together, they separate for the night. 



chapter vi 

i care not, fortune! what you me deny; 
you cannot rob me of free nature’s grace; 
you cannot shut the window of the sky, 
through which aurora show her brighten face; 
you cannot bar my constant feet to trace 
the wood and lawns, by living stream, at eve: 
let health my nerves and fine fibre brace, 
and i their toy to the great children leave: 
of fancy, reason, virtue, nought can me bereave. 
thomson 


in the morning, valancourt breakfast with st. aubert and emily, 
neither of whom seem much refresh by sleep. the languor of illness 
still hung over st. aubert, and to emily’s fear his disorder appear 
to be increase fast upon him. she watch his looks with anxious 
affection, and their expression was always faithfully reflect in her 
own. 

at the commencement of their acquaintance, valancourt had made known 
his name and family. st. aubert was not a stranger to either, for the 
family estates, which were now in the possession of an elder brother of 
valancourt, were little more than twenty mile distant from la vallée, 
and he had sometimes met the elder valancourt on visit in the 
neighbourhood. this knowledge had made him more willing receive his 
present companion; for, though his countenance and manners would have 
won him the acquaintance of st. aubert, who was very apt to trust to 
the intelligence of his own eyes, with respect to countenances, he 
would not have accept these, as sufficient introduction to that of 
his daughter. 

the breakfast was almost as silent as the supper of the preceding 
night; but their muse was at length interrupt by the sound of the 
carriage wheels, which were to bear away st. aubert and emily. 
valancourt start from his chair, and went to the window; it was 
indeed the carriage, and he return to his seat without speaking. the 
moment was now come when they must part. st. aubert told valancourt, 
that he hope he would never pass la vallée without favour him with 
a visit; and valancourt, eager thank him, assured him that he 
never would; as he said which he look timid at emily, who try to 
smile away the serious of her spirits. they pass a few minutes in 
interesting conversation, and st. aubert then led the way to the 
carriage, emily and valancourt following in silence. the latter 
linger at the door several minutes after they were seated, and none 
of the party seem to have courage enough to say—farewell. at length, 
st. aubert pronounced the melancholy word, which emily pass to 
valancourt, who return it, with a dejected smile, and the carriage 
drove on. 

the traveller remained, for some time, in a state of tranquil 
pensiveness, which is not unpleasing. st. aubert interrupt it by 
observing, “this is a very promising young man; it is many years since 
i have been so much pleased with any person, on so short an 
acquaintance. he bring back to my memory the days of my youth, when 
every scene was new and delightful!” st. aubert sighed, and sunk again 
into a reverie; and, as emily look back upon the road they had 
passed, valancourt was seen, at the door of the little inn, following 
them with his eyes. her perceive her, and wave his hand; and she 
return the adieu, till the winding road shut her from his sight. 

“i remember when i was about his age,” resume st. aubert, “and i 
thought, and felt exactly as he does. the world was opening upon me 
then, now—it is closing.” 

“my dear sir, do not think so gloomily,” said emily in a tremble 
voice, “i hope you have many, many years to live—for your own sake—for 
_my_ sake.” 

“ah, my emily!” reply st. aubert, “for thy sake! well—i hope it is 
so.” he wipe away a tear, that was steal down his cheek, threw a 
smile upon his countenance, and said in a cheering voice, “there is 
something in the ardour and ingenuous of youth, which is 
particularly pleasing to the contemplation of an old man, if his 
feelings have not been entire corrode by the world. it is cheering 
and reviving, like the view of spring to a sick person; his mind 
catch somewhat of the spirit of the season, and his eyes are light 
up with a transient sunshine. valancourt is this spring to me.” 

emily, who pressed her father’s hand affectionately, had never before 
listen with so much pleasure to the praises he bestowed; no, not even 
when he had bestow them on herself. 

they travelled on, among vineyards, woods, and pastures, delight with 
the romantic beauty of the landscape, which was bounded, on one side, 
by the grandeur of the pyrenees, and, on the other, by the ocean; and, 
soon after noon, they reach the town of colioure, situated on the 
mediterranean. here they dined, and rest till towards the cool of 
day, when they pursue their way along the shores—those enchanting 
shores!—which extend to languedoc. emily gaze with enthusiasm on the 
vastness of the sea, its surface varying, as the lights and shadow 
fell, and on its woody banks, mellow with autumnal tints. 

st. aubert was impatient to reach perpignan, where he expect letters 
from m. quesnel; and it was the expectation of these letters, that had 
induce him to leave colioure, for his feeble frame had require 
immediate rest. after travel a few miles, he fell asleep; and 
emily, who had put two or three books into the carriage, on leave la 
vallée, had now the leisure for look into them. she sought for one, 
in which valancourt had been reading the day before, and hope for the 
pleasure of retrace a page, over which the eyes of a beloved friend 
had lately passed, of dwelling on the passages, which he had admired, 
and of permit them to speak to her in the language of his own mind, 
and to bring himself to her presence. on searching for the book, she 
could find it nowhere, but in its stead perceive a volume of 
petrarch’s poems, that had belong to valancourt, whose name was 
written in it, and from which he had frequent read passage to her, 
with all the pathetic expression, that characterise the feelings of 
the author. she hesitate in believing, what would have been 
sufficient apparent to almost any other person, that he had purposely 
left this book, instead of the one she had lost, and that love had 
prompt the exchange; but, have open it with impatient pleasure, 
and observe the lines of his pencil drawn along the various passage 
he had read aloud, and under other more descriptive of delicate 
tender than he had dare to trust his voice with, the conviction 
came, at length, to her mind. for some moments she was conscious only 
of being beloved; then, a recollection of all the variation of tone 
and countenance, with which he had recite these sonnets, and of the 
soul, which spoke in their expression, pressed to her memory, and she 
wept over the memorial of his affection. 

they arrive at perpignan soon after sunset, where st. aubert found, as 
he had expected, letters from m. quesnel, the contents of which so 
evidently and grievous affected him, that emily was alarmed, and 
pressed him, as far as her delicacy would permit, to disclose the 
occasion of his concern; but he answer her only by tears, and 
immediately began to talk on other topics. emily, though she forbore to 
press the one most interesting to her, was greatly affected by her 
father’s manner, and pass a night of sleepless solicitude. 

in the morning they pursue their journey along the coast towards 
leucate, another town on the mediterranean, situated on the border of 
languedoc and rousillon. on the way, emily renew the subject of the 
preceding night, and appear so deep affected by st. aubert’s 
silence and dejection, that he relax from his reserve. “i was 
unwilling, my dear emily,” said he, “to throw a cloud over the pleasure 
you receive from these scenes, and meant, therefore, to conceal, for 
the present, some circumstances, with which, however, you must at 
length have been made acquainted. but your anxiety has defeat my 
purpose; you suffer as much from this, perhaps, as you will do from a 
knowledge of the fact i have to relate. m. quesnel’s visit prove an 
unhappy one to me; he came to tell me part of the news he has now 
confirmed. you may have heard me mention a m. motteville, of paris, but 
you did not know that the chief of my personal property was invest in 
his hands. i had great confidence in him, and i am yet willing to 
believe, that he is not wholly unworthy of my esteem. a variety of 
circumstances have concur to ruin him, and—i am ruin with him.” 

st. aubert pause to conceal his emotion. 

“the letters i have just received from m. quesnel,” resume he, 
struggle to speak with firmness, “enclosed other from motteville, 
which confirmed all i dreaded.” 

“must we then quit la vallée?” said emily, after a long pause of 
silence. “that is yet uncertain,” reply st. aubert, “it will depend 
upon the compromise motteville is able to make with his creditors. my 
income, you know, was never large, and now it will be reduce to little 
indeed! it is for you, emily, for you, my child, that i am most 
afflicted.” his last words faltered; emily smile tender upon him 
through her tears, and then, endeavour to overcome her emotion, “my 
dear father,” said she, “do not grieve for me, or for yourself; we may 
yet be happy;—if la vallée remains for us, we must be happy. we will 
retain only one servant, and you shall scarcely perceive the change in 
your income. be comforted, my dear sir; we shall not feel the want of 
those luxuries, which other value so highly, since we never had a 
taste for them; and poverty cannot deprive us of many consolations. it 
cannot rob us of the affection we have for each other, or degrade us in 
our own opinion, or in that of any person, whose opinion we ought to 
value.” 

st. aubert conceal his face with his handkerchief, and was unable to 
speak; but emily continue to urge to her father the truths, which 
himself had impress upon her mind. 

“besides, my dear sir, poverty cannot deprive us of intellectual 
delights. it cannot deprive you of the comfort of afford me example 
of fortitude and benevolence; nor me of the delight of console a 
beloved parent. it cannot deaden our taste for the grand, and the 
beautiful, or deny us the means of indulge it; for the scene of 
nature—those sublime spectacles, so infinite superior to all 
artificial luxuries! are open for the enjoyment of the poor, as well as 
of the rich. of what, then, have we to complain, so long as we are not 
in want of necessaries? pleasures, such as wealth cannot buy, will 
still be ours. we retain, then, the sublime luxury of nature, and 
lose only the frivolous one of art.” 

st. aubert could not reply: he caught emily to his bosom, their tear 
flow together, but—they were not tear of sorrow. after this language 
of the heart, all other would have been feeble, and they remain 
silent for some time. then, st. aubert converse as before; for, if his 
mind had not recover its natural tranquillity, it at least assume 
the appearance of it. 

they reach the romantic town of leucate early in the day, but st. 
aubert was weary, and they determined to pass the night there. in the 
evening, he exert himself so far as to walk with his daughter to view 
the environs that overlook the lake of leucate, the mediterranean, part 
of rousillon, with the pyrenees, and a wide extent of the luxuriant 
province of languedoc, now blush with the ripen vintage, which the 
peasant were beginning to gather. st. aubert and emily saw the busy 
groups, caught the joyous song, that was waft on the breeze, and 
anticipated, with apparent pleasure, their next day’s journey over this 
gay region. he designed, however, still to wind along the sea-shore. to 
return home immediately was partly his wish, but from this he was 
withheld by a desire to lengthen the pleasure, which the journey gave 
his daughter, and to try the effect of the sea air on his own disorder. 

on the following day, therefore, they recommence their journey through 
languedoc, winding the shore of the mediterranean; the pyrenee still 
form the magnificent back-ground of their prospects, while on their 
right was the ocean, and, on their left, wide extend plain melting 
into the blue horizon. st. aubert was pleased, and converse much with 
emily, yet his cheerful was sometimes artificial, and sometimes a 
shade of melancholy would steal upon his countenance, and betray him. 
this was soon chase away by emily’s smile; who smiled, however, with 
an ache heart, for she saw that his misfortune prey upon his mind, 
and upon his enfeeble frame. 

it was evening when they reach a small village of upper languedoc, 
where they meant to pass the night, but the place could not afford them 
beds; for here, too, it was the time of the vintage, and they were 
oblige to proceed to the next post. the languor of illness and of 
fatigue, which return upon st. aubert, require immediate repose, and 
the evening was now far advanced; but from necessity there was no 
appeal, and he ordered michael to proceed. 

the rich plain of languedoc, which exhibit all the glory of the 
vintage, with the gaiety of a france festival, no long awaken st. 
aubert to pleasure, whose condition form a mournful contrast to the 
hilarity and youthful beauty which surround him. as his languid eyes 
move over the scene, he considered, that they would soon, perhaps, be 
closed for ever on this world. “those distant and sublime mountains,” 
said he secretly, as he gaze on a chain of the pyrenee that stretch 
towards the west, “these luxuriant plains, this blue vault, the 
cheerful light of day, will be shut from my eyes! the song of the 
peasant, the cheering voice of man—will no long sound for me!” 

the intelligent eyes of emily seem to read what pass in the mind of 
her father, and she fixed them on his face, with an expression of such 
tender pity, as recall his thought from every desultory object of 
regret, and he remember only, that he must leave his daughter without 
protection. this reflection change regret to agony; he sigh deeply, 
and remain silent, while she seem to understand that sigh, for she 
pressed his hand affectionately, and then turn to the window to 
conceal her tears. the sun now threw a last yellow gleam on the wave 
of the mediterranean, and the gloom of twilight spread fast over the 
scene, till only a melancholy ray appear on the western horizon, 
marking the point where the sun had set amid the vapours of an autumnal 
evening. a cool breeze now came from the shore, and emily let down the 
glass; but the air, which was refreshing to health, was as chill to 
sickness, and st. aubert desired, that the window might be drawn up. 
increase illness made him now more anxious than ever to finish the 
day’s journey, and he stop the muleteer to enquire how far they had 
yet to go to the next post. he replied, “nine miles.” “i feel i am 
unable to proceed much further,” said st. aubert; “enquire, as you go, 
if there is any house on the road that would accommodate us for the 
night.” he sunk back in the carriage, and michael, crack his whip in 
the air, set off, and continue on the full gallop, till st. aubert, 
almost fainting, call to him to stop. emily look anxious from the 
window, and saw a peasant walking at some little distance on the road, 
for whom they waited, till he came up, when he was asked, if there was 
any house in the neighbourhood that accommodate travellers. he 
replied, that he knew of none. “there is a château, indeed, among those 
wood on the right,” add he, “but i believe it receive nobody, and i 
cannot show you the way, for i am almost a stranger here.” st. aubert 
was go to ask him some further question concerning the château, but 
the man abrupt pass on. after some consideration, he ordered 
michael to proceed slow to the woods. every moment now deepen the 
twilight, and increase the difficulty of finding the road. another 
peasant soon after passed. “which is the way to the château in the 
woods?” cry michael. 

“the château in the woods!” exclaim the peasant—“do you mean that 
with the turret, yonder?” 

“i don’t know as for the turret, as you call it,” said michael, “i mean 
that white piece of a building, that we see at a distance there, among 
the trees.” 

“yes, that is the turret; why, who are you, that you are go 
thither?” said the man with surprise. 

st. aubert, on hearing this odd question, and observing the peculiar 
tone in which it was delivered, look out from the carriage. “we are 
travellers,” said he, “who are in search of a house of accommodation 
for the night; is there any hereabout?” 

“none, monsieur, unless you have a mind to try your luck yonder,” 
reply the peasant, point to the woods, “but i would not advise you 
to go there.” 

“to whom do the château belong?” 

“i scarcely know myself, monsieur.” 

“it is uninhabited, then?”—“no, not uninhabited; the steward and 
housekeeper are there, i believe.” 

on hearing this, st. aubert determined to proceed to the château, and 
risk the refusal of being accommodate for the night; he therefore 
desire the countryman would show michael the way, and bade him expect 
reward for his trouble. the man was for a moment silent, and then said, 
that he was go on other business, but that the road could not be 
missed, if they went up an avenue to the right, to which he pointed. 
st. aubert was go to speak, but the peasant wish him good night, 
and walk on. 

the carriage now move towards the avenue, which was guarded by a gate, 
and michael have dismount to open it, they enter between row of 
ancient oak and chesnut, whose intermingle branch form a lofty 
arch above. there was something so gloomy and desolate in the 
appearance of this avenue, and its lonely silence, that emily almost 
shudder as she pass along; and, recollect the manner in which 
the peasant had mention the château, she gave a mysterious meaning to 
his words, such as she had not suspect when he utter them. these 
apprehensions, however, she try to check, considering that they were 
probably the effect of a melancholy imagination, which her father’s 
situation, and a consideration of her own circumstances, had made 
sensible to every impression. 

they pass slow on, for they were now almost in darkness, which, 
together with the uneven of the ground, and the frequent roots of 
old trees, that shot up above the soil, made it necessary to proceed 
with caution. on a sudden michael stop the carriage; and, as st. 
aubert look from the window to enquire the cause, he perceive a 
figure at some distance moving up the avenue. the dusk would not permit 
him to distinguish what it was, but he bade michael go on. 

“this seem a wild place,” said michael; “there is no house hereabout, 
don’t your honour think we had better turn back?” 

“go a little farther, and if we see no house then, we will return to 
the road,” reply st. aubert. 

michael proceed with reluctance, and the extreme slow of his pace 
made st. aubert look again from the window to hasten him, when again he 
saw the same figure. he was somewhat startled: probably the gloomy 
of the spot made him more liable to alarm than usual; however this 
might be, he now stop michael, and bade him call to the person in 
the avenue. 

“please your honour, he may be a robber,” said michael. “it do not 
please me,” reply st. aubert, who could not forbear smile at the 
simplicity of his phrase, “and we will, therefore, return to the road, 
for i see no probability of meeting here with what we seek.” 

michael turn about immediately, and was retrace his way with 
alacrity, when a voice was heard from among the tree on the left. it 
was not the voice of command, or distress, but a deep hollow tone, 
which seem to be scarcely human. the man whip his mule till they 
went as fast as possible, regardless of the darkness, the broken 
ground, and the neck of the whole party, nor once stop till he 
reach the gate, which open from the avenue into the high-road, 
where he went into a more moderate pace. 

“i am very ill,” said st. aubert, taking his daughter’s hand. “you are 
worse, then, sir!” said emily, extremely alarm by his manner, “you 
are worse, and here is no assistance. good god! what is to be done!” he 
lean his head on her shoulder, while she endeavour to support him 
with her arm, and michael was again ordered to stop. when the rattling 
of the wheels had ceased, music was heard on their air; it was to emily 
the voice of hope. “oh! we are near some human habitation!” said she, 
“help may soon be had.” 

she listen anxiously; the sound were distant, and seem to come 
from a remote part of the wood that border the road; and, as she 
look towards the spot whence they issued, she perceive in the faint 
moonlight something like a château. it was difficult, however, to reach 
this; st. aubert was now too ill to bear the motion of the carriage; 
michael could not quit his mules; and emily, who still support her 
father, fear to leave him, and also fear to venture alone to such a 
distance, she knew not whither, or to whom. something, however, it was 
necessary to determine upon immediately; st. aubert, therefore, told 
michael to proceed slowly; but they had not gone far, when he fainted, 
and the carriage was again stopped. he lay quite senseless.—“my dear, 
dear father!” cry emily in great agony, who began to fear that he was 
dying, “speak, if it is only one word to let me hear the sound of your 
voice!” but no voice spoke in reply. in the agony of terror she bade 
michael bring water from the rivulet, that flow along the road; and, 
have received some in the man’s hat, with tremble hand she 
sprinkle it over her father’s face, which, as the moon’s ray now fell 
upon it, seem to bear the impression of death. every emotion of 
selfish fear now gave way to a strong influence, and, commit st. 
aubert to the care of michael, who refuse to go far from his mules, 
she step from the carriage in search of the château she had seen at 
a distance. it was a still moonlight night, and the music, which yet 
sound on the air, direct her steps from the high road, up a shadowy 
lane, that led to the woods. her mind was for some time so entire 
occupy by anxiety and terror for her father, that she felt none for 
herself, till the deepen gloom of the overhang foliage, which now 
wholly exclude the moonlight, and the wild of the place, recall 
her to a sense of her adventurous situation. the music had ceased, and 
she had no guide but chance. for a moment she pause in terrify 
perplexity, till a sense of her father’s condition again overcome 
every consideration for herself, she proceeded. the lane terminate in 
the woods, but she look round in vain for a house, or a human being, 
and as vain listen for a sound to guide her. she hurried on, 
however, not knowing whither, avoid the recess of the woods, and 
endeavour to keep along their margin, till a rude kind of avenue, 
which open upon a moonlight spot, arrest her attention. the 
wild of this avenue brought to her recollection the one leading to 
the turret château, and she was inclined to believe, that this was a 
part of the same domain, and probably led to the same point. while she 
hesitated, whether to follow it or not, a sound of many voice in loud 
merriment burst upon her ear. it seem not the laugh of cheerfulness, 
but of riot, and she stood appalled. while she paused, she heard a 
distant voice, calling from the way she had come, and not doubt but 
it was that of michael, her first impulse was to hasten back; but a 
second thought change her purpose; she believe that nothing less than 
the last extremity could have prevail with michael to quit his mules, 
and fear that her father was now dying, she rush forward, with a 
feeble hope of obtain assistance from the people in the woods. her 
heart beat with fearful expectation, as she drew near the spot whence 
the voice issued, and she often startle when her steps disturbed the 
fallen leaves. the sound led her towards the moonlight glade she had 
before noticed; at a little distance from which she stopped, and saw, 
between the bole of the trees, a small circular level of green turf, 
surround by the woods, on which appear a group of figures. on 
drawing nearer, she distinguished these, by their dress, to be 
peasants, and perceive several cottage scattered round the edge of 
the woods, which wave lofty over this spot. while she gazed, and 
endeavour to overcome the apprehension that withheld her steps, 
several peasant girl came out of a cottage; music instantly struck up, 
and the dance began. it was the joyous music of the vintage—the same 
she had before heard upon the air. her heart, occupy with terror for 
her father, could not feel the contrast, which this gay scene offer 
to her own distress; she step hasty forward towards a group of 
elder peasants, who were seat at the door of a cottage, and, have 
explain her situation, entreat their assistance. several of them 
rose with alacrity, and, offering any service in their power, follow 
emily, who seem to move on the wind, as fast as they could towards 
the road. 

when she reach the carriage she found st. aubert restore to 
animation. on the recovery of his senses, have heard from michael 
whither his daughter was gone, anxiety for her overcame every regard 
for himself, and he had sent him in search of her. he was, however, 
still languid, and, perceive himself unable to travel much farther, 
he renew his enquiry for an inn, and concerning the château in the 
woods. “the château cannot accommodate you, sir,” said a venerable 
peasant who had follow emily from the woods, “it is scarcely 
inhabited; but, if you will do me the honour to visit my cottage, you 
shall be welcome to the best bed it affords.” 

st. aubert was himself a frenchman; he therefore was not surprise at 
france courtesy; but, ill as he was, he felt the value of the offer 
enhance by the manner which accompany it. he had too much delicacy 
to apologise, or to appear to hesitate about avail himself of the 
peasant’s hospitality, but immediately accept it with the same 
frank with which it was offered. 

the carriage again move slow on; michael following the peasant up 
the lane, which emily had just quitted, till they came to the moonlight 
glade. st. aubert’s spirits were so far restore by the courtesy of his 
host, and the near prospect of repose, that he look with a sweet 
complacency upon the moonlight scene, surround by the shadowy woods, 
through which, here and there, an opening admitted the stream 
splendour, discover a cottage, or a sparkle rivulet. he listened, 
with no painful emotion, to the merry note of the guitar and 
tamborine; and, though tear came to his eyes, when he saw the 
_debonnaire_ dance of the peasants, they were not merely tear of 
mournful regret. with emily it was otherwise; immediate terror for her 
father had now subside into a gentle melancholy, which every note of 
joy, by awakening comparison, serve to heighten. 

the dance cease on the approach of the carriage, which was a 
phenomenon in these sequester woods, and the peasantry flock round 
it with eager curiosity. on learning that it brought a sick stranger, 
several girl ran across the turf, and return with wine and basket 
of grapes, which they present to the travellers, each with kind 
contention pressing for a preference. at length, the carriage stop 
at a neat cottage, and his venerable conductor, have assist st. 
aubert to alight, led him and emily to a small inner room, illuminate 
only by moonbeams, which the open case admitted. st. aubert, 
rejoicing in rest, seat himself in an arm-chair, and his senses were 
refresh by the cool and balmy air, that lightly wave the embowere 
honeysuckles, and waft their sweet breath into the apartment. his 
host, who was call la voisin, quit the room, but soon return 
with fruits, cream, and all the pastoral luxury his cottage afforded; 
have set down which, with a smile of unfeigned welcome, he retired 
behind the chair of his guest. st. aubert insist on his taking a seat 
at the table, and, when the fruit had allay the fever of his palate, 
and he found himself somewhat revived, he began to converse with his 
host, who communicate several particulars concerning himself and his 
family, which were interesting, because they were spoken from the 
heart, and delineate a picture of the sweet courtesy of family 
kindness. emily sat by her father, holding his hand, and, while she 
listen to the old man, her heart swell with the affectionate 
sympathy he described, and her tear fell to the mournful 
consideration, that death would probably soon deprive her of the 
dearest blessing she then possessed. the soft moonlight of an autumnal 
evening, and the distant music, which now sound a plaintive strain, 
aid the melancholy of her mind. the old man continue to talk of his 
family, and st. aubert remain silent. “i have only one daughter 
living,” said la voisin, “but she is happily married, and is everything 
to me. when i lost my wife,” he add with a sigh, “i came to live with 
agnes, and her family; she has several children, who are all dance on 
the green yonder, as merry as grasshoppers—and long may they be so! i 
hope to die among them, monsieur. i am old now, and cannot expect to 
live long, but there is some comfort in die surround by one’s 
children.” 

“my good friend,” said st. aubert, while his voice trembled, “i hope 
you will long live surround by them.” 

“ah, sir! at my age i must not expect that!” reply the old man, and 
he paused: “i can scarcely wish it,” he resumed, “for i trust that 
whenever i die i shall go to heaven, where my poor wife is gone before 
me. i can sometimes almost fancy i see her of a still moonlight night, 
walking among these shades she love so well. do you believe, monsieur, 
that we shall be permit to revisit the earth, after we have quit 
the body?” 

emily could no long stifle the anguish of her heart; her tear fell 
fast upon her father’s hand, which she yet held. he made an effort to 
speak, and at length said in a low voice, “i hope we shall be permit 
to look down on those we have left on the earth, but i can only hope 
it. futurity is much veiled from our eyes, and faith and hope are our 
only guide concerning it. we are not enjoin to believe, that 
disembodied spirits watch over the friends they have loved, but we may 
innocent hope it. it is a hope which i will never resign,” continue 
he, while he wipe the tear from his daughter’s eyes, “it will sweeten 
the bitter moments of death!” tear fell slow on his cheeks; la 
voisin wept too, and there was a pause of silence. then, la voisin, 
renew the subject, said, “but you believe, sir, that we shall meet 
in another world the relations we have love in this; i must believe 
this.” “then do believe it,” reply st. aubert, “severe, indeed, would 
be the pang of separation, if we believe it to be eternal. look up, 
my dear emily, we shall meet again!” he lift his eyes towards heaven, 
and a gleam of moonlight, which fell upon his countenance, discover 
peace and resignation, steal on the lines of sorrow. 

la voisin felt that he had pursue the subject too far, and he drop 
it, saying, “we are in darkness, i forgot to bring a light.” 

“no,” said st. aubert, “this is a light i love. sit down, my good 
friend. emily, my love, i find myself better than i have been all day; 
this air refresh me. i can enjoy this tranquil hour, and that music, 
which float so sweet at a distance. let me see you smile. who 
touch that guitar so tastefully? are there two instruments, or is it 
an echo i hear?” 

“it is an echo, monsieur, i fancy. that guitar is often heard at night, 
when all is still, but nobody know who touch it, and it is sometimes 
accompany by a voice so sweet, and so sad, one would almost think the 
wood were haunted.” “they certainly are haunted,” said st. aubert with 
a smile, “but i believe it is by mortals.” “i have sometimes heard it 
at midnight, when i could not sleep,” rejoin la voisin, not seeming 
to notice this remark, “almost under my window, and i never heard any 
music like it. it has often made me think of my poor wife till i cried. 
i have sometimes got up to the window to look if i could see anybody, 
but as soon as i open the case all was hushed, and nobody to be 
seen; and i have listened, and listen till i have been so timorous, 
that even the tremble of the leaves in the breeze has made me start. 
they say it often come to warn people of their death, but i have heard 
it these many years, and outlive the warning.” 

emily, though she smile at the mention of this ridiculous 
superstition, could not, in the present tone of her spirits, wholly 
resist its contagion. 

“well, but, my good friend,” said st. aubert, “has nobody had courage 
to follow the sounds? if they had, they would probably have discover 
who is the musician.” “yes, sir, they have follow them some way into 
the woods, but the music has still retreated, and seem as distant as 
ever, and the people have at last been afraid of being led into harm, 
and would go no further. it is very seldom that i have heard these 
sound so early in the evening. they usually come about midnight, when 
that bright planet, which is rising above the turret yonder, set below 
the wood on the left.” 

“what turret?” ask st. aubert with quickness, “i see none.” 

“your pardon, monsieur, you do see one indeed, for the moon shine full 
upon it;—up the avenue yonder, a long way off; the château it belong 
to is hid among the trees.” 

“yes, my dear sir,” said emily, pointing, “don’t you see something 
glitter above the dark woods? it is a fane, i fancy, which the ray 
fall upon.” 

“o yes, i see what you mean; and who do the château belong to?” 

“the marquis de villeroi was its owner,” reply la voisin, 
emphatically. 

“ah!” said st. aubert, with a deep sigh, “are we then so near 
le-blanc!” he appear much agitated. 

“it use to be the marquis’s favourite residence,” resume la voisin, 
“but he took a dislike to the place, and has not been there for many 
years. we have heard lately that he is dead, and that it is fallen into 
other hands.” st. aubert, who had sat in deep musing, was rouse by the 
last words. “dead!” he exclaimed, “good god! when did he die?” 

“he is report to have die about five week since,” reply la 
voisin. “did you know the marquis, sir?” 

“this is very extraordinary!” said st. aubert without attend to the 
question. “why is it so, my dear sir?” said emily, in a voice of timid 
curiosity. he made no reply, but sunk again into a reverie; and in a 
few moments, when he seem to have recover himself, ask who had 
succeed to the estates. “i have forgot his title, monsieur,” said la 
voisin; “but my lord reside at paris chiefly; i hear no talk of his 
coming hither.” 

“the château is shut up then, still?” 

“why, little better, sir; the old housekeeper, and her husband the 
steward, have the care of it, but they live generally in a cottage hard 
by.” 

“the château is spacious, i suppose,” said emily, “and must be desolate 
for the residence of only two persons.” 

“desolate enough, mademoiselle,” reply la voisin, “i would not pass 
one night in the château, for the value of the whole domain.” 

“what is that?” said st. aubert, rouse again from thoughtfulness. as 
his host repeated his last sentence, a groan escape from st. aubert, 
and then, as if anxious to prevent it from being noticed, he hasty 
ask la voisin how long he had live in this neighbourhood. “almost 
from my childhood, sir,” reply his host. 

“you remember the late marchioness, then?” said st. aubert in an 
alter voice. 

“ah, monsieur!—that i do well. there are many besides me who remember 
her.” 

“yes—” said st. aubert, “and i am one of those.” 

“alas, sir! you remember, then, a most beautiful and excellent lady. 
she deserve a better fate.” 

tear stood in st. aubert’s eyes; “enough,” said he, in a voice almost 
stifle by the violence of his emotions,—“it is enough, my friend.” 

emily, though extremely surprise by her father’s manner, forbore to 
express her feelings by any question. la voisin began to apologise, but 
st. aubert interrupt him; “apology is quite unnecessary,” said he, 
“let us change the topic. you were speak of the music we just now 
heard.” 

“i was, monsieur—but hark!—it come again; listen to that voice!” they 
were all silent; 

at last a soft and solemn-breathing sound 
rose, like a stream of rich distill perfumes, 
and stole upon the air, that even silence 
was took ere she was ’ware, and wish she might 
deny her nature, and be never more 
still, to be so displaced. 
milton. 


in a few moments the voice die into air, and the instrument, which had 
been heard before, sound in low symphony. st. aubert now observed, 
that it produce a tone much more full and melodious than that of a 
guitar, and still more melancholy and soft than the lute. they 
continue to listen, but the sound return no more. “this is 
strange!” said st. aubert, at length interrupt the silence. “very 
strange!” said emily. “it is so,” rejoin la voisin, and they were 
again silent. 

after a long pause, “it is now about eighteen years since i first heard 
that music,” said la voisin; “i remember it was on a fine summer’s 
night, much like this, but later, that i was walking in the woods, and 
alone. i remember, too, that my spirits were very low, for one of my 
boys was ill, and we fear we should lose him. i had been watch at 
his bedside all the evening while his mother slept; for she had sat up 
with him the night before. i had been watching, and went out for a 
little fresh air, the day had been very sultry. as i walk under the 
shades and mused, i heard music at a distance, and thought it was 
claude play upon his flute, as he often did of a fine evening, at 
the cottage door. but, when i came to a place where the tree opened, 
(i shall never forget it!) and stood look up at the north-lights, 
which shot up the heaven to a great height, i heard all of a sudden 
such sounds!—they came so as i cannot describe. it was like the music 
of angels, and i look up again almost expect to see them in the 
sky. when i came home, i told what i had heard, but they laugh at me, 
and said it must be some of the shepherd play on their pipes, and i 
could not persuade them to the contrary. a few nights after, however, 
my wife herself heard the same sounds, and was as much surprise as i 
was, and father deni frightened her sadly by saying, that it was music 
come to warn her of her child’s death, and that music often came to 
house where there was a die person.” 

emily, on hearing this, shrunk with a superstitious dread entire new 
to her, and could scarcely conceal her agitation from st. aubert. 

“but the boy lived, monsieur, in spite of father denis.” 

“father denis!” said st. aubert, who had listen to ‘narrative old 
age’ with patient attention, “are we near a convent, then?” 

“yes, sir; the convent of st. clair stand at no great distance, on the 
sea shore yonder.” 

“ah!” said st. aubert, as if struck with some sudden remembrance, “the 
convent of st. clair!” emily observe the cloud of grief, mingle with 
a faint expression of horror, gathering on his brow; his countenance 
became fixed, and, touched as it now was by the silver white of the 
moonlight, he resemble one of those marble statue of a monument, 
which seem to bend, in hopeless sorrow, over the ashes of the dead, 
shown 

by the blunt light 
that the dim moon through paint case lends. 
the emigrants. 


“but, my dear sir,” said emily, anxious to dissipate his thoughts, “you 
forget that repose is necessary to you. if our kind host will give me 
leave, i will prepare your bed, for i know how you like it to be made.” 
st. aubert, recollect himself, and smile affectionately, desire 
she would not add to her fatigue by that attention; and la voisin, 
whose consideration for his guest had been suspend by the interests 
which his own narrative had recalled, now start from his seat, and, 
apologise for not have call agnes from the green, hurried out of 
the room. 

in a few moments he return with his daughter, a young woman of 
pleasing countenance, and emily learned from her, what she had not 
before suspected, that, for their accommodation, it was necessary part 
of la voisin’s family should leave their beds; she lament this 
circumstance, but agnes, by her reply, fully prove that she inherited, 
at least, a share of her father’s courteous hospitality. it was 
settled, that some of her children and michael should sleep in the 
neighbouring cottage. 

“if i am better, tomorrow, my dear,” said st. aubert when emily 
return to him, “i mean to set out at an early hour, that we may rest, 
during the heat of the day, and will travel towards home. in the 
present state of my health and spirits i cannot look on a long 
journey with pleasure, and i am also very anxious to reach la vallée.” 
emily, though she also desire to return, was grieve at her father’s 
sudden wish to do so, which she thought indicate a greater degree of 
indisposition than he would acknowledge. st. aubert now retired to 
rest, and emily to her little chamber, but not to immediate repose. her 
thought return to the late conversation, concerning the state of 
departed spirits; a subject, at this time, particularly affecting to 
her, when she had every reason to believe that her dear father would 
ere long be number with them. she lean pensive on the little open 
casement, and in deep thought fixed her eyes on the heaven, whose blue 
unclouded concave was stud thick with stars, the worlds, perhaps, of 
spirits, unsphered of mortal mould. as her eyes wander along the 
boundless æther, her thought rose, as before, towards the sublime of 
the deity, and to the contemplation of futurity. no busy note of this 
world interrupt the course of her mind; the merry dance had ceased, 
and every cottager had retired to his home. the still air seem 
scarcely to breathe upon the woods, and, now and then, the distant 
sound of a solitary sheep-bell, or of a close casement, was all that 
broke on silence. at length, even this hint of human being was heard no 
more. elevated and enwrapt, while her eyes were often wet with tear of 
sublime devotion and solemn awe, she continue at the casement, till 
the gloom of midnight hung over the earth, and the planet, which la 
voisin had pointed out, sunk below the woods. she then recollect what 
he had said concerning this planet, and the mysterious music; and, as 
she linger at the window, half hope and half fear that it would 
return, her mind was led to the remembrance of the extreme emotion her 
father had shown on mention of the marquis la villeroi’s death, and of 
the fate of the marchioness, and she felt strong interested 
concerning the remote cause of this emotion. her surprise and curiosity 
were indeed the greater, because she did not recollect ever to have 
heard him mention the name of villeroi. 

no music, however, stole on the silence of the night, and emily, 
perceive the late of the hour, return to a scene of fatigue, 
remember that she was to rise early in the morning, and withdrew from 
the window to repose. 



chapter vii 

let those deplore their doom, 
whose hope still grovel in this dark sojourn. 
but lofty soul can look beyond the tomb, 
can smile at fate, and wonder how they mourn. 
shall spring to these sad scene no more return? 
is yonder wave the sun’s eternal bed?— 
soon shall the orient with new lustre burn, 
and spring shall soon her vital influence shed, 
again attune the grove, again adorn the mead! 
beattie 


emily, called, as she had requested, at an early hour, awoke, little 
refresh by sleep, for uneasy dream had pursue her, and mar the 
kindest blessing of the unhappy. but, when she open her casement, 
look out upon the woods, bright with the morning sun, and inspired 
the pure air, her mind was soothed. the scene was fill with that 
cheering freshness, which seem to breathe the very spirit of health, 
and she heard only sweet and _picturesque_ sounds, if such an 
expression may be allowed—the matin-bell of a distant convent, the 
faint murmur of the sea-waves, the song of birds, and the far-off low 
of cattle, which she saw coming slow on between the trunks of trees. 
struck with the circumstances of imagery around her, she indulge the 
pensive tranquill which they inspired; and while she lean on her 
window, wait till st. aubert should descend to breakfast, her idea 
arrange themselves in the following lines: 

the first hour of morning 

how sweet to wind the forest’s tangle shade, 
when early twilight, from the eastern bound, 
dawn on the sleep landscape in the glade, 
and fade as morning spread her blush around! 

when ev’ry infant flower, that wept in night, 
lift its chill head soft glowing with a tear, 
expand its tender blossom to the light, 
and give its incense to the genial air. 

how fresh the breeze that waft the rich perfume, 
and swell the melody of waking birds; 
the hum of bees, beneath the verdant gloom, 
and woodman’s song, and low of distant herds! 

then, doubtful gleam the mountain’s hoary head, 
seen through the parting foliage from afar; 
and, farther still, the ocean’s misty bed, 
with flit sails, that partial sunbeam share. 

but, vain the sylvan shade—the breath of may, 
the voice of music floating on the gale, 
and forms, that beam through morning’s dewy veil, 
if health no long bid the heart be gay! 

o balmy hour! ’tis thine her wealth to give, 
here spread her blush, and bid the parent live! 


emily now heard person moving below in the cottage, and presently the 
voice of michael, who was talk to his mules, as he led them forth 
from a hut adjoining. as she left her room, st. aubert, who was now 
risen, met her at the door, apparently as little restore by sleep as 
herself. she led him down stairs to the little parlour, in which they 
had sup on the preceding night, where they found a neat breakfast 
set out, while the host and his daughter wait to bid them 
good-morrow. 

“i envy you this cottage, my good friends,” said st. aubert, as he met 
them, “it is so pleasant, so quiet, and so neat; and this air, that one 
breathes—if anything could restore lost health, it would surely be this 
air.” 

la voisin bowed gratefully, and replied, with the gallantry of a 
frenchman, “our cottage may be envied, sir, since you and mademoiselle 
have honour it with your presence.” st. aubert gave him a friendly 
smile for his compliment, and sat down to a table, spread with cream, 
fruit, new cheese, butter, and coffee. emily, who had observe her 
father with attention and thought he look very ill, endeavour to 
persuade him to defer travel till the afternoon; but he seem very 
anxious to be at home, and his anxiety he express repeatedly, and 
with an earnest that was unusual with him. he now said, he found 
himself as well as he had been of late, and that he could bear 
travel better in the cool hour of the morning, than at any other 
time. but, while he was talk with his venerable host, and thank 
him for his kind attentions, emily observe his countenance change, 
and, before she could reach him, he fell back in his chair. in a few 
moments he recover from the sudden faint that had come over him, 
but felt so ill, that he perceive himself unable to set out, and, 
have remain a little while, struggle against the pressure of 
indisposition, he beg he might be help up stairs to bed. this 
request renew all the terror which emily had suffer on the 
preceding evening; but, though scarcely able to support herself, under 
the sudden shock it gave her, she try to conceal her apprehension 
from st. aubert, and gave her tremble arm to assist him to the door 
of his chamber. 

when he was once more in bed, he desire that emily, who was then 
weeping in her own room, might be called; and, as she came, he wave 
his hand for every other person to quit the apartment. when they were 
alone, he held out his hand to her, and fixed his eyes upon her 
countenance, with an expression so full of tender and grief, that 
all her fortitude forsook her, and she burst into an agony of tears. 
st. aubert seem struggle to acquire firmness, but was still unable 
to speak; he could only press her hand, and check the tear that stood 
tremble in his eyes. at length he command his voice, “my dear 
child,” said he, try to smile through his anguish, “my dear 
emily!”—and pause again. he raise his eyes to heaven, as if in 
prayer, and then, in a firm tone, and with a look, in which the 
tender of the father was dignified by the pious solemnity of the 
saint, he said, “my dear child, i would soften the painful truth i have 
to tell you, but i find myself quite unequal to the art. alas! i would, 
at this moment, conceal it from you, but that it would be most cruel to 
deceive you. it cannot be long before we must part; let us talk of it, 
that our thought and our prayer may prepare us to bear it.” his voice 
faltered, while emily, still weeping, pressed his hand close to her 
heart, which swell with a convulsive sigh, but she could not look up. 

“let me not waste these moments,” said st. aubert, recover himself, 
“i have much to say. there is a circumstance of solemn consequence, 
which i have to mention, and a solemn promise to obtain from you; when 
this is done i shall be easier. you have observed, my dear, how anxious 
i am to reach home, but know not all my reason for this. listen to 
what i am go to say.—yet stay—before i say more give me this 
promise, a promise made to your die father!”—st. aubert was 
interrupted; emily, struck by his last words, as if for the first time, 
with a conviction of his immediate danger, raise her head; her tear 
stopped, and, gaze at him for a moment with an expression of 
unutterable anguish, a slight convulsion seize her, and she sunk 
senseless in her chair. st. aubert’s cries brought la voisin and his 
daughter to the room, and they administer every means in their power 
to restore her, but, for a considerable time, without effect. when she 
recovered, st. aubert was so exhaust by the scene he had witnessed, 
that it was many minutes before he had strength to speak; he was, 
however, somewhat revive by a cordial, which emily gave him; and, 
being again alone with her, he exert himself to tranquil her 
spirits, and to offer her all the comfort of which her situation 
admitted. she threw herself into his arms, wept on his neck, and grief 
made her so insensible to all he said, that he cease to offer the 
alleviations, which he himself could not, at this moment, feel, and 
mingle his silent tear with hers. recalled, at length, to a sense of 
duty, she try to spare her father from a farther view of her 
suffering; and, quit his embrace, dry her tears, and said 
something, which she meant for consolation. “my dear emily,” reply 
st. aubert, “my dear child, we must look up with humble confidence to 
that being, who has protect and comfort us in every danger, and in 
every affliction we have known; to whose eye every moment of our lives 
has been exposed; he will not, he do not, forsake us now; i feel his 
consolation in my heart. i shall leave you, my child, still in his 
care; and, though i depart from this world, i shall be still in his 
presence. nay, weep not again, my emily. in death there is nothing new, 
or surprising, since we all know, that we are born to die; and nothing 
terrible to those, who can confide in an all-powerful god. had my life 
been spare now, after a very few years, in the course of nature, i 
must have resigned it; old age, with all its train of infirmity, its 
privation and its sorrows, would have been mine; and then, at last, 
death would have come, and call forth the tear you now shed. rather, 
my child, rejoice, that i am save from such suffering, and that i am 
permit to die with a mind unimpaired, and sensible of the comfort 
of faith and resignation.” st. aubert paused, fatigue with speaking. 
emily again endeavour to assume an air of composure; and, in reply 
to what he had said, try to sooth him with a belief, that he had not 
spoken in vain. 

when he had repose a while, he resume the conversation. “let me 
return,” said he, “to a subject, which is very near my heart. i said i 
had a solemn promise to receive from you; let me receive it now, before 
i explain the chief circumstance which it concerns; there are others, 
of which your peace require that you should rest in ignorance. 
promise, then, that you will perform exactly what i shall enjoin.” 

emily, awed by the earnest solemnity of his manner, dry her tears, 
that had begun again to flow, in spite of her effort to suppress them; 
and, look eloquent at st. aubert, bound herself to do whatever he 
should require by a vow, at which she shuddered, yet knew not why. 

he proceeded: “i know you too well, my emily, to believe, that you 
would break any promise, much less one thus solemn given; your 
assurance give me peace, and the observance of it is of the utmost 
importance to your tranquillity. hear, then, what i am go to tell 
you. the closet, which adjoin my chamber at la vallée, has a slide 
board in the floor. you will know it by a remarkable knot in the wood, 
and by its being the next board, except one, to the wainscot, which 
front the door. at the distance of about a yard from that end, near 
the window, you will perceive a line across it, as if the plank had 
been joined;—the way to open it is this:—press your foot upon the line; 
the end of the board will then sink, and you may slide it with ease 
beneath the other. below, you will see a hollow place.” st. aubert 
pause for breath, and emily sat fixed in deep attention. “do you 
understand these directions, my dear?” said he. emily, though scarcely 
able to speak, assured him that she did. 

“when you return home, then,” he add with a deep sigh— 

at the mention of her return home, all the melancholy circumstances, 
that must attend this return, rush upon her fancy; she burst into 
convulsive grief, and st. aubert himself, affected beyond the 
resistance of the fortitude which he had, at first, summoned, wept with 
her. after some moments, he compose himself. “my dear child,” said he, 
“be comforted. when i am gone, you will not be forsaken—i leave you 
only in the more immediate care of that providence, which has never yet 
forsaken me. do not afflict me with this excess of grief; rather teach 
me by your example to bear my own.” he stop again, and emily, the 
more she endeavour to restrain her emotion, found it the less 
possible to do so. 

st. aubert, who now spoke with pain, resume the subject. “that closet, 
my dear,—when you return home, go to it; and, beneath the board i have 
described, you will find a packet of written papers. attend to me now, 
for the promise you have given particularly relate to what i shall 
direct. these papers you must burn—and, solemn i command you, 
_without examine them_.” 

emily’s surprise, for a moment, overcame her grief, and she venture to 
ask, why this must be? st. aubert replied, that, if it had been right 
for him to explain his reasons, her late promise would have been 
unnecessary exacted. “it is sufficient for you, my love, to have a 
deep sense of the importance of observing me in this instance.” st. 
aubert proceeded. “under that board you will also find about two 
hundred louis d’ors, wrap in a silk purse; indeed, it was to secure 
whatever money might be in the château, that this secret place was 
contrived, at a time when the province was over-run by troops of men, 
who took advantage of the tumults, and became plunderers. 

“but i have yet another promise to receive from you, which is—that you 
will never, whatever may be your future circumstances, _sell_ the 
château.” st. aubert even enjoin her, whenever she might marry, to 
make it an article in the contract, that the château should always be 
hers. he then gave her a more minute account of his present 
circumstances than he had yet done, adding, “the two hundred louis, 
with what money you will now find in my purse, is all the ready money i 
have to leave you. i have told you how i am circumstance with m. 
motteville, at paris. ah, my child! i leave you poor—but not 
destitute,” he added, after a long pause. emily could make no reply to 
anything he now said, but knelt at the bedside, with her face upon the 
quilt, weeping over the hand she held there. 

after this conversation, the mind of st. aubert appear to be much 
more at ease; but, exhaust by the effort of speaking, he sunk into a 
kind of doze, and emily continue to watch and weep beside him, till a 
gentle tap at the chamber-door rouse her. it was la voisin, come to 
say, that a confessor from the neighbouring convent was below, ready to 
attend st. aubert. emily would not suffer her father to be disturbed, 
but desired, that the priest might not leave the cottage. when st. 
aubert awoke from this doze, his senses were confused, and it was some 
moments before he recover them sufficient to know, that it was 
emily who sat beside him. he then move his lips, and stretch forth 
his hand to her; as she received which, she sunk back in her chair, 
overcome by the impression of death on his countenance. in a few 
minutes he recover his voice, and emily then asked, if he wish to 
see the confessor; he replied, that he did; and, when the holy father 
appeared, she withdrew. they remain alone together above half an 
hour; when emily was call in, she found st. aubert more agitate than 
when she had left him, and she gazed, with a slight degree of 
resentment, at the friar, as the cause of this; who, however, look 
mildly and mournful at her, and turn away. st. aubert, in a 
tremulous voice, said, he wish her to join in prayer with him, and 
ask if la voisin would do so too. the old man and his daughter came; 
they both wept, and knelt with emily round the bed, while the holy 
father read in a solemn voice the service for the dying. st. aubert lay 
with a serene countenance, and seem to join fervent in the 
devotion, while tear often stole from beneath his closed eyelids, and 
emily’s sob more than once interrupt the service. 

when it was concluded, and extreme unction had been administered, the 
friar withdrew. st. aubert then made a sign for la voisin to come 
nearer. he gave him his hand, and was, for a moment, silent. at length, 
he said, in a tremble voice, “my good friend, our acquaintance has 
been short, but long enough to give you an opportunity of showing me 
much kind attention. i cannot doubt, that you will extend this kindness 
to my daughter, when i am gone; she will have need of it. i entrust her 
to your care during the few days she will remain here. i need say no 
more—you know the feelings of a father, for you have children; mine 
would be, indeed, severe if i had less confidence in you.” he paused. 
la voisin assured him, and his tear bore testimony to his sincerity, 
that he would do all he could to soften her affliction, and that, if 
st. aubert wish it, he would even attend her into gascony; an offer 
so pleasing to st. aubert, that he had scarcely words to acknowledge 
his sense of the old man’s kindness, or to tell him, that he accept 
it. the scene, that follow between st. aubert and emily, affected la 
voisin so much, that he quit the chamber, and she was again left 
alone with her father, whose spirits seem faint fast, but neither 
his senses, nor his voice, yet fail him; and, at intervals, he 
employ much of these last awful moments in advise his daughter, as 
to her future conduct. perhaps, he never had thought more justly, or 
express himself more clearly, than he did now. 

“above all, my dear emily,” said he, “do not indulge in the pride of 
fine feeling, the romantic error of amiable minds. those, who really 
possess sensibility, ought early to be taught, that it is a dangerous 
quality, which is continual extract the excess of misery, or 
delight, from every surrounding circumstance. and, since, in our 
passage through this world, painful circumstances occur more frequent 
than pleasing ones, and since our sense of evil is, i fear, more acute 
than our sense of good, we become the victim of our feelings, unless 
we can in some degree command them. i know you will say, (for you are 
young, my emily) i know you will say, that you are contented sometimes 
to suffer, rather than to give up your refined sense of happiness, at 
others; but, when your mind has been long harass by vicissitude, you 
will be content to rest, and you will then recover from your delusion. 
you will perceive, that the phantom of happiness is exchange for the 
substance; for happiness arise in a state of peace, not of tumult. it 
is of a temperate and uniform nature, and can no more exist in a heart, 
that is continual alive to minute circumstances, than in one that is 
dead to feeling. you see, my dear, that, though i would guard you 
against the danger of sensibility, i am not an advocate for apathy. at 
your age i should have said _that_ is a vice more hateful than all the 
error of sensibility, and i say so still. i call it a _vice_, because 
it leads to positive evil; in this, however, it do no more than an 
ill-governed sensibility, which, by such a rule, might also be call a 
vice; but the evil of the former is of more general consequence. i have 
exhaust myself,” said st. aubert, feebly, “and have weary you, my 
emily; but, on a subject so important to your future comfort, i am 
anxious to be perfectly understood.” 

emily assured him, that his advice was most precious to her, and that 
she would never forget it, or cease from endeavour to profit by it. 
st. aubert smile affectionate and sorrowful upon her. “i repeat 
it,” said he, “i would not teach you to become insensible, if i could; 
i would only warn you of the evil of susceptibility, and point out how 
you may avoid them. beware, my love, i conjure you, of that 
self-delusion, which has been fatal to the peace of so many persons; 
beware of pride yourself on the graceful of sensibility; if you 
yield to this vanity, your happiness is lost for ever. always remember 
how much more valuable is the strength of fortitude, than the grace of 
sensibility. do not, however, confound fortitude with apathy; apathy 
cannot know the virtue. remember, too, that one act of beneficence, one 
act of real usefulness, is worth all the abstract sentiment in the 
world. sentiment is a disgrace, instead of an ornament, unless it lead 
us to good actions. the miser, who think himself respectable, merely 
because he possess wealth, and thus mistake the means of do good, 
for the actual accomplishment of it, is not more blame than the man 
of sentiment, without active virtue. you may have observe persons, who 
delight so much in this sort of sensibility to sentiment, which 
exclude that to the call of any practical virtue, that they turn from 
the distressed, and, because their suffering are painful to be 
contemplated, do not endeavour to relieve them. how despicable is that 
humanity, which can be contented to pity, where it might assuage!” 

st. aubert, some time after, spoke of madame cheron, his sister. “let 
me inform you of a circumstance, that nearly affect your welfare,” he 
added. “we have, you know, had little intercourse for some years, but, 
as she is now your only female relation, i have thought it proper to 
consign you to her care, as you will see in my will, till you are of 
age, and to recommend you to her protection afterwards. she is not 
exactly the person, to whom i would have committed my emily, but i had 
no alternative, and i believe her to be upon the whole—a good kind of 
woman. i need not recommend it to your prudence, my love, to endeavour 
to conciliate her kindness; you will do this for his sake, who has 
often wish to do so for yours.” 

emily assured him, that, whatever he request she would religiously 
perform to the utmost of her ability. “alas!” add she, in a voice 
interrupt by sighs, “that will soon be all which remains for me; it 
will be almost my only consolation to fulfil your wishes.” 

st. aubert look up silent in her face, as if would have spoken, but 
his spirit sunk a while, and his eyes became heavy and dull. she felt 
that look at her heart. “my dear father!” she exclaimed; and then, 
check herself, pressed his hand closer, and hid her face with her 
handkerchief. her tear were concealed, but st. aubert heard her 
convulsive sobs. his spirits returned. “o my child!” said he, faintly, 
“let my consolation be yours. i die in peace; for i know, that i am 
about to return to the bosom of my father, who will still be your 
father, when i am gone. always trust in him, my love, and he will 
support you in these moments, as he support me.” 

emily could only listen, and weep; but the extreme composure of his 
manner, and the faith and hope he expressed, somewhat soothe her 
anguish. yet, whenever she look upon his emaciate countenance, and 
saw the lines of death beginning to prevail over it—saw his sunk eyes, 
still bent on her, and their heavy lid pressing to a close, there was 
a pang in her heart, such as defy expression, though it require 
filial virtue, like hers, to forbear the attempt. 

he desire once more to bless her; “where are you, my dear?” said he, 
as he stretch forth his hands. emily had turn to the window, that 
he might not perceive her anguish; she now understood, that his sight 
had fail him. when he had given her his blessing, and it seem to be 
the last effort of expire life, he sunk back on his pillow. she 
kiss his forehead; the damp of death had settled there, and, 
forget her fortitude for a moment, her tear mingle with them. st. 
aubert lift up his eyes; the spirit of a father return to them, but 
it quick vanished, and he spoke no more. 

st. aubert linger till about three o’clock in the afternoon, and, 
thus gradual sink into death, he expire without a struggle, or a 
sigh. 

emily was led from the chamber by la voisin and his daughter, who did 
what they could to comfort her. the old man sat and wept with her. 
agnes was more erroneous officious. 



chapter viii 

o’er him, whose doom thy virtue grieve, 
aerial form shall sit at eve, 
and bend the pensive head. 
collins 


the monk, who had before appeared, return in the evening to offer 
consolation to emily, and brought a kind message from the lady abbess, 
inviting her to the convent. emily, though she did not accept the 
offer, return an answer expressive of her gratitude. the holy 
conversation of the friar, whose mild benevolence of manners bore some 
resemblance to those of st. aubert, soothe the violence of her grief, 
and lift her heart to the being, who, extend through all place and 
all eternity, looks on the event of this little world as on the 
shadow of a moment, and behold equally, and in the same instant, the 
soul that has pass the gate of death, and that, which still linger 
in the body. “in the sight of god,” said emily, “my dear father now 
exists, as truly as he yesterday exist to me; it is to me only that 
he is dead; to god and to himself he yet lives!” 

the good monk left her more tranquil than she had been since st. aubert 
died; and, before she retired to her little cabin for the night, she 
trust herself so far as to visit the corpse. silent, and without 
weeping, she stood by its side. the features, placid and serene, told 
the nature of the last sensations, that had linger in the now 
desert frame. for a moment she turn away, in horror of the 
still in which death had fixed that countenance, never till now 
seen otherwise than animated; then gaze on it with a mixture of doubt 
and awful astonishment. her reason could scarcely overcome an 
involuntary and unaccountable expectation of seeing that beloved 
countenance still susceptible. she continue to gaze wildly; took up 
the cold hand; spoke; still gazed, and then burst into a transport of 
grief. la voisin, hearing her sobs, came into the room to lead her 
away, but she heard nothing, and only beg that he would leave her. 

again alone, she indulge her tears, and, when the gloom of evening 
obscure the chamber, and almost veiled from her eyes the object of her 
distress, she still hung over the body; till her spirits, at length, 
were exhausted, and she became tranquil. la voisin again knock at the 
door, and entreat that she would come to the common apartment. before 
she went, she kiss the lip of st. aubert, as she was wont to do when 
she bade him good night. again she kiss them; her heart felt as if it 
would break, a few tear of agony start to her eyes, she look up to 
heaven, then at st. aubert, and left the room. 

retired to her lonely cabin, her melancholy thought still hover 
round the body of her deceased parent; and, when she sunk into a kind 
of slumber, the image of her waking mind still haunt her fancy. she 
thought she saw her father approach her with a benign countenance; 
then, smile mournful and point upwards, his lip moved, but, 
instead of words, she heard sweet music borne on the distant air, and 
presently saw his features glow with the mild rapture of a superior 
being. the strain seem to swell louder, and she awoke. the vision was 
gone, but music yet came to her ear in strain such as angel might 
breathe. she doubted, listened, raise herself in the bed, and again 
listened. it was music, and not an illusion of her imagination. after a 
solemn steady harmony, it paused; then rose again, in mournful 
sweetness, and then died, in a cadence, that seem to bear away the 
listen soul to heaven. she instantly remember the music of the 
preceding night, with the strange circumstances, related by la voisin, 
and the affecting conversation it had led to, concerning the state of 
departed spirits. all that st. aubert had said, on that subject, now 
pressed upon her heart, and overwhelm it. what a change in a few 
hours! he, who then could only conjecture, was now made acquaint with 
truth; was himself become one of the departed! as she listened, she was 
chill with superstitious awe, her tear stopped; and she rose, and 
went to the window. all without was obscure in shade; but emily, 
turning her eyes from the massy dark of the woods, whose wave 
outline appear on the horizon, saw, on the left, that effulgent 
planet, which the old man had pointed out, setting over the woods. she 
remember what he had said concerning it, and, the music now coming at 
interval on the air, she unclosed the case to listen to the 
strains, that soon gradual sunk to a greater distance, and try to 
discover whence they came. the obscurity prevent her from 
distinguish any object on the green platform below; and the sound 
became faint and fainter, till they soften into silence. she 
listened, but they return no more. soon after, she observe the 
planet tremble between the fringe tops of the woods, and, in the 
next moment, sink behind them. chill with a melancholy awe, she 
retired once more to her bed, and, at length, forgot for a while her 
sorrow in sleep. 

on the following morning, she was visit by a sister of the convent, 
who came, with kind offices and a second invitation from the lady 
abbess; and emily, though she could not forsake the cottage, while the 
remains of her father were in it, consented, however painful such a 
visit must be, in the present state of her spirits, to pay her respects 
to the abbess, in the evening. 

about an hour before sunset, la voisin show her the way through the 
wood to the convent, which stood in a small bay of the mediterranean, 
crown by a woody amphitheatre; and emily, had she been less unhappy, 
would have admire the extensive sea view, that appear from the green 
slope, in front of the edifice, and the rich shores, hung with wood 
and pastures, that extend on either hand. but her thought were now 
occupy by one sad idea, and the features of nature were to her 
colourless and without form. the bell for vespers struck, as she pass 
the ancient gate of the convent, and seem the funereal note for st. 
aubert. little incident affect a mind, enervate by sorrow; emily 
struggle against the sickening faintness, that came over her, and was 
led into the presence of the abbess, who received her with an air of 
maternal tenderness; an air of such gentle solicitude and 
consideration, as touched her with an instantaneous gratitude; her eyes 
were fill with tears, and the words she would have spoken falter on 
her lips. the abbess led her to a seat, and sat down beside her, still 
holding her hand and regarding her in silence, as emily dry her tear 
and attempt to speak. “be composed, my daughter,” said the abbess in 
a soothe voice, “do not speak yet; i know all you would say. your 
spirits must be soothed. we are go to prayers;—will you attend our 
evening service? it is comfortable, my child, to look up in our 
affliction to a father, who see and pity us, and who chasten in 
his mercy.” 

emily’s tear flow again, but a thousand sweet emotion mingle with 
them. the abbess suffer her to weep without interruption, and watch 
over her with a look of benignity, that might have characterise the 
countenance of a guardian angel. emily, when she became tranquil, was 
encourage to speak without reserve, and to mention the motive, that 
made her unwill to quit the cottage, which the abbess did not oppose 
even by a hint; but praise the filial piety of her conduct, and add 
a hope, that she would pass a few days at the convent, before she 
return to la vallée. “you must allow yourself a little time to 
recover from your first shock, my daughter, before you encounter a 
second; i will not affect to conceal from you how much i know your 
heart must suffer, on return to the scene of your former happiness. 
here, you will have all, that quiet and sympathy and religion can give, 
to restore your spirits. but come,” add she, observing the tear 
swell in emily’s eyes, “we will go to the chapel.” 

emily follow to the parlour, where the nun were assembled, to whom 
the abbess committed her, saying, “this is a daughter, for whom i have 
much esteem; be sister to her.” 

they pass on in a train to the chapel, where the solemn devotion, 
with which the service was performed, elevated her mind, and brought to 
it the comfort of faith and resignation. 

twilight came on, before the abbess’s kindness would suffer emily to 
depart, when she left the convent, with a heart much lighter than she 
had enter it, and was reconducte by la voisin through the woods, the 
pensive gloom of which was in unison with the temper of her mind; and 
she pursue the little wild path, in muse silence, till her guide 
sudden stopped, look round, and then struck out of the path into 
the high grass, saying he had mistaken the road. he now walk on 
quickly, and emily, proceeding with difficulty over the obscure and 
uneven ground, was left at some distance, till her voice arrest him, 
who seem unwill to stop, and still hurried on. “if you are in 
doubt about the way,” said emily, “had we not better enquire it at the 
château yonder, between the trees?” 

“no,” reply la voisin, “there is no occasion. when we reach that 
brook, ma’amselle, (you see the light upon the water there, beyond the 
woods) when we reach that brook, we shall be at home presently. i don’t 
know how i happen to mistake the path; i seldom come this way after 
sunset.” 

“it is solitary enough,” said emily, “but you have no banditti here.” 

“no, ma’amselle—no banditti.” 

“what are you afraid of then, my good friend? you are not 
superstitious?” “no, not superstitious; but, to tell you the truth, 
lady, nobody likes to go near that château, after dusk.” “by whom is it 
inhabited,” said emily, “that it is so formidable?” “why, ma’amselle, 
it is scarcely inhabited, for our lord the marquis, and the lord of all 
these find woods, too, is dead. he had not once been in it, for these 
many years, and his people, who have the care of it, live in a cottage 
close by.” emily now understood this to be the château, which la voisin 
had formerly pointed out, as have belong to the marquis villeroi, 
on the mention of which her father had appear so much affected. 

“ah! it is a desolate place now,” continue la voisin, “and such a 
grand, fine place, as i remember it!” emily enquire what had 
occasion this lamentable change; but the old man was silent, and 
emily, whose interest was awaken by the fear he had expressed, and 
above all by a recollection of her father’s agitation, repeated the 
question, and added, “if you are neither afraid of the inhabitants, my 
good friend, nor are superstitious, how happen it, that you dread to 
pass near that château in the dark?” 

“perhaps, then, i am a little superstitious, ma’amselle; and, if you 
knew what i do, you might be so too. strange things have happen 
there. monsieur, your good father, appear to have known the late 
marchioness.” “pray inform me what did happen?” said emily, with much 
emotion. 

“alas! ma’amselle,” answer la voisin, “enquire no further; it is not 
for me to lay open the domestic secret of my lord.”—emily, surprise 
by the old man’s words, and his manner of deliver them, forbore to 
repeat her question; a near interest, the remembrance of st. aubert, 
occupy her thoughts, and she was led to recollect the music she heard 
on the preceding night, which she mention to la voisin. “you were not 
alone, ma’amselle, in this,” he replied, “i heard it too; but i have so 
often heard it, at the same hour, that i was scarcely surprised.” 

“you doubtless believe this music to have some connection with the 
château,” said emily suddenly, “and are, therefore, superstitious.” “it 
may be so, ma’amselle, but there are other circumstances, belong to 
that château, which i remember, and sadly too.” a heavy sigh followed: 
but emily’s delicacy restrained the curiosity these words revived, and 
she enquire no further. 

on reach the cottage, all the violence of her grief returned; it 
seem as if she had escape its heavy pressure only while she was 
remove from the object of it. she pass immediately to the chamber, 
where the remains of her father were laid, and yield to all the 
anguish of hopeless grief. la voisin, at length, persuade her to leave 
the room, and she return to her own, where, exhaust by the 
suffering of the day, she soon fell into deep sleep, and awoke 
considerably refreshed. 

when the dreadful hour arrived, in which the remains of st. aubert were 
to be taken from her for ever, she went alone to the chamber to look 
upon his countenance yet once again, and la voisin, who had wait 
patient below stairs, till her despair should subside, with the 
respect due to grief, forbore to interrupt the indulgence of it, till 
surprise, at the length of her stay, and then apprehension overcame his 
delicacy, and he went to lead her from the chamber. have tap 
gently at the door, without receiving an answer, he listen 
attentively, but all was still; no sigh, no sob of anguish was heard. 
yet more alarm by this silence, he open the door, and found emily 
lie senseless across the foot of the bed, near which stood the 
coffin. his call procure assistance, and she was carry to her room, 
where proper applications, at length, restore her. 

during her state of insensibility, la voisin had given directions for 
the coffin to be closed, and he succeed in persuade emily to 
forbear revisite the chamber. she, indeed, felt herself unequal to 
this, and also perceive the necessity of sparing her spirits, and 
recollect fortitude sufficient to bear her through the approach 
scene. st. aubert had given a particular injunction, that his remains 
should be inter in the church of the convent of st. clair, and, in 
mention the north chancel, near the ancient tomb of the villerois, 
had pointed out the exact spot, where he wish to be laid. the 
superior had grant this place for the interment, and thither, 
therefore, the sad procession now moved, which was met, at the gates, 
by the venerable priest, follow by a train of friars. every person, 
who heard the solemn chant of the anthem, and the peal of the organ, 
that struck up, when the body enter the church, and saw also the 
feeble steps, and the assume tranquill of emily, gave her 
involuntary tears. she shed none, but walked, her face partly shade by 
a thin black veil, between two persons, who support her, precede by 
the abbess, and follow by nuns, whose plaintive voice mellow the 
swelling harmony of the dirge. when the procession came to the grave 
the music ceased. emily drew the veil entire over her face, and, in a 
momentary pause, between the anthem and the rest of the service, her 
sob were distinct audible. the holy father began the service, and 
emily again command her feelings, till the coffin was let down, and 
she heard the earth rattle on its lid. then, as she shuddered, a groan 
burst from her heart, and she lean for support on the person who 
stood next to her. in a few moments she recovered; and, when she heard 
those affecting and sublime words: “his body is bury in peace, and 
his soul returns to him that gave it,” her anguish soften into tears. 

the abbess led her from the church into her own parlour, and there 
administer all the consolations, that religion and gentle sympathy 
can give. emily struggle against the pressure of grief; but the 
abbess, observing her attentively, ordered a bed to be prepared, and 
recommend her to retire to repose. she also kindly claim her 
promise to remain a few days at the convent; and emily, who had no wish 
to return to the cottage, the scene of all her sufferings, had leisure, 
now that no immediate care pressed upon her attention, to feel the 
indisposition, which disabled her from immediately travelling. 

meanwhile, the maternal kindness of the abbess, and the gentle 
attention of the nun did all, that was possible, towards soothe her 
spirits and restore her health. but the latter was too deep 
wounded, through the medium of her mind, to be quick revived. she 
linger for some week at the convent, under the influence of a slow 
fever, wish to return home, yet unable to go thither; often even 
reluctant to leave the spot where her father’s relics were deposited, 
and sometimes soothe herself with the consideration, that, if she 
die here, her remains would repose beside those of st. aubert. in the 
meanwhile, she sent letters to madame cheron and to the old 
housekeeper, inform them of the sad event, that had taken place, and 
of her own situation. from her aunt she received an answer, abound 
more in common-place condolement, than in trait of real sorrow, which 
assured her, that a servant should be sent to conduct her to la vallée, 
for that her own time was so much occupy by company, that she had no 
leisure to undertake so long a journey. however emily might prefer la 
vallée to thoulouse, she could not be insensible to the indecorous and 
unkind conduct of her aunt, in suffering her to return thither, where 
she had no long a relation to console and protect her; a conduct, 
which was the more culpable, since st. aubert had appoint madame 
cheron the guardian of his orphan daughter. 

madame cheron’s servant made the attendance of the good la voisin 
unnecessary; and emily, who felt sensible her obligation to him, for 
all his kind attention to her late father, as well as to herself, was 
glad to spare him a long, and what, at his time of life, must have been 
a troublesome journey. 

during her stay at the convent, the peace and sanctity that reign 
within, the tranquil beauty of the scenery without, and the delicate 
attention of the abbess and the nuns, were circumstances so soothe 
to her mind, that they almost tempt her to leave a world, where she 
had lost her dearest friends, and devote herself to the cloister, in a 
spot, render sacred to her by contain the tomb of st. aubert. the 
pensive enthusiasm, too, so natural to her temper, had spread a 
beautiful illusion over the sanctify retirement of a nun, that almost 
hid from her view the selfish of its security. but the touches, 
which a melancholy fancy, slightly tincture with superstition, gave to 
the monastic scene, began to fade, as her spirits revived, and brought 
once more to her heart an image, which had only transient been 
banish thence. by this she was silent awaken to hope and comfort 
and sweet affections; vision of happiness gleam faint at a 
distance, and, though she knew them to be illusions, she could not 
resolve to shut them out for ever. it was the remembrance of 
valancourt, of his taste, his genius, and of the countenance which 
glow with both, that, perhaps, alone determined her to return to the 
world. the grandeur and sublime of the scenes, amidst which they had 
first met, had fascinate her fancy, and had imperceptible contribute 
to render valancourt more interesting by seeming to communicate to him 
somewhat of their own character. the esteem, too, which st. aubert had 
repeatedly express for him, sanction this kindness; but, though his 
countenance and manner had continual express his admiration of her, 
he had not otherwise declared it; and even the hope of seeing him again 
was so distant, that she was scarcely conscious of it, still less that 
it influence her conduct on this occasion. 

it was several days after the arrival of madame cheron’s servant before 
emily was sufficient recover to undertake the journey to la vallée. 
on the evening preceding her departure, she went to the cottage to take 
leave of la voisin and his family, and to make them a return for their 
kindness. the old man she found sitting on a bench at his door, between 
his daughter, and his son-in-law, who was just return from his daily 
labour, and who was play upon a pipe, that, in tone, resemble an 
oboe. a flask of wine stood beside the old man, and, before him, a 
small table with fruit and bread, round which stood several of his 
grandsons, fine rosy children, who were taking their supper, as their 
mother distribute it. on the edge of the little green, that spread 
before the cottage, were cattle and a few sheep repose under the 
trees. the landscape was touched with the mellow light of the evening 
sun, whose long slant beam play through a vista of the woods, and 
light up the distant turret of the château. she pause a moment, 
before she emerge from the shade, to gaze upon the happy group before 
her—on the complacency and ease of healthy age, depicture on the 
countenance of la voisin; the maternal tender of agnes, as she 
look upon her children, and the innocent of infantine pleasures, 
reflect in their smiles. emily look again at the venerable old man, 
and at the cottage; the memory of her father rose with full force upon 
her mind, and she hasty step forward, afraid to trust herself with 
a long pause. she took an affectionate and affecting leave of la 
voisin and his family; he seem to love her as his daughter, and shed 
tears; emily shed many. she avoid go into the cottage, since she 
knew it would revive emotions, such as she could not now endure. 

one painful scene yet await her, for she determined to visit again 
her father’s grave; and that she might not be interrupted, or observe 
in the indulgence of her melancholy tenderness, she defer her visit, 
till every inhabitant of the convent, except the nun who promise to 
bring her the key of the church, should be retired to rest. emily 
remain in her chamber, till she heard the convent bell strike twelve, 
when the nun came, as she had appointed, with the key of a private 
door, that open into the church, and they descended together the 
narrow winding staircase, that led thither. the nun offer to 
accompany emily to the grave, adding, “it is melancholy to go alone at 
this hour;” but the former, thank her for the consideration, could 
not consent to have any witness of her sorrow; and the sister, have 
unlock the door, gave her the lamp. “you will remember, sister,” said 
she, “that in the east aisle, which you must pass, is a newly open 
grave; hold the light to the ground, that you may not stumble over the 
loose earth.” emily, thank her again, took the lamp, and, step 
into the church, sister mariette departed. but emily pause a moment at 
the door; a sudden fear came over her, and she return to the foot of 
the staircase, where, as she heard the steps of the nun ascending, and, 
while she held up the lamp, saw her black veil wave over the spiral 
balusters, she was tempt to call her back. while she hesitated, the 
veil disappeared, and, in the next moment, ashamed of her fears, she 
return to the church. the cold air of the aisle chill her, and 
their deep silence and extent, feeble shone upon by the moonlight, that 
stream through a distant gothic window, would at any other time have 
awed her into superstition; now, grief occupy all her attention. she 
scarcely heard the whisper echo of her own steps, or thought of 
the open grave, till she found herself almost on its brink. a friar of 
the convent had been bury there on the preceding evening, and, as she 
had sat alone in her chamber at twilight, she heard, at distance, the 
monk chant the requiem for his soul. this brought freshly to her 
memory the circumstances of her father’s death; and, as the voices, 
mingle with a low querulous peal of the organ, swell faintly, 
gloomy and affecting vision had arisen upon her mind. now she 
remember them, and, turning aside to avoid the broken ground, these 
recollection made her pass on with quick steps to the grave of st. 
aubert, when in the moonlight, that fell athwart a remote part of the 
aisle, she thought she saw a shadow gliding between the pillars. she 
stop to listen, and, not hearing any footstep, believe that her 
fancy had deceive her, and, no long apprehensive of being observed, 
proceeded. st. aubert was bury beneath a plain marble, bearing little 
more than his name and the date of his birth and death, near the foot 
of the stately monument of the villerois. emily remain at his grave, 
till a chime, that call the monk to early prayers, warn her to 
retire; then, she wept over it a last farewell, and forced herself from 
the spot. after this hour of melancholy indulgence, she was refresh 
by a deep sleep, than she had experienced for a long time, and, on 
awakening, her mind was more tranquil and resigned, than it had been 
since st. aubert’s death. 

but, when the moment of her departure from the convent arrived, all her 
grief returned; the memory of the dead, and the kindness of the living 
attach her to the place; and for the sacred spot, where her father’s 
remains were interred, she seem to feel all those tender affection 
which we conceive for home. the abbess repeated many kind assurance of 
regard at their parting, and pressed her to return, if ever she should 
find her condition elsewhere unpleasant; many of the nun also 
express unaffected regret at her departure, and emily left the 
convent with many tears, and follow by sincere wish for her 
happiness. 

she had travelled several leagues, before the scene of the country, 
through which she passed, had power to rouse her for a moment from the 
deep melancholy, into which she was sunk, and, when they did, it was 
only to remind her, that, on her last view of them, st. aubert was at 
her side, and to call up to her remembrance the remark he had 
deliver on similar scenery. thus, without any particular occurrence, 
pass the day in languor and dejection. she slept that night in a town 
on the skirt of languedoc, and, on the following morning, enter 
gascony. 

towards the close of this day, emily came within view of the plain in 
the neighbourhood of la vallée, and the well-known object of former 
times began to press upon her notice, and with them recollections, that 
awaken all her tender and grief. often, while she look through 
her tear upon the wild grandeur of the pyrenees, now varied with the 
rich lights and shadow of evening, she remembered, that, when last she 
saw them, her father partook with her of the pleasure they inspired. 
sudden some scene, which he had particularly pointed out to her, 
would present itself, and the sick languor of despair would steal upon 
her heart. “there!” she would exclaim, “there are the very cliffs, 
there the wood of pines, which he look at with such delight, as we 
pass this road together for the last time. there, too, under the crag 
of that mountain, is the cottage, peep from among the cedars, which 
he bade me remember, and copy with my pencil. o my father, shall i 
never see you more!” 

as she drew near the château, these melancholy memorial of past times 
multiplied. at length, the château itself appeared, amid the glowing 
beauty of st. aubert’s favourite landscape. this was an object, which 
call for fortitude, not for tears; emily dry hers, and prepared to 
meet with calm the try moment of her return to that home, where 
there was no long a parent to welcome her. “yes,” said she, “let me 
not forget the lesson he has taught me! how often he has pointed out 
the necessity of resist even virtuous sorrow; how often we have 
admire together the great of a mind, that can at once suffer and 
reason! o my father! if you are permit to look down upon your child, 
it will please you to see, that she remembers, and endeavour to 
practise, the precept you have given her.” 

a turn on the road now allow a near view of the château, the 
chimneys, tip with light, rising from behind st. aubert’s favourite 
oaks, whose foliage partly conceal the lower part of the building. 
emily could not suppress a heavy sigh. “this, too, was his favourite 
hour,” said she, as she gaze upon the long evening shadows, stretch 
athwart the landscape. “how deep the repose, how lovely the scene! 
lovely and tranquil as in former days!” 

again she resist the pressure of sorrow, till her ear caught the gay 
melody of the dance, which she had so often listen to, as she walk 
with st. aubert, on the margin of the garonne, when all her fortitude 
forsook her, and she continue to weep, till the carriage stop at 
the little gate, that open upon what was now her own territory. she 
raise her eyes on the sudden stopping of the carriage, and saw her 
father’s old housekeeper coming to open the gate. manchon also came 
running, and bark before her; and when his young mistress alighted, 
fawned, and play round her, gasp with joy. 

“dear ma’amselle!” said theresa, and paused, and look as if she would 
have offer something of condole to emily, whose tear now 
prevent reply. the dog still fawn and ran round her, and then flew 
towards the carriage, with a short quick bark. “ah, ma’amselle!—my poor 
master!” said theresa, whose feelings were more awaken than her 
delicacy, “manchon’s gone to look for him.” emily sob aloud; and, on 
look towards the carriage, which still stood with the door open, saw 
the animal spring into it, and instantly leap out, and then with his 
nose on the ground run round the horses. 

“don’t cry so, ma’amselle,” said theresa, “it break my heart to see 
you.” the dog now came running to emily, then return to the carriage, 
and then back again to her, whine and discontented. “poor rogue!” 
said theresa, “thou hast lost thy master, thou mayst well cry! but 
come, my dear young lady, be comforted. what shall i get to refresh 
you?” emily gave her hand to the old servant, and try to restrain her 
grief, while she made some kind enquiry concerning her health. but 
she still linger in the walk which led to the château, for within was 
no person to meet her with the kiss of affection; her own heart no 
long palpitate with impatient joy to meet again the well-known 
smile, and she dread to see objects, which would recall the full 
remembrance of her former happiness. she move slow towards the door, 
paused, went on, and pause again. how silent, how forsaken, how 
forlorn did the château appear! tremble to enter it, yet blame 
herself for delay what she could not avoid, she, at length, pass 
into the hall; cross it with a hurried step, as if afraid to look 
round, and open the door of that room, which she was wont to call her 
own. the gloom of evening gave solemnity to its silent and desert 
air. the chairs, the tables, every article of furniture, so familiar to 
her in happy times, spoke eloquent to her heart. she seat 
herself, without immediately observing it, in a window, which open 
upon the garden, and where st. aubert had often sat with her, watch 
the sun retire from the rich and extensive prospect, that appear 
beyond the groves. 

have indulge her tear for some time, she became more composed; and, 
when theresa, after seeing the baggage deposit in her lady’s room, 
again appeared, she had so far recover her spirits, as to be able to 
converse with her. 

“i have made up the green bed for you, ma’amselle,” said theresa, as 
she set the coffee upon the table. “i thought you would like it better 
than your own now; but i little thought this day month, that you would 
come back alone. a-well-a-day! the news almost broke my heart, when it 
did come. who would have believed, that my poor master, when he went 
from home, would never return again!” emily hid her face with her 
handkerchief, and wave her hand. 

“do taste the coffee,” said theresa. “my dear young lady, be 
comforted—we must all die. my dear master is a saint above.” emily took 
the handkerchief from her face, and raise her eyes full of tear 
towards heaven; soon after she dry them, and, in a calm, but 
tremulous voice, began to enquire concerning some of her late father’s 
pensioners. 

“alas-a-day!” said theresa, as she pour out the coffee, and hand it 
to her mistress, “all that could come, have been here every day to 
enquire after you and my master.” she then proceed to tell, that some 
were dead whom they had left well; and others, who were ill, had 
recovered. “and see, ma’amselle,” add theresa, “there is old mary 
coming up the garden now; she has look every day these three years as 
if she would die, yet she is alive still. she has seen the chaise at 
the door, and know you are come home.” 

the sight of this poor old woman would have been too much for emily, 
and she beg theresa would go and tell her, that she was too ill to 
see any person that night. “tomorrow i shall be better, perhaps; but 
give her this token of my remembrance.” 

emily sat for some time, given up to sorrow. not an object, on which 
her eye glanced, but awaken some remembrance, that led immediately to 
the subject of her grief. her favourite plants, which st. aubert had 
taught her to nurse; the little drawings, that adorn the room, which 
his taste had instruct her to execute; the books, that he had 
select for her use, and which they had read together; her musical 
instruments, whose sound he love so well, and which he sometimes 
awaken himself—every object gave new force to sorrow. at length, she 
rouse herself from this melancholy indulgence, and, summon all her 
resolution, step forward to go into those forlorn rooms, which, 
though she dread to enter, she knew would yet more powerful affect 
her, if she delay to visit them. 

have pass through the green-house, her courage for a moment forsook 
her, when she open the door of the library; and, perhaps, the shade, 
which evening and the foliage of the tree near the window threw 
across the room, heighten the solemnity of her feelings on enter 
that apartment, where everything spoke of her father. there was an arm 
chair, in which he use to sit; she shrunk when she observe it, for 
she had so often seen him seat there, and the idea of him rose so 
distinct to her mind, that she almost fancy she saw him before her. 
but she checked the illusion of a distempered imagination, though she 
could not subdue a certain degree of awe, which now mingle with her 
emotions. she walk slow to the chair, and seat herself in it; 
there was a reading-desk before it, on which lay a book open, as it had 
been left by her father. it was some moments before she recover 
courage enough to examine it; and, when she look at the open page, 
she immediately recollected, that st. aubert, on the evening before his 
departure from the château, had read to her some passage from this his 
favourite author. the circumstance now affected her extremely; she 
look at the page, wept, and look again. to her the book appear 
sacred and invaluable, and she would not have move it, or closed the 
page, which he had left open, for the treasure of the indies. still 
she sat before the desk, and could not resolve to quit it, though the 
increase gloom, and the profound silence of the apartment, revive a 
degree of painful awe. her thought dwelt on the probable state of 
departed spirits, and she remember the affecting conversation, which 
had pass between st. aubert and la voisin, on the night preceding his 
death. 

as she muse she saw the door slow open, and a rustling sound in a 
remote part of the room startle her. through the dusk she thought she 
perceive something move. the subject she had been considering, and the 
present tone of her spirits, which made her imagination respond to 
every impression of her senses, gave her a sudden terror of something 
supernatural. she sat for a moment motionless, and then, her dissipated 
reason returning, “what should i fear?” said she. “if the spirits of 
those we love ever return to us, it is in kindness.” 

the silence, which again reigned, made her ashamed of her late fears, 
and she believed, that her imagination had delude her, or that she had 
heard one of those unaccountable noises, which sometimes occur in old 
houses. the same sound, however, returned; and, distinguish 
something moving towards her, and in the next instant press beside her 
into the chair, she shrieked; but her fleeting senses were instantly 
recalled, on perceive that it was manchon who sat by her, and who now 
lick her hand affectionately. 

perceive her spirits unequal to the task she had assign herself of 
visiting the desert rooms of the château this night, when she left 
the library, she walk into the garden, and down to the terrace, that 
overhung the river. the sun was now set; but, under the dark branch 
of the almond trees, was seen the saffron glow of the west, spread 
beyond the twilight of middle air. the bat flit silent by; and, 
now and then, the mourning note of the nightingale was heard. the 
circumstances of the hour brought to her recollection some lines, which 
she had once heard st. aubert recite on this very spot, and she had now 
a melancholy pleasure in repeating them. 

sonnet 

now the bat circle on the breeze of eve, 
that creeps, in shudd’ring fits, along the wave, 
and tremble ’mid the woods, and through the cave 
whose lonely sigh the wanderer deceive; 

for oft, when melancholy charm his mind, 
he think the spirit of the rock he hears, 
nor listens, but with sweetly-thrilling fears, 
to the low, mystic murmur of the wind! 

now the bat circles, and the twilight-dew 
falls silent round, and, o’er the mountain-cliff, 
the gleam wave, and far-discover’d skiff, 
spread the grey veil of soft, harmonious hue. 

so falls o’er grief the dew of pity’s tear 
dim her lonely vision of despair. 


emily, wandering on, came to st. aubert’s favourite plane-tree, where 
so often, at this hour, they had sat beneath the shade together, and 
with her dear mother so often had converse on the subject of a future 
state. how often, too, had her father express the comfort he derive 
from believing, that they should meet in another world! emily, overcome 
by these recollections, left the plane-tree, and, as she lean 
pensive on the wall of the terrace, she observe a group of peasant 
dance gaily on the bank of the garonne, which spread in broad 
expanse below, and reflect the evening light. what a contrast they 
form to the desolate, unhappy emily! they were gay and _debonnaire_, 
as they were wont to be when she, too, was gay—when st. aubert use to 
listen to their merry music, with a countenance beam pleasure and 
benevolence. emily, have look for a moment on this sprightly band, 
turn away, unable to bear the remembrance it excited; but where, 
alas! could she turn, and not meet new object to give acute to 
grief? 

as she walk slow towards the house, she was met by theresa. “dear 
ma’amselle,” said she, “i have been seek you up and down this half 
hour, and was afraid some accident had happen to you. how can you 
like to wander about so in this night air! do come into the house. 
think what my poor master would have said, if he could see you. i am 
sure, when my dear lady died, no gentleman could take it more to heart 
than he did, yet you know he seldom shed a tear.” 

“pray, theresa, cease,” said emily, wish to interrupt this 
ill-judged, but well-meaning harangue; theresa’s loquacity, however, 
was not to be silence so easily. “and when you use to grieve so,” she 
added, “he often told you how wrong it was—for that my mistress was 
happy. and, if she was happy, i am sure he is so too; for the prayer 
of the poor, they say, reach heaven.” during this speech, emily had 
walk silent into the château, and theresa light her across the 
hall into the common sitting parlour, where she had laid the cloth, 
with one solitary knife and fork, for supper. emily was in the room 
before she perceive that it was not her own apartment, but she checked 
the emotion which inclined her to leave it, and seat herself quiet 
by the little supper table. her father’s hat hung upon the opposite 
wall; while she gaze at it, a faint came over her. theresa look 
at her, and then at the object, on which her eyes were settled, and 
went to remove it; but emily wave her hand—“no,” said she, “let it 
remain. i am go to my chamber.” “nay, ma’amselle, supper is ready.” 
“i cannot take it,” reply emily, “i will go to my room, and try to 
sleep. tomorrow i shall be better.” 

“this is poor doings!” said theresa. “dear lady! do take some food! i 
have dress a pheasant, and a fine one it is. old monsieur barreaux 
sent it this morning, for i saw him yesterday, and told him you were 
coming. and i know nobody that seem more concerned, when he heard the 
sad news, then he.” 

“did he?” said emily, in a tender voice, while she felt her poor heart 
warm for a moment by a ray of sympathy. 

at length, her spirits were entire overcome, and she retired to her 
room. 



chapter ix 

can music’s voice, can beauty’s eye, 
can painting’s glowing hand supply 
a charm so suit to my mind, 
as blow this hollow gust of wind? 
as drops this little weeping rill, 
soft tinkle down the moss-grown hill; 
while, through the west, where sink the crimson day, 
meek twilight slow sails, and wave her banner grey? 
mason 


emily, some time after her return to la vallée, received letters from 
her aunt, madame cheron, in which, after some common-place condole 
and advice, she invite her to thoulouse, and added, that, as her late 
brother had entrust emily’s _education_ to her, she should consider 
herself bound to overlook her conduct. emily, at this time, wish only 
to remain at la vallée, in the scene of her early happiness, now 
render infinite dear to her, as the late residence of those, whom 
she had lost for ever, where she could weep unobserved, retrace their 
steps, and remember each minute particular of their manners. but she 
was equally anxious to avoid the displeasure of madame cheron. 

though her affection would not suffer her to question, even a moment, 
the propriety of st. aubert’s conduct in appoint madame cheron for 
her guardian, she was sensible, that this step had made her happiness 
depend, in a great degree, on the humour of her aunt. in her reply, she 
beg permission to remain, at present, at la vallée, mention the 
extreme dejection of her spirits, and the necessity she felt for quiet 
and retirement to restore them. these she knew were not to be found at 
madame cheron’s, whose inclination led her into a life of dissipation, 
which her ample fortune encouraged; and, have given her answer, she 
felt somewhat more at ease. 

in the first days of her affliction, she was visit by monsieur 
barreaux, a sincere mourner for st. aubert. “i may well lament my 
friend,” said he, “for i shall never meet with his resemblance. if i 
could have found such a man in what is call society, i should not 
have left it.” 

m. barreaux’s admiration of her father endear him extremely to emily, 
whose heart found almost its first relief in converse of her parents, 
with a man, whom she so much revered, and who, though with such an 
ungracious appearance, possessed to much goodness of heart and delicacy 
of mind. 

several week pass away in quiet retirement, and emily’s affliction 
began to soften into melancholy. she could bear to read the books she 
had before read with her father; to sit in his chair in the library—to 
watch the flower his hand had planted—to awaken the tone of that 
instrument his finger had pressed, and sometimes even to play his 
favourite air. 

when her mind had recover from the first shock of affliction, 
perceive the danger of yielding to indolence, and that activity alone 
could restore its tone, she scrupulous endeavour to pass all her 
hour in employment. and it was now that she understood the full value 
of the education she had received from st. aubert, for in cultivate 
her understanding he had secure her an asylum from indolence, without 
recourse to dissipation, and rich and varied amusement and information, 
independent of the society, from which her situation secluded her. nor 
were the good effects of this education confine to selfish advantages, 
since, st. aubert have nourish every amiable quality of her heart, 
it now expand in benevolence to all around her, and taught her, when 
she could not remove the misfortune of others, at least to soften them 
by sympathy and tenderness;—a benevolence that taught her to feel for 
all, that could suffer. 

madame cheron return no answer to emily’s letter, who began to hope, 
that she should be permit to remain some time long in her 
retirement, and her mind had now so far recover its strength, that 
she venture to view the scenes, which most powerful recall the 
image of past times. among these was the fishing-house; and, to 
indulge still more the affectionate melancholy of the visit, she took 
thither her lute, that she might again hear there the tones, to which 
st. aubert and her mother had so often delight to listen. she went 
alone, and at that still hour of the evening which is so soothe to 
fancy and to grief. the last time she had been here she was in company 
with monsieur and madame st. aubert, a few days preceding that, on 
which the latter was seize with a fatal illness. now, when emily again 
enter the woods, that surround the building, they awaken so 
forcibly the memory of former times, that her resolution yield for a 
moment to excess of grief. she stopped, lean for support against a 
tree, and wept for some minutes, before she had recover herself 
sufficient to proceed. the little path, that led to the building, was 
overgrown with grass and the flower which st. aubert had scattered 
careless along the border were almost choke with weeds—the tall 
thistle—the fox-glove, and the nettle. she often pause to look on the 
desolate spot, now so silent and forsaken, and when, with a tremble 
hand, she open the door of the fishing-house, “ah!” said she, 
“everything—everything remains as when i left it last—left it with 
those who never must return!” she went to a window, that overhung the 
rivulet, and, leaning over it, with her eyes fixed on the current, was 
soon lost in melancholy reverie. the lute she had brought lay forgotten 
beside her; the mournful sigh of the breeze, as it wave the high 
pine above, and its soft whisper among the osiers, that bowed upon 
the bank below, was a kind of music more in unison with her feelings. 
it did not vibrate on the chord of unhappy memory, but was soothe to 
the heart as the voice of pity. she continue to muse, unconscious of 
the gloom of evening, and that the sun’s last light tremble on the 
heights above, and would probably have remain so much longer, if a 
sudden footstep, without the building, had not alarm her attention, 
and first made her recollect that she was unprotected. in the next 
moment, a door opened, and a stranger appeared, who stop on 
perceive emily, and then began to apologise for his intrusion. but 
emily, at the sound of his voice, lost her fear in a strong emotion: 
its tone were familiar to her ear, and, though she could not readily 
distinguish through the dusk the features of the person who spoke, she 
felt a remembrance too strong to be distrusted. 

he repeated his apology, and emily then said something in reply, when 
the stranger eager advancing, exclaimed, “good god! can it be—surely 
i am not mistaken—ma’amselle st. aubert?—is it not?” 

“it is indeed,” said emily, who was confirmed in her first conjecture, 
for she now distinguished the countenance of valancourt, light up 
with still more than its usual animation. a thousand painful 
recollection crowded to her mind, and the effort, which she made to 
support herself, only serve to increase her agitation. valancourt, 
meanwhile, have enquire anxious after her health, and express 
his hopes, that m. st. aubert had found benefit from travelling, 
learned from the flood of tears, which she could no long repress, the 
fatal truth. he led her to a seat, and sat down by her, while emily 
continue to weep, and valancourt to hold the hand, which she was 
unconscious he had taken, till it was wet with the tears, which grief 
for st. aubert and sympathy for herself had call forth. 

“i feel,” said he at length, “i feel how insufficient all attempt at 
consolation must be on this subject. i can only mourn with you, for i 
cannot doubt the source of your tears. would to god i were mistaken!” 

emily could still answer only by tears, till she rose, and beg they 
might leave the melancholy spot, when valancourt, though he saw her 
feebleness, could not offer to detain her, but took her arm within his, 
and led her from the fishing-house. they walk silent through the 
woods, valancourt anxious to know, yet fear to ask any particulars 
concerning st. aubert; and emily too much distress to converse. after 
some time, however, she acquire fortitude enough to speak of her 
father, and to give a brief account of the manner of his death; during 
which recital valancourt’s countenance betray strong emotion, and, 
when he heard that st. aubert had die on the road, and that emily had 
been left among strangers, he pressed her hand between his, and 
involuntary exclaimed, “why was i not there!” but in the next moment 
recollect himself, for he immediately return to the mention of her 
father; till, perceive that her spirits were exhausted, he gradual 
change the subject, and spoke of himself. emily thus learned that, 
after they had parted, he had wandered, for some time, along the shore 
of the mediterranean, and had then return through languedoc into 
gascony, which was his native province, and where he usually resided. 

when he had conclude his little narrative, he sunk into a silence, 
which emily was not disposed to interrupt, and it continued, till they 
reach the gate of the château, when he stopped, as if he had known 
this to be the limit of his walk. here, saying, that it was his 
intention to return to estuvière on the following day, he ask her if 
she would permit him to take leave of her in the morning; and emily, 
perceive that she could not reject an ordinary civility, without 
express by her refusal an expectation of something more, was 
compel to answer, that she should be at home. 

she pass a melancholy evening, during which the retrospect of all 
that had happened, since she had seen valancourt, would rise to her 
imagination; and the scene of her father’s death appear in tint as 
fresh, as if it had pass on the preceding day. she remember 
particularly the earnest and solemn manner, in which he had require 
her to destroy the manuscript papers, and, awakening from the lethargy, 
in which sorrow had held her, she was shock to think she had not yet 
obey him, and determined, that another day should not reproach her 
with the neglect. 



chapter x 

can such things be, 
and overcome us like a summer’s cloud, 
without our special wonder? 
macbeth 


on the next morning, emily ordered a fire to be light in the stove of 
the chamber, where st. aubert use to sleep; and, as soon as she had 
breakfasted, went thither to burn the papers. have fasten the door 
to prevent interruption, she open the closet where they were 
concealed, as she enter which, she felt an emotion of unusual awe, 
and stood for some moments survey it, trembling, and almost afraid 
to remove the board. there was a great chair in one corner of the 
closet, and, opposite to it, stood the table, at which she had seen her 
father sit, on the evening that precede his departure, look over, 
with so much emotion, what she believe to be these very papers. 

the solitary life, which emily had led of late, and the melancholy 
subjects, on which she had suffer her thought to dwell, had render 
her at times sensible to the ‘thick-coming fancies’ of a mind greatly 
enervated. it was lamentable, that her excellent understanding should 
have yielded, even for a moment, to the reverie of superstition, or 
rather to those start of imagination, which deceive the senses into 
what can be call nothing less than momentary madness. instance of 
this temporary failure of mind had more than once occur since her 
return home; particularly when, wandering through this lonely mansion 
in the evening twilight, she had been alarm by appearances, which 
would have been unseen in her more cheerful days. to this infirm state 
of her nerves may be attribute what she imagined, when, her eyes 
glancing a second time on the arm-chair, which stood in an obscure part 
of the closet, the countenance of her dead father appear there. emily 
stood fixed for a moment to the floor, after which she left the closet. 
her spirits, however, soon returned; she reproach herself with the 
weakness of thus suffering interrupt in an act of serious 
importance, and again open the door. by the directions which st. 
aubert had given her, she readily found the board he had describe in 
an opposite corner of the closet, near the window; she distinguished 
also the line he had mentioned, and, pressing it as he had bade her, it 
slid down, and disclose the bundle of papers, together with some 
scattered ones, and the purse of louis. with a tremble hand she 
remove them, replace the board, pause a moment, and was rising from 
the floor, when, on look up, there appear to her alarm fancy the 
same countenance in the chair. the illusion, another instance of the 
unhappy effect which solitude and grief had gradual produce upon her 
mind, subdued her spirits; she rush forward into the chamber, and 
sunk almost senseless into a chair. return reason soon overcame the 
dreadful, but pitiable attack of imagination, and she turn to the 
papers, though still with so little recollection, that her eyes 
involuntary settled on the writing of some loose sheets, which lay 
open; and she was unconscious, that she was transgress her father’s 
strict injunction, till a sentence of dreadful import awaken her 
attention and her memory together. she hasty put the papers from her; 
but the words, which had rouse equally her curiosity and terror, she 
could not dismiss from her thoughts. so powerful had they affected 
her, that she even could not resolve to destroy the papers immediately; 
and the more she dwelt on the circumstance, the more it inflamed her 
imagination. urge by the most forcible, and apparently the most 
necessary, curiosity to enquire farther, concerning the terrible and 
mysterious subject, to which she had seen an allusion, she began to 
lament her promise to destroy the papers. for a moment, she even 
doubted, whether it could just be obeyed, in contradiction to such 
reason as there appear to be for further information. but the 
delusion was momentary. 

“i have given a solemn promise,” said she, “to observe a solemn 
injunction, and it is not my business to argue, but to obey. let me 
hasten to remove the temptation, that would destroy my innocence, and 
embitter my life with the consciousness of irremediable guilt, while i 
have strength to reject it.” 

thus reanimate with a sense of her duty, she complete the triumph of 
her integrity over temptation, more forcible than any she had ever 
known, and consign the papers to the flames. her eyes watch them as 
they slow consumed, she shudder at the recollection of the sentence 
she had just seen, and at the certainty, that the only opportunity of 
explain it was then passing away for ever. 

it was long after this, that she recollect the purse; and as she was 
deposit it, unopened, in a cabinet, perceive that it contained 
something of a size large than coin, she examine it. “his hand 
deposit them here,” said she, as she kiss some pieces of the coin, 
and wet them with her tears, “his hand—which is now dust!” at the 
bottom of the purse was a small packet, have taken out which, and 
unfold paper after paper, she found to be an ivory case, contain 
the miniature of a—lady! she started—“the same,” said she, “my father 
wept over!” on examine the countenance she could recollect no person 
that it resembled. it was of uncommon beauty, and was characterise by 
an expression of sweetness, shade with sorrow, and temper by 
resignation. 

st. aubert had given no directions concerning this picture, nor had 
even name it; she, therefore, thought herself justified in preserve 
it. more than once remember his manner, when he had spoken of the 
marchioness of villeroi, she felt inclined to believe that this was her 
resemblance; yet there appear no reason why he should have preserve 
a picture of that lady, or, have preserve it, why he should lament 
over it in a manner so striking and affecting as she had witness on 
the night preceding his departure. 

emily still gaze on the countenance, examine its features, but she 
knew not where to detect the charm that captivate her attention, and 
inspired sentiment of such love and pity. dark brown hair play 
careless along the open forehead; the nose was rather inclined to 
aquiline; the lip spoke in a smile, but it was a melancholy one; the 
eyes were blue, and were direct upwards with an expression of 
peculiar meekness, while the soft cloud of the brow spoke of the fine 
sensibility of the temper. 

emily was rouse from the muse mood into which the picture had thrown 
her, by the close of the garden gate; and, on turning her eyes to the 
window, she saw valancourt coming towards the château. her spirits 
agitate by the subject that had lately occupy her mind, she felt 
unprepared to see him, and remain a few moments in the chamber to 
recover herself. 

when she met him in the parlour, she was struck with the change that 
appear in his air and countenance since they had part in rousillon, 
which twilight and the distress she suffer on the preceding evening 
had prevent her from observing. but dejection and languor 
disappeared, for a moment, in the smile that now enlightened his 
countenance, on perceive her. “you see,” said he, “i have avail 
myself of the permission with which you honour me—of bidding _you_ 
farewell, whom i had the happiness of meeting only yesterday.” 

emily smile faintly, and, anxious to say something, ask if he had 
been long in gascony. “a few days only,” reply valancourt, while a 
blush pass over his cheek. “i engaged in a long ramble after i had 
the misfortune of parting with the friends who had made my wanderings 
among the pyrenee so delightful.” 

a tear came to emily’s eye, as valancourt said this, which he observed; 
and, anxious to draw off her attention from the remembrance that had 
occasion it, as well as shock at his own thoughtlessness, he began 
to speak on other subjects, express his admiration of the château, 
and its prospects. emily, who felt somewhat embarrass how to support 
a conversation, was glad of such an opportunity to continue it on 
indifferent topics. they walk down to the terrace, where valancourt 
was charm with the river scenery, and the view over the opposite 
shore of guienne. 

as he lean on the wall of the terrace, watch the rapid current of 
the garonne, “i was a few week ago,” said he, “at the source of this 
noble river; i had not then the happiness of knowing you, or i should 
have regret your absence—it was a scene so exactly suit to your 
taste. it rise in a part of the pyrenees, still wild and more 
sublime, i think, than any we pass in the way to rousillon.” he then 
describe its fall among the precipice of the mountains, where its 
waters, augment by the stream that descend from the snowy summit 
around, rush into the vallée d’aran, between whose romantic heights it 
foam along, pursue its way to the north west till it emerge upon 
the plain of languedoc. then, washing the wall of thoulouse, and 
turning again to the north west, it assume a mild character, as it 
fertilize the pasture of gascony and guienne, in its progress to the 
bay of biscay. 

emily and valancourt talk of the scene they had pass among the 
pyrenean alps; as he spoke of which there was often a tremulous 
tender in his voice, and sometimes he expatiate on them with all 
the fire of genius, sometimes would appear scarcely conscious of the 
topic, though he continue to speak. this subject recall forcibly to 
emily the idea of her father, whose image appear in every landscape, 
which valancourt particularized, whose remark dwelt upon her memory, 
and whose enthusiasm still glow in her heart. her silence, at length, 
remind valancourt how nearly his conversation approach to the 
occasion of her grief, and he change the subject, though for one 
scarcely less affecting to emily. when he admire the grandeur of the 
plane-tree, that spread its wide branch over the terrace, and under 
whose shade they now sat, she remember how often she had sat thus 
with st. aubert, and heard him express the same admiration. 

“this was a favourite tree with my dear father,” said she; “he use to 
love to sit under its foliage with his family about him, in the fine 
evenings of summer.” 

valancourt understood her feelings, and was silent; had she raise her 
eyes from the ground she would have seen tear in his. he rose, and 
lean on the wall of the terrace, from which, in a few moments, he 
return to his seat, then rose again, and appear to be greatly 
agitated; while emily found her spirits so much depressed, that several 
of her attempt to renew the conversation were ineffectual. valancourt 
again sat down, but was still silent, and trembled. at length he said, 
with a hesitate voice, “this lovely scene!—i am go to leave—to 
leave you—perhaps for ever! these moments may never return; i cannot 
resolve to neglect, though i scarcely dare to avail myself of them. let 
me, however, without offend the delicacy of your sorrow, venture to 
declare the admiration i must always feel of your goodness—o! that at 
some future period i might be permit to call it love!” 

emily’s emotion would not suffer her to reply; and valancourt, who now 
venture to look up, observing her countenance change, expect to see 
her faint, and made an involuntary effort to support her, which 
recall emily to a sense of her situation, and to an exertion of her 
spirits. valancourt did not appear to notice her indisposition, but, 
when he spoke again, his voice told the tenderest love. “i will not 
presume,” he added, “to intrude this subject long upon your attention 
at this time, but i may, perhaps, be permit to mention, that these 
parting moments would lose much of their bitter if i might be 
allow to hope the declaration i have made would not exclude me from 
your presence in future.” 

emily made another effort to overcome the confusion of her thoughts, 
and to speak. she fear to trust the preference her heart acknowledge 
towards valancourt, and to give him any encouragement for hope, on so 
short an acquaintance. for though in this narrow period she had 
observe much that was admirable in his taste and disposition, and 
though these observations had been sanction by the opinion of her 
father, they were not sufficient testimony of his general worth to 
determine her upon a subject so infinite important to her future 
happiness as that, which now solicit her attention. yet, though the 
thought of dismiss valancourt was so very painful to her, that she 
could scarcely endure to pause upon it, the consciousness of this made 
her fear the partiality of her judgment, and hesitate still more to 
encourage that suit, for which her own heart too tender pleaded. the 
family of valancourt, if not his circumstances, had been known to her 
father, and known to be unexceptionable. of his circumstances, 
valancourt himself hint as far as delicacy would permit, when he said 
he had at present little else to offer but a heart, that adore her. he 
had solicit only for a distant hope, and she could not resolve to 
forbid, though she scarcely dare to permit it; at length, she acquire 
courage to say, that she must think herself honour by the good 
opinion of any person, whom her father had esteemed. 

“and was i, then, thought worthy of his esteem?” said valancourt, in a 
voice tremble with anxiety; then check himself, he added, “but 
pardon the question; i scarcely know what i say. if i might dare to 
hope, that you think me not unworthy such honour, and might be 
permit sometimes to enquire after your health, i should now leave 
you with comparative tranquillity.” 

emily, after a moment’s silence, said, “i will be ingenuous with you, 
for i know you will understand, and allow for my situation; you will 
consider it as a proof of my—my esteem that i am so. though i live here 
in what was my father’s house, i live here alone. i have, alas! no 
long a parent—a parent, whose presence might sanction your visits. it 
is unnecessary for me to point out the impropriety of my receiving 
them.” 

“nor will i affect to be insensible of this,” reply valancourt, 
add mournfully—“but what is to console me for my candour? i distress 
you, and would now leave the subject, if i might carry with me a hope 
of being some time permit to renew it, of being allow to make 
myself known to your family.” 

emily was again confused, and again hesitate what to reply; she felt 
most acute the difficulty—the forlorn of her situation, which did 
not allow her a single relative, or friend, to whom she could turn for 
even a look, that might support and guide her in the present 
embarrass circumstances. madame cheron, who was her only relative, 
and ought to have been this friend, was either occupy by her own 
amusements, or so resentful of the reluctance her niece had shown to 
quit la vallée, that she seem total to have abandoned her. 

“ah! i see,” said valancourt, after a long pause, during which emily 
had begun, and left unfinished two or three sentences, “i see that i 
have nothing to hope; my fear were too just, you think me unworthy of 
your esteem. that fatal journey! which i considered as the happiest 
period of my life—those delightful days were to embitter all my future 
ones. how often i have look back to them with hope and fear—yet never 
till this moment could i prevail with myself to regret their enchanting 
influence.” 

his voice faltered, and he abrupt quit his seat and walk on the 
terrace. there was an expression of despair on his countenance, that 
affected emily. the pleadings of her heart overcame, in some degree, 
her extreme timidity, and, when he resume his seat, she said, in an 
accent that betray her tenderness, “you do both yourself and me 
injustice when you say i think you unworthy of my esteem; i will 
acknowledge that you have long possessed it, and—and—” 

valancourt wait impatient for the conclusion of the sentence, but 
the words die on her lips. her eyes, however, reflect all the 
emotion of her heart. valancourt passed, in an instant, from the 
impatience of despair, to that of joy and tenderness. “o emily!” he 
exclaimed, “my own emily—teach me to sustain this moment! let me seal 
it as the most sacred of my life!” 

he pressed her hand to his lips, it was cold and trembling; and, 
raise her eyes, he saw the pale of her countenance. tear came to 
her relief, and valancourt watch in anxious silence over her. in a 
few moments, she recover herself, and smile faint through her 
tears, said, “can you excuse this weakness? my spirits have not yet, i 
believe, recover from the shock they lately received.” 

“i cannot excuse myself,” said valancourt, “but i will forbear to renew 
the subject, which may have contribute to agitate them, now that i can 
leave you with the sweet certainty of possess your esteem.” 

then, forget his resolution, he again spoke of himself. “you know 
not,” said he, “the many anxious hour i have pass near you lately, 
when you believe me, if indeed you honour me with a thought, far 
away. i have wandered, near the château, in the still hour of the 
night, when no eye could observe me. it was delightful to know i was so 
near you, and there was something particularly soothe in the thought, 
that i watch round your habitation, while you slept. these grounds 
are not entire new to me. once i venture within the fence, and spent 
one of the happiest, and yet most melancholy hour of my life in 
walking under what i believe to be your window.” 

emily enquire how long valancourt had been in the neighbourhood. 
“several days,” he replied. “it was my design to avail myself of the 
permission m. st. aubert had given me. i scarcely know how to account 
for it; but, though i anxious wish to do this, my resolution always 
failed, when the moment approached, and i constant defer my visit. 
i lodge in a village at some distance, and wander with my dogs, 
among the scene of this charming country, wish continual to meet 
you, yet not daring to visit you.” 

have thus continue to converse, without perceive the flight of 
time, valancourt, at length, seem to recollect himself. “i must go,” 
said he mournfully, “but it is with the hope of seeing you again, of 
being permit to pay my respects to your family; let me hear this 
hope confirmed by your voice.” “my family will be happy to see any 
friend of my dear father,” said emily. valancourt kiss her hand, and 
still lingered, unable to depart, while emily sat silently, with her 
eyes bent on the ground; and valancourt, as he gaze on her, considered 
that it would soon be impossible for him to recall, even to his memory, 
the exact resemblance of the beautiful countenance he then beheld; at 
this moment a hasty footstep approach from behind the plane-tree, 
and, turning her eyes, emily saw madame cheron. she felt a blush steal 
upon her cheek, and her frame tremble with the emotion of her mind; 
but she instantly rose to meet her visitor. “so, niece!” said madame 
cheron, casting a look of surprise and enquiry on valancourt, “so 
niece, how do you do? but i need not ask, your looks tell me you have 
already recover your loss.” 

“my looks do me injustice then, madame, my loss i know can never be 
recovered.” 

“well—well! i will not argue with you; i see you have exactly your 
father’s disposition; and let me tell you it would have been much 
happy for him, poor man! if it had been a different one.” 

a look of dignified displeasure, with which emily regard madame 
cheron, while she spoke, would have touched almost any other heart; she 
made no other reply, but introduce valancourt, who could scarcely 
stifle the resentment he felt, and whose bow madame cheron return 
with a slight curtsy, and a look of supercilious examination. after a 
few moments he took leave of emily, in a manner, that hasty express 
his pain both at his own departure, and at leave her to the society 
of madame cheron. 

“who is that young man?” said her aunt, in an accent which equally 
imply inquisitive and censure. “some idle admirer of yours i 
suppose; but i believe niece you had a greater sense of propriety, 
than to have received the visit of any young man in your present 
unfriended situation. let me tell you the world will observe those 
things, and it will talk, aye and very freely too.” 

emily, extremely shock at this coarse speech, attempt to interrupt 
it; but madame cheron would proceed, with all the self-importance of a 
person, to whom power is new. 

“it is very necessary you should be under the eye of some person more 
able to guide you than yourself. i, indeed, have not much leisure for 
such a task; however, since your poor father made it his last request, 
that i should overlook your conduct—i must even take you under my care. 
but this let me tell you niece, that, unless you will determine to be 
very conformable to my direction, i shall not trouble myself long 
about you.” 

emily made no attempt to interrupt madame cheron a second time, grief 
and the pride of conscious innocence kept her silent, till her aunt 
said, “i am now come to take you with me to thoulouse; i am sorry to 
find, that your poor father died, after all, in such indifferent 
circumstances; however, i shall take you home with me. ah! poor man, he 
was always more generous than provident, or he would not have left his 
daughter dependent on his relations.” 

“nor has he done so, i hope, madam,” said emily calmly, “nor did his 
pecuniary misfortune arise from that noble generosity, which always 
distinguished him. the affair of m. de motteville may, i trust, yet be 
settled without deep injure his creditors, and in the meantime i 
should be very happy to remain at la vallée.” 

“no doubt you would,” reply madame cheron, with a smile of irony, 
“and i shall no doubt consent to this, since i see how necessary 
tranquill and retirement are to restore your spirits. i did not 
think you capable of so much duplicity, niece; when you plead this 
excuse for remain here, i foolish believe it to be a just one, 
nor expect to have found with you so agreeable a companion as this m. 
la val—, i forget his name.” 

emily could no long endure these cruel indignities. “it was a just 
one, madam,” said she; “and now, indeed, i feel more than ever the 
value of the retirement i then solicited; and, if the purport of your 
visit is only to add insult to the sorrow of your brother’s child, she 
could well have spare it.” 

“i see that i have undertaken a very troublesome task,” said madame 
cheron, colouring highly. “i am sure, madam,” said emily mildly, and 
endeavour to restrain her tears, “i am sure my father did not mean 
it should be such. i have the happiness to reflect, that my conduct 
under his eye was such as he often delight to approve. it would be 
very painful to me to disobey the sister of such a parent, and, if you 
believe the task will really be so troublesome, i must lament, that it 
is yours.” 

“well! niece, fine speak signify little. i am willing, in 
consideration of my poor brother, to overlook the impropriety of your 
late conduct, and to try what your future will be.” 

emily interrupt her, to beg she would explain what was the 
impropriety she allude to. 

“what impropriety! why that of receiving the visit of a lover unknown 
to your family,” reply madame cheron, not considering the impropriety 
of which she had herself been guilty, in expose her niece to the 
possibility of conduct so erroneous. 

a faint blush pass over emily’s countenance; pride and anxiety 
struggle in her breast; and, till she recollected, that appearances 
did, in some degree, justify her aunt’s suspicions, she could not 
resolve to humble herself so far as to enter into the defence of a 
conduct, which had been so innocent and undesign on her part. she 
mention the manner of valancourt’s introduction to her father; the 
circumstances of his receiving the pistol-shot, and of their afterwards 
travel together; with the accidental way, in which she had met him, 
on the preceding evening. she own he had declared a partiality for 
her, and that he had ask permission to address her family. 

“and who is this young adventurer, pray?” said madame cheron, “and what 
are his pretensions?” “these he must himself explain, madam,” reply 
emily. “of his family my father was not ignorant, and i believe it is 
unexceptionable.” she then proceed to mention what she knew 
concerning it. 

“oh, then, this it seem is a younger brother,” exclaim her aunt, 
“and of course a beggar. a very fine tale indeed! and so my brother 
took a fancy to this young man after only a few days acquaintance!—but 
that was so like him! in his youth he was always taking these likes and 
dislikes, when no other person saw any reason for them at all; nay, 
indeed, i have often thought the people he disapprove were much more 
agreeable than those he admired;—but there is no account for tastes. 
he was always so much influence by people’s countenances; now i, for 
my part, have no notion of this, it is all ridiculous enthusiasm. what 
has a man’s face to do with his character? can a man of good character 
help have a disagreeable face?”—which last sentence madame cheron 
deliver with the decisive air of a person who congratulate herself 
on have made a grand discovery, and believe the question to be 
unanswerable settled. 

emily, desirous of conclude the conversation, enquire if her aunt 
would accept some refreshment, and madame cheron accompany her to the 
château, but without desist from a topic, which she discuss with 
so much complacency to herself, and severity to her niece. 

“i am sorry to perceive, niece,” said she, in allusion to somewhat that 
emily had said, concerning physiognomy, “that you have a great many of 
your father’s prejudices, and among them those sudden predilection for 
people from their looks. i can perceive, that you imagine yourself to 
be violent in love with this young adventurer, after an acquaintance 
of only a few days. there was something, too, so charming romantic in 
the manner of your meeting!” 

emily checked the tears, that tremble in her eyes, while she said, 
“when my conduct shall deserve this severity, madam, you will do well 
to exercise it; till then justice, if not tenderness, should surely 
restrain it. i have never willing offend you; now i have lost my 
parents, you are the only person to whom i can look for kindness. let 
me not lament more than ever the loss of such parents.” the last words 
were almost stifle by her emotions, and she burst into tears. 
remember the delicacy and the tender of st. aubert, the happy, 
happy days she had pass in these scenes, and contrast them with 
the coarse and unfeeling behaviour of madame cheron, and from the 
future hour of mortification she must submit to in her presence—a 
degree of grief seize her, that almost reach despair. madame cheron, 
more offend by the reproof which emily’s words conveyed, than touched 
by the sorrow they expressed, said nothing, that might soften her 
grief; but, notwithstanding an apparent reluctance to receive her 
niece, she desire her company. the love of sway was her ruling 
passion, and she knew it would be highly gratify by taking into her 
house a young orphan, who had no appeal from her decisions, and on whom 
she could exercise without control the capricious humour of the moment. 

on enter the château, madame cheron express a desire, that she 
would put up what she thought necessary to take to thoulouse, as she 
meant to set off immediately. emily now try to persuade her to defer 
the journey, at least till the next day, and, at length, with much 
difficulty, prevailed. 

the day pass in the exercise of petty tyranny on the part of madame 
cheron, and in mournful regret and melancholy anticipation on that of 
emily, who, when her aunt retired to her apartment for the night, went 
to take leave of every other room in this her dear native home, which 
she was now quit for she knew not how long, and for a world, to 
which she was wholly a stranger. she could not conquer a presentiment, 
which frequent occur to her, this night—that she should never more 
return to la vallée. have pass a considerable time in what had been 
her father’s study, have select some of his favourite authors, to 
put up with her clothes, and shed many tears, as she wipe the dust 
from their covers, she seat herself in his chair before the reading 
desk, and sat lost in melancholy reflection, till theresa open the 
door to examine, as was her custom before she went to bed, it was all 
safe. she started, on observing her young lady, who bade her come in, 
and then gave her some directions for keeping the château in readiness 
for her reception at all times. 

“alas-a-day! that you should leave it!” said theresa, “i think you 
would be happy here than where you are going, if one may judge.” 
emily made no reply to this remark; the sorrow theresa proceed to 
express at her departure affected her, but she found some comfort in 
the simple affection of this poor old servant, to whom she gave such 
directions as might best conduce to her comfort during her own absence. 

have dismiss theresa to bed, emily wander through every lonely 
apartment of the château, lingering long in what had been her father’s 
bedroom, indulge melancholy, yet not unpleasing, emotions, and, 
have often return within the door to take another look at it, she 
withdrew to her own chamber. from her window she gaze upon the garden 
below, shown faint by the moon, rising over the tops of the 
palm-trees, and, at length, the calm beauty of the night increase a 
desire of indulge the mournful sweet of bidding farewell to the 
beloved shades of her childhood, till she was tempt to descend. 
throw over her the light veil, in which she usually walked, she 
silent pass into the garden, and, hasten towards the distant 
groves, was glad to breathe once more the air of liberty, and to sigh 
unobserved. the deep repose of the scene, the rich scents, that float 
on the breeze, the grandeur of the wide horizon and of the clear blue 
arch, soothe and gradual elevated her mind to that sublime 
complacency, which render the vexation of this world so insignificant 
and mean in our eyes, that we wonder they have had power for a moment 
to disturb us. emily forgot madame cheron and all the circumstances of 
her conduct, while her thought ascend to the contemplation of those 
unnumbered worlds, that lie scattered in the depths of æther, thousand 
of them hid from human eyes, and almost beyond the flight of human 
fancy. as her imagination soar through the regions of space, and 
aspire to that great first cause, which pervade and govern all 
being, the idea of her father scarcely ever left her; but it was a 
pleasing idea, since she resigned him to god in the full confidence of 
a pure and holy faith. she pursue her way through the grove to the 
terrace, often pause as memory awaken the pang of affection, and as 
reason anticipate the exile, into which she was going. 

and now the moon was high over the woods, touching their summit with 
yellow light, and dart between the foliage long level beams; while 
on the rapid garonne below the tremble radiance was faint obscure 
by the lightest vapour. emily long watch the play lustre, listen 
to the soothe murmur of the current, and the yet lighter sound of 
the air, as it stirred, at intervals, the lofty palm-trees. “how 
delightful is the sweet breath of these groves,” said she. “this lovely 
scene!—how often shall i remember and regret it, when i am far away. 
alas! what event may occur before i see it again! o, peaceful, happy 
shades!—scenes of my infant delights, of parental tender now lost 
for ever!—why must i leave ye!—in your retreat i should still find 
safety and repose. sweet hour of my childhood—i am now to leave even 
your last memorials! no objects, that would revive your impressions, 
will remain for me!” 

then dry her tear and look up, her thought rose again to the 
sublime subject she had contemplated; the same divine complacency stole 
over her heart, and, hush its throbs, inspired hope and confidence 
and resignation to the will of the deity, whose works fill her mind 
with adoration. 

emily gaze long on the plane-tree, and then seat herself, for the 
last time, on the bench under its shade, where she had so often sat 
with her parents, and where, only a few hour before, she had converse 
with valancourt, at the remembrance of whom, thus revived, a mingle 
sensation of esteem, tender and anxiety rose in her breast. with 
this remembrance occur a recollection of his late confession—that he 
had often wander near her habitation in the night, have even pass 
the boundary of the garden, and it immediately occur to her, that he 
might be at this moment in the grounds. the fear of meeting him, 
particularly after the declaration he had made, and of incur a 
censure, which her aunt might so reasonably bestow, if it was known, 
that she was met by her lover, at this hour, made her instantly leave 
her beloved plane-tree, and walk towards the château. she cast an 
anxious eye around, and often stop for a moment to examine the 
shadowy scene before she venture to proceed, but she pass on without 
perceive any person, till, have reach a clump of almond trees, 
not far from the house, she rest to take a retrospect of the garden, 
and to sigh forth another adieu. as her eyes wander over the 
landscape she thought she perceive a person emerge from the groves, 
and pass slow along a moonlight alley that led between them; but the 
distance, and the imperfect light would not suffer her to judge with 
any degree of certainty whether this was fancy or reality. she 
continue to gaze for some time on the spot, till on the dead still 
of the air she heard a sudden sound, and in the next instant fancy 
she distinguished footstep near her. waste not another moment in 
conjecture, she hurried to the château, and, have reach it, retired 
to her chamber, where, as she closed her window she look upon the 
garden, and then again thought she distinguished a figure, gliding 
between the almond tree she had just left. she immediately withdrew 
from the casement, and, though much agitated, sought in sleep the 
refreshment of a short oblivion. 



chapter xi 

i leave that flowery path for eye 
of childhood, where i sport many a day, 
warble and saunter careless along; 
where every face was innocent and gay, 
each vale romantic, tuneful every tongue— 
sweet, wild, and artless, all. 
the minstrel 


at an early hour, the carriage, which was to take emily and madame 
cheron to thoulouse, appear at the door of the château, and madame 
was already in the breakfast-room, when her niece enter it. the 
repast was silent and melancholy on the part of emily; and madame 
cheron, whose vanity was pique on observing her dejection, reprove 
her in a manner that did not contribute to remove it. it was with much 
reluctance, that emily’s request to take with her the dog, which had 
been a favourite of her father, was granted. her aunt, impatient to be 
gone, ordered the carriage to draw up; and, while she pass to the 
hall door, emily gave another look into the library, and another 
farewell glance over the garden, and then followed. old theresa stood 
at the door to take leave of her young lady. “god for ever keep you, 
ma’amselle!” said she, while emily gave her hand in silence, and could 
answer only with a pressure of her hand, and a forced smile. 

at the gate, which led out of the grounds, several of her father’s 
pensioner were assemble to bid her farewell, to whom she would have 
spoken, if her aunt would have suffer the driver to stop; and, have 
distribute to them almost all the money she had about her, she sunk 
back in the carriage, yielding to the melancholy of her heart. soon 
after, she caught, between the steep bank of the road, another view of 
the château, peep from among the high trees, and surround by green 
slope and tuft groves, the garonne winding its way beneath their 
shades, sometimes lost among the vineyards, and then rising in greater 
majesty in the distant pastures. the towering precipice of the 
pyrenees, that rose to the south, gave emily a thousand interesting 
recollection of her late journey; and these object of her former 
enthusiast admiration, now excited only sorrow and regret. have 
gaze on the château and its lovely scenery, till the bank again 
closed upon them, her mind became too much occupy by mournful 
reflections, to permit her to attend to the conversation, which madame 
cheron had begun on some trivial topic, so that they soon travelled in 
profound silence. 

valancourt, meanwhile, was return to estuvière, his heart occupy 
with the image of emily; sometimes indulge in reverie of future 
happiness, but more frequent shrink with dread of the opposition 
he might encounter from her family. he was the younger son of an 
ancient family of gascony; and, have lost his parent at an early 
period of his life, the care of his education and of his small portion 
had devolve to his brother, the count de duvarney, his senior by 
nearly twenty years. valancourt had been educated in all the 
accomplishment of his age, and had an ardour of spirit, and a certain 
grandeur of mind, that gave him particular excellence in the exercises 
then thought heroic. his little fortune had been diminish by the 
necessary expence of his education; but m. la valancourt, the elder, 
seem to think that his genius and accomplishment would ample supply 
the deficiency of his inheritance. they offer flatter hope of 
promotion in the military profession, in those times almost the only 
one in which a gentleman could engage without incur a stain on his 
name; and la valancourt was of course enroll in the army. the general 
genius of his mind was but little understood by his brother. that 
ardour for whatever is great and good in the moral world, as well as in 
the natural one, display itself in his infant years; and the strong 
indignation, which he felt and express at a criminal, or a mean 
action, sometimes drew upon him the displeasure of his tutor; who 
reprobate it under the general term of violence of temper; and who, 
when harangue on the virtue of mild and moderation, seem to 
forget the gentle and compassion, which always appear in his 
pupil towards object of misfortune. 

he had now obtain leave of absence from his regiment when he made the 
excursion into the pyrenees, which was the means of introduce him to 
st. aubert; and, as this permission was nearly expired, he was the more 
anxious to declare himself to emily’s family, from whom he reasonably 
apprehend opposition, since his fortune, though, with a moderate 
addition from hers, it would be sufficient to support them, would not 
satisfy the views, either of vanity, or ambition. valancourt was not 
without the latter, but he saw golden vision of promotion in the army; 
and believed, that with emily he could, in the mean time, be delight 
to live within the limit of his humble income. his thought were now 
occupy in considering the means of making himself known to her 
family, to whom, however, he had yet no address, for he was entire 
ignorant of emily’s precipitate departure from la vallée, of whom he 
hope to obtain it. 

meanwhile, the traveller pursue their journey; emily making frequent 
effort to appear cheerful, and too often relapse into silence and 
dejection. madame cheron, attribute her melancholy solely to the 
circumstance of her being remove to a distance from her lover, and 
believing, that the sorrow, which her niece still express for the 
loss of st. aubert, proceed partly from an affectation of 
sensibility, endeavour to make it appear ridiculous to her, that such 
deep regret should continue to be felt so long after the period usually 
allow for grief. 

at length, these unpleasant lecture were interrupt by the arrival of 
the traveller at thoulouse; and emily, who had not been there for many 
years, and had only a very faint recollection of it, was surprise at 
the ostentatious style exhibit in her aunt’s house and furniture; the 
more so, perhaps, because it was so total different from the modest 
elegance, to which she had been accustomed. she follow madame cheron 
through a large hall, where several servant in rich livery appeared, 
to a kind of saloon, fitted up with more show than taste; and her aunt, 
complain of fatigue, ordered supper immediately. “i am glad to find 
myself in my own house again,” said she, throw herself on a large 
settee, “and to have my own people about me. i detest travelling; 
though, indeed, i ought to like it, for what i see abroad always make 
me delight to return to my own château. what make you so silent, 
child?—what is it that disturb you now?” 

emily suppress a start tear, and try to smile away the 
expression of an oppress heart; she was thinking of _her_ home, and 
felt too sensible the arrogance and ostentatious vanity of madame 
cheron’s conversation. “can this be my father’s sister!” said she to 
herself; and then the conviction that she was so, warm her heart 
with something like kindness towards her, she felt anxious to soften 
the harsh impression her mind had received of her aunt’s character, and 
to show a willing to oblige her. the effort did not entire fail; 
she listen with apparent cheerfulness, while madame cheron expatiate 
on the splendour of her house, told of the numerous party she 
entertained, and what she should expect of emily, whose diffidence 
assume the air of a reserve, which her aunt, believe it to be that 
of pride and ignorance united, now took occasion to reprehend. she knew 
nothing of the conduct of a mind, that fear to trust its own powers; 
which, possess a nice judgment, and incline to believe, that every 
other person perceive still more critically, fear to commit itself to 
censure, and seek shelter in the obscurity of silence. emily had 
frequent blush at the fearless manners, which she had seen admired, 
and the brilliant nothings, which she had heard applauded; yet this 
applause, so far from encourage her to imitate the conduct that had 
won it, rather made her shrink into the reserve, that would protect her 
from such absurdity. 

madame cheron look on her niece’s diffidence with a feeling very near 
to contempt, and endeavour to overcome it by reproof, rather than to 
encourage it by gentleness. 

the entrance of supper somewhat interrupt the complacent discourse of 
madame cheron and the painful considerations, which it had forced upon 
emily. when the repast, which was render ostentatious by the 
attendance of a great number of servants, and by a profusion of plate, 
was over, madame cheron retired to her chamber, and a female servant 
came to show emily to hers. have pass up a large staircase, and 
through several galleries, they came to a flight of back stairs, which 
led into a short passage in a remote part of the château, and there the 
servant open the door of a small chamber, which she said was 
ma’amselle emily’s, who, once more alone, indulge the tear she had 
long try to restrain. 

those, who know, from experience, how much the heart become attach 
even to inanimate objects, to which it has been long accustomed, how 
unwilling it resign them; how with the sensation of an old friend 
it meet them, after temporary absence, will understand the forlorn 
of emily’s feelings, of emily shut out from the only home she had known 
from her infancy, and thrown upon a scene, and among persons, 
disagreeable for more quality than their novelty. her father’s 
favourite dog, now in the chamber, thus seem to acquire the character 
and importance of a friend; and, as the animal fawn over her when she 
wept, and lick her hands, “ah, poor manchon!” said she, “i have 
nobody now to love me—but you!” and she wept the more. after some time, 
her thought return to her father’s injunctions, she remember how 
often he had blame her for indulge useless sorrow; how often he had 
pointed out to her the necessity of fortitude and patience, assure 
her, that the faculty of the mind strengthen by exertion, till they 
finally unnerve affliction, and triumph over it. these recollection 
dry her tears, gradual soothe her spirits, and inspired her with 
the sweet emulation of practise precepts, which her father had so 
frequent inculcated. 



chapter xii 

some pow’r impart the spear and shield, 
at which the wizard passion fly, 
by which the giant folly die! 
collins 


madame cheron’s house stood at a little distance from the city of 
thoulouse, and was surround by extensive gardens, in which emily, who 
had risen early, amuse herself with wandering before breakfast. from a 
terrace, that extend along the highest part of them, was a wide view 
over languedoc. on the distant horizon to the south, she discover the 
wild summit of the pyrenees, and her fancy immediately paint the 
green pasture of gascony at their feet. her heart pointed to her 
peaceful home—to the neighbourhood where valancourt was—where st. 
aubert had been; and her imagination, piercing the veil of distance, 
brought that home to her eyes in all its interesting and romantic 
beauty. she experienced an inexpressible pleasure in believing, that 
she beheld the country around it, though no feature could be 
distinguished, except the retiring chain of the pyrenees; and, 
inattentive to the scene immediately before her, and to the flight of 
time, she continue to lean on the window of a pavilion, that 
terminate the terrace, with her eyes fixed on gascony, and her mind 
occupy with the interesting idea which the view of it awakened, till 
a servant came to tell her breakfast was ready. her thought thus 
recall to the surrounding objects, the straight walks, square 
parterres, and artificial fountain of the garden, could not fail, as 
she pass through it, to appear the worse, oppose to the negligent 
graces, and natural beauty of the grounds of la vallée, upon which 
her recollection had been so intense employed. 

“whither have you been rambling so early?” said madame cheron, as her 
niece enter the breakfast-room. “i don’t approve of these solitary 
walks.” and emily was surprised, when, have informed her aunt, that 
she had been no further than the gardens, she understood these to be 
included in the reproof. “i desire you will not walk there again at so 
early an hour unattended,” said madame cheron; “my garden are very 
extensive; and a young woman, who can make assignation by moonlight at 
la vallée, is not to be trust to her own inclination elsewhere.” 

emily, extremely surprise and shocked, had scarcely power to beg an 
explanation of these words, and, when she did, her aunt absolutely 
refuse to give it, though, by her severe looks, and half sentences, 
she appear anxious to impress emily with a belief, that she was well 
informed of some degrade circumstances of her conduct. conscious 
innocence could not prevent a blush from steal over emily’s cheek; 
she trembled, and look confused under the bold eye of madame 
cheron, who blush also; but hers was the blush of triumph, such as 
sometimes stain the countenance of a person, congratulate himself on 
the penetration which had taught him to suspect another, and who lose 
both pity for the supposed criminal, and indignation of his guilt, in 
the gratification of his own vanity. 

emily, not doubt that her aunt’s mistake arose from the have 
observe her ramble in the garden on the night preceding her departure 
from la vallée, now mention the motive of it, at which madame cheron 
smile contemptuously, refuse either to accept this explanation, or 
to give her reason for refuse it; and, soon after, she conclude the 
subject by saying, “i never trust people’s assertions, i always judge 
of them by their actions; but i am willing to try what will be your 
behaviour in future.” 

emily, less surprise by her aunt’s moderation and mysterious silence, 
than by the accusation she had received, deep considered the latter, 
and scarcely doubted, that it was valancourt whom she had seen at night 
in the garden of la vallée, and that he had been observe there by 
madame cheron; who now passing from one painful topic only to revive 
another almost equally so, spoke of the situation of her niece’s 
property, in the hand of m. motteville. while she thus talk with 
ostentatious pity of emily’s misfortunes, she fail not to inculcate 
the duty of humility and gratitude, or to render emily fully sensible 
of every cruel mortification, who soon perceived, that she was to be 
considered as a dependant, not only by her aunt, but by her aunt’s 
servants. 

she was now informed, that a large party were expect to dinner, on 
which account madame cheron repeated the lesson of the preceding night, 
concerning her conduct in company, and emily wish that she might have 
courage enough to practise it. her aunt then proceed to examine the 
simplicity of her dress, adding, that she expect to see her attire 
with gaiety and taste; after which she condescend to show emily the 
splendour of her château, and to point out the particular beauty, or 
elegance, which she thought distinguished each of her numerous suite 
of apartments. she then withdrew to her toilet, the throne of her 
homage, and emily to her chamber, to unpack her books, and to try to 
charm her mind by reading, till the hour of dressing. 

when the company arrived, emily enter the saloon with an air of 
timidity, which all her effort could not overcome, and which was 
increase by the consciousness of madame cheron’s severe observation. 
her mourning dress, the mild dejection of her beautiful countenance, 
and the retiring diffidence of her manner, render her a very 
interesting object to many of the company; among whom she distinguished 
signor montoni, and his friend cavigni, the late visitor at m. 
quesnel’s, who now seem to converse with madame cheron with the 
familiarity of old acquaintance, and she to attend to them with 
particular pleasure. 

this signor montoni had an air of conscious superiority, animate by 
spirit, and strengthen by talents, to which every person seem 
involuntary to yield. the quick of his perception was striking 
express on his countenance, yet that countenance could submit 
implicit to occasion; and, more than once in this day, the triumph of 
art over nature might have been discern in it. his visage was long, 
and rather narrow, yet he was call handsome; and it was, perhaps, the 
spirit and vigour of his soul, sparkle through his features, that 
triumph for him. emily felt admiration, but not the admiration that 
leads to esteem; for it was mixed with a degree of fear she knew not 
exactly wherefore. 

cavigni was gay and insinuate as formerly; and, though he paid almost 
incessant attention to madame cheron, he found some opportunity of 
converse with emily, to whom he directed, at first, the sally of 
his wit, but now and then assume an air of tenderness, which she 
observed, and shrunk from. though she reply but little, the 
gentle and sweet of her manners encourage him to talk, and she 
felt relieved when a young lady of the party, who spoke incessantly, 
obtrude herself on his notice. this lady, who possessed all the 
sprightly of a frenchwoman, with all her coquetry, affected to 
understand every subject, or rather there was no affectation in the 
case; for, never look beyond the limit of her own ignorance, she 
believe she had nothing to learn. she attract notice from all; 
amuse some, disgust other for a moment, and was then forgotten. 

this day pass without any material occurrence; and emily, though 
amuse by the character she had seen, was glad when she could retire 
to the recollections, which had acquire with her the character of 
duties. 

a fortnight pass in a round of dissipation and company, and emily, 
who attend madame cheron in all her visits, was sometimes 
entertained, but often wearied. she was struck by the apparent 
talent and knowledge display in the various conversation she 
listen to, and it was long before she discovered, that the talent 
were for the most part those of imposture, and the knowledge nothing 
more than was necessary to assist them. but what deceive her most, was 
the air of constant gaiety and good spirits, display by every 
visitor, and which she supposed to arise from content as constant, and 
from benevolence as ready. at length, from the over-acting of some, 
less accomplished than the others, she could perceive, that, though 
contentment and benevolence are the only sure source of cheerfulness, 
the immoderate and feverish animation, usually exhibit in large 
parties, result partly from an insensibility to the cares, which 
benevolence must sometimes derive from the suffering of others, and 
partly from a desire to display the appearance of that prosperity, 
which they know will command submission and attention to themselves. 

emily’s pleasantest hour were pass in the pavilion of the terrace, 
to which she retired, when she could steal from observation, with a 
book to overcome, or a lute to indulge, her melancholy. there, as she 
sat with her eyes fixed on the far-distant pyrenees, and her thought 
on valancourt and the beloved scene of gascony, she would play the 
sweet and melancholy song of her native province—the popular song she 
had listen to from her childhood. 

one evening, have excuse herself from accompany her aunt abroad, 
she thus withdrew to the pavilion, with books and her lute. it was the 
mild and beautiful evening of a sultry day, and the windows, which 
front the west, open upon all the glory of a setting sun. its ray 
illuminated, with strong splendour, the cliff of the pyrenees, and 
touched their snowy tops with a roseate hue, that remained, long after 
the sun had sunk below the horizon, and the shades of twilight had 
stolen over the landscape. emily touched her lute with that fine 
melancholy expression, which came from her heart. the pensive hour and 
the scene, the evening light on the garonne, that flow at no great 
distance, and whose waves, as they pass towards la vallée, she often 
view with a sigh—these united circumstances disposed her mind to 
tenderness, and her thought were with valancourt, of whom she had 
heard nothing since her arrival at thoulouse, and now that she was 
remove from him, and in uncertainty, she perceive all the interest he 
held in her heart. before she saw valancourt she had never met a mind 
and taste so accordant with her own, and, though madame cheron told her 
much of the arts of dissimulation, and that the elegance and propriety 
of thought, which she so much admire in her lover, were assume for 
the purpose of pleasing her, she could scarcely doubt their truth. this 
possibility, however, faint as it was, was sufficient to harass her 
mind with anxiety, and she found, that few conditions are more painful 
than that of uncertainty, as to the merit of a beloved object; an 
uncertainty, which she would not have suffered, had her confidence in 
her own opinion been greater. 

she was awaken from her muse by the sound of horses’ feet along a 
road, that wound under the window of the pavilion, and a gentleman 
pass on horseback, whose resemblance to valancourt, in air and 
figure, for the twilight did not permit a view of his features, 
immediately struck her. she retired hasty from the lattice, fear 
to be seen, yet wish to observe further, while the stranger pass 
on without look up, and, when she return to the lattice, she saw 
him faint through the twilight, winding under the high trees, that 
led to thoulouse. this little incident so much disturbed her spirits, 
that the temple and its scenery were no long interesting to her, and, 
after walking a while on the terrace, she return to the château. 

madame cheron, whether she had seen a rival admired, had lost at play, 
or had witness an entertainment more splendid than her own, was 
return from her visit with a temper more than usually discomposed; 
and emily was glad, when the hour arrived, in which she could retire to 
the solitude of her own apartment. 

on the following morning, she was summon to madame cheron, whose 
countenance was inflamed with resentment, and, as emily advanced, she 
held out a letter to her. 

“do you know this hand?” said she, in a severe tone, and with a look 
that was intended to search her heart, while emily examine the letter 
attentively, and assured her, that she did not. 

“do not provoke me,” said her aunt; “you do know it, confess the truth 
immediately. i insist upon your confess the truth instantly.” 

emily was silent, and turn to leave the room, but madame call her 
back. “o you are guilty, then,” said she, “you do know the hand.” “if 
you were before in doubt of this, madam,” reply emily calmly, “why 
did you accuse me of have told a falsehood.” madame cheron did not 
blush; but her niece did, a moment after, when she heard the name of 
valancourt. it was not, however, with the consciousness of deserving 
reproof, for, if she ever had seen his hand-writing, the present 
character did not bring it to her recollection. 

“it is useless to deny it,” said madame cheron, “i see in your 
countenance, that you are no stranger to this letter; and, i dare say, 
you have received many such from this impertinent young man, without my 
knowledge, in my own house.” 

emily, shock at the indelicacy of this accusation, still more than by 
the vulgarity of the former, instantly forgot the pride, that had 
impose silence, and endeavour to vindicate herself from the 
aspersion, but madame cheron was not to be convinced. 

“i cannot suppose,” she resumed, “that this young man would have taken 
the liberty of writing to me, if you had not encourage him to do so, 
and i must now” 

“you will allow me to remind you, madam,” said emily timidly, “of some 
particulars of a conversation we had at la vallée. i then told you 
truly, that i had only not forbade monsieur valancourt from address 
my family.” 

“i will not be interrupted,” said madame cheron, interrupt her 
niece, “i was go to say—i—i—have forgot what i was go to say. but 
how happen it that you did not forbid him?” emily was silent. “how 
happen it that you encourage him to trouble me with this letter?—a 
young man that nobody knows;—an utter stranger in the place,—a young 
adventurer, no doubt, who is look out for a good fortune. however, 
on that point he has mistaken his aim.” 

“his family was known to my father,” said emily modestly, and without 
appear to be sensible of the last sentence. 

“o! that is no recommendation at all,” reply her aunt, with her usual 
readiness upon this topic; “he took such strange fancies to people! he 
was always judge person by their countenances, and was continual 
deceived.” 

“yet it was but now, madam, that you judge me guilty by my 
countenance,” said emily, with a design of reproving madame cheron, to 
which she was induce by this disrespectful mention of her father. 

“i call you here,” resume her aunt, colouring, “to tell you, that i 
will not be disturbed in my own house by any letters, or visit from 
young men, who may take a fancy to flatter you. this m. de valantine—i 
think you call him, has the impertinence to beg i will permit him to 
pay his respects to me! i shall send him a proper answer. and for you, 
emily, i repeat it once for all—if you are not contented to conform to 
my directions, and to my way of live, i shall give up the task of 
overlook your conduct—i shall no long trouble myself with your 
education, but shall send you to board in a convent.” 

“dear madam,” said emily, burst into tears, and overcome by the rude 
suspicion her aunt had expressed, “how have i deserve these 
reproofs?” she could say no more; and so very fearful was she of acting 
with any degree of impropriety in the affair itself, that, at the 
present moment, madame cheron might perhaps have prevail with her to 
bind herself by a promise to renounce valancourt for ever. her mind, 
weaken by her terrors, would no long suffer her to view him as she 
had formerly done; she fear the error of her own judgment, not that 
of madame cheron, and fear also, that, in her former conversation 
with him, at la vallée, she had not conduct herself with sufficient 
reserve. she knew, that she did not deserve the coarse suspicions, 
which her aunt had thrown out, but a thousand scruple rose to torment 
her, such as would never have disturbed the peace of madame cheron. 
thus render anxious to avoid every opportunity of erring, and willing 
to submit to any restrictions, that her aunt should think proper, she 
express an obedience, to which madame cheron did not give much 
confidence, and which she seem to consider as the consequence of 
either fear, or artifice. 

“well, then,” said she, “promise me that you will neither see this 
young man, nor write to him without my consent.” “dear madam,” reply 
emily, “can you suppose i would do either, unknown to you!” “i don’t 
know what to suppose; there is no knowing how young women will act. it 
is difficult to place any confidence in them, for they have seldom 
sense enough to wish for the respect of the world.” 

“alas, madam!” said emily, “i am anxious for my own respect; my father 
taught me the value of that; he said if i deserve my own esteem, that 
the world would follow of course.” 

“my brother was a good kind of a man,” reply madame cheron, “but he 
did not know the world. i am sure i have always felt a proper respect 
for myself, yet—” she stopped, but she might have added, that the world 
had not always shown respect to her, and this without impeach its 
judgment. 

“well!” resume madame cheron, “you have not given me the promise, 
though, that i demand.” 

emily readily gave it, and, being then suffer to withdraw, she walk 
in the garden; try to compose her spirits, and, at length, arrive at 
her favourite pavilion at the end of the terrace, where, seating 
herself at one of the embowered windows, that open upon a balcony, 
the still and seclusion of the scene allow her to recollect her 
thoughts, and to arrange them so as to form a clear judgment of her 
former conduct. she endeavour to review with exact all the 
particulars of her conversation with valancourt at la vallée, had the 
satisfaction to observe nothing, that could alarm her delicate pride, 
and thus to be confirmed in the self-esteem, which was so necessary to 
her peace. her mind then became tranquil, and she saw valancourt 
amiable and intelligent, as he had formerly appeared, and madame cheron 
neither the one, nor the other. the remembrance of her lover, however, 
brought with it many very painful emotions, for it by no means 
reconcile her to the thought of resign him; and, madame cheron 
have already shown how highly she disapprove of the attachment, she 
foresaw much suffering from the opposition of interests; yet with all 
this was mingle a degree of delight, which, in spite of reason, 
partook of hope. she determined, however, that no consideration should 
induce her to permit a clandestine correspondence, and to observe in 
her conversation with valancourt, should they ever meet again, the same 
nicety of reserve, which had hitherto marked her conduct. as she 
repeated the words—“should we ever meet again!” she shrunk as if this 
was a circumstance, which had never before occur to her, and tear 
came to her eyes, which she hasty dried, for she heard footstep 
approaching, and then the door of the pavilion open, and, on turning, 
she saw—valancourt. 

an emotion of mingle pleasure, surprise and apprehension pressed so 
sudden upon her heart as almost to overcome her spirits; the colour 
left her cheeks, then return bright than before, and she was for a 
moment unable to speak, or to rise from her chair. his countenance was 
the mirror, in which she saw her own emotion reflected, and it rouse 
her to self-command. the joy, which had animate his features, when he 
enter the pavilion, was sudden repressed, as, approaching, he 
perceive her agitation, and, in a tremulous voice, enquire after her 
health. recover from her first surprise, she answer him with a 
temper smile; but a variety of opposite emotion still assail her 
heart, and struggle to subdue the mild dignity of her manner. it was 
difficult to tell which predominated—the joy of seeing valancourt, or 
the terror of her aunt’s displeasure, when she should hear of this 
meeting. after some short and embarrass conversation, she led him 
into the gardens, and enquire if he had seen madame cheron. “no,” said 
he, “i have not yet seen her, for they told me she was engaged, and as 
soon as i learned that you were in the gardens, i came hither.” he 
pause a moment, in great agitation, and then added, “may i venture to 
tell you the purport of my visit, without incur your displeasure, 
and to hope, that you will not accuse me of precipitation in now 
avail myself of the permission you once gave me of address your 
family?” emily, who knew not what to reply, was spare from further 
perplexity, and was sensible only of fear, when on raise her eyes, 
she saw madame cheron turn into the avenue. as the consciousness of 
innocence returned, this fear was so far dissipated as to permit her to 
appear tranquil, and, instead of avoid her aunt, she advanced with 
valancourt to meet her. the look of haughty and impatient displeasure, 
with which madame cheron regard them, made emily shrink, who 
understood from a single glance, that this meeting was believe to have 
been more than accidental: have mention valancourt’s name, she 
became again too much agitate to remain with them, and return into 
the château; where she await long, in a state of tremble anxiety, 
the conclusion of the conference. she knew not how to account for 
valancourt’s visit to her aunt, before he had received the permission 
he solicited, since she was ignorant of a circumstance, which would 
have render the request useless, even if madame cheron had been 
inclined to grant it. valancourt, in the agitation of his spirits, had 
forgotten to date his letter, so that it was impossible for madame 
cheron to return an answer; and, when he recollect this circumstance, 
he was, perhaps, not so sorry for the omission as glad of the excuse it 
allow him for wait on her before she could send a refusal. 

madame cheron had a long conversation with valancourt, and, when she 
return to the château, her countenance express ill-humour, but not 
the degree of severity, which emily had apprehended. “i have dismiss 
this young man, at last,” said she, “and i hope my house will never 
again be disturbed with similar visits. he assure me, that your 
interview was not preconcerted.” 

“dear madam!” said emily in extreme emotion, “you surely did not ask 
him the question!” “most certainly i did; you could not suppose i 
should be so imprudent as to neglect it.” 

“good god!” exclaim emily, “what an opinion must he form of me, since 
you, madam, could express a suspicion of such ill conduct!” 

“it is of very little consequence what opinion he may form of you,” 
reply her aunt, “for i have put an end to the affair; but i believe 
he will not form a worse opinion of me for my prudent conduct. i let 
him see, that i was not to be trifle with, and that i had more 
delicacy, than to permit any clandestine correspondence to be carry 
on in my house.” 

emily had frequent heard madame cheron use the word delicacy, but she 
was now more than usually perplexed to understand how she meant to 
apply it in this instance, in which her whole conduct appear to merit 
the very reverse of the term. 

“it was very inconsiderate of my brother,” resume madame cheron, “to 
leave the trouble of overlook your conduct to me; i wish you were 
well settled in life. but if i find, that i am to be further trouble 
with such visitor as this m. valancourt, i shall place you in a 
convent at once;—so remember the alternative. this young man has the 
impertinence to own to me,—he own it! that his fortune is very small, 
and that he is chiefly dependent on an elder brother and on the 
profession he has chosen! he should have conceal these circumstances, 
at least, if he expect to succeed with me. had he the presumption to 
suppose i would marry my niece to a person such as he describe 
himself!” 

emily dry her tear when she heard of the candid confession of 
valancourt; and, though the circumstances it discover were afflict 
to her hopes, his artless conduct gave her a degree of pleasure, that 
overcame every other emotion. but she was compelled, even thus early in 
life, to observe, that good sense and noble integrity are not always 
sufficient to cope with folly and narrow cunning; and her heart was 
pure enough to allow her, even at this try moment, to look with more 
pride on the defeat of the former, than with mortification on the 
conquest of the latter. 

madame cheron pursue her triumph. “he has also thought proper to tell 
me, that he will receive his dismiss from no person but yourself; 
this favour, however, i have absolutely refuse him. he shall learn, 
that it is quite sufficient, that i disapprove him. and i take this 
opportunity of repeating,—that if you concert any means of interview 
unknown to me, you shall leave my house immediately.” 

“how little do you know me, madam, that you should think such an 
injunction necessary!” said emily, try to suppress her emotion, “how 
little of the dear parents, who educated me!” 

madame cheron now went to dress for an engagement, which she had made 
for the evening; and emily, who would gladly have been excuse from 
attend her aunt, did not ask to remain at home lest her request 
should be attribute to an improper motive. when she retired to her own 
room, the little fortitude, which had support her in the presence of 
her relation, forsook her; she remember only that valancourt, whose 
character appear more amiable from every circumstance, that unfold 
it, was banish from her presence, perhaps, for ever, and she pass 
the time in weeping, which, according to her aunt’s direction, she 
ought to have employ in dressing. this important duty was, however, 
quick dispatched; though, when she join madame cheron at table, her 
eyes betrayed, that she had been in tears, and drew upon her a severe 
reproof. 

her effort to appear cheerful did not entire fail when she join 
the company at the house of madame clairval, an elderly widow lady, who 
had lately come to reside at thoulouse, on an estate of her late 
husband. she had live many years at paris in a splendid style; had 
naturally a gay temper, and, since her residence at thoulouse, had 
given some of the most magnificent entertainments, that had been seen 
in that neighbourhood. 

these excited not only the envy, but the trifling ambition of madame 
cheron, who, since she could not rival the splendour of her 
festivities, was desirous of being rank in the number of her most 
intimate friends. for this purpose she paid her the most obsequious 
attention, and made a point of being disengaged, whenever she received 
an invitation from madame clairval, of whom she talked, wherever she 
went, and derive much self-consequence from impress a belief on her 
general acquaintance, that they were on the most familiar footing. 

the entertainment of this evening consist of a ball and supper; it 
was a fancy ball, and the company dance in group in the gardens, 
which were very extensive. the high and luxuriant trees, under which 
the group assembled, were illuminate with a profusion of lamps, 
disposed with taste and fancy. the gay and various dress of the 
company, some of whom were seat on the turf, converse at their 
ease, observing the _cotillons_, taking refreshments, and sometimes 
touching sportive a guitar; the gallant manners of the gentlemen, the 
exquisite capricious air of the ladies; the light fantastic steps of 
their dances; the musicians, with the lute, the hautboy, and the tabor, 
seat at the foot of an elm, and the sylvan scenery of wood around 
were circumstances, that united form a characteristic and striking 
picture of france festivity. emily survey the gaiety of the scene 
with a melancholy kind of pleasure, and her emotion may be imagine 
when, as she stood with her aunt, look at one of the groups, she 
perceive valancourt; saw him dance with a young and beautiful lady, 
saw him converse with her with a mixture of attention and 
familiarity, such as she had seldom observe in his manner. she turn 
hasty from the scene, and attempt to draw away madame cheron, who 
was converse with signor cavigni, and neither perceive valancourt, 
nor was willing to be interrupted. a faint sudden came over 
emily, and, unable to support herself, she sat down on a turf bank 
beneath the trees, where several other person were seated. one of 
these, observing the extreme pale of her countenance, enquire if 
she was ill, and beg she would allow him to fetch her a glass of 
water, for which polite she thank him, but did not accept it. her 
apprehension lest valancourt should observe her emotion made her 
anxious to overcome it, and she succeed so far as to recompose her 
countenance. madame cheron was still converse with cavigni; and the 
count bauvillers, who had address emily, made some observations upon 
the scene, to which she answer almost unconsciously, for her mind was 
still occupy with the idea of valancourt, to whom it was with extreme 
uneasy that she remain so near. some remarks, however, which the 
count made upon the dance oblige her to turn her eyes towards it, and, 
at that moment, valancourt’s met hers. her colour fade again, she 
felt, that she was relapse into faintness, and instantly avert her 
looks, but not before she had observe the alter countenance of 
valancourt, on perceive her. she would have left the spot 
immediately, had she not been conscious, that this conduct would have 
shown him more obviously the interest he held in her heart; and, have 
try to attend to the count’s conversation, and to join in it, she, at 
length, recover her spirits. but, when he made some observation on 
valancourt’s partner, the fear of showing that she was interested in 
the remark, would have betray it to him, had not the count, while he 
spoke, look towards the person of whom he was speaking. “the lady,” 
said he, “dancing with that young chevalier, who appear to be 
accomplished in everything, but in dancing, is rank among the 
beauty of thoulouse. she is handsome, and her fortune will be very 
large. i hope she will make a better choice in a partner for life than 
she has done in a partner for the dance, for i observe he has just put 
the set into great confusion; he do nothing but commit blunders. i am 
surprised, that, with his air and figure, he has not taken more care to 
accomplish himself in dancing.” 

emily, whose heart tremble at every word, that was now uttered, 
endeavour to turn the conversation from valancourt, by enquiring the 
name of the lady, with whom he danced; but, before the count could 
reply, the dance concluded, and emily, perceive that valancourt was 
coming towards her, rose and join madame cheron. 

“here is the chevalier valancourt, madam,” said she in a whisper, “pray 
let us go.” her aunt immediately move on, but not before valancourt 
had reach them, who bowed lowly to madame cheron, and with an earnest 
and dejected look to emily, with whom, notwithstanding all her effort, 
an air of more than common reserve prevailed. the presence of madame 
cheron prevent valancourt from remaining, and he pass on with a 
countenance, whose melancholy reproach her for have increase it. 
emily was call from the muse fit, into which she had fallen, by the 
count bauvillers, who was known to her aunt. 

“i have your pardon to beg, ma’amselle,” said he, “for a rudeness, 
which you will readily believe was quite unintentional. i did not know, 
that the chevalier was your acquaintance, when i so freely criticise 
his dancing.” emily blush and smiled, and madame cheron spare her 
the difficulty of replying. “if you mean the person, who has just 
pass us,” said she, “i can assure you he is no acquaintance of either 
mine, or ma’amselle st. aubert’s: i know nothing of him.” 

“o! that is the chevalier valancourt,” said cavigni carelessly, and 
look back. “you know him then?” said madame cheron. “i am not 
acquaint with him,” reply cavigni. “you don’t know, then, the 
reason i have to call him impertinent;—he has had the presumption to 
admire my niece!” 

“if every man deserve the title of impertinent, who admire ma’amselle 
st. aubert,” reply cavigni, “i fear there are a great many 
impertinents, and i am willing to acknowledge myself one of the 
number.” 

“o signor!” said madame cheron, with an affected smile, “i perceive you 
have learnt the art of complimenting, since you came into france. but 
it is cruel to compliment children, since they mistake flattery for 
truth.” 

cavigni turn away his face for a moment, and then said with a studied 
air, “whom then are we to compliment, madam? for it would be absurd to 
compliment a woman of refined understanding; _she_ is above all 
praise.” as he finished the sentence he gave emily a sly look, and the 
smile, that had lurk in his eye, stole forth. she perfectly 
understood it, and blush for madame cheron, who replied, “you are 
perfectly right, signor, no woman of understanding can endure 
compliment.” 

“i have heard signor montoni say,” rejoin cavigni, “that he never 
knew but one woman who deserve it.” 

“well!” exclaim madame cheron, with a short laugh, and a smile of 
unutterable complacency, “and who could she be?” 

“o!” reply cavigni, “it is impossible to mistake her, for certainly 
there is not more than one woman in the world, who has both the merit 
to deserve compliment and the wit to refuse it. most women reverse the 
case entirely.” he look again at emily, who blush deep than 
before for her aunt, and turn from him with displeasure. 

“well, signor!” said madame cheron, “i protest you are a frenchman; i 
never heard a foreigner say anything half so gallant as that!” 

“true, madam,” said the count, who had been some time silent, and with 
a low bow, “but the gallantry of the compliment had been utterly lost, 
but for the ingenuity that discover the application.” 

madame cheron did not perceive the meaning of this too satirical 
sentence, and she, therefore, escape the pain, which emily felt on her 
account. “o! here come signor montoni himself,” said her aunt, “i 
protest i will tell him all the fine things you have been saying to 
me.” the signor, however, pass at this moment into another walk. 
“pray, who is it, that has so much engaged your friend this evening?” 
ask madame cheron, with an air of chagrin, “i have not seen him 
once.” 

“he had a very particular engagement with the marquis la rivière,” 
reply cavigni, “which has detain him, i perceive, till this moment, 
or he would have done himself the honour of pay his respects to you, 
madam, sooner, as he commission me to say. but, i know not how it 
is—your conversation is so fascinating—that it can charm even memory, i 
think, or i should certainly have deliver my friend’s apology 
before.” 

“the apology, sir, would have been more satisfactory from himself,” 
said madame cheron, whose vanity was more mortify by montoni’s 
neglect, than flatter by cavigni’s compliment. her manner, at this 
moment, and cavigni’s late conversation, now awaken a suspicion in 
emily’s mind, which, notwithstanding that some recollection serve to 
confirm it, appear preposterous. she thought she perceived, that 
montoni was pay serious address to her aunt, and that she not only 
accept them, but was jealous watchful of any appearance of neglect 
on his part.—that madame cheron at her years should elect a second 
husband was ridiculous, though her vanity made it not impossible; but 
that montoni, with his discernment, his figure, and pretensions, should 
make a choice of madame cheron—appeared most wonderful. her thoughts, 
however, did not dwell long on the subject; near interests pressed 
upon them; valancourt, reject of her aunt, and valancourt dance 
with a gay and beautiful partner, alternate torment her mind. as 
she pass along the garden she look timid forward, half fear 
and half hope that he might appear in the crowd; and the 
disappointment she felt on not seeing him, told her, that she had hope 
more than she had feared. 

montoni soon after join the party. he mutter over some short speech 
about regret for have been so long detain elsewhere, when he knew 
he should have the pleasure of seeing madame cheron here; and she, 
receiving the apology with the air of a pettish girl, address herself 
entire to cavigni, who look arch at montoni, as if he would have 
said, “i will not triumph over you too much; i will have the goodness 
to bear my honours meekly; but look sharp, signor, or i shall certainly 
run away with your prize.” 

the supper was serve in different pavilion in the gardens, as well as 
in one large saloon of the château, and with more of taste, than either 
of splendour, or even of plenty. madame cheron and her party sup 
with madame clairval in the saloon, and emily, with difficulty, 
disguise her emotion, when she saw valancourt placed at the same table 
with herself. there, madame cheron have survey him with high 
displeasure, said to some person who sat next to her, “pray, who _is_ 
that young man?” “it is the chevalier valancourt,” was the answer. 
“yes, i am not ignorant of his name, but who is this chevalier 
valancourt that thus intrude himself at this table?” the attention of 
the person, to whom she spoke, was call off before she received a 
second reply. the table, at which they sat, was very long, and, 
valancourt being seated, with his partner, near the bottom, and emily 
near the top, the distance between them may account for his not 
immediately perceive her. she avoid look to that end of the 
table, but whenever her eyes happen to glance towards it, she 
observe him converse with his beautiful companion, and the 
observation did not contribute to restore her peace, any more than the 
account she heard of the fortune and accomplishment of this same 
lady. 

madame cheron, to whom these remark were sometimes addressed, because 
they support topic for trivial conversation, seem indefatigable in 
her attempt to depreciate valancourt, towards whom she felt all the 
petty resentment of a narrow pride. “i admire the lady,” said she, “but 
i must condemn her choice of a partner.” “oh, the chevalier valancourt 
is one of the most accomplished young men we have,” reply the lady, 
to whom this remark was addressed: “it is whispered, that mademoiselle 
d’emery, and her large fortune, are to be his.” 

“impossible!” exclaim madame cheron, redden with vexation, “it is 
impossible that she can be so destitute of taste; he has so little the 
air of a person of condition, that, if i did not see him at the table 
of madame clairval, i should never have suspect him to be one. i have 
besides particular reason for believe the report to be erroneous.” 

“i cannot doubt the truth of it,” reply the lady gravely, disgust 
by the abrupt contradiction she had received, concerning her opinion of 
valancourt’s merit. “you will, perhaps, doubt it,” said madame cheron, 
“when i assure you, that it was only this morning that i reject his 
suit.” 

this was said without any intention of imposing the meaning it 
conveyed, but simply from a habit of considering herself to be the most 
important person in every affair that concerned her niece, and because 
literally _she_ had reject valancourt. “your reason are indeed such 
as cannot be doubted,” reply the lady, with an ironic smile. “any 
more than the discernment of the chevalier valancourt,” add cavigni, 
who stood by the chair of madame cheron, and had heard her arrogate to 
herself, as he thought, a distinction which had been paid to her niece. 
“his discernment _may_ be just questioned, signor,” said madame 
cheron, who was not flatter by what she understood to be an encomium 
on emily. 

“alas!” exclaim cavigni, survey madame cheron with affected 
ecstasy, “how vain is that assertion, while that face—that shape—that 
air—combine to refute it! unhappy valancourt! his discernment has been 
his destruction.” 

emily look surprise and embarrassed; the lady, who had lately 
spoken, astonished, and madame cheron, who, though she did not 
perfectly understand this speech, was very ready to believe herself 
compliment by it, said smilingly, “o signor! you are very gallant; 
but those, who hear you vindicate the chevalier’s discernment, will 
suppose that i am the object of it.” 

“they cannot doubt it,” reply cavigni, bowing low. 

“and would not that be very mortifying, signor?” 

“unquestionably it would,” said cavigni. 

“i cannot endure the thought,” said madame cheron. 

“it is not to be endured,” reply cavigni. 

“what can be done to prevent so humiliate a mistake?” rejoin madame 
cheron. 

“alas! i cannot assist you,” reply cavigni, with a deliberate air. 
“your only chance of refute the calumny, and of making people 
understand what you wish them to believe, is to persist in your first 
assertion; for, when they are told of the chevalier’s want of 
discernment, it is possible they may suppose he never presume to 
distress you with his admiration.—but then again—that diffidence, which 
render you so insensible to your own perfections—they will consider 
this, and valancourt’s taste will not be doubted, though you arraign 
it. in short, they will, in spite of your endeavours, continue to 
believe, what might very naturally have occur to them without any 
hint of mine—that the chevalier has taste enough to admire a beautiful 
woman.” 

“all this is very distressing!” said madame cheron, with a profound 
sigh. 

“may i be allow to ask what is so distressing?” said madame clairval, 
who was struck with the rueful countenance and doleful accent, with 
which this was delivered. 

“it is a delicate subject,” reply madame cheron, “a very mortify 
one to me.” “i am concerned to hear it,” said madame clairval, “i hope 
nothing has occurred, this evening, particularly to distress you?” 
“alas, yes! within this half hour; and i know not where the report may 
end;—my pride was never so shock before, but i assure you the report 
is total void of foundation.” “good god!” exclaim madame clairval, 
“what can be done? can you point out any way, by which i can assist, or 
console you?” 

“the only way, by which you can do either,” reply madame cheron, “is 
to contradict the report wherever you go.” 

“well! but pray inform me what i am to contradict.” 

“it is so very humiliating, that i know not how to mention it,” 
continue madame cheron, “but you shall judge. do you observe that 
young man seat near the bottom of the table, who is converse with 
mademoiselle d’emery?” “yes, i perceive whom you mean.” “you observe 
how little he has the air of a person of condition; i was saying just 
now, that i should not have thought him a gentleman, if i had not seen 
him at this table.” “well! but the report,” said madame clairval, “let 
me understand the subject of your distress.” “ah! the subject of my 
distress,” reply madame cheron; “this person, whom nobody knows—(i 
beg pardon, madam, i did not consider what i said)—this impertinent 
young man, have had the presumption to address my niece, has, i fear, 
given rise to a report, that he had declared himself my admirer. now 
only consider how very mortify such a report must be! you, i know, 
will feel for my situation. a woman of my condition!—think how 
degrade even the rumour of such an alliance must be.” 

“degrading indeed, my poor friend!” said madame clairval. “you may rely 
upon it i will contradict the report wherever i go;” as she said which, 
she turn her attention upon another part of the company; and cavigni, 
who had hitherto appear a grave spectator of the scene, now fear 
he should be unable to smother the laugh, that convulse him, walk 
abrupt away. 

“i perceive you do not know,” said the lady who sat near madame cheron, 
“that the gentleman you have been speak of is madame clairval’s 
nephew!” “impossible!” exclaim madame cheron, who now began to 
perceive, that she had been total mistaken in her judgment of 
valancourt, and to praise him aloud with as much servility, as she had 
before censure him with frivolous malignity. 

emily, who, during the greater part of this conversation, had been so 
absorb in thought as to be spare the pain of hearing it, was now 
extremely surprise by her aunt’s praise of valancourt, with whose 
relationship to madame clairval she was unacquainted; but she was not 
sorry when madame cheron, who, though she now try to appear 
unconcerned, was really much embarrassed, prepared to withdraw 
immediately after supper. montoni then came to hand madame cheron to 
her carriage, and cavigni, with an arch solemnity of countenance, 
follow with emily, who, as she wish them good night, and drew up 
the glass, saw valancourt among the crowd at the gates. before the 
carriage drove off, he disappeared. madame cheron forbore to mention 
him to emily, and, as soon as they reach the château, they separate 
for the night. 

on the following morning, as emily sat at breakfast with her aunt, a 
letter was brought to her, of which she knew the handwriting upon the 
cover; and, as she received it with a tremble hand, madame cheron 
hasty enquire from whom it came. emily, with her leave, broke the 
seal, and, observing the signature of valancourt, gave it unread to her 
aunt, who received it with impatience; and, as she look it over, 
emily endeavour to read on her countenance its contents. have 
return the letter to her niece, whose eyes ask if she might examine 
it, “yes, read it, child,” said madame cheron, in a manner less severe 
than she had expected, and emily had, perhaps, never before so 
willing obey her aunt. in this letter valancourt said little of the 
interview of the preceding day, but conclude with declaring, that he 
would accept his dismiss from emily only, and with entreating, that 
she would allow him to wait upon her, on the approach evening. when 
she read this, she was astonish at the moderation of madame cheron, 
and look at her with timid expectation, as she said sorrowfully—“what 
am i to say, madam?” 

“why—we must see the young man, i believe,” reply her aunt, “and hear 
what he has further to say for himself. you may tell him he may come.” 
emily dare scarcely credit what she heard. “yet, stay,” add madame 
cheron, “i will tell him so myself.” she call for pen and ink; emily 
still not daring to trust the emotion she felt, and almost sink 
beneath them. her surprise would have been less had she overheard, on 
the preceding evening, what madame cheron had not forgotten—that 
valancourt was the nephew of madame clairval. 

what were the particulars of her aunt’s note emily did not learn, but 
the result was a visit from valancourt in the evening, whom madame 
cheron received alone, and they had a long conversation before emily 
was call down. when she enter the room, her aunt was converse 
with complacency, and she saw the eyes of valancourt, as he impatient 
rose, animate with hope. 

“we have been talk over this affair,” said madame cheron, “the 
chevalier has been telling me, that the late monsieur clairval was the 
brother of the countess de duvarney, his mother. i only wish he had 
mention his relationship to madame clairval before; i certainly 
should have considered that circumstance as a sufficient introduction 
to my house.” valancourt bowed, and was go to address emily, but her 
aunt prevent him. “i have, therefore, consent that you shall 
receive his visits; and, though i will not bind myself by any promise, 
or say, that i shall consider him as my nephew, yet i shall permit the 
intercourse, and shall look forward to any further connection as an 
event, which may possibly take place in a course of years, provided the 
chevalier rise in his profession, or any circumstance occurs, which 
may make it prudent for him to take a wife. but mons. valancourt will 
observe, and you too, emily, that, till that happens, i positively 
forbid any thought of marrying.” 

emily’s countenance, during this coarse speech, varied every instant, 
and, towards its conclusion, her distress had so much increased, that 
she was on the point of leave the room. valancourt, meanwhile, 
scarcely less embarrassed, did not dare to look at her, for whom he was 
thus distressed; but, when madame cheron was silent, he said, 
“flattering, madam, as your approbation is to me—highly as i am 
honour by it—i have yet so much to fear, that i scarcely dare to 
hope.” “pray, sir, explain yourself,” said madame cheron; an unexpected 
requisition, which embarrass valancourt again, and almost overcame 
him with confusion, at circumstances, on which, had he been only a 
spectator of the scene, he would have smiled. 

“till i receive mademoiselle st. aubert’s permission to accept your 
indulgence,” said he, falteringly—“till she allow me to hope—” 

“o! is that all?” interrupt madame cheron. “well, i will take upon me 
to answer for her. but at the same time, sir, give me leave to observe 
to you, that i am her guardian, and that i expect, in every instance, 
that my will is hers.” 

as she said this, she rose and quit the room, leave emily and 
valancourt in a state of mutual embarrassment; and, when valancourt’s 
hope enable him to overcome his fears, and to address her with the 
zeal and sincerity so natural to him, it was a considerable time before 
she was sufficient recover to hear with distinct his 
solicit and inquiries. 

the conduct of madame cheron in this affair had been entire govern 
by selfish vanity. valancourt, in his first interview, had with great 
candour laid open to her the true state of his present circumstances, 
and his future expectancies, and she, with more prudence than humanity, 
had absolutely and abrupt reject his suit. she wish her niece to 
marry ambitiously, not because she desire to see her in possession of 
the happiness, which rank and wealth are usually believe to bestow, 
but because she desire to partake the importance, which such an 
alliance would give. when, therefore, she discover that valancourt 
was the nephew of a person of so much consequence as madame clairval, 
she became anxious for the connection, since the prospect it afford 
of future fortune and distinction for emily, promise the exaltation 
she covet for herself. her calculation concerning fortune in this 
alliance were guide rather by her wishes, than by any hint of 
valancourt, or strong appearance of probability; and, when she rest 
her expectation on the wealth of madame clairval, she seem total to 
have forgotten, that the latter had a daughter. valancourt, however, 
had not forgotten this circumstance, and the consideration of it had 
made him so modest in his expectations from madame clairval, that he 
had not even name the relationship in his first conversation with 
madame cheron. but, whatever might be the future fortune of emily, the 
present distinction, which the connection would afford for herself, was 
certain, since the splendour of madame clairval’s establishment was 
such as to excite the general envy and partial imitation of the 
neighbourhood. thus had she consent to involve her niece in an 
engagement, to which she saw only a distant and uncertain conclusion, 
with as little consideration of her happiness, as when she had so 
precipitate forbade it: for though she herself possessed the means of 
rendering this union not only certain, but prudent, yet to do so was no 
part of her present intention. 

from this period valancourt made frequent visit to madame cheron, and 
emily pass in his society the happiest hour she had known since the 
death of her father. they were both too much engaged by the present 
moments to give serious consideration to the future. they love and 
were beloved, and saw not, that the very attachment, which form the 
delight of their present days, might possibly occasion the suffering 
of years. meanwhile, madame cheron’s intercourse with madame clairval 
became more frequent than before, and her vanity was already gratify 
by the opportunity of proclaiming, wherever she went, the attachment 
that subsist between their nephew and niece. 

montoni was now also become a daily guest at the château, and emily was 
compel to observe, that he really was a suitor, and a favoured 
suitor, to her aunt. 

thus pass the winter months, not only in peace, but in happiness, to 
valancourt and emily; the station of his regiment being so near 
thoulouse, as to allow this frequent intercourse. the pavilion on the 
terrace was the favourite scene of their interviews, and there emily, 
with madame cheron, would work, while valancourt read aloud works of 
genius and taste, listen to her enthusiasm, express his own, and 
caught new opportunity of observing, that their mind were form to 
constitute the happiness of each other, the same taste, the same noble 
and benevolent sentiment animate each. 



chapter xiii 

as when a shepherd of the hebrid-isles, 
placed far amid the melancholy main, 
(whether it be lone fancy him beguiles, 
or that aerial being sometimes deign 
to stand embody to our senses plain) 
see on the naked hill, or valley low, 
the whilst in ocean phœbus dip his wain, 
a vast assembly moving to and fro, 
then all at once in air dissolve the wondrous show. 
castle of indolence 


madame cheron’s avarice at length yield to her vanity. some very 
splendid entertainments, which madame clairval had given, and the 
general adulation, which was paid her, made the former more anxious 
than before to secure an alliance, that would so much exalt her in her 
own opinion and in that of the world. she propose terms for the 
immediate marriage of her niece, and offer to give emily a dower, 
provided madame clairval observe equal terms, on the part of her 
nephew. madame clairval listen to the proposal, and, considering that 
emily was the apparent heiress of her aunt’s wealth, accept it. 
meanwhile, emily knew nothing of the transaction, till madame cheron 
informed her, that she must make preparation for the nuptials, which 
would be celebrated without further delay; then, astonish and wholly 
unable to account for this sudden conclusion, which valancourt had not 
solicit (for he was ignorant of what had pass between the elder 
ladies, and had not dare to hope such good fortune), she decisive 
object to it. madame cheron, however, quite as jealous of 
contradiction now, as she had been formerly, contend for a speedy 
marriage with as much vehemence as she had formerly oppose whatever 
had the most remote possibility of leading to it; and emily’s scruple 
disappeared, when she again saw valancourt, who was now informed of the 
happiness, design for him, and came to claim a promise of it from 
herself. 

while preparation were making for these nuptials, montoni became the 
acknowledge lover of madame cheron; and, though madame clairval was 
much displeased, when she heard of the approach connection, and was 
willing to prevent that of valancourt with emily, her conscience told 
her, that she had no right thus to trifle with their peace, and madame 
clairval, though a woman of fashion, was far less advanced than her 
friend in the art of derive satisfaction from distinction and 
admiration, rather than from conscience. 

emily observe with concern the ascendancy, which montoni had acquire 
over madame cheron, as well as the increase frequency of his visits; 
and her own opinion of this italy was confirmed by that of 
valancourt, who had always express a dislike of him. as she was, one 
morning, sitting at work in the pavilion, enjoy the pleasant 
fresh of spring, whose colours were now spread upon the landscape, 
and listen to valancourt, who was reading, but who often laid aside 
the book to converse, she received a summons to attend madame cheron 
immediately, and had scarcely enter the dressing-room, when she 
observe with surprise the dejection of her aunt’s countenance, and the 
contrast gaiety of her dress. “so, niece!”—said madame, and she 
stop under some degree of embarrassment.—“i sent for you—i—i wish 
to see you; i have news to tell you. from this hour you must consider 
the signor montoni as your uncle—we were married this morning.” 

astonished—not so much at the marriage, as at the secrecy with which it 
had been concluded, and the agitation with which it was announced, 
emily, at length, attribute the privacy to the wish of montoni, rather 
than of her aunt. his wife, however, intended, that the contrary should 
be believed, and therefore added, “you see i wish to avoid a bustle; 
but now the ceremony is over i shall do so no longer; and i wish to 
announce to my servant that they must receive the signor montoni for 
their master.” emily made a feeble attempt to congratulate her on these 
apparently imprudent nuptials. “i shall now celebrate my marriage with 
some splendour,” continue madame montoni, “and to save time i shall 
avail myself of the preparation that has been made for yours, which 
will, of course, be delay a little while. such of your wedding 
clothes as are ready i shall expect you will appear in, to do honour to 
this festival. i also wish you to inform monsieur valancourt, that i 
have change my name, and he will acquaint madame clairval. in a few 
days i shall give a grand entertainment, at which i shall request their 
presence.” 

emily was so lost in surprise and various thought, that she made madame 
montoni scarcely any reply, but, at her desire, she return to inform 
valancourt of what had passed. surprise was not his predominant emotion 
on hearing of these hasty nuptials; and, when he learned, that they 
were to be the means of delay his own, and that the very ornament 
of the château, which had been prepared to grace the nuptial day of his 
emily, were to be degrade to the celebration of madame montoni’s, 
grief and indignation agitate him alternately. he could conceal 
neither from the observation of emily, whose effort to abstract him 
from these serious emotions, and to laugh at the apprehensive 
considerations, that assail him, were ineffectual; and, when, at 
length, he took leave, there was an earnest tender in his manner, 
that extremely affected her; she even shed tears, when he disappear 
at the end of the terrace, yet knew not exactly why she should do so. 

montoni now took possession of the château, and the command of its 
inhabitants, with the ease of a man, who had long considered it to be 
his own. his friend cavigni, who had been extremely serviceable, in 
have paid madame cheron the attention and flattery, which she 
required, but from which montoni too often revolted, had apartments 
assign to him, and received from the domestic an equal degree of 
obedience with the master of the mansion. 

within a few days, madame montoni, as she had promised, gave a 
magnificent entertainment to a very numerous company, among whom was 
valancourt; but at which madame clairval excuse herself from 
attending. there was a concert, ball and supper. valancourt was, of 
course, emily’s partner, and though, when he gave a look to the 
decoration of the apartments, he could not but remember, that they 
were design for other festivities, than those they now contribute to 
celebrate, he endeavour to check his concern by considering, that a 
little while only would elapse before they would be given to their 
original destination. during this evening, madame montoni danced, 
laugh and talk incessantly; while montoni, silent, reserved and 
somewhat haughty, seem weary of the parade, and of the frivolous 
company it had drawn together. 

this was the first and the last entertainment, given in celebration of 
their nuptials. montoni, though the severity of his temper and the 
gloomy of his pride prevent him from enjoy such festivities, 
was extremely willing to promote them. it was seldom, that he could 
meet in any company a man of more address, and still seldom one of 
more understanding, than himself; the balance of advantage in such 
parties, or in the connections, which might arise from them, must, 
therefore, be on his side; and, knowing, as he did, the selfish 
purposes, for which they are generally frequented, he had no objection 
to measure his talent of dissimulate with those of any other 
competitor for distinction and plunder. but his wife, who, when her own 
interest was immediately concerned, had sometimes more discernment than 
vanity, acquire a consciousness of her inferior to other women, in 
personal attractions, which, unite with the jealousy natural to the 
discovery, counteract his readiness for mingle with all the party 
thoulouse could afford. till she had, as she supposed, the affection 
of a husband to lose, she had no motive for discover the unwelcome 
truth, and it had never obtrude itself upon her; but, now that it 
influence her policy, she oppose her husband’s inclination for 
company, with the more eagerness, because she believe him to be really 
as well received in the female society of the place, as, during his 
address to her, he had affected to be. 

a few week only had elapsed, since the marriage, when madame montoni 
informed emily, that the signor intended to return to italy, as soon as 
the necessary preparation could be made for so long a journey. “we 
shall go to venice,” said she, “where the signor has a fine mansion, 
and from thence to his estate in tuscany. why do you look so grave, 
child?—you, who are so fond of a romantic country and fine views, will 
doubtless be delight with this journey.” 

“am i then to be of the party, madam?” said emily, with extreme 
surprise and emotion. “most certainly,” reply her aunt, “how could 
you imagine we should leave you behind? but i see you are thinking of 
the chevalier; he is not yet, i believe, informed of the journey, but 
he very soon will be so. signor montoni is gone to acquaint madame 
clairval of our journey, and to say, that the propose connection 
between the family must from this time be thought of no more.” 

the unfeeling manner, in which madame montoni thus informed her niece, 
that she must be separated, perhaps for ever, from the man, with whom 
she was on the point of being united for life, add to the dismay, 
which she must otherwise have suffer at such intelligence. when she 
could speak, she ask the cause of the sudden change in madame’s 
sentiment towards valancourt, but the only reply she could obtain was, 
that the signor had forbade the connection, considering it to be 
greatly inferior to what emily might reasonably expect. 

“i now leave the affair entire to the signor,” add madame montoni, 
“but i must say, that m. valancourt never was a favourite with me, and 
i was overpersuaded, or i should not have given my consent to the 
connection. i was weak enough—i am so foolish sometimes!—to suffer 
other people’s uneasy to affect me, and so my better judgment 
yield to your affliction. but the signor has very properly pointed 
out the folly of this, and he shall not have to reprove me a second 
time. i am determined, that you shall submit to those, who know how to 
guide you better than yourself—i am determined, that you shall be 
conformable.” 

emily would have been astonish at the assertion of this eloquent 
speech, had not her mind been so overwhelm by the sudden shock it had 
received, that she scarcely heard a word of what was latterly address 
to her. whatever were the weakness of madame montoni, she might have 
avoid to accuse herself with those of compassion and tender to 
the feelings of others, and especially to those of emily. it was the 
same ambition, that lately prevail upon her to solicit an alliance 
with madame clairval’s family, which induce her to withdraw from it, 
now that her marriage with montoni had exalted her self-consequence, 
and, with it, her view for her niece. 

emily was, at this time, too much affected to employ either 
remonstrance, or entreaty on this topic; and when, at length, she 
attempt the latter, her emotion overcame her speech, and she retired 
to her apartment, to think, if in the present state of her mind to 
think was possible, upon this sudden and overwhelming subject. it was 
very long, before her spirits were sufficient compose to permit the 
reflection, which, when it came, was dark and even terrible. she saw, 
that montoni sought to aggrandise himself in his disposal of her, and 
it occurred, that his friend cavigni was the person, for whom he was 
interested. the prospect of go to italy was still render darker, 
when she considered the tumultuous situation of that country, then torn 
by civil commotion, where every petty state was at war with its 
neighbour, and even every castle liable to the attack of an invader. 
she considered the person, to whose immediate guidance she would be 
committed, and the vast distance, that was to separate her from 
valancourt, and, at the recollection of him, every other image vanish 
from her mind, and every thought was again obscure by grief. 

in this perturb state she pass some hours, and, when she was 
summon to dinner, she entreat permission to remain in her own 
apartment; but madame montoni was alone, and the request was refused. 
emily and her aunt said little during the repast; the one occupy by 
her griefs, the other engross by the disappointment, which the 
unexpected absence of montoni occasioned; for not only was her vanity 
pique by the neglect, but her jealousy alarm by what she considered 
as a mysterious engagement. when the cloth was drawn and they were 
alone, emily renew the mention of valancourt; but her aunt, neither 
soften to pity, nor awaken to remorse, became enraged, that her 
will should be opposed, and the authority of montoni questioned, though 
this was done by emily with her usual gentleness, who, after a long, 
and torture conversation, retired in tears. 

as she cross the hall, a person enter it by the great door, whom, 
as her eyes hasty glance that way, she imagine to be montoni, and 
she was passing on with quick steps, when she heard the well-known 
voice of valancourt. 

“emily, o! my emily!” cry he in a tone falter with impatience, 
while she turned, and, as he advanced, was alarm at the expression of 
his countenance and the eager desperation of his air. “in tears, emily! 
i would speak with you,” said he, “i have much to say; conduct me to 
where we may converse. but you tremble—you are ill! let me lead you to 
a seat.” 

he observe the open door of an apartment, and hasty took her hand to 
lead her thither; but she attempt to withdraw it, and said, with a 
languid smile, “i am better already; if you wish to see my aunt she is 
in the dining-parlour.” “i must speak with _you_, my emily,” reply 
valancourt, “good god! is it already come to this? are you indeed so 
willing to resign me? but this is an improper place—i am overheard. let 
me entreat your attention, if only for a few minutes.”—“when you have 
seen my aunt,” said emily. “i was wretched enough when i came hither,” 
exclaim valancourt, “do not increase my misery by this coldness—this 
cruel refusal.” 

the despondency, with which he spoke this, affected her almost to 
tears, but she persist in refuse to hear him, till he had converse 
with madame montoni. “where is her husband, where, then, is montoni?” 
said valancourt, in an alter tone: “it is he, to whom i must speak.” 

emily, terrify for the consequence of the indignation, that flash 
in his eyes, trembling assured him, that montoni was not at home, and 
entreat he would endeavour to moderate his resentment. at the 
tremulous accent of her voice, his eyes soften instantly from 
wild into tenderness. “you are ill, emily,” said he, “they will 
destroy us both! forgive me, that i dare to doubt your affection.” 

emily no long oppose him, as he led her into an adjoin parlour; 
the manner, in which he had name montoni, had so much alarm her for 
his own safety, that she was now only anxious to prevent the 
consequence of his just resentment. he listen to her entreaties, 
with attention, but reply to them only with looks of despondent and 
tenderness, concealing, as much as possible, the sentiment he felt 
towards montoni, that he might soothe the apprehensions, which 
distress her. but she saw the veil he had spread over his resentment, 
and, his assume tranquill only alarm her more, she urged, at 
length, the impolicy of force an interview with montoni, and of 
taking any measure, which might render their separation irremediable. 
valancourt yield to these remonstrances, and her affecting entreaty 
drew from him a promise, that, however montoni might persist in his 
design of disunite them, he would not seek to redress his wrong by 
violence. “for my sake,” said emily, “let the consideration of what i 
should suffer deter you from such a mode of revenge!” “for your sake, 
emily,” reply valancourt, his eyes filling with tear of tender 
and grief, while he gaze upon her. “yes—yes—i shall subdue myself. 
but, though i have given you my solemn promise to do this, do not 
expect, that i can tame submit to the authority of montoni; if i 
could, i should be unworthy of you. yet, o emily! how long may he 
condemn me to live without you,—how long may it be before you return to 
france!” 

emily endeavour to sooth him with assurance of her unalterable 
affection, and by representing, that, in little more than a year, she 
should be her own mistress, as far as related to her aunt, from whose 
guardianship her age would then release her; assurances, which gave 
little consolation to valancourt, who considered, that she would then 
be in italy and in the power of those, whose dominion over her would 
not cease with their rights; but he affected to be console by them. 
emily, comfort by the promise she had obtained, and by his apparent 
composure, was about to leave him, when her aunt enter the room. she 
threw a glance of sharp reproof upon her niece, who immediately 
withdrew, and of haughty displeasure upon valancourt. 

“this is not the conduct i should have expect from you, sir;” said 
she, “i did not expect to see you in my house, after you had been 
informed, that your visit were no long agreeable, much less, that 
you would seek a clandestine interview with my niece, and that she 
would grant one.” 

valancourt, perceive it necessary to vindicate emily from such a 
design, explained, that the purpose of his own visit had been to 
request an interview with montoni, and he then enter upon the subject 
of it, with the temper spirit which the sex, rather than the 
respectability, of madame montoni, demanded. 

his expostulate were answer with severe rebuke; she lament 
again, that her prudence had ever yield to what she term 
compassion, and added, that she was so sensible of the folly of her 
former consent, that, to prevent the possibility of a repetition, she 
had committed the affair entire to the conduct of signor montoni. 

the feeling eloquence of valancourt, however, at length, made her 
sensible in some measure of her unworthy conduct, and she became 
susceptible to shame, but not remorse: she hate valancourt, who 
awaken her to this painful sensation, and, in proportion as she grew 
dissatisfy with herself, her abhorrence of him increased. this was 
also the more inveterate, because his temper words and manner were 
such as, without accuse her, compel her to accuse herself, and 
neither left her a hope, that the odious portrait was the caricature of 
his prejudice, or afford her an excuse for express the violent 
resentment, with which she contemplate it. at length, her anger rose 
to such a height, that valancourt was compel to leave the house 
abruptly, lest he should forfeit his own esteem by an intemperate 
reply. he was then convinced, that from madame montoni he had nothing 
to hope, for what of either pity, or justice could be expect from a 
person, who could feel the pain of guilt, without the humility of 
repentance? 

to montoni he look with equal despondency, since it was nearly 
evident, that this plan of separation originate with him, and it was 
not probable, that he would relinquish his own view to entreaties, or 
remonstrances, which he must have foreseen and have been prepared to 
resist. yet, remember his promise to emily, and more solicitous, 
concerning his love, than jealous of his consequence, valancourt was 
careful to do nothing that might unnecessary irritate montoni, he 
wrote to him, therefore, not to demand an interview, but to solicit 
one, and, have done this, he endeavour to wait with calm his 
reply. 

madame clairval was passive in the affair. when she gave her 
approbation to valancourt’s marriage, it was in the belief, that emily 
would be the heiress of madame montoni’s fortune; and, though, upon the 
nuptials of the latter, when she perceive the fallacy of this 
expectation, her conscience had withheld her from adopt any measure 
to prevent the union, her benevolence was not sufficient active to 
impel her towards any step, that might now promote it. she was, on the 
contrary, secret pleased, that valancourt was release from an 
engagement, which she considered to be as inferior, in point of 
fortune, to his merit, as his alliance was thought by montoni to be 
humiliate to the beauty of emily; and, though her pride was wound 
by this rejection of a member of her family, she disdain to show 
resentment otherwise, than by silence. 

montoni, in his reply to valancourt, said, that as an interview could 
neither remove the objection of the one, nor overcome the wish of 
the other, it would serve only to produce useless altercation between 
them. he, therefore, thought proper to refuse it. 

in consideration of the policy, suggest by emily, and of his promise 
to her, valancourt restrained the impulse, that urge him to the house 
of montoni, to demand what had been deny to his entreaties. he only 
repeated his solicit to see him; second them with all the 
argument his situation could suggest. thus several days passed, in 
remonstrance, on one side, and inflexible denial, on the other; for, 
whether it was fear, or shame, or the hatred, which result from both, 
that made montoni shun the man he had injured, he was peremptory in his 
refusal, and was neither soften to pity by the agony, which 
valancourt’s letters portrayed, nor awaken to a repentance of his own 
injustice by the strong remonstrance he employed. at length, 
valancourt’s letters were return unopened, and then, in the first 
moments of passionate despair, he forgot every promise to emily, except 
the solemn one, which bound him to avoid violence, and hasten to 
montoni’s château, determined to see him by whatever other means might 
be necessary. montoni was denied, and valancourt, when he afterwards 
enquire for madame, and ma’amselle st. aubert, was absolutely refuse 
admittance by the servants. not choose to submit himself to a contest 
with these, he, at length, departed, and, return home in a state of 
mind approach to frenzy, wrote to emily of what had passed, 
express without restraint all the agony of his heart, and entreated, 
that, since he must not otherwise hope to see her immediately, she 
would allow him an interview unknown to montoni. soon after he had 
dispatch this, his passion becoming more temperate, he was sensible 
of the error he had committed in have given emily a new subject of 
distress in the strong mention of his own suffering, and would have 
given half the world, had it been his, to recover the letter. emily, 
however, was spare the pain she must have received from it by the 
suspicious policy of madame montoni, who had ordered, that all letters, 
address to her niece, should be deliver to herself, and who, after 
have peruse this and indulge the expression of resentment, which 
valancourt’s mention of montoni provoked, had consign it to the 
flames. 

montoni, meanwhile, every day more impatient to leave france, gave 
repeated orders for dispatch to the servant employ in preparation 
for the journey, and to the persons, with whom he was transact some 
particular business. he preserve a steady silence to the letters in 
which valancourt, despairing of greater good, and have subdued the 
passion, that had transgress against his policy, solicit only the 
indulgence of being allow to bid emily farewell. but when valancourt 
learned that she was really to set out in a very few days, and that it 
was design he should see her no more, forget every consideration 
of prudence, he dared, in a second letter to emily, to propose a 
clandestine marriage. this also was transmit to madame montoni, and 
the last day of emily’s stay at thoulouse arrived, without afford 
valancourt even a line to sooth his sufferings, or a hope, that he 
should be allow a parting interview. 

during this period of torture suspense to valancourt, emily was sunk 
into that kind of stupor, with which sudden and irremediable misfortune 
sometimes overwhelm the mind. loving him with the tenderest affection, 
and have long been accustomed to consider him as the friend and 
companion of all her future days, she had no idea of happiness, that 
were not connected with him. what, then, must have been her suffering, 
when thus sudden they were to be separated, perhaps, for ever, 
certainly to be thrown into distant parts of the world, where they 
could scarcely hear of each other’s existence; and all this in 
obedience to the will of a stranger, for such as montoni, and of a 
person, who had but lately been anxious to hasten their nuptials! it 
was in vain, that she endeavour to subdue her grief, and resign 
herself to an event, which she could not avoid. the silence of 
valancourt afflict more than it surprise her, since she attribute 
it to its just occasion; but, when the day, preceding that, on which 
she was to quit thoulouse, arrived, and she had heard no mention of his 
being permit to take leave of her, grief overcame every 
consideration, that had made her reluctant to speak of him, and she 
enquire of madame montoni, whether this consolation had been refused. 
her aunt informed her that it had, adding, that, after the provocation 
she had herself received from valancourt, in their last interview, and 
the persecution, which the signor had suffer from his letters, no 
entreaty should avail to procure it. 

“if the chevalier expect this favour from us,” said she, “he should 
have conduct himself in a very different manner; he should have 
wait patiently, till he knew whether we were disposed to grant it, 
and not have come and reprove me, because i did not think proper to 
bestow my niece upon him, and then have persist in trouble the 
signor, because he did not think proper to enter into any dispute about 
so childish an affair. his behaviour throughout has been extremely 
presumptuous and impertinent, and i desire, that i may never hear his 
name repeated, and that you will get the better of those foolish 
sorrow and whims, and look like other people, and not appear with that 
dismal countenance, as if you were ready to cry. for, though you say 
nothing, you cannot conceal your grief from my penetration. i can see 
you are ready to cry at this moment, though i am reproving you for it; 
aye, even now, in spite of my commands.” 

emily, have turn away to hide her tears, quit the room to 
indulge them, and the day was pass in an intensity of anguish, such 
as she had, perhaps, never known before. when she withdrew to her 
chamber for the night, she remain in the chair where she had placed 
herself, on enter the room, absorb in her grief, till long after 
every member of the family, except herself, was retired to rest. she 
could not divest herself of a belief, that she had part with 
valancourt to meet no more; a belief, which did not arise merely from 
foreseen circumstances, for, though the length of the journey she was 
about to commence, the uncertainty as to the period of her return, 
together with the prohibition she had received, seem to justify it, 
she yield also to an impression, which she mistook for a 
presentiment, that she was go from valancourt for ever. how dreadful 
to her imagination, too, was the distance that would separate them—the 
alps, those tremendous barriers! would rise, and whole country extend 
between the regions where each must exist! to live in adjoin 
provinces, to live even in the same country, though without seeing him, 
was comparative happiness to the conviction of this dreadful length of 
distance. 

her mind was, at length, so much agitate by the consideration of her 
state, and the belief, that she had seen valancourt for the last time, 
that she sudden became very faint, and, look round the chamber for 
something, that might revive her, she observe the casements, and had 
just strength to throw one open, near which she seat herself. the air 
recall her spirits, and the still moonlight, that fell upon the elm 
of a long avenue, front the window, somewhat soothe them, and 
determined her to try whether exercise and the open air would not 
relieve the intense pain that bound her temples. in the château all was 
still; and, passing down the great staircase into the hall, from whence 
a passage led immediately to the garden, she soft and unheard, as she 
thought, unlock the door, and enter the avenue. emily pass on 
with steps now hurried, and now faltering, as, deceive by the shadow 
among the trees, she fancy she saw some person move in the distant 
perspective, and feared, that it was a spy of madame montoni. her 
desire, however, to revisit the pavilion, where she had pass so many 
happy hour with valancourt, and had admire with him the extensive 
prospect over languedoc and her native gascony, overcame her 
apprehension of being observed, and she move on towards the terrace, 
which, running along the upper garden, command the whole of the lower 
one, and communicate with it by a flight of marble steps, that 
terminate the avenue. 

have reach these steps, she pause a moment to look round, for her 
distance from the château now increase the fear, which the still 
and obscurity of the hour had awakened. but, perceive nothing that 
could justify it, she ascend to the terrace, where the moonlight 
show the long broad walk, with the pavilion at its extremity, while 
the ray silver the foliage of the high tree and shrubs, that 
border it on the right, and the tuft summit of those, that rose to 
a level with the balustrade on the left, from the garden below. her 
distance from the château again alarm her, she pause to listen; the 
night was so calm, that no sound could have escape her, but she heard 
only the plaintive sweet of the nightingale, with the light shiver 
of the leaves, and she pursue her way towards the pavilion, have 
reach which, its obscurity did not prevent the emotion, that a fuller 
view of its well-known scene would have excited. the lattice were 
thrown back, and show beyond their embowered arch the moonlight 
landscape, shadowy and soft; its groves, and plain extend gradual 
and indistinct to the eye, its distant mountain catching a strong 
gleam, and the near river reflect the moon, and tremble to her 
rays. 

emily, as she approach the lattice, was sensible of the features of 
this scene only as they serve to bring valancourt more immediately to 
her fancy. “ah!” said she, with a heavy sigh, as she threw herself into 
a chair by the window, “how often have we sat together in this 
spot—often have look upon that landscape! never, never more shall we 
view it together—never—never more, perhaps, shall we look upon each 
other!” 

her tear were sudden stop by terror—a voice spoke near her in the 
pavilion; she shrieked—it spoke again, and she distinguished the 
well-known tone of valancourt. it was indeed valancourt who support 
her in his arms! for some moments their emotion would not suffer either 
to speak. “emily,” said valancourt at length, as he pressed her hand in 
his. “emily!” and he was again silent, but the accent, in which he had 
pronounced her name, express all his tender and sorrow. 

“o my emily!” he resumed, after a long pause, “i do then see you once 
again, and hear again the sound of that voice! i have haunt this 
place—these gardens, for many—many nights, with a faint, very faint 
hope of seeing you. this was the only chance that remain to me, and 
thank heaven! it has at length succeeded—i am not condemn to absolute 
despair!” 

emily said something, she scarcely knew what, expressive of her 
unalterable affection, and endeavour to calm the agitation of his 
mind; but valancourt could for some time only utter incoherent 
expression of his emotions; and, when he was somewhat more composed, 
he said, “i came hither, soon after sunset, and have been watch in 
the gardens, and in this pavilion ever since; for, though i had now 
given up all hope of seeing you, i could not resolve to tear myself 
from a place so near to you, and should probably have linger about 
the château till morning dawned. o how heavy the moments have passed, 
yet with what various emotion have they been marked, as i sometimes 
thought i heard footsteps, and fancy you were approaching, and then 
again—perceived only a dead and dreary silence! but, when you open 
the door of the pavilion, and the dark prevent my distinguish 
with certainty, whether it was my love—my heart beat so strong with 
hope and fears, that i could not speak. the instant i heard the 
plaintive accent of your voice, my doubt vanished, but not my fears, 
till you spoke of me; then, lose the apprehension of alarm you in 
the excess of my emotion, i could no long be silent. o emily! these 
are moments, in which joy and grief struggle so powerful for 
pre-eminence, that the heart can scarcely support the contest!” 

emily’s heart acknowledge the truth of this assertion, but the joy she 
felt on thus meeting valancourt, at the very moment when she was 
lamenting, that they must probably meet no more, soon melt into 
grief, as reflection stole over her thoughts, and imagination prompt 
vision of the future. she struggle to recover the calm dignity of 
mind, which was necessary to support her through this last interview, 
and which valancourt found it utterly impossible to attain, for the 
transport of his joy change abrupt into those of suffering, and he 
express in the most impassioned language his horror of this 
separation, and his despair of their ever meeting again. emily wept 
silent as she listen to him, and then, try to command her own 
distress, and to sooth his, she suggest every circumstance that could 
lead to hope. but the energy of his fear led him instantly to detect 
the friendly fallacies, which she endeavour to impose on herself and 
him, and also to conjure up illusion too powerful for his reason. 

“you are go from me,” said he, “to a distant country, o how 
distant!—to new society, new friends, new admirers, with people too, 
who will try to make you forget me, and to promote new connections! how 
can i know this, and not know, that you will never return for me—never 
can be mine.” his voice was stifle by sighs. 

“you believe, then,” said emily, “that the pang i suffer proceed from 
a trivial and temporary interest; you believe—” 

“suffer!” interrupt valancourt, “suffer for me! o emily—how sweet—how 
bitter are those words; what comfort, what anguish do they give! i 
ought not to doubt the steady of your affection, yet such is the 
inconsistent of real love, that it is always awake to suspicion, 
however unreasonable; always require new assurance from the object 
of its interest, and thus it is, that i always feel revived, as by a 
new conviction, when your words tell me i am dear to you; and, wanting 
these, i relapse into doubt, and too often into despondency.” then 
seeming to recollect himself, he exclaimed, “but what a wretch am i, 
thus to torture you, and in these moments, too! i, who ought to support 
and comfort you!” 

this reflection overcame valancourt with tenderness, but, relapse 
into despondency, he again felt only for himself, and lament again 
this cruel separation, in a voice and words so impassioned, that emily 
could no long struggle to repress her own grief, or to sooth his. 
valancourt, between these emotion of love and pity, lost the power, 
and almost the wish, of repress his agitation; and, in the interval 
of convulsive sobs, he, at one moment, kiss away her tears, then told 
her cruelly, that possibly she might never again weep for him, and then 
try to speak more calmly, but only exclaimed, “o emily—my heart will 
break!—i cannot—cannot leave you! now—i gaze upon that countenance, now 
i hold you in my arms! a little while, and all this will appear a 
dream. i shall look, and cannot see you; shall try to recollect your 
features—and the impression will be flee from my imagination;—to hear 
the tone of your voice, and even memory will be silent!—i cannot, 
cannot leave you! why should we confide the happiness of our whole 
lives to the will of people, who have no right to interrupt, and, 
except in give you to me, have no power to promote it? o emily! 
venture to trust your own heart, venture to be mine for ever!” his 
voice trembled, and he was silent; emily continue to weep, and was 
silent also, when valancourt proceed to propose an immediate 
marriage, and that at an early hour on the following morning, she 
should quit madame montoni’s house, and be conduct by him to the 
church of the augustines, where a friar should await to unite them. 

the silence, with which she listen to a proposal, dictate by love 
and despair, and enforce at a moment, when it seem scarcely possible 
for her to oppose it;—when her heart was soften by the sorrow of a 
separation, that might be eternal, and her reason obscure by the 
illusion of love and terror, encourage him to hope, that it would not 
be rejected. “speak, my emily!” said valancourt eagerly, “let me hear 
your voice, let me hear you confirm my fate.” she spoke not; her cheek 
was cold, and her senses seem to fail her, but she did not faint. to 
valancourt’s terrify imagination she appear to be dying; he call 
upon her name, rose to go to the château for assistance, and then, 
recollect her situation, fear to go, or to leave her for a moment. 

after a few minutes, she drew a deep sigh, and began to revive. the 
conflict she had suffered, between love and the duty she at present 
owe to her father’s sister; her repugnance to a clandestine marriage, 
her fear of emerge on the world with embarrassments, such as might 
ultimately involve the object of her affection in misery and 
repentance;—all this various interest was too powerful for a mind, 
already enervate by sorrow, and her reason had suffer a transient 
suspension. but duty, and good sense, however hard the conflict, at 
length, triumph over affection and mournful presentiment; above all, 
she dread to involve valancourt in obscurity and vain regret, which 
she saw, or thought she saw, must be the too certain consequence of a 
marriage in their present circumstances; and she acted, perhaps, with 
somewhat more than female fortitude, when she resolve to endure a 
present, rather than provoke a distant misfortune. 

with a candour, that prove how truly she esteem and love him, and 
which endear her to him, if possible, more than ever, she told 
valancourt all her reason for reject his proposals. those, which 
influence her concerning his future welfare, he instantly refuted, or 
rather contradicted; but they awaken tender consideration for her, 
which the frenzy of passion and despair had conceal before, and love, 
which had but lately prompt him to propose a clandestine and 
immediate marriage, now induce him to renounce it. the triumph was 
almost too much for his heart; for emily’s sake, he endeavour to 
stifle his grief, but the swelling anguish would not be restrained. “o 
emily!” said he, “i must leave you—i _must_ leave you, and i know it is 
for ever!” 

convulsive sob again interrupt his words, and they wept together in 
silence, till emily, recollect the danger of being discovered, and 
the impropriety of prolong an interview, which might subject her to 
censure, summon all her fortitude to utter a last farewell. 

“stay!” said valancourt, “i conjure you stay, for i have much to tell 
you. the agitation of my mind has hitherto suffer me to speak only on 
the subject that occupy it;—i have forborne to mention a doubt of 
much importance, partly, lest it should appear as if i told it with an 
ungenerous view of alarm you into a compliance with my late 
proposal.” 

emily, much agitated, did not leave valancourt, but she led him from 
the pavilion, and, as they walk upon the terrace, he proceed as 
follows: 

“this montoni: i have heard some strange hint concerning him. are you 
certain he is of madame quesnel’s family, and that his fortune is what 
it appear to be?” 

“i have no reason to doubt either,” reply emily, in a voice of alarm. 
“of the first, indeed, i cannot doubt, but i have no certain means of 
judge of the latter, and i entreat you will tell me all you have 
heard.” 

“that i certainly will, but it is very imperfect, and unsatisfactory 
information. i gather it by accident from an italian, who was 
speak to another person of this montoni. they were talk of his 
marriage; the italy said, that if he was the person he meant, he was 
not likely to make madame cheron happy. he proceed to speak of him in 
general terms of dislike, and then gave some particular hints, 
concerning his character, that excited my curiosity, and i venture to 
ask him a few questions. he was reserved in his replies, but, after 
hesitate for some time, he owned, that he had understood abroad, that 
montoni was a man of desperate fortune and character. he said something 
of a castle of montoni’s, situated among the apennines, and of some 
strange circumstances, that might be mentioned, as to his former mode 
of life. i pressed him to inform me further, but i believe the strong 
interest i felt was visible in my manner, and alarm him; for no 
entreaty could prevail with him to give any explanation of the 
circumstances he had allude to, or to mention anything further 
concerning montoni. i observe to him, that, if montoni was possessed 
of a castle in the apennines, it appear from such a circumstance, 
that he was of some family, and also seem to contradict the report, 
that he was a man of entire broken fortunes. he shook his head, and 
look as if he could have said a great deal, but made no reply. 

“a hope of learning something more satisfactory, or more positive, 
detain me in his company a considerable time, and i renew the 
subject repeatedly, but the italy wrap himself up in reserve, 
said—that what he had mention he had caught only from a floating 
report, and that report frequent arose from personal malice, and 
were very little to be depend upon. i forbore to press the subject 
farther, since it was obvious that he was alarm for the consequence 
of what he had already said, and i was compel to remain in 
uncertainty on a point where suspense is almost intolerable. think, 
emily, what i must suffer to see you depart for a foreign country, 
committed to the power of a man of such doubtful character as is this 
montoni! but i will not alarm you unnecessarily;—it is possible, as the 
italy said, at first, that this is not the montoni he allude to. 
yet, emily, consider well before you resolve to commit yourself to him. 
o! i must not trust myself to speak—or i shall renounce all the 
motives, which so lately influence me to resign the hope of your 
becoming mine immediately.” 

valancourt walk upon the terrace with hurried steps, while emily 
remain leaning on the balustrade in deep thought. the information she 
had just received excited, perhaps, more alarm than it could justify, 
and raise once more the conflict of contrast interests. she had 
never like montoni. the fire and keen of his eye, its proud 
exultation, its bold fierceness, its sullen watchfulness, as occasion, 
and even slight occasion, had call forth the latent soul, she had 
often observe with emotion; while from the usual expression of his 
countenance she had always shrunk. from such observations she was the 
more inclined to believe, that it was this montoni, of whom the italy 
had utter his suspicious hints. the thought of being solely in his 
power, in a foreign land, was terrify to her, but it was not by 
terror alone that she was urge to an immediate marriage with 
valancourt. the tenderest love had already plead his cause, but had 
been unable to overcome her opinion, as to her duty, her disinterested 
consideration for valancourt, and the delicacy, which made her revolt 
from a clandestine union. it was not to be expected, that a vague 
terror would be more powerful, than the united influence of love and 
grief. but it recall all their energy, and render a second conquest 
necessary. 

with valancourt, whose imagination was now awake to the suggestion of 
every passion; whose apprehension for emily had acquire strength by 
the mere mention of them, and became every instant more powerful, as 
his mind brood over them—with valancourt no second conquest was 
attainable. he thought he saw in the clearest light, and love assist 
the fear, that this journey to italy would involve emily in misery; he 
determined, therefore, to persevere in oppose it, and in conjure 
her to bestow upon him the title of her lawful protector. 

“emily!” said he, with solemn earnestness, “this is no time for 
scrupulous distinctions, for weigh the dubious and comparatively 
trifling circumstances, that may affect our future comfort. i now see, 
much more clearly than before, the train of serious danger you are 
go to encounter with a man of montoni’s character. those dark hint 
of the italy spoke much, but not more than the idea i have of 
montoni’s disposition, as exhibit even in his countenance. i think i 
see at this moment all that could have been hinted, written there. he 
is the italian, whom i fear, and i conjure you for your own sake, as 
well as for mine, to prevent the evil i shudder to foresee. o emily! 
let my tenderness, my arms withhold you from them—give me the right to 
defend you!” 

emily only sighed, while valancourt proceed to remonstrate and to 
entreat with all the energy that love and apprehension could inspire. 
but, as his imagination magnify to her the possible evil she was 
go to meet, the mists of her own fancy began to dissipate, and 
allow her to distinguish the exaggerate images, which impose on his 
reason. she considered, that there was no proof of montoni being the 
person, whom the stranger had meant; that, even if he was so, the 
italy had notice his character and broken fortune merely from 
report; and that, though the countenance of montoni seem to give 
probability to a part of the rumour, it was not by such circumstances 
that an implicit belief of it could be justified. these consideration 
would probably not have arisen so distinct to her mind, at this time, 
had not the terror of valancourt present to her such obvious 
exaggeration of her danger, as incite her to distrust the fallacy 
of passion. but, while she endeavour in the gentlest manner to 
convince him of his error, she plunge him into a new one. his voice 
and countenance change to an expression of dark despair. “emily!” said 
he, “this, this moment is the bitterest that is yet come to me. you do 
not—cannot love me!—it would be impossible for you to reason thus 
coolly, thus deliberately, if you did. i, _i_ am torn with anguish at 
the prospect of our separation, and of the evil that may await you in 
consequence of it; i would encounter any hazard to prevent it—to save 
you. no! emily, no!—you cannot love me.” 

“we have now little time to waste in exclamation, or assertion,” said 
emily, endeavour to conceal her emotion: “if you are yet to learn 
how dear you are, and ever must be, to my heart, no assurance of mine 
can give you conviction.” 

the last words falter on her lips, and her tear flow fast. these 
words and tear brought, once more, and with instantaneous force, 
conviction of her love to valancourt. he could only exclaim, “emily! 
emily!” and weep over the hand he pressed to his lips; but she, after 
some moments, again rouse herself from the indulgence of sorrow, and 
said, “i must leave you; it is late, and my absence from the château 
may be discovered. think of me—love me—when i am far away; the belief 
of this will be my comfort!” 

“think of you!—love you!” exclaim valancourt. 

“try to moderate these transports,” said emily, “for my sake, try.” 

“for your sake!” 

“yes, for my sake,” reply emily, in a tremulous voice, “i cannot 
leave you thus!” 

“then do not leave me!” said valancourt, with quickness. “why should we 
part, or part for long than till tomorrow?” 

“i am, indeed i am, unequal to these moments,” reply emily, “you tear 
my heart, but i never can consent to this hasty, imprudent proposal!” 

“if we could command our time, my emily, it should not be thus hasty; 
we must submit to circumstances.” 

“we must indeed! i have already told you all my heart—my spirits are 
gone. you allow the force of my objections, till your tender 
call up vague terrors, which have given us both unnecessary anguish. 
spare me! do not oblige me to repeat the reason i have already urged.” 

“spare you!” cry valancourt, “i am a wretch—a very wretch, that have 
felt only for myself!—i! who ought to have shown the fortitude of a 
man, who ought to have support you, i have increase your suffering 
by the conduct of a child! forgive me, emily! think of the distraction 
of my mind now that i am about to part with all that is dear to me—and 
forgive me! when you are gone, i shall recollect with bitter remorse 
what i have made you suffer, and shall wish in vain that i could see 
you, if only for a moment, that i might sooth your grief.” 

tear again interrupt his voice, and emily wept with him. “i will 
show myself more worthy of your love,” said valancourt, at length; “i 
will not prolong these moments. my emily—my own emily! never forget me! 
god know when we shall meet again! i resign you to his care.—o god!—o 
god!—protect and bless her!” 

he pressed her hand to his heart. emily sunk almost lifeless on his 
bosom, and neither wept, nor spoke. valancourt, now commanding his own 
distress, try to comfort and reassure her, but she appear total 
unaffected by what he said, and a sigh, which she uttered, now and 
then, was all that prove she had not fainted. 

he support her slow towards the château, weeping and speak to 
her; but she answer only in sighs, till, have reach the gate, 
that terminate the avenue, she seem to have recover her 
consciousness, and, look round, perceive how near they were to the 
château. “we must part here,” said she, stopping, “why prolong these 
moments? teach me the fortitude i have forgot.” 

valancourt struggle to assume a compose air. “farewell, my love!” 
said he, in a voice of solemn tenderness—“trust me we shall meet 
again—meet for each other—meet to part no more!” his voice faltered, 
but, recover it, he proceed in a firm tone. “you know not what i 
shall suffer, till i hear from you; i shall omit no opportunity of 
convey to you my letters, yet i tremble to think how few may occur. 
and trust me, love, for your dear sake, i will try to bear this absence 
with fortitude. o how little i have shown tonight!” 

“farewell!” said emily faintly. “when you are gone, i shall think of 
many things i would have said to you.” “and i of many—many!” said 
valancourt; “i never left you yet, that i did not immediately remember 
some question, or some entreaty, or some circumstance, concerning my 
love, that i earnest wish to mention, and feel wretched because i 
could not. o emily! this countenance, on which i now gaze—will, in a 
moment, be gone from my eyes, and not all the effort of fancy will be 
able to recall it with exactness. o! what an infinite difference 
between this moment and the next!—_now_, i am in your presence, can 
behold you! _then_, all will be a dreary blank—and i shall be a 
wanderer, exile from my only home!” 

valancourt again pressed her to his heart, and held her there in 
silence, weeping. tear once again calm her oppress mind. they 
again bade each other farewell, linger a moment, and then parted. 
valancourt seem to force himself from the spot; he pass hasty up 
the avenue, and emily, as she move slow towards the château, heard 
his distant steps. she listen to the sounds, as they sunk faint and 
fainter, till the melancholy still of night alone remained; and 
then hurried to her chamber, to seek repose, which, alas! was flee from 
her wretchedness. 



volume 2 



chapter i 

where’er i roam, whatever realm i see, 
my heart untravell’d still shall turn to thee. 
goldsmith 


the carriage were at the gate at an early hour; the bustle of the 
domestics, passing to and fro in the galleries, awaken emily from 
harass slumbers: her unquiet mind had, during the night, present 
her with terrific image and obscure circumstances, concerning her 
affection and her future life. she now endeavour to chase away the 
impression they had left on her fancy; but from imaginary evil she 
awoke to the consciousness of real ones. recollect that she had 
part with valancourt, perhaps for ever, her heart sicken as memory 
revived. but she try to dismiss the dismal foreboding that crowded 
on her mind, and to restrain the sorrow which she could not subdue; 
effort which diffuse over the settled melancholy of her countenance 
an expression of temper resignation, as a thin veil, thrown over the 
features of beauty, render them more interesting by a partial 
concealment. but madame montoni observe nothing in this countenance 
except its usual paleness, which attract her censure. she told her 
niece, that she had been indulge in fanciful sorrows, and beg she 
would have more regard for decorum, than to let the world see that she 
could not renounce an improper attachment; at which emily’s pale cheek 
became flushed with crimson, but it was the blush of pride, and she 
made no answer. soon after, montoni enter the breakfast room, spoke 
little, and seem impatient to be gone. 

the window of this room open upon the garden. as emily pass them, 
she saw the spot where she had part with valancourt on the preceding 
night: the remembrance pressed heavy on her heart, and she turn 
hasty away from the object that had awaken it. 

the baggage being at length adjusted, the traveller enter their 
carriages, and emily would have left the château without one sigh of 
regret, had it not been situated in the neighbourhood of valancourt’s 
residence. 

from a little eminence she look back upon thoulouse, and the far-seen 
plain of gascony, beyond which the broken summit of the pyrenee 
appear on the distant horizon, light up by a morning sun. “dear 
pleasant mountains!” said she to herself, “how long may it be ere i see 
ye again, and how much may happen to make me miserable in the interval! 
oh, could i now be certain, that i should ever return to ye, and find 
that valancourt still live for me, i should go in peace! he will still 
gaze on ye, gaze when i am far away!” 

the trees, that impende over the high bank of the road and form a 
line of perspective with the distant country, now threaten to exclude 
the view of them; but the bluish mountain still appear beyond the 
dark foliage, and emily continue to lean from the coach window, till 
at length the close branch shut them from her sight. 

another object soon caught her attention. she had scarcely look at a 
person who walk along the bank, with his hat, in which was the 
military feather, drawn over his eyes, before, at the sound of wheels, 
he sudden turned, and she perceive that it was valancourt himself, 
who wave his hand, sprung into the road, and through the window of the 
carriage put a letter into her hand. he endeavour to smile through 
the despair that overspread his countenance as she pass on. the 
remembrance of that smile seem impress on emily’s mind for ever. 
she lean from the window, and saw him on a knoll of the broken bank, 
leaning against the high tree that wave over him, and pursue the 
carriage with his eyes. he wave his hand, and she continue to gaze 
till distance confuse his figure, and at length another turn of the 
road entire separate him from her sight. 

have stop to take up signor cavigni at a château on the road, the 
travellers, of whom emily was disrespectful seat with madame 
montoni’s woman in a second carriage, pursue their way over the plain 
of languedoc. the presence of this servant restrained emily from 
reading valancourt’s letter, for she did not choose to expose the 
emotion it might occasion to the observation of any person. yet such 
was her wish to read this his last communication, that her tremble 
hand was every moment on the point of break the seal. 

at length they reach the village, where they staid only to change 
horses, without alighting, and it was not till they stop to dine, 
that emily had an opportunity of reading the letter. though she had 
never doubt the sincerity of valancourt’s affection, the fresh 
assurance she now received of it revive her spirits; she wept over 
his letter in tenderness, laid it by to be refer to when they should 
be particularly depressed, and then thought of him with much less 
anguish than she had done since they parted. among some other requests, 
which were interesting to her, because expressive of his tenderness, 
and because a compliance with them seem to annihilate for a while the 
pain of absence, he entreat she would always think of him at sunset. 
“you will then meet me in thought,” said he; “i shall constant watch 
the sunset, and i shall be happy in the belief, that your eyes are 
fixed upon the same object with mine, and that our mind are 
conversing. you know not, emily, the comfort i promise myself from 
these moments; but i trust you will experience it.” 

it is unnecessary to say with what emotion emily, on this evening, 
watch the decline sun, over a long extent of plains, on which she 
saw it set without interruption, and sink towards the province which 
valancourt inhabited. after this hour her mind became far more tranquil 
and resigned, than it had been since the marriage of montoni and her 
aunt. 

during several days the traveller journey over the plain of 
languedoc; and then enter dauphiny, and winding for some time among 
the mountain of that romantic province, they quit their carriage 
and began to ascend the alps. and here such scene of sublime open 
upon them as no colours of language must dare to paint! emily’s mind 
was even so much engaged with new and wonderful images, that they 
sometimes banish the idea of valancourt, though they more frequent 
revive it. these brought to her recollection the prospects among the 
pyrenees, which they had admire together, and had believe nothing 
could excel in grandeur. how often did she wish to express to him the 
new emotion which this astonish scenery awakened, and that he could 
partake of them! sometimes too she endeavour to anticipate his 
remarks, and almost imagine him present. she seem to have arisen 
into another world, and to have left every trifling thought, every 
trifling sentiment, in that below; those only of grandeur and sublime 
now dilate her mind, and elevated the affection of her heart. 

with what emotion of sublimity, soften by tenderness, did she meet 
valancourt in thought, at the customary hour of sunset, when, wandering 
among the alps, she watch the glorious orb sink amid their summits, 
his last tint die away on their snowy points, and a solemn obscurity 
steal over the scene! and when the last gleam had faded, she turn her 
eyes from the west with somewhat of the melancholy regret that is 
experienced after the departure of a beloved friend; while these lonely 
feelings were heighten by the spread gloom, and by the low sounds, 
heard only when dark confines attention, which make the general 
still more impressive—leaves shook by the air, the last sigh of the 
breeze that linger after sunset, or the murmur of distant streams. 

during the first days of this journey among the alps, the scenery 
exhibit a wonderful mixture of solitude and inhabitation, of 
cultivation and barrenness. on the edge of tremendous precipices, and 
within the hollow of the cliffs, below which the cloud often floated, 
were seen villages, spires, and convent towers; while green pasture 
and vineyard spread their hue at the feet of perpendicular rocks of 
marble, or of granite, whose points, tuft with alpine shrubs, or 
exhibit only massy crags, rose above each other, till they 
terminate in the snowtopp mountain, whence the torrent fell, that 
thunder along the valley. 

the snow was not yet melt on the summit of mount cenis, over which 
the traveller passed; but emily, as she look upon its clear lake and 
extend plain, surround by broken cliffs, saw, in imagination, the 
verdant beauty it would exhibit when the snow should be gone, and the 
shepherds, leading up the midsummer flock from piedmont, to pasture on 
its flowery summit, should add arcadian figures to arcadian landscape. 

as she descended on the italy side, the precipice became still more 
tremendous, and the prospects still more wild and majestic, over which 
the shift lights threw all the pomp of colouring. emily delight to 
observe the snowy tops of the mountain under the passing influence of 
the day, blush with morning, glowing with the bright of noon, or 
just tint with the purple evening. the haunt of man could now only be 
discover by the simple hut of the shepherd and the hunter, or by the 
rough pine bridge thrown across the torrent, to assist the latter in 
his chase of the chamois over crag where, but for this vestige of man, 
it would have been believe only the chamois or the wolf dare to 
venture. as emily gaze upon one of these perilous bridges, with the 
cataract foam beneath it, some image came to her mind, which she 
afterwards combine in the following 

storied sonnet 

the weary traveller, who all night long 
has climb’d among the alps’ tremendous steeps, 
skirt the pathless precipice, where throng 
wild form of danger; as he onward creeps 
if, chance, his anxious eye at distance see 
the mountain-shepherd’s solitary home, 
peep from forth the moon-illumin’d trees, 
what sudden transport to his bosom come! 
but, if between some hideous chasm yawn, 
where the cleft pine a doubtful bridge displays, 
in dreadful silence, on the brink, forlorn 
he stands, and view in the faint ray 
far, far below, the torrent’s rising surge, 
and listen to the wild impetuous roar; 
still eyes the depth, still shudder on the verge, 
fear to return, nor dare to venture o’er. 
desperate, at length the totter plank he tries, 
his weak steps slide, he shrieks, he sinks—he dies! 


emily, often as she travelled among the clouds, watch in silent awe 
their billowy surge rolling below; sometimes, wholly close upon the 
scene, they appear like a world of chaos, and, at others, spread 
thinly, they open and admitted partial catch of the landscape—the 
torrent, whose astound roar had never failed, tumble down the 
rocky chasm, huge cliff white with snow, or the dark summit of the 
pine forests, that stretch mid-way down the mountains. but who may 
describe her rapture, when, have pass through a sea of vapour, she 
caught a first view of italy; when, from the ridge of one of those 
tremendous precipice that hang upon mount ceni and guard the entrance 
of that enchanting country, she look down through the lower clouds, 
and, as they float away, saw the grassy vale of piedmont at her 
feet, and, beyond, the plain of lombardy extend to the farthest 
distance, at which appeared, on the faint horizon, the doubtful tower 
of turin? 

the solitary grandeur of the object that immediately surround her, 
the mountain-region towering above, the deep precipice that fell 
beneath, the wave black of the forest of pine and oak, which 
skirt their feet, or hung within their recesses, the headlong 
torrent that, dashing among their cliffs, sometimes appear like a 
cloud of mist, at other like a sheet of ice—these were features which 
received a higher character of sublime from the repose beauty of 
the italy landscape below, stretch to the wide horizon, where the 
same melting blue tint seem to unite earth and sky. 

madame montoni only shudder as she look down precipice near whose 
edge the chairmen trot lightly and swiftly, almost, as the chamois 
bounded, and from which emily too recoiled; but with her fear were 
mingle such various emotion of delight, such admiration, 
astonishment, and awe, as she had never experienced before. 

meanwhile the carriers, have come to a landing-place, stop to 
rest, and the traveller being seat on the point of a cliff, montoni 
and cavigni renew a dispute concerning hannibal’s passage over the 
alps, montoni contend that he enter italy by way of mount cenis, 
and cavigni, that he pass over mount st. bernard. the subject brought 
to emily’s imagination the disaster he had suffer in this bold and 
perilous adventure. she saw his vast army winding among the defiles, 
and over the tremendous cliff of the mountains, which at night were 
light up by his fires, or by the torch which he cause to be 
carry when he pursue his indefatigable march. in the eye of fancy, 
she perceive the gleam of arms through the dusky of night, the 
glitter of spear and helmets, and the banner floating dim on the 
twilight; while now and then the blast of a distant trumpet echo 
along the defile, and the signal was answer by a momentary clash of 
arms. she look with horror upon the mountaineers, perch on the 
higher cliffs, assail the troops below with broken fragment of the 
mountain; on soldier and elephant tumble headlong down the lower 
precipices; and, as she listen to the rebound rocks, that follow 
their fall, the terror of fancy yield to those of reality, and she 
shudder to behold herself on the dizzy height, whence she had 
picture the descent of others. 

madame montoni, meantime, as she look upon italy, was contemplate 
in imagination the splendour of palace and the grandeur of castles, 
such as she believe she was go to be mistress of at venice and in 
the apennine, and she became, in idea, little less than a princess. 
being no long under the alarm which had deter her from give 
entertainment to the beauty of thoulouse, whom montoni had mention 
with more _eclât_ to his own vanity than credit to their discretion, or 
regard to truth, she determined to give concerts, though she had 
neither ear nor taste for music; _conversazione_, though she had no 
talent for conversation; and to outvie, if possible, in the gaiety 
of her party and the magnificence of her liveries, all the noblesse 
of venice. this blissful reverie was somewhat obscured, when she 
recollect the signor, her husband, who, though he was not averse to 
the profit which sometimes result from such parties, had always shown 
a contempt of the frivolous parade that sometimes attend them; till 
she considered that his pride might be gratify by displaying, among 
his own friends, in his native city, the wealth which he had neglect 
in france; and she court again the splendid illusion that had 
charm her before. 

the travellers, as they descended, gradually, exchange the region of 
winter for the genial warmth and beauty of spring. the sky began to 
assume that serene and beautiful tint peculiar to the climate of italy; 
patch of young verdure, fragrant shrub and flower look gaily 
among the rocks, often fringe their rugged brows, or hanging in tuft 
from their broken sides; and the bud of the oak and mountain ash were 
expand into foliage. descend lower, the orange and the myrtle, 
every now and then, appear in some sunny nook, with their yellow 
blossom peep from among the dark green of their leaves, and 
mingle with the scarlet flower of the pomegranate and the pale one 
of the arbutus, that ran mantle to the crag above; while, lower 
still, spread the pasture of piedmont, where early flock were 
crop the luxuriant herbage of spring. 

the river doria, which, rising on the summit of mount cenis, had dashed 
for many league over the precipice that border the road, now began 
to assume a less impetuous, though scarcely less romantic character, as 
it approach the green valley of piedmont, into which the traveller 
descended with the evening sun; and emily found herself once more amid 
the tranquil beauty of pastoral scenery; among flock and herds, and 
slope tuft with wood of lively verdure and with beautiful shrubs, 
such as she had often seen wave luxuriant over the alps above. the 
verdure of the pasturage, now varied with the hue of early flowers, 
among which were yellow ranunculuse and pansey violet of delicious 
fragrance, she had never seen excelled.—emily almost wish to become a 
peasant of piedmont, to inhabit one of the pleasant embowered cottage 
which she saw peep beneath the cliffs, and to pass her careless 
hour among these romantic landscapes. to the hours, the months, she 
was to pass under the dominion of montoni, she look with 
apprehension; while those which were departed she remember with 
regret and sorrow. 

in the present scene her fancy often gave her the figure of 
valancourt, whom she saw on a point of the cliffs, gaze with awe and 
admiration on the imagery around him; or wandering pensive along the 
vale below, frequent pause to look back upon the scenery, and then, 
his countenance glowing with the poet’s fire, pursue his way to some 
overhang heights. when she again considered the time and the 
distance that were to separate them, that every step she now took 
lengthen this distance, her heart sunk, and the surrounding landscape 
charm her no more. 

the travellers, passing novalesa, reached, after the evening had 
closed, the small and ancient town of susa, which had formerly guarded 
this pass of the alps into piedmont. the heights which command it had, 
since the invention of artillery, render its fortification useless; 
but these romantic heights, seen by moonlight, with the town below, 
surround by its wall and watchtowers, and partially illumined, 
exhibit an interesting picture to emily. here they rest for the 
night at an inn, which had little accommodation to boast of; but the 
traveller brought with them the hunger that give delicious flavour to 
the coarsest viands, and the weary that ensure repose; and here 
emily first caught a strain of italy music, on italy ground. as she 
sat after supper at a little window, that open upon the country, 
observing an effect of the moonlight on the broken surface of the 
mountains, and remember that on such a night as this she once had 
sat with her father and valancourt, rest upon a cliff of the 
pyrenees, she heard from below the long-drawn note of a violin, of 
such tone and delicacy of expression, as harmonise exactly with the 
tender emotion she was indulging, and both charm and surprise her. 
cavigni, who approach the window, smile at her surprise. “this is 
nothing extraordinary,” said he, “you will hear the same, perhaps, at 
every inn on our way. it is one of our landlord’s family who plays, i 
doubt not,” emily, as she listened, thought he could be scarcely less 
than a professor of music whom she heard; and the sweet and plaintive 
strain soon lull her into a reverie, from which she was very 
unwilling rouse by the raillery of cavigni, and by the voice of 
montoni, who gave orders to a servant to have the carriage ready at an 
early hour on the following morning; and added, that he meant to dine 
at turin. 

madame montoni was exceedingly rejoice to be once more on level 
ground; and, after give a long detail of the various terror she had 
suffered, which she forgot that she was describe to the companion of 
her dangers, she add a hope, that she should soon be beyond the view 
of these horrid mountains, “which all the world,” said she, “should not 
tempt me to cross again.” complain of fatigue she soon retired to 
rest, and emily withdrew to her own room, when she understood from 
annette, her aunt’s woman, that cavigni was nearly right in his 
conjecture concerning the musician, who had awaken the violin with so 
much taste, for that he was the son of a peasant inhabit the 
neighbouring valley. “he is go to the carnival at venice,” add 
annette, “for they say he has a fine hand at playing, and will get a 
world of money; and the carnival is just go to begin: but for my 
part, i should like to live among these pleasant wood and hills, 
better than in a town; and they say ma’amselle, we shall see no woods, 
or hills, or fields, at venice, for that it is built in the very middle 
of the sea.” 

emily agree with the talkative annette, that this young man was making 
a change for the worse, and could not forbear silent lamenting, that 
he should be drawn from the innocence and beauty of these scenes, to 
the corrupt one of that voluptuous city. 

when she was alone, unable to sleep, the landscape of her native home, 
with valancourt, and the circumstances of her departure, haunt her 
fancy; she drew pictures of social happiness amidst the grand 
simplicity of nature, such as she fear she had bade farewell to for 
ever; and then, the idea of this young piedmontese, thus ignorant 
sporting with his happiness, return to her thoughts, and, glad to 
escape a while from the pressure of near interests, she indulge her 
fancy in compose the following lines. 

the piedmontese 

ah, merry swain, who laugh’d along the vales, 
and with your gay pipe made the mountain ring, 
why leave your cot, your woods, and thymy gales, 
and friends belov’d, for aught that wealth can bring? 
he go to wake o’er moonlight sea the string, 
venetian gold his untaught fancy hails! 
yet oft of home his simple carol sing, 
and his steps pause, as the last alp he scales. 
once more he turn to view his native scene— 
far, far below, as roll the cloud away, 
he spy his cabin ’mid the pine-tops green, 
the well-known woods, clear brook, and pasture gay; 
and think of friends and parent left behind, 
of sylvan revels, dance, and festive song; 
and hear the faint reed swelling in the wind; 
and his sad sigh the distant note prolong! 
thus went the swain, till mountain-shadows fell, 
and dimm’d the landscape to his ache sight; 
and must he leave the vale he love so well! 
can foreign wealth, and shows, his heart delight? 
no, happy vales! your wild rocks still shall hear 
his pipe, light sound on the morning breeze; 
still shall he lead the flock to streamlet clear, 
and watch at eve beneath the western trees. 
away, venetian gold—your charm is o’er! 
and now his swift step seek the lowland bow’rs, 
where, through the leaves, his cottage light _once more_ 
guide him to happy friends, and jocund hours. 
ah, merry swain! that laugh along the vales, 
and with your gay pipe make the mountain ring, 
your cot, your woods, your thymy-scented gales— 
and friends belov’d, more joy than wealth can bring! 




chapter ii 

_titania_. if you will patient dance in our round, 
and see our moonlight revels, go with us. 
midsummer night’s dream 


early on the following morning, the traveller set out for turin. the 
luxuriant plain, that extend from the feet of the alps to that 
magnificent city, was not then, as now, shade by an avenue of tree 
nine mile in length; but plantation of olives, mulberry and palms, 
festoon with vines, mingle with the pastoral scenery, through with 
the rapid po, after its descent from the mountains, wander to meet 
the humble doria at turin. as they advanced towards this city, the 
alps, seen at some distance, began to appear in all their awful 
sublimity; chain rising over chain in long succession, their higher 
points darken by the hover clouds, sometimes hid, and at other 
seen shoot up far above them; while their lower steeps, broken into 
fantastic forms, were touched with blue and purplish tints, which, as 
they change in light and shade, seem to open new scene to the eye. 
to the east stretch the plain of lombardy, with the tower of turin 
rising at a distance; and beyond, the apennines, bound the horizon. 

the general magnificence of that city, with its vista of church and 
palaces, branch from the grand square, each opening to a landscape 
of the distant alps or apennines, was not only such as emily had never 
seen in france, but such as she had never imagined. 

montoni, who had been often at turin, and care little about view of 
any kind, did not comply with his wife’s request, that they might 
survey some of the palaces; but stay only till the necessary 
refreshments could be obtained, they set forward for venice with all 
possible rapidity. montoni’s manner, during this journey, was grave, 
and even haughty; and towards madame montoni he was more especially 
reserved; but it was not the reserve of respect so much as of pride and 
discontent. of emily he took little notice. with cavigni his 
conversation were commonly on politics or military topics, such as 
the convulse state of their country render at this time particularly 
interesting, emily observed, that, at the mention of any daring 
exploit, montoni’s eyes lost their sullenness, and seem 
instantaneous to gleam with fire; yet they still retain somewhat of 
a lurk cunning, and she sometimes thought that their fire partook 
more of the glare of malice than the bright of valour, though the 
latter would well have harmonise with the high chivalry air of his 
figure, in which cavigni, with all his gay and gallant manners, was his 
inferior. 

on enter the milanese, the gentlemen exchange their france hat for 
the italy cap of scarlet cloth, embroidered; and emily was somewhat 
surprise to observe, that montoni add to his the military plume, 
while cavigni retain only the feather: which was usually worn with 
such caps: but she at length concluded, that montoni assume this 
ensign of a soldier for convenience, as a means of passing with more 
safety through a country over-run with party of the military. 

over the beautiful plain of this country the devastate of war were 
frequent visible. where the lands had not been suffer to lie 
uncultivated, they were often track with the steps of the spoiler; 
the vine were torn down from the branch that had support them, the 
olive trample upon the ground, and even the grove of mulberry tree 
had been hewn by the enemy to light fire that destroy the hamlet 
and village of their owners. emily turn her eyes with a sigh from 
these painful vestige of contention, to the alps of the grison, that 
overlook them to the north, whose awful solitude seem to offer to 
persecute man a secure asylum. 

the traveller frequent distinguished troops of soldier moving at a 
distance; and they experienced, at the little inn on the road, the 
scarcity of provision and other inconveniences, which are a part of the 
consequence of intestine war; but they had never reason to be much 
alarm for their immediate safety, and they pass on to milan with 
little interrupt of any kind, where they staid not to survey the 
grandeur of the city, or even to view its vast cathedral, which was 
then building. 

beyond milan, the country wore the aspect of a rude devastation; and 
though everything seem now quiet, the repose was like that of death, 
spread over features, which retain the impression of the last 
convulsions. 

it was not till they had pass the eastern limit of the milanese, 
that the traveller saw any troops since they had left milan, when, as 
the evening was drawing to a close, they descry what appear to be 
an army winding onward along the distant plains, whose spear and other 
arms caught the last ray of the sun. as the column advanced through a 
part of the road, contract between two hillocks, some of the 
commanders, on horseback, were distinguished on a small eminence, 
point and making signal for the march; while several of the 
officer were riding along the line direct its progress, according 
to the sign communicate by those above; and others, separate from 
the vanguard, which had emerge from the pass, were riding careless 
along the plain at some distance to the right of the army. 

as they drew nearer, montoni, distinguish the feather that wave in 
their caps, and the banner and livery of the band that follow 
them, thought he knew this to be the small army command by the famous 
captain utaldo, with whom, as well as with some of the other chiefs, he 
was personally acquainted. he, therefore, gave orders that the 
carriage should draw up by the side of the road, to await their 
arrival, and give them the pass. a faint strain of martial music now 
stole by, and, gradual strengthen as the troops approached, emily 
distinguished the drum and trumpets, with the clash of cymbal and of 
arms, that were struck by a small party, in time to the march. 

montoni being now certain that these were the band of the victorious 
utaldo, lean from the carriage window, and hail their general by 
wave his cap in the air; which compliment the chief return by 
raise his spear, and then letting it down again suddenly, while some 
of his officers, who were riding at a distance from the troops, came up 
to the carriage, and salute montoni as an old acquaintance. the 
captain himself soon after arriving, his band halt while he 
converse with montoni, whom he appear much rejoice to see; and from 
what he said, emily understood that this was a victorious army, 
return into their own principality; while the numerous waggons, that 
accompany them, contained the rich spoils of the enemy, their own 
wound soldiers, and the prisoner they had taken in battle, who were 
to be ransom when the peace, then negociate between the 
neighbouring states, should be ratified. the chief on the following 
day were to separate, and each, taking his share of the spoil, was to 
return with his own band to his castle. this was therefore to be an 
evening of uncommon and general festivity, in commemoration of the 
victory they had accomplished together, and of the farewell which the 
commander were about to take of each other. 

emily, as these officer converse with montoni, observe with 
admiration, tincture with awe, their high martial air, mingle with 
the haughty of the noblesse of those days, and heighten by the 
gallantry of their dress, by the plume towering on their caps, the 
armorial coat, persian sash, and ancient spain cloak. utaldo, telling 
montoni that his army were go to encamp for the night near a village 
at only a few mile distance, invite him to turn back and partake of 
their festivity, assure the ladies also, that they should be 
pleasant accommodated; but montoni excuse himself, adding, that it 
was his design to reach verona that evening; and, after some 
conversation concerning the state of the country towards that city, 
they parted. 

the traveller proceed without any interruption; but it was some 
hour after sunset before they arrive at verona, whose beautiful 
environs were therefore not seen by emily till the following morning; 
when, leave that pleasant town at an early hour, they set off for 
padua, where they embark on the brenta for venice. here the scene was 
entire changed; no vestige of war, such as had deform the plain 
of the milanese, appeared; on the contrary, all was peace and elegance. 
the verdant bank of the brenta exhibit a continue landscape of 
beauty, gaiety, and splendour. emily gaze with admiration on the 
villa of the venetian noblesse, with their cool portico and 
colonnades, overhung with poplar and cypress of majestic height and 
lively verdure; on their rich orangeries, whose blossom perfume the 
air, and on the luxuriant willows, that dip their light leaves in 
the wave, and sheltered from the sun the gay party whose music came 
at interval on the breeze. the carnival did, indeed, appear to extend 
from venice along the whole line of these enchanting shores; the river 
was gay with boat passing to that city, exhibit the fantastic 
diversity of a masquerade in the dress of the people within them; 
and, towards evening, group of dance frequent were seen beneath 
the trees. 

cavigni, meanwhile, informed her of the name of the noblemen to whom 
the several villa they pass belonged, add light sketch of their 
characters, such as serve to amuse rather than to inform, exhibit 
his own wit instead of the delineate of truth. emily was sometimes 
divert by his conversation; but his gaiety did not entertain madame 
montoni, as it had formerly done; she was frequent grave, and montoni 
retain his usual reserve. 

nothing could exceed emily’s admiration on her first view of venice, 
with its islets, palaces, and tower rising out of the sea, whose clear 
surface reflect the tremulous picture in all its colours. the sun, 
sink in the west, tint the wave and the lofty mountain of 
friuli, which skirt the northern shore of the adriatic, with a saffron 
glow, while on the marble portico and colonnade of st. mark were 
thrown the rich lights and shades of evening. as they glide on, the 
grand features of this city appear more distinctly: its terraces, 
crown with airy yet majestic fabrics, touched, as they now were, with 
the splendour of the setting sun, appear as if they had been call 
up from the ocean by the wand of an enchanter, rather than rear by 
mortal hands. 

the sun, soon after, sink to the lower world, the shadow of the 
earth stole gradual over the waves, and then up the towering side of 
the mountain of friuli, till it extinguish even the last upward 
beam that had linger on their summits, and the melancholy purple of 
evening drew over them, like a thin veil. how deep, how beautiful was 
the tranquill that wrap the scene! all nature seem to repose; 
the finest emotion of the soul were alone awake. emily’s eyes fill 
with tear of admiration and sublime devotion, as she raise them over 
the sleep world to the vast heavens, and heard the note of solemn 
music, that stole over the waters from a distance. she listen in 
still rapture, and no person of the party broke the charm by an 
enquiry. the sound seem to grow on the air; for so smooth did the 
barge glide along, that its motion was not perceivable, and the fairy 
city appear approach to welcome the strangers. they now 
distinguished a female voice, accompany by a few instruments, singing 
a soft and mournful air; and its fine expression, as sometimes it 
seem pleading with the impassioned tender of love, and then 
languish into the cadence of hopeless grief, declared, that it 
flow from no feign sensibility. ah! thought emily, as she sigh 
and remember valancourt, those strain come from the heart! 

she look round, with anxious enquiry; the deep twilight, that had 
fallen over the scene, admitted only imperfect image to the eye, but, 
at some distance on the sea, she thought she perceive a gondola: a 
chorus of voice and instrument now swell on the air—so sweet, so 
solemn! it seem like the hymn of angel descend through the 
silence of night! now it die away, and fancy almost beheld the holy 
choir reascend towards heaven; then again it swell with the 
breeze, tremble awhile, and again die into silence. it brought to 
emily’s recollection some lines of her late father, and she repeated in 
a low voice, 

oft i hear, 
upon the silence of the midnight air, 
celestial voice swell in holy chorus 
that bear the soul to heaven! 


the deep stillness, that succeeded, was as expressive as the strain 
that had just ceased. it was uninterrupted for several minutes, till a 
general sigh seem to release the company from their enchantment. 
emily, however, long indulge the pleasing sadness, that had stolen 
upon her spirits; but the gay and busy scene that appeared, as the 
barge approach st. mark’s place, at length rouse her attention. the 
rising moon, which threw a shadowy light upon the terraces, and 
illumine the portico and magnificent arcade that crown them, 
discover the various company, whose light steps, soft guitars, and 
soft voices, echo through the colonnades. 

the music they heard before now pass montoni’s barge, in one of the 
gondolas, of which several were seen skim along the moonlight sea, 
full of gay parties, catching the cool breeze. most of these had music, 
made sweet by the wave over which it floated, and by the measured 
sound of oars, as they dashed the sparkle tide. emily gazed, and 
listened, and thought herself in a fairy scene; even madame montoni was 
pleased; montoni congratulate himself on his return to venice, which 
he call the first city in the world, and cavigni was more gay and 
animate than ever. 

the barge pass on to the grand canal, where montoni’s mansion was 
situated. and here, other form of beauty and of grandeur, such as her 
imagination had never painted, were unfold to emily in the palace of 
sansovino and palladio, as she glide along the waves. the air bore no 
sounds, but those of sweetness, echo along each margin of the canal, 
and from gondola on its surface, while group of mask were seen 
dance on the moonlight terraces, and seem almost to realise the 
romance of fairyland. 

the barge stop before the portico of a large house, from whence a 
servant of montoni cross the terrace, and immediately the party 
disembarked. from the portico they pass a noble hall to a staircase 
of marble, which led to a saloon, fitted up in a style of magnificence 
that surprise emily. the wall and ceiling were adorn with 
historical and allegorical paintings, in _fresco_; silver tripods, 
depend from chain of the same metal, illumine the apartment, the 
floor of which was cover with indian mat paint in a variety of 
colours and devices; the couch and drapery of the lattice were of 
pale green silk, embroider and fringe with green and gold. balcony 
lattice open upon the grand canal, whence rose a confusion of voice 
and of musical instruments, and the breeze that gave fresh to the 
apartment. emily, considering the gloomy temper of montoni, look upon 
the splendid furniture of this house with surprise, and remember the 
report of his being a man of broken fortune, with astonishment. “ah!” 
said she to herself, “if valancourt could but see this mansion, what 
peace would it give him! he would then be convinced that the report was 
groundless.” 

madame montoni seem to assume the air of a princess; but montoni was 
restless and discontented, and did not even observe the civility of 
bidding her welcome to her home. 

soon after his arrival, he ordered his gondola, and, with cavigni, went 
out to mingle in the scene of the evening. madame then became serious 
and thoughtful. emily, who was charm with everything she saw, 
endeavour to enliven her; but reflection had not, with madame 
montoni, subdued caprice and ill-humour, and her answer discover so 
much of both, that emily gave up the attempt of divert her, and 
withdrew to a lattice, to amuse herself with the scene without, so new 
and so enchanting. 

the first object that attract her notice was a group of dance on 
the terrace below, led by a guitar and some other instruments. the 
girl, who struck the guitar, and another, who flourish a tambourine, 
pass on in a dance step, and with a light grace and gaiety of 
heart, that would have subdued the goddess of spleen in her worst 
humour. after these came a group of fantastic figures, some dress as 
gondolieri, other as minstrels, while other seem to defy all 
description. they sung in parts, their voice accompany by a few soft 
instruments. at a little distance from the portico they stopped, and 
emily distinguished the verse of ariosto. they sung of the war of the 
moor against charlemagne, and then of the woe of orlando: afterwards 
the measure changed, and the melancholy sweet of petrarch 
succeeded. the magic of his grief was assist by all that italy 
music and italy expression, heighten by the enchantment of 
venetian moonlight, could give. 

emily, as she listened, caught the pensive enthusiasm; her tear flow 
silently, while her fancy bore her far away to france and to 
valancourt. each succeed sonnet, more full of charming sad than 
the last, seem to bind the spell of melancholy: with extreme regret 
she saw the musician move on, and her attention follow the strain 
till the last faint warble die in air. she then remain sunk in that 
pensive tranquill which soft music leaves on the mind—a state like 
that produce by the view of a beautiful landscape by moonlight, or by 
the recollection of scene marked with the tender of friends lost 
for ever, and with sorrows, which time has mellow into mild regret. 
such scene are indeed, to the mind, like “those faint trace which the 
memory bear of music that is past.” 

other sound soon awaken her attention: it was the solemn harmony of 
horns, that swell from a distance; and, observing the gondola 
arrange themselves along the margin of the terraces, she threw on her 
veil, and, step into the balcony, discerned, in the distant 
perspective of the canal, something like a procession, floating on the 
light surface of the water: as it approached, the horn and other 
instrument mingle sweetly, and soon after the fabled deity of the 
city seem to have arisen from the ocean; for neptune, with venice 
personify as his queen, came on the undulate waves, surround by 
triton and sea-nymphs. the fantastic splendour of this spectacle, 
together with the grandeur of the surrounding palaces, appear like 
the vision of a poet sudden embodied, and the fanciful images, which 
it awaken in emily’s mind, linger there long after the procession 
had pass away. she indulge herself in imagine what might be the 
manners and delight of a sea-nymph, till she almost wish to throw 
off the habit of mortality, and plunge into the green wave to 
participate them. 

“how delightful,” said she, “to live amidst the coral bower and 
crystal cavern of the ocean, with my sister nymphs, and listen to the 
sound waters above, and to the soft shell of the tritons! and then, 
after sunset, to skim on the surface of the wave round wild rocks and 
along sequester shores, where, perhaps, some pensive wanderer come 
to weep! then would i soothe his sorrow with my sweet music, and offer 
him from a shell some of the delicious fruit that hang round neptune’s 
palace.” 

she was recall from her reverie to a mere mortal supper, and could 
not forbear smile at the fancies she had been indulging, and at her 
conviction of the serious displeasure, which madame montoni would have 
expressed, could she have been made acquaint with them. 

after supper, her aunt sat late, but montoni did not return, and she at 
length retired to rest. if emily had admire the magnificence of the 
saloon, she was not less surprised, on observing the half-furnished and 
forlorn appearance of the apartments she pass in the way to her 
chamber, whither she went through long suite of noble rooms, that 
seemed, from their desolate aspect, to have been unoccupy for many 
years. on the wall of some were the fade remains of tapestry; from 
others, paint in fresco, the damp had almost withdrawn both colours 
and design. at length she reach her own chamber, spacious, desolate, 
and lofty, like the rest, with high lattice that open towards the 
adriatic. it brought gloomy image to her mind, but the view of the 
adriatic soon gave her other more airy, among which was that of the 
sea-nymph, whose delight she had before amuse herself with picturing; 
and, anxious to escape from serious reflections, she now endeavour to 
throw her fanciful idea into a train, and conclude the hour with 
compose the following lines: 

the sea-nymph 

down, down a thousand fathom deep, 
among the sound sea i go; 
play round the foot of ev’ry steep 
whose cliff above the ocean grow. 

there, within their secret cares, 
i hear the mighty river roar; 
and guide their stream through neptune’s wave 
to bless the green earth’s inmost shore: 

and bid the freshen’d waters glide, 
for fern-crown’d nymph of lake, or brook, 
through winding wood and pasture wide, 
and many a wild, romantic nook. 

for this the nymphs, at fall of eave, 
oft dance upon the flow’ry banks, 
and sing my name, and garland weave 
to bear beneath the wave their thanks. 

in coral bow’rs i love to lie, 
and hear the surge roll above, 
and through the waters view on high 
the proud ship sail, and gay cloud move. 

and oft at midnight’s stillest hour, 
when summer sea the vessel lave, 
i love to prove my charmful pow’r 
while floating on the moonlight wave. 

and when deep sleep the crew has bound, 
and the sad lover muse lean 
o’er the ship’s side, i breathe around 
such strain as speak no mortal means! 

o’er the dim wave his searching eye 
see but the vessel’s lengthen’d shade; 
above—the moon and azure sky; 
entranc’d he hears, and half afraid! 

sometimes, a single note i swell, 
that, soft sweet, at distance dies; 
then wake the magic of my shell, 
and choral voice round me rise! 

the tremble youth, charm’d by my strain, 
call up the crew, who, silent, bend 
o’er the high deck, but list in vain; 
my song is hush’d, my wonders end! 

within the mountain’s woody bay, 
where the tall bark at anchor rides, 
at twilight hour, with triton gay, 
i dance upon the lapse tides: 

and with my sister-nymphs i sport, 
till the broad sun looks o’er the floods; 
then, swift we seek our crystal court, 
deep in the wave, ’mid neptune’s woods. 

in cool arcade and glassy hall 
we pass the sultry hour of noon, 
beyond wherever sunbeam falls, 
weave sea-flowers in gay festoon. 

the while we chant our ditty sweet 
to some soft shell that warble near; 
join’d by the murmur currents, fleet, 
that glide along our hall so clear. 

there, the pale pearl and sapphire blue, 
and ruby red, and em’rald green, 
dart from the dome a change hue, 
and sparry column deck the scene. 

when the dark storm scowl o’er the deep, 
and long, long peal of thunder sound, 
on some high cliff my watch i keep 
o’er all the restless sea around: 

till on the ridgy wave afar 
come the lone vessel, labour slow, 
spread the white foam in the air, 
with sail and top-mast bend low. 

then, plunge i ’mid the ocean’s roar, 
my way by quiv’ring lightning shown, 
to guide the bark to peaceful shore, 
and hush the sailor’s fearful groan. 

and if too late i reach its side 
to save it from the ’whelming surge, 
i call my dolphin o’er the tide, 
to bear the crew where isle emerge. 

their mournful spirits soon i cheer, 
while round the desert coast i go, 
with warble song they faint hear, 
oft as the stormy gust sink low. 

my music leads to lofty groves, 
that wild upon the sea-bank wave; 
where sweet fruits bloom, and fresh spring roves, 
and close bough the tempest brave. 

then, from the air spirits obey 
my potent voice they love so well, 
and, on the clouds, paint vision gay, 
while strain more sweet at distance swell. 

and thus the lonely hour i cheat, 
soothe the ship-wreck’d sailor’s heart, 
till from the wave the storm retreat, 
and o’er the east the day-beams dart. 

neptune for this oft bind me fast 
to rocks below, with coral chain, 
till all the tempest’s over-past, 
and drown seamen cry in vain. 

whoe’er ye are that love my lay, 
come, when red sunset tint the wave, 
to the still sands, where fairy play; 
there, in cool seas, i love to lave. 




chapter iii 

he is a great observer, and he looks 
quite through the deed of men: he love no plays, 
....................he hear no music; 
seldom he smiles; and smile in such a sort, 
as if he mock’d himself, and scorn’d his spirit 
that could be mov’d to smile at anything. 
such men as he be never at heart’s ease, 
while they behold a greater than themselves. 
julius cÆsar 


montoni and his companion did not return home, till many hour after 
the dawn had blush upon the adriatic. the airy groups, which had 
dance all night along the colonnade of st. mark, disperse before the 
morning, like so many spirits. montoni had been otherwise engaged; his 
soul was little susceptible of light pleasures. he delight in the 
energy of the passions; the difficulty and tempest of life, which 
wreck the happiness of others, rouse and strengthen all the powers 
of his mind, and afford him the highest enjoyments, of which his 
nature was capable. without some object of strong interest, life was to 
him little more than a sleep; and, when pursuit of real interest 
failed, he substitute artificial ones, till habit change their 
nature, and they cease to be unreal. of this kind was the habit of 
gaming, which he had adopted, first, for the purpose of relieve him 
from the languor of inaction, but had since pursue with the ardour of 
passion. in this occupation he had pass the night with cavigni and a 
party of young men, who had more money than rank, and more vice than 
either. montoni despise the greater part of these for the inferior 
of their talents, rather than for their vicious inclinations, and 
associate with them only to make them the instrument of his purposes. 
among these, however, were some of superior abilities, and a few whom 
montoni admitted to his intimacy, but even towards these he still 
preserve a decisive and haughty air, which, while it impose 
submission on weak and timid minds, rouse the fierce hatred of strong 
ones. he had, of course, many and bitter enemies; but the rancour of 
their hatred prove the degree of his power; and, as power was his 
chief aim, he glory more in such hatred, than it was possible he 
could in being esteemed. a feeling so temper as that of esteem, he 
despised, and would have despise himself also had he thought himself 
capable of being flatter by it. 

among the few whom he distinguished, were the signor bertolini, 
orsino, and verezzi. the first was a man of gay temper, strong 
passions, dissipated, and of unbounded extravagance, but generous, 
brave, and unsuspicious. orsino was reserved, and haughty; loving power 
more than ostentation; of a cruel and suspicious temper; quick to feel 
an injury, and relentless in avenge it; cunning and unsearchable in 
contrivance, patient and indefatigable in the execution of his schemes. 
he had a perfect command of feature and of his passions, of which he 
had scarcely any, but pride, revenge and avarice; and, in the 
gratification of these, few consideration had power to restrain him, 
few obstacle to withstand the depth of his stratagems. this man was 
the chief favourite of montoni. verezzi was a man of some talent, of 
fiery imagination, and the slave of alternate passions. he was gay, 
voluptuous, and daring; yet had neither perseverance nor true courage, 
and was mean selfish in all his aims. quick to form schemes, and 
sanguine in his hope of success, he was the first to undertake, and to 
abandon, not only his own plans, but those adopt from other persons. 
proud and impetuous, he revolt against all subordination; yet those 
who were acquaint with his character, and watch the turn of his 
passions, could lead him like a child. 

such were the friends whom montoni introduce to his family and his 
table, on the day after his arrival at venice. there were also of the 
party a venetian nobleman, count morano, and a signora livona, whom 
montoni had introduce to his wife, as a lady of distinguished merit, 
and who, have call in the morning to welcome her to venice, had 
been request to be of the dinner party. 

madame montoni received with a very ill grace, the compliments of the 
signors. she dislike them, because they were the friends of her 
husband; hate them, because she believe they had contribute to 
detain him abroad till so late an hour of the preceding morning; and 
envy them, since, conscious of her own want of influence, she was 
convinced, that he prefer their society to her own. the rank of 
count morano procure him that distinction which she refuse to the 
rest of the company. the haughty sullen of her countenance and 
manner, and the ostentatious extravagance of her dress, for she had not 
yet adopt the venetian habit, were striking contrast by the 
beauty, modesty, sweet and simplicity of emily, who observed, with 
more attention than pleasure, the party around her. the beauty and 
fascinating manners of signora livona, however, won her involuntary 
regard; while the sweet of her accent and her air of gentle 
kindness awaken with emily those pleasing affections, which so long 
had slumbered. 

in the cool of the evening the party embark in montoni’s gondola, and 
row out upon the sea. the red glow of sunset still touched the waves, 
and linger in the west, where the melancholy gleam seem slow 
expiring, while the dark blue of the upper æther began to twinkle with 
stars. emily sat, given up to pensive and sweet emotions. the 
smooth of the water, over which she glided, its reflect images—a 
new heaven and tremble stars below the waves, with shadowy outline 
of tower and porticos, conspire with the still of the hour, 
interrupt only by the passing wave, or the note of distant music, to 
raise those emotion to enthusiasm. as she listen to the measured 
sound of the oars, and to the remote warble that came in the breeze, 
her soften mind return to the memory of st. aubert and to 
valancourt, and tear stole to her eyes. the ray of the moon, 
strengthen as the shadow deepened, soon after threw a silvery gleam 
upon her countenance, which was partly shade by a thin black veil, and 
touched it with inimitable softness. hers was the _contour_ of a 
madona, with the sensibility of a magdalen; and the pensive uplift 
eye, with the tear that glitter on her cheek, confirmed the 
expression of the character. 

the last strain of distant music now die in air, for the gondola was 
far upon the waves, and the party determined to have music of their 
own. the count morano, who sat next to emily, and who had been 
observing her for some time in silence, snatch up a lute, and struck 
the chord with the finger of harmony herself, while his voice, a fine 
tenor, accompany them in a rondeau full of tender sadness. to him, 
indeed, might have been applied that beautiful exhortation of an 
english poet, had it then existed: 

strike up, my master, 
but touch the strings with a religious softness! 
teach sound to languish through the night’s dull ear 
till melancholy start from off her couch, 
and careless grow concert to attention! 


with such powers of expression the count sung the following 

rondeau 

soft as yon silver ray, that sleep 
upon the ocean’s tremble tide; 
soft as the air, that lightly sweep 
yon sad, that swell in stately pride: 

soft as the surge’s steal note, 
that die along the distant shores, 
or warble strain, that sink remote— 
so soft the sigh my bosom pours! 

true as the wave to cynthia’s ray, 
true as the vessel to the breeze, 
true as the soul to music’s sway, 
or music to venetian seas: 

soft as yon silver beams, that sleep 
upon the ocean’s tremble breast; 
so soft, so true, fond love shall weep, 
so soft, so true, with _thee_ shall rest. 


the cadence with which he return from the last stanza to a repetition 
of the first; the fine modulation in which his voice stole upon the 
first line, and the pathetic energy with which it pronounced the last, 
were such as only exquisite taste could give. when he had concluded, he 
gave the lute with a sigh to emily, who, to avoid any appearance of 
affectation, immediately began to play. she sung a melancholy little 
air, one of the popular song of her native province, with a simplicity 
and pathos that made it enchanting. but its well-known melody brought 
so forcibly to her fancy the scene and the persons, among which she 
had often heard it, that her spirits were overcome, her voice tremble 
and ceased—and the strings of the lute were struck with a disorder 
hand; till, ashamed of the emotion she had betrayed, she sudden 
pass on to a song so gay and airy, that the steps of the dance seem 
almost to echo to the notes. _bravissimo!_ burst instantly from the 
lip of her delight auditors, and she was compel to repeat the 
air. among the compliments that followed, those of the count were not 
the least audible, and they had not concluded, when emily gave the 
instrument to signora livona, whose voice accompany it with true 
italy taste. 

afterwards, the count, emily, cavigni, and the signora, sung 
_canzonettes_, accompany by a couple of lute and a few other 
instruments. sometimes the instrument sudden ceased, and the voice 
drop from the full swell of harmony into a low chant; then, after a 
deep pause, they rose by degrees, the instrument one by one striking 
up, till the loud and full chorus soar again to heaven! 

meanwhile, montoni, who was weary of this harmony, was considering how 
he might disengage himself from his party, or withdraw with such of it 
as would be willing to play, to a casino. in a pause of the music, he 
propose return to shore, a proposal which orsino eager seconded, 
but which the count and the other gentlemen as warm opposed. 

montoni still meditate how he might excuse himself from long 
attendance upon the count, for to him only he thought excuse necessary, 
and how he might get to land, till the gondolieri of an empty boat, 
return to venice, hail his people. without trouble himself 
long about an excuse, he seize this opportunity of go thither, 
and, commit the ladies to the care of his friends, departed with 
orsino, while emily, for the first time, saw him go with regret; for 
she considered his presence a protection, though she knew not what she 
should fear. he landed at st. mark’s, and, hurry to a casino, was 
soon lost amidst a crowd of gamesters. 

meanwhile, the count have secret dispatch a servant in montoni’s 
boat, for his own gondola and musicians, emily heard, without knowing 
his project, the gay song of gondolieri approaching, as they sat on the 
stern of the boat, and saw the tremulous gleam of the moonlight wave, 
which their oar disturbed. presently she heard the sound of 
instruments, and then a full symphony swell on the air, and, the 
boat meeting, the gondolieri hail each other. the count then 
explain himself, the party remove into his gondola, which was 
embellish with all that taste could bestow. 

while they partook of a collation of fruits and ice, the whole band, 
following at a distance in the other boat, play the most sweet and 
enchanting strains, and the count, who had again seat himself by 
emily, paid her unremitt attention, and sometimes, in a low but 
impassioned voice, utter compliments which she could not 
misunderstand. to avoid them she converse with signora livona, and her 
manner to the count assume a mild reserve, which, though dignified, 
was too gentle to repress his assiduities: he could see, hear, speak to 
no person, but emily while cavigni observe him now and then, with a 
look of displeasure, and emily, with one of uneasiness. she now wish 
for nothing so much as to return to venice, but it was near midnight 
before the gondola approach st. mark’s place, where the voice of 
gaiety and song was loud. the busy hum of mingle sound was heard at 
a considerable distance on the water, and, had not a bright moonlight 
discover the city, with its terrace and towers, a stranger would 
almost have credit the fabled wonders of neptune’s court, and 
believed, that the tumult arose from beneath the waves. 

they landed at st. mark’s, where the gaiety of the colonnade and the 
beauty of the night, made madame montoni willing submit to the 
count’s solicit to join the promenade, and afterwards to take a 
supper with the rest of the party, at his casino. if anything could 
have dissipated emily’s uneasiness, it would have been the grandeur, 
gaiety, and novelty of the surrounding scene, adorn with palladio’s 
palaces, and busy with party of masqueraders. 

at length they withdrew to the casino, which was fitted up with 
infinite taste, and where a splendid banquet was prepared; but here 
emily’s reserve made the count perceive, that it was necessary for his 
interest to win the favour of madame montoni, which, from the 
condescension she had already shown to him, appear to be an 
achievement of no great difficulty. he transferred, therefore, part of 
his attention from emily to her aunt, who felt too much flatter by 
the distinction even to disguise her emotion; and before the party 
broke up, he had entire engaged the esteem of madame montoni. 
whenever he address her, her ungracious countenance relax into 
smiles, and to whatever he propose she assented. he invite her, with 
the rest of the party, to take coffee, in his box at the opera, on the 
following evening, and emily heard the invitation accepted, with strong 
anxiety, concerning the means of excuse herself from attend madame 
montoni thither. 

it was very late before their gondola was ordered, and emily’s surprise 
was extreme, when, on quit the casino, she beheld the broad sun 
rising out of the adriatic, while st. mark’s place was yet crowded with 
company. sleep had long weigh heavy on her eyes, but now the fresh 
sea-breeze revive her, and she would have quit the scene with 
regret, had not the count been present, perform the duty, which he 
had impose upon himself, of escort them home. there they heard that 
montoni was not yet returned; and his wife, retiring in displeasure to 
her apartment, at length release emily from the fatigue of further 
attendance. 

montoni came home late in the morning, in a very ill humour, have 
lost considerably at play, and, before he withdrew to rest, had a 
private conference with cavigni, whose manner, on the following day, 
seem to tell, that the subject of it had not been pleasing to him. 

in the evening, madame montoni, who, during the day, had observe a 
sullen silence towards her husband, received visit from some venetian 
ladies, with whose sweet manners emily was particularly charmed. they 
had an air of ease and kindness towards the strangers, as if they had 
been their familiar friends for years; and their conversation was by 
turn tender, sentimental and gay. madame, though she had no taste for 
such conversation, and whose coarse and selfish sometimes 
exhibit a ludicrous contrast to their excessive refinement, could not 
remain wholly insensible to the captivate of their manner. 

in a pause of conversation, a lady who was call signora herminia took 
up a lute, and began to play and sing, with as much easy gaiety, as if 
she had been alone. her voice was uncommonly rich in tone, and various 
in expression; yet she appear to be entire unconscious of its 
powers, and meant nothing less than to display them. she sung from the 
gaiety of her heart, as she sat with her veil half thrown back, holding 
graceful the lute, under the spread foliage and flower of some 
plants, that rose from baskets, and interlace one of the lattice of 
the saloon. emily, retiring a little from the company, sketch her 
figure, with the miniature scenery around her, and drew a very 
interesting picture, which, though it would not, perhaps, have borne 
criticism, had spirit and taste enough to awaken both the fancy and the 
heart. when she had finished it, she present it to the beautiful 
original, who was delight with the offering, as well as the sentiment 
it conveyed, and assured emily, with a smile of captivate sweetness, 
that she should preserve it as a pledge of her friendship. 

in the evening cavigni join the ladies, but montoni had other 
engagements; and they embark in the gondola for st. mark’s, where the 
same gay company seem to flutter as on the preceding night. the cool 
breeze, the glassy sea, the gentle sound of its waves, and the sweet 
murmur of distant music; the lofty portico and arcades, and the happy 
group that saunter beneath them; these, with every feature and 
circumstance of the scene, united to charm emily, no long tease by 
the officious attention of count morano. but, as she look upon the 
moonlight sea, undulate along the wall of st. mark, and, lingering 
for a moment over those walls, caught the sweet and melancholy song of 
some gondolier as he sat in his boat below, wait for his master, her 
soften mind return to the memory of her home, of her friends, and 
of all that was dear in her native country. 

after walking some time, they sat down at the door of a casino, and, 
while cavigni was accommodating them with coffee and ice, were join 
by count morano. he sought emily with a look of impatient delight, who, 
remember all the attention he had shown her on the preceding 
evening, was compelled, as before, to shrink from his assiduity into 
a timid reserve, except when she converse with signora herminia and 
the other ladies of her party. 

it was near midnight before they withdrew to the opera, where emily was 
not so charm but that, when she remember the scene she had just 
quitted, she felt how infinite inferior all the splendour of art is 
to the sublime of nature. her heart was not now affected, tear of 
admiration did not start to her eyes, as when she view the vast 
expanse of ocean, the grandeur of the heavens, and listen to the 
rolling waters, and to the faint music that, at intervals, mingle with 
their roar. remember these, the scene before her fade into 
insignificance. 

of the evening, which pass on without any particular incident, she 
wish the conclusion, that she might escape from the attention of the 
count; and, as opposite quality frequent attract each other in our 
thoughts, thus emily, when she look on count morano, remember 
valancourt, and a sigh sometimes follow the recollection. 

several week pass in the course of customary visits, during which 
nothing remarkable occurred. emily was amuse by the manners and scene 
that surround her, so different from those of france, but where count 
morano, too frequent for her comfort, contrived to introduce himself. 
his manner, figure and accomplishments, which were generally admired, 
emily would, perhaps, have admire also, had her heart been disengaged 
from valancourt, and had the count forborne to persecute her with 
officious attentions, during which she observe some trait in his 
character, that prejudiced her against whatever might otherwise be good 
in it. 

soon after his arrival at venice, montoni received a packet from m. 
quesnel, in which the latter mention the death of his wife’s uncle, 
at his villa on the brenta; and that, in consequence of this event, he 
should hasten to take possession of that estate and of other effects 
bequeath to him. this uncle was the brother of madame quesnel’s late 
mother; montoni was related to her by the father’s side, and though he 
could have had neither claim nor expectation concerning these 
possessions, he could scarcely conceal the envy which m. quesnel’s 
letter excited. 

emily had observe with concern, that, since they left france, montoni 
had not even affected kindness towards her aunt, and that, after 
treat her, at first, with neglect, he now met her with uniform 
ill-humour and reserve. she had never supposed, that her aunt’s foible 
could have escape the discernment of montoni, or that her mind or 
figure were of a kind to deserve his attention. her surprise, 
therefore, at this match, had been extreme; but since he had made the 
choice, she did not suspect that he would so openly have discover his 
contempt of it. but montoni, who had been allure by the seeming wealth 
of madame cheron, was now severe disappointed by her comparative 
poverty, and highly exasperate by the deceit she had employ to 
conceal it, till concealment was no long necessary. he had been 
deceive in an affair, wherein he meant to be the deceiver; out-witted 
by the superior cunning of a woman, whose understanding he despised, 
and to whom he had sacrifice his pride and his liberty, without saving 
himself from the ruin, which had impende over his head. madame montoni 
had contrived to have the greatest part of what she really did possess, 
settled upon herself: what remained, though it was total inadequate 
both to her husband’s expectations, and to his necessities, he had 
convert into money, and brought with him to venice, that he might a 
little long delude society, and make a last effort to regain the 
fortune he had lost. 

the hint which had been thrown out to valancourt, concerning montoni’s 
character and condition, were too true; but it was now left to time and 
occasion, to unfold the circumstances, both of what had, and of what 
had not been hinted, and to time and occasion we commit them. 

madame montoni was not of a nature to bear injury with meekness, or 
to resent them with dignity: her exasperate pride display itself in 
all the violence and acrimony of a little, or at least of an 
ill-regulated mind. she would not acknowledge, even to herself, that 
she had in any degree provoke contempt by her duplicity, but weak 
persist in believing, that she alone was to be pitied, and montoni 
alone to be censured; for, as her mind had naturally little perception 
of moral obligation, she seldom understood its force but when it 
happen to be violate towards herself: her vanity had already been 
severe shock by a discovery of montoni’s contempt; it remain to 
be farther reprove by a discovery of his circumstances. his mansion at 
venice, though its furniture discover a part of the truth to 
unprejudiced persons, told nothing to those who were blind by a 
resolution to believe whatever they wished. madame montoni still 
thought herself little less than a princess, possess a palace at 
venice, and a castle among the apennines. to the castle di udolpho, 
indeed, montoni sometimes talk of go for a few week to examine 
into its condition, and to receive some rents; for it appear that he 
had not been there for two years, and that, during this period, it had 
been inhabit only by an old servant, whom he call his steward. 

emily listen to the mention of this journey with pleasure, for she 
not only expect from it new ideas, but a release from the persevering 
assiduity of count morano. in the country, too, she would have 
leisure to think of valancourt, and to indulge the melancholy, which 
his image, and a recollection of the scene of la vallée, always 
blessed with the memory of her parents, awakened. the ideal scene were 
dearer, and more soothe to her heart, than all the splendour of gay 
assemblies; they were a kind of talisman that expel the poison of 
temporary evils, and support her hope of happy days: they appear 
like a beautiful landscape, light up by a gleam of sunshine, and seen 
through a perspective of dark and rugged rocks. 

but count morano did not long confine himself to silent assiduities; he 
declared his passion to emily, and made proposal to montoni, who 
encouraged, though emily rejected, him: with montoni for his friend, 
and an abundance of vanity to delude him, he did not despair of 
success. emily was astonish and highly disgust at his perseverance, 
after she had explain her sentiment with a frank that would not 
allow him to misunderstand them. 

he now pass the greater part of his time at montoni’s, dine there 
almost daily, and attend madame and emily wherever they went; and 
all this, notwithstanding the uniform reserve of emily, whose aunt 
seem as anxious as montoni to promote this marriage; and would never 
dispense with her attendance at any assembly where the count propose 
to be present. 

montoni now said nothing of his intended journey, of which emily wait 
impatient to hear; and he was seldom at home but when the count, or 
signor orsino, was there, for between himself and cavigni a cool 
seem to subsist, though the latter remain in his house. with 
orsino, montoni was frequent closet for hour together, and, 
whatever might be the business, upon which they consulted, it appear 
to be of consequence, since montoni often sacrifice to it his 
favourite passion for play, and remain at home the whole night. there 
was somewhat of privacy, too, in the manner of orsino’s visits, which 
had never before occurred, and which excited not only surprise, but 
some degree of alarm in emily’s mind, who had unwilling discover 
much of his character when he had most endeavour to disguise it. 
after these visits, montoni was often more thoughtful than usual; 
sometimes the deep workings of his mind entire abstracted him from 
surrounding objects, and threw a gloom over his visage that render it 
terrible; at others, his eyes seem almost to flash fire, and all the 
energy of his soul appear to be rouse for some great enterprise. 
emily observe these written character of his thought with deep 
interest, and not without some degree of awe, when she considered that 
she was entire in his power; but forbore even to hint her fears, or 
her observations, to madame montoni, who discern nothing in her 
husband, at these times, but his usual sternness. 

a second letter from m. quesnel announce the arrival of himself and 
his lady at the villa miarenti; state several circumstances of his 
good fortune, respecting the affair that had brought him into italy; 
and conclude with an earnest request to see montoni, his wife and 
niece, at his new estate. 

emily received, about the same period, a much more interesting letter, 
and which soothe for a while every anxiety of her heart. valancourt, 
hope she might be still at venice, had trust a letter to the 
ordinary post, that told her of his health, and of his uncease and 
anxious affection. he had linger at thoulouse for some time after her 
departure, that he might indulge the melancholy pleasure of wandering 
through the scene where he had been accustomed to behold her, and had 
thence gone to his brother’s château, which was in the neighbourhood of 
la vallée. have mention this, he added, “if the duty of attend 
my regiment did not require my departure, i know not when i should have 
resolution enough to quit the neighbourhood of a place which is 
endear by the remembrance of you. the vicinity to la vallée has alone 
detain me thus long at estuvière: i frequent ride thither early in 
the morning, that i may wander, at leisure, through the day, among 
scenes, which were once your home, where i have been accustomed to see 
you, and to hear you converse. i have renew my acquaintance with the 
good old theresa, who rejoice to see me, that she might talk of you: i 
need not say how much this circumstance attach me to her, or how 
eager i listen to her upon her favourite subject. you will guess 
the motive that first induce me to make myself known to theresa: it 
was, indeed, no other than that of gain admittance into the château 
and gardens, which my emily had so lately inhabited: here, then, i 
wander, and meet your image under every shade: but chiefly i love to 
sit beneath the spread branch of your favourite plane, where once, 
emily, we sat together; where i first venture to tell you, that i 
loved. o emily! the remembrance of those moments overcome me—i sit 
lost in reverie—i endeavour to see you dim through my tears, in all 
the heaven of peace and innocence, such as you then appear to me; to 
hear again the accent of that voice, which then thrill my heart with 
tender and hope. i lean on the wall of the terrace, where we 
together watch the rapid current of the garonne below, while i 
describe the wild scenery about its source, but thought only of you. o 
emily! are these moments pass for ever—will they never more return?” 

in another part of his letter he wrote thus. “you see my letter is 
dated on many different days, and, if you look back to the first, you 
will perceive, that i began to write soon after your departure from 
france. to write was, indeed, the only employment that withdrew me from 
my own melancholy, and render your absence supportable, or rather, it 
seem to destroy absence; for, when i was converse with you on 
paper, and telling you every sentiment and affection of my heart, you 
almost appear to be present. this employment has been from time to 
time my chief consolation, and i have defer send off my packet, 
merely for the comfort of prolong it, though it was certain, that 
what i had written, was written to no purpose till you received it. 
whenever my mind has been more than usually depressed i have come to 
pour forth its sorrow to you, and have always found consolation; and, 
when any little occurrence has interested my heart, and given a gleam 
of joy to my spirits, i have hasten to communicate it to you, and 
have received reflect satisfaction. thus, my letter is a kind of 
picture of my life and of my thought for the last month, and thus, 
though it has been deep interesting to me, while i wrote it, and i 
dare hope will, for the same reason, be not indifferent to you, yet to 
other reader it would seem to abound only in frivolities. thus it is 
always, when we attempt to describe the fine movements of the heart, 
for they are too fine to be discerned, they can only be experienced, 
and are therefore pass over by the indifferent observer, while the 
interested one feels, that all description is imperfect and 
unnecessary, except as it may prove the sincerity of the writer, and 
sooth his own sufferings. you will pardon all this egotism—for i am a 
lover.” 

“i have just heard of a circumstance, which entire destroy all my 
fairy paradise of ideal delight, and which will reconcile me to the 
necessity of return to my regiment, for i must no long wander 
beneath the beloved shades, where i have been accustomed to meet you in 
thought.—la vallée is let! i have reason to believe this is without 
your knowledge, from what theresa told me this morning, and, therefore, 
i mention the circumstance. she shed tears, while she related, that she 
was go to leave the service of her dear mistress, and the château 
where she had live so many happy years; and all this, add she, 
without even a letter from mademoiselle to soften the news; but it is 
all mons. quesnel’s doings, and i dare say she do not even know what 
is go forward.” 

“theresa added, that she had received a letter from him, inform her 
the château was let, and that, as her service would no long be 
required, she must quit the place, on that day week, when the new 
tenant would arrive.” 

“theresa had been surprise by a visit from m. quesnel, some time 
before the receipt of this letter, who was accompany by a stranger 
that view the premises with much curiosity.” 

towards the conclusion of his letter, which is dated a week after this 
sentence, valancourt adds, “i have received a summons from my regiment, 
and i join it without regret, since i am shut out from the scene that 
are so interesting to my heart. i rode to la vallée this morning, and 
heard that the new tenant was arrived, and that theresa was gone. i 
should not treat the subject thus familiarly if i did not believe you 
to be uninformed of this disposal of your house; for your satisfaction 
i have endeavour to learn something of the character and fortune of 
your tenant, but without success. he is a gentleman, they say, and this 
is all i can hear. the place, as i wander round the boundaries, 
appear more melancholy to my imagination, than i had ever seen it. i 
wish earnest to have got admittance, that i might have taken 
another leave of your favourite plane-tree, and thought of you once 
more beneath its shade: but i forbore to tempt the curiosity of 
strangers: the fishing-house in the woods, however, was still open to 
me; thither i went, and pass an hour, which i cannot even look back 
upon without emotion. o emily! surely we are not separate for 
ever—surely we shall live for each other!” 

this letter brought many tear to emily’s eyes; tear of tender and 
satisfaction on learning that valancourt was well, and that time and 
absence had in no degree efface her image from his heart. there were 
passage in this letter which particularly affected her, such as those 
describe his visit to la vallée, and the sentiment of delicate 
affection that its scene had awakened. it was a considerable time 
before her mind was sufficient abstracted from valancourt to feel the 
force of his intelligence concerning la vallée. that mons. quesnel 
should let it, without even consulting her on the measure, both 
surprise and shock her, particularly as it prove the absolute 
authority he thought himself entitle to exercise in her affairs. it is 
true, he had proposed, before she left france, that the château should 
be let, during her absence, and to the economical prudence of this she 
had nothing to object; but the commit what had been her father’s 
villa to the power and caprice of strangers, and the deprive herself 
of a sure home, should any unhappy circumstances make her look back to 
her home as an asylum, were consideration that made her, even then, 
strong oppose the measure. her father, too, in his last hour, had 
received from her a solemn promise never to dispose of la vallée; and 
this she considered as in some degree violate if she suffer the 
place to be let. but it was now evident with how little respect m. 
quesnel had regard these objections, and how insignificant he 
considered every obstacle to pecuniary advantage. it appeared, also, 
that he had not even condescend to inform montoni of the step he had 
taken, since no motive was evident for montoni’s conceal the 
circumstance from her, if it had been made known to him: this both 
displease and surprise her; but the chief subject of her uneasy 
were—the temporary disposal of la vallée, and the dismiss of her 
father’s old and faithful servant.—“poor theresa,” said emily, “thou 
hadst not save much in thy servitude, for thou wast always tender 
towards the poor, and believd’st thou shouldst die in the family, where 
thy best years had been spent. poor theresa!—now thou art turn out in 
thy old age to seek thy bread!” 

emily wept bitter as these thought pass over her mind, and she 
determined to consider what could be done for theresa, and to talk very 
explicit to m. quesnel on the subject; but she much fear that his 
cold heart could feel only for itself. she determined also to enquire 
whether he had made any mention of her affairs, in his letter to 
montoni, who soon gave her the opportunity she sought, by desire that 
she would attend him in his study. she had little doubt, that the 
interview was intended for the purpose of communicate to her a part 
of m. quesnel’s letter concerning the transactions at la vallée, and 
she obey him immediately. montoni was alone. 

“i have just been writing to mons. quesnel,” said he when emily 
appeared, “in reply to the letter i received from him a few days ago, 
and i wish to talk to you upon a subject that occupy part of it.” 

“i also wish to speak with you on this topic, sir,” said emily. 

“it is a subject of some interest to you, undoubtedly,” rejoin 
montoni, “and i think you must see it in the light that i do; indeed it 
will not bear any other. i trust you will agree with me, that any 
objection found on sentiment, as they call it, ought to yield to 
circumstances of solid advantage.” 

“granting this, sir,” reply emily, modestly, “those of humanity ought 
surely to be attend to. but i fear it is now too late to deliberate 
upon this plan, and i must regret, that it is no long in my power to 
reject it.” 

“it is too late,” said montoni; “but since it is so, i am pleased to 
observe, that you submit to reason and necessity without indulge 
useless complaint. i applaud this conduct exceedingly, the more, 
perhaps, since it discover a strength of mind seldom observable in 
your sex. when you are old you will look back with gratitude to the 
friends who assist in rescue you from the romantic illusion of 
sentiment, and will perceive, that they are only the snare of 
childhood, and should be vanquish the moment you escape from the 
nursery. i have not closed my letter, and you may add a few lines to 
inform your uncle of your acquiescence. you will soon see him, for it 
is my intention to take you, with madame montoni, in a few days to 
miarenti, and you can then talk over the affair.” 

emily wrote on the opposite page of the paper as follows: 

“it is now useless, sir, for me to remonstrate upon the circumstances 
of which signor montoni inform me that he has written. i could have 
wished, at least, that the affair had been conclude with less 
precipitation, that i might have taught myself to subdue some 
prejudices, as the signor call them, which still linger in my heart. 
as it is, i submit. in point of prudence nothing certainly can be 
objected; but, though i submit, i have yet much to say on some other 
points of the subject, when i shall have the honour of seeing you. in 
the meantime i entreat you will take care of theresa, for the sake of, 
“sir, 
“your affectionate niece, 
“emily st. aubert.” 


montoni smile satirical at what emily had written, but did not 
object to it, and she withdrew to her own apartment, where she sat down 
to begin a letter to valancourt, in which she related the particulars 
of her journey, and her arrival at venice, describe some of the most 
striking scene in the passage over the alps; her emotion on her first 
view of italy; the manners and character of the people around her, and 
some few circumstances of montoni’s conduct. but she avoid even 
name count morano, much more the declaration he had made, since she 
well knew how trembling alive to fear is real love, how jealous 
watchful of every circumstance that may affect its interest; and she 
scrupulous avoid to give valancourt even the slightest reason for 
believe he had a rival. 

on the following day count morano dine again at montoni’s. he was in 
an uncommon flow of spirits, and emily thought there was somewhat of 
exultation in his manner of address her, which she had never 
observe before. she endeavour to repress this by more than her usual 
reserve, but the cold civility of her air now seem rather to 
encourage than to depress him. he appear watchful of an opportunity 
of speak with her alone, and more than once solicit this; but 
emily always replied, that she could hear nothing from him which he 
would be unwill to repeat before the whole company. 

in the evening, madame montoni and her party went out upon the sea, and 
as the count led emily to his _zendaletto_, he carry her hand to his 
lips, and thank her for the condescension she had shown him. emily, 
in extreme surprise and displeasure, hasty withdrew her hand, and 
conclude that he had spoken ironically; but, on reach the steps of 
the terrace, and observing by the livery, that it was the count’s 
_zendaletto_ which wait below, while the rest of the party, have 
arrange themselves in the gondolas, were moving on, she determined not 
to permit a separate conversation, and, wish him a good evening, 
return to the portico. the count follow to expostulate and entreat, 
and montoni, who then came out, render solicit unnecessary, for, 
without condescend to speak, he took her hand, and led her to the 
_zendaletto_. emily was not silent; she entreat montoni, in a low 
voice, to consider the impropriety of these circumstances, and that he 
would spare her the mortification of submit to them; he, however, 
was inflexible. 

“this caprice is intolerable,” said he, “and shall not be indulged: 
there is no impropriety in the case.” 

at this moment, emily’s dislike of count morano rose to abhorrence. 
that he should, with undaunted assurance, thus pursue her, 
notwithstanding all she had express on the subject of his addresses, 
and think, as it was evident he did, that her opinion of him was of no 
consequence, so long as his pretension were sanction by montoni, 
add indignation to the disgust which she had felt towards him. she 
was somewhat relieved by observing that montoni was to be of the party, 
who seat himself on one side of her, while morano placed himself on 
the other. there was a pause for some moments as the gondolieri 
prepared their oars, and emily tremble from apprehension of the 
discourse that might follow this silence. at length she collected 
courage to break it herself, in the hope of prevent fine speech 
from morano, and reproof from montoni. to some trivial remark which she 
made, the latter return a short and disoblige reply; but morano 
immediately follow with a general observation, which he contrived to 
end with a particular compliment, and, though emily pass it without 
even the notice of a smile, he was not discouraged. 

“i have been impatient,” said he, address emily, “to express my 
gratitude; to thank you for your goodness; but i must also thank signor 
montoni, who has allow me this opportunity of do so.” 

emily regard the count with a look of mingle astonishment and 
displeasure. 

“why,” continue he, “should you wish to diminish the delight of this 
moment by that air of cruel reserve?—why seek to throw me again into 
the perplexity of doubt, by teaching your eyes to contradict the 
kindness of your late declaration? you cannot doubt the sincerity, the 
ardour of my passion; it is therefore unnecessary, charming emily! 
surely unnecessary, any long to attempt a disguise of your 
sentiments.” 

“if i ever had disguise them, sir,” said emily, with recollect 
spirit, “it would certainly be unnecessary any long to do so. i had 
hoped, sir, that you would have spare me any farther necessity of 
allude to them; but, since you do not grant this, hear me declare, 
and for the last time, that your perseverance has deprived you even of 
the esteem, which i was inclined to believe you merited.” 

“astonishing!” exclaim montoni: “this is beyond even my expectation, 
though i have hitherto done justice to the caprice of the sex! but you 
will observe, mademoiselle emily, that i am no lover, though count 
morano is, and that i will not be made the amusement of your capricious 
moments. here is the offer of an alliance, which would do honour to any 
family; yours, you will recollect, is not noble; you long resist my 
remonstrances, but my honour is now engaged, and it shall not be 
trifle with.—you shall adhere to the declaration, which you have made 
me an agent to convey to the count.” 

“i must certainly mistake you, sir,” said emily; “my answer on the 
subject have been uniform; it is unworthy of you to accuse me of 
caprice. if you have condescend to be my agent, it is an honour i did 
not solicit. i myself have constant assured count morano, and you 
also, sir, that i never can accept the honour he offer me, and i now 
repeat the declaration.” 

the count look with an air of surprise and enquiry at montoni, whose 
countenance also was marked with surprise, but it was surprise mingle 
with indignation. 

“here is confidence, as well as caprice!” said the latter. “will you 
deny your own words, madam?” 

“such a question is unworthy of an answer, sir;” said emily blushing; 
“you will recollect yourself, and be sorry that you have ask it.” 

“speak to the point,” rejoin montoni, in a voice of increase 
vehemence. “will you deny your own words; will you deny, that you 
acknowledged, only a few hour ago, that it was too late to recede from 
your engagements, and that you accept the count’s hand?” 

“i will deny all this, for no words of mine ever import it.” 

“astonishing! will you deny what you wrote to mons. quesnel, your 
uncle? if you do, your own hand will bear testimony against you. what 
have you now to say?” continue montoni, observing the silence and 
confusion of emily. 

“i now perceive, sir, that you are under a very great error, and that i 
have been equally mistaken.” 

“no more duplicity, i entreat; be open and candid, if it be possible.” 

“i have always been so, sir; and can claim no merit in such conduct, 
for i have had nothing to conceal.” 

“how is this, signor?” cry morano, with tremble emotion. 

“suspend your judgment, count,” reply montoni, “the wiles of a female 
heart are unsearchable. now, madame, your _explanation_.” 

“excuse me, sir, if i withhold my explanation till you appear willing 
to give me your confidence; assertion as present can only subject me to 
insult.” 

“your explanation, i entreat you!” said morano. 

“well, well,” rejoin montoni, “i give you my confidence; let us hear 
this explanation.” 

“let me lead to it then, by ask a question.” 

“as many as you please,” said montoni, contemptuously. 

“what, then, was the subject of your letter to mons. quesnel?” 

“the same that was the subject of your note to him, certainly. you did 
well to stipulate for my confidence before you demand that question.” 

“i must beg you will be more explicit, sir; what was that subject?” 

“what could it be, but the noble offer of count morano,” said montoni. 

“then, sir, we entire misunderstood each other,” reply emily. 

“we entire misunderstood each other too, i suppose,” rejoin 
montoni, “in the conversation which precede the writing of that note? 
i must do you the justice to own, that you are very ingenious at this 
same art of misunderstanding.” 

emily try to restrain the tear that came to her eyes, and to answer 
with becoming firmness. “allow me, sir, to explain myself fully, or to 
be wholly silent.” 

“the explanation may now be dispense with; it is anticipated. if count 
morano still think one necessary, i will give him an honest one: you 
have change your intention since our last conversation; and, if he can 
have patience and humility enough to wait till tomorrow, he will 
probably find it change again: but as i have neither the patience nor 
the humility, which you expect from a lover, i warn you of the effect 
of my displeasure!” 

“montoni, you are too precipitate,” said the count, who had listen to 
this conversation in extreme agitation and impatience;—“signora, i 
entreat your own explanation of this affair!” 

“signor montoni has said justly,” reply emily, “that all explanation 
may now be dispense with; after what has pass i cannot suffer myself 
to give one. it is sufficient for me, and for you, sir, that i repeat 
my late declaration; let me hope this is the last time it will be 
necessary for me to repeat it—i never can accept the honour of your 
alliance.” 

“charming emily!” exclaim the count in an impassioned tone, “let not 
resentment make you unjust; let me not suffer for the offence of 
montoni!—revoke—” 

“offence!” interrupt montoni—“count, this language is ridiculous, 
this submission is childish!—speak as become a man, not as the slave 
of a pretty tyrant.” 

“you distract me, signor; suffer me to plead my own cause; you have 
already prove insufficient to it.” 

“all conversation on this subject, sir,” said emily, “is worse than 
useless, since it can bring only pain to each of us: if you would 
oblige me, pursue it no farther.” 

“it is impossible, madam, that i can thus easily resign the object of a 
passion, which is the delight and torment of my life.—i must still 
love—still pursue you with unremitting ardour;—when you shall be 
convinced of the strength and constancy of my passion, your heart must 
soften into pity and repentance.” 

“is this generous, sir? is this manly? can it either deserve or obtain 
the esteem you solicit, thus to continue a persecution from which i 
have no present means of escaping?” 

a gleam of moonlight that fell upon morano’s countenance, reveal the 
strong emotion of his soul; and, glancing on montoni discover the 
dark resentment, which contrast his features. 

“by heaven this is too much!” sudden exclaim the count; “signor 
montoni, you treat me ill; it is from you that i shall look for 
explanation.” 

“from me, sir! you shall have it;” mutter montoni, “if your 
discernment is indeed so far obscure by passion, as to make 
explanation necessary. and for you, madam, you should learn, that a man 
of honour is not to be trifle with, though you may, perhaps, with 
impunity, treat a _boy_ like a puppet.” 

this sarcasm rouse the pride of morano, and the resentment which he 
had felt at the indifference of emily, being lost in indignation of the 
insole of montoni, he determined to mortify him, by defend her. 

“this also,” said he, reply to montoni’s last words, “this also, 
shall not pass unnoticed. i bid you learn, sir, that you have a 
strong enemy than a woman to contend with: i will protect signora st. 
aubert from your threaten resentment. you have misle me, and would 
revenge your disappointed view upon the innocent.” 

“misled you!” retort montoni with quickness, “is my conduct—my 
word”—then pausing, while he seem endeavour to restrain the 
resentment, that flash in his eyes, in the next moment he added, in a 
subdued voice, “count morano, this is a language, a sort of conduct to 
which i am not accustomed: it is the conduct of a passionate boy—as 
such, i pass it over in contempt.” 

“in contempt, signor?” 

“the respect i owe myself,” rejoin montoni, “requires, that i should 
converse more largely with you upon some points of the subject in 
dispute. return with me to venice, and i will condescend to convince 
you of your error.” 

“condescend, sir! but i will not condescend to be so converse with.” 

montoni smile contemptuously; and emily, now terrify for the 
consequence of what she saw and heard, could no long be silent. she 
explain the whole subject upon which she had mistaken montoni in the 
morning, declaring, that she understood him to have consult her 
solely concerning the disposal of la vallée, and conclude with 
entreating, that he would write immediately to m. quesnel, and rectify 
the mistake. 

but montoni either was, or affected to be, still incredulous; and count 
morano was still entangle in perplexity. while she was speaking, 
however, the attention of her auditor had been divert from the 
immediate occasion of their resentment, and their passion consequently 
became less. montoni desire the count would order his servant to row 
back to venice, that he might have some private conversation with him; 
and morano, somewhat soothe by his soften voice and manner, and 
eager to examine into the full extent of his difficulties, complied. 

emily, comfort by this prospect of release, employ the present 
moments in endeavouring, with conciliate care, to prevent any fatal 
mischief between the person who so lately had persecute and insult 
her. 

her spirits revived, when she heard once more the voice of song and 
laughter, resounding from the grand canal, and at length enter again 
between its stately piazzas. the _zendaletto_ stop at montoni’s 
mansion, and the count hasty led her into the hall, where montoni 
took his arm, and said something in a low voice, on which morano kiss 
the hand he held, notwithstanding emily’s effort to disengage it, and, 
wish her a good evening, with an accent and look she could not 
misunderstand, return to his _zendaletto_ with montoni. 

emily, in her own apartment, considered with intense anxiety all the 
unjust and tyrannical conduct of montoni, the dauntless perseverance of 
morano, and her own desolate situation, remove from her friends and 
country. she look in vain to valancourt, confine by his profession 
to a distant kingdom, as her protector; but it gave her comfort to 
know, that there was, at least, one person in the world, who would 
sympathise in her afflictions, and whose wish would fly eager to 
release her. yet she determined not to give him unavailing pain by 
relate the reason she had to regret the have reject his better 
judgment concerning montoni; reasons, however, which could not induce 
her to lament the delicacy and disinterested affection that had made 
her reject his proposal for a clandestine marriage. the approach 
interview with her uncle she regard with some degree of hope, for she 
determined to represent to him the distress of her situation, and to 
entreat that he would allow her to return to france with him and madame 
quesnel. then, sudden remember that her beloved la vallée, her 
only home, was no long at her command, her tear flow anew, and she 
fear that she had little pity to expect from a man who, like m. 
quesnel, could dispose of it without deign to consult with her, and 
could dismiss an age and faithful servant, destitute of either support 
or asylum. but, though it was certain, that she had herself no long a 
home in france, and few, very few friends there, she determined to 
return, if possible, that she might be release from the power of 
montoni, whose particularly oppressive conduct towards herself, and 
general character as to others, were just terrible to her 
imagination. she had no wish to reside with her uncle, m. quesnel, 
since his behaviour to her late father and to herself, had been 
uniform such as to convince her, that in flying to him she could only 
obtain an exchange of oppressors; neither had she the slightest 
intention of consent to the proposal of valancourt for an immediate 
marriage, though this would give her a lawful and a generous protector, 
for the chief reasons, which had formerly influence her conduct, still 
exist against it, while others, which seem to justify the step, 
would not be done away; and his interest, his fame were at all times 
too dear to her, to suffer her to consent to a union, which, at this 
early period of their lives, would probably defeat both. one sure, and 
proper asylum, however, would still be open to her in france. she knew 
that she could board in the convent, where she had formerly experienced 
so much kindness, and which had an affecting and solemn claim upon her 
heart, since it contained the remains of her late father. here she 
could remain in safety and tranquillity, till the term, for which la 
vallée might be let, should expire; or, till the arrangement of m. 
motteville’s affair enable her so far to estimate the remains of her 
fortune, as to judge whether it would be prudent for her to reside 
there. 

concerning montoni’s conduct with respect to his letters to m. quesnel, 
she had many doubts; however he might be at first mistaken on the 
subject, she much suspect that he wilful persevere in his error, 
as a means of intimidate her into a compliance with his wish of 
unite her to count morano. whether this was or was not the fact, she 
was extremely anxious to explain the affair to m. quesnel, and look 
forward with a mixture of impatience, hope and fear, to her approach 
visit. 

on the following day, madame montoni, being alone with emily, 
introduce the mention of count morano, by express her surprise, 
that she had not join the party on the water the preceding evening, 
and at her abrupt departure to venice. emily then related what had 
passed, express her concern for the mutual mistake that had occur 
between montoni and herself, and solicit her aunt’s kind offices in 
urge him to give a decisive denial to the count’s further addresses; 
but she soon perceived, that madame montoni had not been ignorant of 
the late conversation, when she introduce the present. 

“you have no encouragement to expect from me,” said her aunt, “in these 
notions. i have already given my opinion on the subject, and think 
signor montoni right in enforcing, by any means, your consent. if young 
person will be blind to their interest, and obstinate oppose it, 
why, the greatest blessing they can have are friends, who will oppose 
their folly. pray what pretension of any kind do you think you have to 
such a match as is now offer you?” 

“not any whatever, madam,” reply emily, “and, therefore, at least, 
suffer me to be happy in my humility.” 

“nay, niece, it cannot be denied, that you have pride enough; my poor 
brother, your father, had his share of pride too; though, let me add, 
his fortune did not justify it.” 

emily, somewhat embarrass by the indignation, which this malevolent 
allusion to her father excited, and by the difficulty of rendering her 
answer as temperate as it should be reprehensive, hesitate for some 
moments, in a confusion, which highly gratify her aunt. at length she 
said, “my father’s pride, madam, had a noble object—the happiness which 
he knew could be derive only from goodness, knowledge and charity. as 
it never consist in his superiority, in point of fortune, to some 
persons, it was not humble by his inferiority, in that respect, to 
others. he never disdain those, who were wretched by poverty and 
misfortune; he did sometimes despise persons, who, with many 
opportunity of happiness, render themselves miserable by vanity, 
ignorance and cruelty. i shall think it my highest glory to emulate 
such pride.” 

“i do not pretend to understand anything of these high-flown 
sentiments, niece; you have all that glory to yourself: i would teach 
you a little plain sense, and not have you so wise as to despise 
happiness.” 

“that would indeed not be wisdom, but folly,” said emily, “for wisdom 
can boast no higher attainment than happiness; but you will allow, 
madam, that our idea of happiness may differ. i cannot doubt, that you 
wish me to be happy, but i must fear you are mistaken in the means of 
making me so.” 

“i cannot boast of a learned education, niece, such as your father 
thought proper to give you, and, therefore, do not pretend to 
understand all these fine speech about happiness. i must be contented 
to understand only common sense, and happy would it have been for you 
and your father, if that had been included in his education.” 

emily was too much shock by these reflection on her father’s memory, 
to despise this speech as it deserved. 

madame montoni was about to speak, but emily quit the room, and 
retired to her own, where the little spirit she had lately exert 
yield to grief and vexation, and left her only to her tears. from 
every review of her situation she could derive, indeed, only new 
sorrow. to the discovery, which had just been forced upon her, of 
montoni’s unworthiness, she had now to add, that of the cruel vanity, 
for the gratification of which her aunt was about to sacrifice her; of 
the effrontery and cunning, with which, at the time that she meditate 
the sacrifice, she boast of her tenderness, or insult her victim; 
and of the venomous envy, which, as it did not scruple to attack her 
father’s character, could scarcely be expect to withhold from her 
own. 

during the few days that intervene between this conversation and the 
departure for miarenti, montoni did not once address himself to emily. 
his looks sufficient declared his resentment; but that he should 
forbear to renew a mention of the subject of it, exceedingly surprise 
her, who was no less astonished, that, during three days, count morano 
neither visit montoni, nor was name by him. several conjecture 
arose in her mind. sometimes she fear that the dispute between them 
had been revived, and had end fatally to the count. sometimes she was 
inclined to hope, that weariness, or disgust at her firm rejection of 
his suit had induce him to relinquish it; and, at others, she 
suspect that he had now recourse to stratagem, and forbore his 
visits, and prevail with montoni to forbear the repetition of his 
name, in the expectation that gratitude and generous would prevail 
with her to give him the consent, which he could not hope from love. 

thus pass the time in vain conjecture, and alternate hope and fears, 
till the day arrive when montoni was to set out for the villa of 
miarenti, which, like the preceding ones, neither brought the count, 
nor the mention of him. 

montoni have determined not to leave venice, till towards evening, 
that he might avoid the heats, and catch the cool breeze of night, 
embark about an hour before sunset, with his family, in a barge, for 
the brenta. emily sat alone near the stern of the vessel, and, as it 
float slow on, watch the gay and lofty city lessen from her 
view, till its palace seem to sink in the distant waves, while its 
lofty tower and domes, illumine by the decline sun, appear on 
the horizon, like those far-seen cloud which, in more northern climes, 
often linger on the western verge, and catch the last light of a 
summer’s evening. soon after, even these grew dim, and fade in 
distance from her sight; but she still sat gaze on the vast scene of 
cloudless sky, and mighty waters, and listen in pleasing awe to the 
deep-sounding waves, while, as her eyes glance over the adriatic, 
towards the opposite shores, which were, however, far beyond the reach 
of sight, she thought of greece, and, a thousand classical remembrance 
steal to her mind, she experienced that pensive luxury which is felt 
on view the scene of ancient story, and on compare their present 
state of silence and solitude with that of their former grandeur and 
animation. the scene of the illiad illapse in glowing colours to her 
fancy—scenes, once the haunt of heroes—now lonely, and in ruins; but 
which still shone, in the poet’s strain, in all their youthful 
splendour. 

as her imagination paint with melancholy touches, the desert plain 
of troy, such as they appear in this after-day, she reanimate the 
landscape with the following little story. 

stanza 

o’er ilion’s plains, where once the warrior bled, 
and once the poet rais’d his deathless strain, 
o’er ilion’s plain a weary driver led 
his stately camels: for the ruin’d fane 

wide round the lonely scene his glance he threw, 
for now the red cloud fade in the west, 
and twilight o’er the silent landscape drew 
her deep’ning veil; eastward his course he prest: 

there, on the grey horizon’s glimm’ring bound, 
rose the proud column of desert troy, 
and wandering shepherd now a shelter found 
within those walls, where prince wont to joy. 

beneath a lofty porch the driver pass’d, 
then, from his camel heav’d the heavy load; 
partook with them the simple, cool repast, 
and in short vesper gave himself to god. 

from distant lands with merchandise he came, 
his all of wealth his patient servant bore; 
oft deep-drawn sigh his anxious wish proclaim 
to reach, again, his happy cottage door; 

for there, his wife, his little children, dwell; 
their smile shall pay the toil of many an hour: 
ev’n now warm tear to expectation swell, 
as fancy o’er his mind extend her pow’r. 

a death-like still reign’d, where once the song, 
the song of heroes, wak’d the midnight air, 
save, when a solemn murmur roll’d along, 
that seem’d to say—“for future world prepare.” 

for time’s imperious voice was frequent heard 
shake the marble temple to its fall, 
(by hand he long had conquer’d, vain rear’d), 
and distant ruins answer’d to his call. 

while hamet slept, his camel round him lay, 
beneath him, all his store of wealth was piled; 
and here, his cruse and empty wallet lay, 
and there, the flute that chear’d him in the wild. 

the robber tartar on his slumber stole, 
for o’er the waste, at eve, he watch’d his train; 
ah! who his thirst of plunder shall control? 
who call on him for mercy—calls in vain! 

a poison’d poignard in his belt he wore, 
a crescent sword depend at his side, 
the deathful quiver at his back he bore, 
and infants—at his very look had died! 

the moon’s cold beam athwart the temple fell, 
and to his sleep prey the tartar led; 
but soft!—a startle camel shook his bell, 
then stretch’d his limbs, and rear’d his drowsy head. 

hamet awoke! the poignard glitter’d high! 
swift from his couch he sprung, and ’scap’d the blow; 
when from an unknown hand the arrow fly, 
that lay the ruffian, in his vengeance, low. 

he groan’d, he died! from forth a column’d gate 
a fearful shepherd, pale and silent, crept, 
who, as he watch’d his fold flock star-late, 
had mark’d the robber steal where hamet slept. 

he fear’d his own, and sav’d a stranger’s life! 
poor hamet clasp’d him to his grateful heart; 
then, rous’d his camel for the dusty strife, 
and, with the shepherd, hasten’d to depart. 

and now, aurora breathe her fresh’ning gale, 
and faint tremble on the eastern cloud; 
and now, the sun, from under twilight’s veil, 
looks gaily forth, and melt her airy shroud. 

wide o’er the level plains, his slant beam 
dart their long lines on ilion’s tower’d site; 
the distant hellespont with morning gleams, 
and old scamander wind his wave in light. 

all merry sound the camel bells, so gay, 
and merry beat fond hamet’s heart, for he, 
e’er the dim evening steal upon the day, 
his children, wife and happy home shall see. 


as emily approach the shore of italy she began to discriminate the 
rich features and varied colouring of the landscape—the purple hills, 
grove of orange pine and cypress, shading magnificent villas, and 
town rising among vineyard and plantations. the noble brenta, pour 
its broad wave into the sea, now appeared, and, when she reach its 
mouth, the barge stopped, that the horse might be fasten which were 
now to tow it up the stream. this done, emily gave a last look to the 
adriatic, and to the dim sail, 

that from the sky-mix’d wave 
dawn on the sight, 


and the barge slow glide between the green and luxuriant slope of 
the river. the grandeur of the palladian villas, that adorn these 
shores, was considerably heighten by the setting rays, which threw 
strong contrast of light and shade upon the portico and long arcades, 
and beam a mellow lustre upon the orangery and the tall grove of 
pine and cypress, that overhung the buildings. the scent of oranges, of 
flowering myrtles, and other odoriferous plant was diffuse upon the 
air, and often, from these embowered retreats, a strain of music stole 
on the calm, and “softened into silence.” 

the sun now sunk below the horizon, twilight fell over the landscape, 
and emily, wrapt in muse silence, continue to watch its features 
gradual vanish into obscurity. she remember her many happy 
evenings, when with st. aubert she had observe the shades of twilight 
steal over a scene as beautiful as this, from the garden of la vallée, 
and a tear fell to the memory of her father. her spirits were soften 
into melancholy by the influence of the hour, by the low murmur of the 
wave passing under the vessel, and the still of the air, that 
tremble only at interval with distant music:—why else should she, at 
these moments, have look on her attachment to valancourt with 
presage so very afflicting, since she had but lately received letters 
from him, that had soothe for a while all her anxieties? it now seem 
to her oppress mind, that she had taken leave of him for ever, and 
that the countries, which separate them, would never more be retrace 
by her. she look upon count morano with horror, as in some degree the 
cause of this; but apart from him, a conviction, if such that may be 
called, which arise from no proof, and which she knew not how to 
account for, seize her mind—that she should never see valancourt 
again. though she knew, that neither morano’s solicitations, nor 
montoni’s command had lawful power to enforce her obedience, she 
regard both with a superstitious dread, that they would finally 
prevail. 

lost in this melancholy reverie, and shed frequent tears, emily was 
at length rouse by montoni, and she follow him to the cabin, where 
refreshments were spread, and her aunt was seat alone. the 
countenance of madame montoni was inflamed with resentment, that 
appear to be the consequence of some conversation she had held with 
her husband, who regard her with a kind of sullen disdain, and both 
preserved, for some time, a haughty silence. montoni then spoke to 
emily of mons. quesnel: “you will not, i hope, persist in disclaim 
your knowledge of the subject of my letter to him?” 

“i had hoped, sir, that it was no long necessary for me to disclaim 
it,” said emily, “i had hoped, from your silence, that you were 
convinced of your error.” 

“you have hope impossible then,” reply montoni; “i might as 
reasonably have expect to find sincerity and uniform of conduct in 
one of your sex, as you to convict me of error in this affair.” 

emily blushed, and was silent; she now perceive too clearly, that she 
had hope an impossibility, for, where no mistake had been committed no 
conviction could follow; and it was evident, that montoni’s conduct had 
not been the consequence of mistake, but of design. 

anxious to escape from conversation, which was both afflict and 
humiliate to her, she soon return to the deck, and resume her 
station near the stern, without apprehension of cold, for no vapour 
rose from the water, and the air was dry and tranquil; here, at least, 
the benevolence of nature allow her the quiet which montoni had 
deny her elsewhere. it was now past midnight. the stars shed a kind 
of twilight, that serve to show the dark outline of the shore on 
either hand, and the grey surface of the river; till the moon rose from 
behind a high palm grove, and shed her mellow lustre over the scene. 
the vessel glide smooth on: amid the still of the hour emily 
heard, now and then, the solitary voice of the barge-men on the bank, 
as they spoke to their horses; while, from a remote part of the vessel, 
with melancholy song, 

the sailor sooth’d, 
beneath the tremble moon, the midnight wave. 


emily, meanwhile, anticipate her reception by mons, and madame 
quesnel; considered what she should say on the subject of la vallée; 
and then, to withhold her mind from more anxious topics, try to amuse 
herself by discriminating the faint-drawn features of the landscape, 
repose in the moonlight. while her fancy thus wandered, she saw, at a 
distance, a building peep between the moonlight trees, and, as the 
barge approached, heard voice speaking, and soon distinguished the 
lofty portico of a villa, overshadow by grove of pine and sycamore, 
which she recollect to be the same, that had formerly been pointed 
out to her, as belong to madame quesnel’s relative. 

the barge stop at a flight of marble steps, which led up the bank to 
a lawn. lights appear between some pillar beyond the portico. 
montoni sent forward his servant, and then disembark with his family. 
they found mons. and madame quesnel, with a few friends, seat on 
sofa in the portico, enjoy the cool breeze of the night, and eat 
fruits and ices, while some of their servant at a little distance, on 
the river’s bank, were perform a simple serenade. emily was now 
accustomed to the way of living in this warm country, and was not 
surprise to find mons. and madame quesnel in their portico, two hour 
after midnight. 

the usual salutation being over, the company seat themselves in the 
portico, and refreshments were brought them from the adjoin hall, 
where a banquet was spread, and servant attended. when the bustle of 
this meeting had subsided, and emily had recover from the little 
flutter into which it had thrown her spirits, she was struck with the 
singular beauty of the hall, so perfectly accommodate to the luxury 
of the season. it was of white marble, and the roof, rising into an 
open cupola, was support by column of the same material. two 
opposite side of the apartment, terminate in open porticos, admitted 
to the hall a full view of the gardens, and of the river scenery; in 
the centre a fountain continual refresh the air, and seem to 
heighten the fragrance, that breathe from the surrounding orangeries, 
while its dashing waters gave an agreeable and soothe sound. etruscan 
lamps, suspend from the pillars, diffuse a brilliant light over the 
interior part of the hall, leave the remote portico to the soft 
lustre of the moon. 

mons. quesnel talk apart to montoni of his own affairs, in his usual 
strain of self-importance; boast of his new acquisitions, and then 
affected to pity some disappointments, which montoni had lately 
sustained. meanwhile, the latter, whose pride at least enable him to 
despise such vanity as this, and whose discernment at once detect 
under this assume pity, the frivolous malignity of quesnel’s mind, 
listen to him in contemptuous silence, till he name his niece, and 
then they left the portico, and walk away into the gardens. 

emily, however, still attend to madame quesnel, who spoke of france 
(for even the name of her native country was dear to her) and she found 
some pleasure in look at a person, who had lately been in it. that 
country, too, was inhabit by valancourt, and she listen to the 
mention of it, with a faint hope, that he also would be named. madame 
quesnel, who, when she was in france, had talk with rapture of italy, 
now, that she was in italy, talk with equal praise of france, and 
endeavour to excite the wonder and the envy of her auditor by 
account of places, which they had not been happy enough to see. in 
these description she not only impose upon them, but upon herself, 
for she never thought a present pleasure equal to one, that was passed; 
and thus the delicious climate, the fragrant orangery and all the 
luxuries, which surround her, slept unnoticed, while her fancy 
wander over the distant scene of a northern country. 

emily listen in vain for the name of valancourt. madame montoni spoke 
in her turn of the delight of venice, and of the pleasure she expect 
from visiting the fine castle of montoni, on the apennine; which latter 
mention, at least, was merely a retaliate boast, for emily well knew, 
that her aunt had no taste for solitary grandeur, and, particularly, 
for such as the castle of udolpho promised. thus the party continue to 
converse, and, as far as civility would permit, to torture each other 
by mutual boasts, while they recline on sofa in the portico, and were 
environed with delight both from nature and art, by which any honest 
mind would have been temper to benevolence, and happy imagination 
would have been soothe into enchantment. 

the dawn, soon after, tremble in the eastern horizon, and the light 
tint of morning, gradual expanding, show the beautiful decline 
form of the italy mountain and the gleam landscapes, stretch 
at their feet. then the sunbeams, shoot up from behind the hills, 
spread over the scene that fine saffron tinge, which seem to impart 
repose to all it touches. the landscape no long gleamed; all its 
glowing colours were revealed, except that its remote features were 
still soften and united in the mist of distance, whose sweet effect 
was heighten to emily by the dark verdure of the pine and cypresses, 
that over-arched the foreground of the river. 

the market people, passing with their boat to venice, now form a 
moving picture on the brenta. most of these had little paint awnings, 
to shelter their owner from the sunbeams, which, together with the 
piles of fruit and flowers, display beneath, and the tasteful 
simplicity of the peasant girls, who watch the rural treasures, 
render them gay and striking objects. the swift movement of the boat 
down the current, the quick glance of oar in the water, and now and 
then the passing chorus of peasants, who recline under the sail of 
their little bark, or the tone of some rustic instrument, play by a 
girl, as she sat near her sylvan cargo, heighten the animation and 
festivity of the scene. 

when montoni and m. quesnel had join the ladies, the party left the 
portico for the gardens, where the charming scenery soon withdrew 
emily’s thought from painful subjects. the majestic form and rich 
verdure of cypress she had never seen so perfect before: grove of 
cedar, lemon, and orange, the spiry cluster of the pine and poplar, 
the luxuriant chesnut and oriental plane, threw all their pomp of shade 
over these gardens; while bower of flowering myrtle and other spicy 
shrub mingle their fragrance with that of flowers, whose vivid and 
various colouring glow with increase effect beneath the contrast 
umbrage of the groves. the air also was continual refresh by 
rivulets, which, with more taste than fashion, had been suffer to 
wander among the green recesses. 

emily often linger behind the party, to contemplate the distant 
landscape, that closed a vista, or that gleam beneath the dark 
foliage of the foreground;—the spiral summit of the mountains, touched 
with a purple tint, broken and steep above, but shelving gradual to 
their base; the open valley, marked by no formal lines of art; and the 
tall grove of cypress, pine and poplar, sometimes embellish by a 
ruin villa, whose broken column appear between the branch of a 
pine, that seem to droop over their fall. 

from other parts of the gardens, the character of the view was entire 
changed, and the fine solitary beauty of the landscape shift for the 
crowded features and varied colouring of inhabitation. 

the sun was now gain fast upon the sky, and the party quit the 
gardens, and retired to repose. 



chapter iv 

and poor misfortune feel the lash of vice. 
thomson 


emily seize the first opportunity of converse alone with mons. 
quesnel, concerning la vallée. his answer to her enquiry were 
concise, and deliver with the air of a man, who is conscious of 
possess absolute power and impatient of hearing it questioned. he 
declared, that the disposal of the place was a necessary measure; and 
that she might consider herself indebted to his prudence for even the 
small income that remain for her. “but, however,” add he, “when 
this venetian count (i have forgot his name) marry you, your present 
disagreeable state of dependence will cease. as a relation to you i 
rejoice in the circumstance, which is so fortunate for you, and, i may 
add, so unexpected by your friends.” for some moments emily was chill 
into silence by this speech; and, when she attempt to undeceive him, 
concerning the purport of the note she had inclose in montoni’s 
letter, he appear to have some private reason for disbelieve her 
assertion, and, for a considerable time, persevere in accuse her of 
capricious conduct. being, at length, however, convinced that she 
really dislike morano and had positively reject his suit, his 
resentment was extravagant, and he express it in terms equally 
pointed and inhuman; for, secret flatter by the prospect of a 
connection with a nobleman, whose title he had affected to forget, he 
was incapable of feeling pity for whatever suffering of his niece 
might stand in the way of his ambition. 

emily saw at once in his manner all the difficulties, that await her, 
and, though no oppression could have power to make her renounce 
valancourt for morano, her fortitude now tremble at an encounter with 
the violent passion of her uncle. 

she oppose his turbulence and indignation only by the mild dignity of 
a superior mind; but the gentle firm of her conduct serve to 
exasperate still more his resentment, since it compel him to feel 
his own inferiority, and, when he left her, he declared, that, if she 
persist in her folly, both himself and montoni would abandon her to 
the contempt of the world. 

the calm she had assume in his presence fail emily, when alone, 
and she wept bitterly, and call frequent upon the name of her 
departed father, whose advice to her from his death-bed she then 
remembered. “alas!” said she, “i do indeed perceive how much more 
valuable is the strength of fortitude than the grace of sensibility, 
and i will also endeavour to fulfil the promise i then made; i will not 
indulge in unavailing lamentation, but will try to endure, with 
firmness, the oppression i cannot elude.” 

somewhat soothe by the consciousness of perform a part of st. 
aubert’s last request, and of endeavour to pursue the conduct which 
he would have approved, she overcame her tears, and, when the company 
met at dinner, had recover her usual serene of countenance. 

in the cool of the evening, the ladies took the _fresco_ along the bank 
of the brenta in madame quesnel’s carriage. the state of emily’s mind 
was in melancholy contrast with the gay group assemble beneath the 
shades that overhung this enchanting stream. some were dance under 
the trees, and other recline on the grass, taking ice and coffee 
and calm enjoy the effect of a beautiful evening, on a luxuriant 
landscape. emily, when she look at the snow-capped apennines, 
ascend in the distance, thought of montoni’s castle, and suffer 
some terror, lest he should convey her thither, for the purpose of 
enforce her obedience; but the thought vanished, when she considered, 
that she was as much in his power at venice as she could be elsewhere. 

it was moonlight before the party return to the villa, where supper 
was spread in the airy hall, which had so much enchant emily’s fancy, 
on the preceding night. the ladies seat themselves in the portico, 
till mons. quesnel, montoni, and other gentlemen should join them at 
table, and emily endeavour to resign herself to the tranquill of 
the hour. presently, a barge stop at the steps that led into the 
gardens, and, soon after, she distinguished the voice of montoni and 
quesnel, and then that of morano, who, in the next moment, appeared. 
his compliments she received in silence, and her cold air seem at 
first to discompose him; but he soon recover his usual gaiety of 
manner, though the officious kindness of m. and madame quesnel emily 
perceive disgust him. such a degree of attention she had scarcely 
believe could be shown by m. quesnel, for she had never before seen 
him otherwise than in the presence of his inferior or equals. 

when she could retire to her own apartment, her mind almost 
involuntary dwelt on the most probable means of prevailing with the 
count to withdraw his suit, and to her liberal mind none appear more 
probable, than that of acknowledge to him a prior attachment and 
throw herself upon his generous for a release. when, however, on 
the following day, he renew his addresses, she shrunk from the 
adoption of the plan she had formed. there was something so repugnant 
to her just pride, in lay open the secret of her heart to such a man 
as morano, and in sue to him for compassion, that she impatient 
reject this design and wondered, that she could have pause upon it 
for a moment. the rejection of his suit she repeated in the most 
decisive terms she could select, mingle with it a severe censure of 
his conduct; but, though the count appear mortify by this, he 
persevere in the most ardent profession of admiration, till he was 
interrupt and emily release by the presence of madame quesnel. 

during her stay at this pleasant villa, emily was thus render 
miserable by the assiduity of morano, together with the cruel 
exert authority of m. quesnel and montoni, who, with her aunt, seem 
now more resolute determined upon this marriage than they had even 
appear to be at venice. m. quesnel, finding, that both argument and 
menace were ineffectual in enforce an immediate conclusion to it, at 
length relinquish his endeavours, and trust to the power of montoni 
and to the course of event at venice. emily, indeed, look to venice 
with hope, for there she would be relieved in some measure from the 
persecution of morano, who would no long be an inhabitant of the same 
house with herself, and from that of montoni, whose engagement would 
not permit him to be continual at home. but amidst the pressure of 
her own misfortunes, she did not forget those of poor theresa, for whom 
she plead with courageous tender to quesnel, who promised, in 
slight and general terms, that she should not be forgotten. 

montoni, in a long conversation with m. quesnel, arrange the plan to 
be pursue respecting emily, and m. quesnel propose to be at venice, 
as soon as he should be informed, that the nuptials were concluded. 

it was new to emily to part with any person, with whom she was 
connected, without feeling of regret; the moment, however, in which she 
took leave of m. and madame quesnel, was, perhaps, the only 
satisfactory one she had known in their presence. 

morano return in montoni’s barge, and emily, as she watch her 
gradual approach to that magic city, saw at her side the only person, 
who occasion her to view it with less than perfect delight. they 
arrive there about midnight, when emily was release from the presence 
of the count, who, with montoni, went to a casino, and she was suffer 
to retire to her own apartment. 

on the following day, montoni, in a short conversation, which he held 
with emily, informed her, that he would no long be _trifled_ with, 
and that, since her marriage with the count would be so highly 
advantageous to her, that folly only could object to it, and folly of 
such extent as was incapable of conviction, it should be celebrated 
without further delay, and, if that was necessary, without her consent. 

emily, who had hitherto try remonstrance, had now recourse to 
supplication, for distress prevent her from foreseeing, that, with a 
man of montoni’s disposition, supplicate would be equally useless. 
she afterwards enquire by what right he exert this unlimited 
authority over her, a question, which her better judgment would have 
withheld her, in a calm moment, from making, since it could avail her 
nothing, and would afford montoni another opportunity of triumph 
over her defenceless condition. 

“by what right!” cry montoni, with a malicious smile, “by the right 
of my will; if you can elude that, i will not inquire by what right you 
do so. i now remind you, for the last time, that you are a stranger, in 
a foreign country, and that it is your interest to make me your friend; 
you know the means; if you compel me to become your enemy—i will 
venture to tell you, that the punishment shall exceed your expectation. 
you may know _i_ am not to be trifle with.” 

emily continued, for some time after montoni had left her, in a state 
of despair, or rather stupefaction; a consciousness of misery was all 
that remain in her mind. in this situation madame montoni found her, 
at the sound of whose voice emily look up, and her aunt, somewhat 
soften by the expression of despair, that fixed her countenance, 
spoke in a manner more kind than she had ever yet done. emily’s heart 
was touched; she shed tears, and, after weeping for some time, 
recover sufficient composure to speak on the subject of her distress, 
and to endeavour to interest madame montoni in her behalf. but, though 
the compassion of her aunt had been surprised, her ambition was not to 
be overcome, and her present object was to be the aunt of a countess. 
emily’s efforts, therefore, were as unsuccessful as they had been with 
montoni, and she withdrew to her apartment to think and weep alone. how 
often did she remember the parting scene with valancourt, and wish, 
that the italy had mention montoni’s character with less reserve! 
when her mind, however, had recover from the first shock of this 
behaviour, she considered, that it would be impossible for him to 
compel her alliance with morano, if she persist in refuse to repeat 
any part of the marriage ceremony; and she persevere in her resolution 
to await montoni’s threaten vengeance rather than give herself for 
life to a man, whom she must have despise for his present conduct, had 
she never even love valancourt; yet she tremble at the revenge she 
thus resolve to brave. 

an affair, however, soon after occurred, which somewhat call off 
montoni’s attention from emily. the mysterious visit of orsino were 
renew with more frequency since the return of the former to venice. 
there were others, also, besides orsino, admitted to these midnight 
councils, and among them cavigni and verezzi. montoni became more 
reserved and austere in his manner than ever; and emily, if her own 
interests had not made her regardless of his, might have perceived, 
that something extraordinary was working in his mind. 

one night, on which a council was not held, orsino came in great 
agitation of spirits, and dispatch his confidential servant to 
montoni, who was at a casino, desire that he would return home 
immediately; but charge the servant not to mention his name. montoni 
obey the summons, and, on meeting orsino, was informed of the 
circumstances, that occasion his visit and his visible alarm, with a 
part of which he was already acquainted. 

a venetian nobleman, who had, on some late occasion, provoke the 
hatred of orsino, had been way-laid and poniard by hire assassins: 
and, as the murder person was of the first connections, the senate 
had taken up the affair. one of the assassin was now apprehended, who 
had confessed, that orsino was his employer in the atrocious deed; and 
the latter, informed of his danger, had now come to montoni to consult 
on the measure necessary to favour his escape. he knew, that, at this 
time, the officer of the police were upon the watch for him, all over 
the city; to leave it, at present, therefore, was impracticable, and 
montoni consent to secrete him for a few days till the vigilance of 
justice should relax, and then to assist him in quit venice. he 
knew the danger he himself incur by permit orsino to remain in 
his house, but such was the nature of his obligation to this man, that 
he did not think it prudent to refuse him an asylum. 

such was the person whom montoni had admitted to his confidence, and 
for whom he felt as much friendship as was compatible with his 
character. 

while orsino remain conceal in his house, montoni was unwill to 
attract public observation by the nuptials of count morano; but this 
obstacle was, in a few days, overcome by the departure of his criminal 
visitor, and he then informed emily, that her marriage was to be 
celebrated on the following morning. to her repeated assurances, that 
it should not take place, he reply only by a malignant smile; and, 
telling her that the count and a priest would be at his house, early in 
the morning, he advise her no further to dare his resentment, by 
opposition to his will and to her own interest. “i am now go out for 
the evening,” said he, “remember, that i shall give your hand to count 
morano in the morning.” emily, having, ever since his late threats, 
expected, that her trial would at length arrive to this crisis, was 
less shock by the declaration, that she otherwise would have been, 
and she endeavour to support herself by the belief, that the marriage 
could not be valid, so long as she refuse before the priest to repeat 
any part of the ceremony. yet, as the moment of trial approached, her 
long-harassed spirits shrunk almost equally from the encounter of his 
vengeance, and from the hand of count morano. she was not even 
perfectly certain of the consequence of her steady refusal at the 
altar, and she trembled, more than ever, at the power of montoni, which 
seem unlimited as his will, for she saw, that he would not scruple to 
transgress any law, if, by so doing, he could accomplish his project. 

while her mind was thus suffering and in a state little short of 
distraction, she was informed that morano ask permission to see her, 
and the servant had scarcely departed with an excuse, before she 
repent that she had sent one. in the next moment, revert to her 
former design, and determine to try, whether expostulate and 
entreaty would not succeed, where a refusal and a just disdain had 
failed, she recall the servant, and, send a different message, 
prepared to go down to the count. 

the dignity and assume composure with which she met him, and the kind 
of pensive resignation, that soften her countenance, were 
circumstances not likely to induce him to relinquish her, serving, as 
they did, to heighten a passion, which had already intoxicate his 
judgment. he listen to all she said with an appearance of complacency 
and of a wish to oblige her; but his resolution remain invariable the 
same, and he endeavour to win her admiration by every insinuate art 
he so well knew how to practise. being, at length, assured, that she 
had nothing to hope from his justice, she repeated, in a solemn and 
impressive manner, her absolute rejection of his suit, and quit him 
with an assurance, that her refusal would be effectually maintain 
against every circumstance, that could be imagine for subdue it. a 
just pride had restrained her tear in his presence, but now they 
flow from the fulness of her heart. she often call upon the name of 
her late father, and often dwelt with unutterable anguish on the idea 
of valancourt. 

she did not go down to supper, but remain alone in her apartment, 
sometimes yielding to the influence of grief and terror, and, at 
others, endeavour to fortify her mind against them, and to prepare 
herself to meet, with compose courage, the scene of the following 
morning, when all the stratagem of morano and the violence of montoni 
would be united against her. 

the evening was far advanced, when madame montoni came to her chamber 
with some bridal ornaments, which the count had sent to emily. she had, 
this day, purposely avoid her niece; perhaps, because her usual 
insensibility fail her, and she fear to trust herself with a view 
of emily’s distress; or possibly, though her conscience was seldom 
audible, it now reproach her with her conduct to her brother’s orphan 
child, whose happiness had been entrust to her care by a die 
father. 

emily could not look at these presents, and made a last, though almost 
hopeless, effort to interest the compassion of madame montoni, who, if 
she did feel any degree of pity, or remorse, successful conceal it, 
and reproach her niece with folly in being miserable, concerning a 
marriage, which ought only to make her happy. “i am sure,” said she, 
“if i was unmarried, and the count had propose to me, i should have 
been flatter by the distinction: and if i should have been so, i am 
sure, niece, you, who have no fortune, ought to feel yourself highly 
honoured, and show a proper gratitude and humility towards the count, 
for his condescension. i am often surprised, i must own, to observe how 
humble he deport himself to you, notwithstanding the haughty airs you 
give yourself; i wonder he has patience to humour you so: if i was he, 
i know, i should often be ready to reprehend you, and make you know 
yourself a little better. i would not have flatter you, i can tell 
you, for it is this absurd flattery that make you fancy yourself of so 
much consequence, that you think nobody can deserve you, and i often 
tell the count so, for i have no patience to hear him pay you such 
extravagant compliments, which you believe every word of!” 

“your patience, madam, cannot suffer more cruel on such occasions, 
than my own,” said emily. 

“o! that is all mere affectation,” rejoin her aunt. “i know that his 
flattery delight you, and make you so vain, that you think you may 
have the whole world at your feet. but you are very much mistaken; i 
can assure you, niece, you will not meet with many such suitor as the 
count: every other person would have turn upon his heel, and left you 
to repent at your leisure, long ago.” 

“o that the count had resemble every other person, then!” said emily, 
with a heavy sigh. 

“it is happy for you, that he do not,” rejoin madame montoni; “and 
what i am now saying is from pure kindness. i am endeavour to 
convince you of your good fortune, and to persuade you to submit to 
necessity with a good grace. it is nothing to me, you know, whether you 
like this marriage or not, for it must be; what i say, therefore, is 
from pure kindness. i wish to see you happy, and it is your own fault 
if you are not so. i would ask you, now, seriously and calmly, what 
kind of a match you can expect, since a count cannot content your 
ambition?” 

“i have no ambition whatever, madam,” reply emily, “my only wish is 
to remain in my present station.” 

“o! that is speak quite from the purpose,” said her aunt, “i see you 
are still thinking of mons. valancourt. pray get rid of all those 
fantastic notions about love, and this ridiculous pride, and be 
something like a reasonable creature. but, however, this is nothing to 
the purpose—for your marriage with the count take place tomorrow, you 
know, whether you approve it or not. the count will be trifle with no 
longer.” 

emily made no attempt to reply to this curious speech; she felt it 
would be mean, and she knew it would be useless. madame montoni laid 
the count’s presents upon the table, on which emily was leaning, and 
then, desire she would be ready early in the morning, bade her 
good-night. “good-night, madam,” said emily, with a deep sigh, as the 
door closed upon her aunt, and she was left once more to her own sad 
reflections. for some time she sat so lost in thought, as to be wholly 
unconscious where she was; at length, raise her head, and look 
round the room, its gloom and profound still awed her. she fixed 
her eyes on the door, through which her aunt had disappeared, and 
listen anxious for some sound, that might relieve the deep 
dejection of her spirits; but it was past midnight, and all the family 
except the servant, who sat up for montoni, had retired to bed. her 
mind, long harass by distress, now yield to imaginary terrors; she 
tremble to look into the obscurity of her spacious chamber, and fear 
she knew not what; a state of mind, which continue so long, that she 
would have call up annette, her aunt’s woman, had her fear permit 
her to rise from her chair, and to cross the apartment. 

these melancholy illusion at length began to disperse, and she retired 
to her bed, not to sleep, for that was scarcely possible, but to try, 
at least, to quiet her disturbed fancy, and to collect strength of 
spirits sufficient to bear her through the scene of the approach 
morning. 



chapter v 

dark power! with shudd’ring, meek submit thought 
be mine to read the vision old 
which thy awak’ning bard have told, 
and, lest they meet my blasted view, 
hold each strange tale devoutly true. 
collins’ ode to fear 


emily was recall from a kind of slumber, into which she had, at 
length, sunk, by a quick knock at her chamber door. she start up 
in terror, for montoni and count morano instantly came to her mind; 
but, have listen in silence for some time, and recognise the 
voice of annette, she rose and open the door. “what bring you hither 
so early?” said emily, tremble excessively. she was unable to support 
herself, and sat down on the bed. 

“dear ma’amselle!” said annette, “do not look so pale. i am quite 
frightened to see you. here is a fine bustle below stairs, all the 
servant running to and fro, and none of them fast enough! here is a 
bustle, indeed, all of a sudden, and nobody know for what!” 

“who is below besides them?” said emily, “annette, do not trifle with 
me!” 

“not for the world, ma’amselle, i would not trifle for the world; but 
one cannot help making one’s remarks, and there is the signor in such a 
bustle, as i never saw him before; and he has sent me to tell you, 
ma’am, to get ready immediately.” 

“good god support me!” cry emily, almost fainting, “count morano is 
below, then!” 

“no, ma’amselle, he is not below that i know of,” reply annette, 
“only his _excellenza_ sent me to desire you would get ready directly 
to leave venice, for that the gondola would be at the steps of the 
canal in a few minutes: but i must hurry back to my lady, who is just 
at her wits’ end, and know not which way to turn for haste.” 

“explain, annette, explain the meaning of all this before you go,” said 
emily, so overcome with surprise and timid hope, that she had scarcely 
breath to speak. 

“nay, ma’amselle, that is more than i can do. i only know that the 
signor is just come home in a very ill humour, that he has had us all 
call out of our beds, and tell us we are all to leave venice 
immediately.” 

“is count morano to go with the signor?” said emily, “and whither are 
we going?” 

“i know neither, ma’am, for certain; but i heard ludovico say something 
about going, after we get to _terra-firma_, to the signor’s castle 
among some mountains, that he talk of.” 

“the apennines!” said emily, eagerly, “o! then i have little to hope!” 

“that is the very place, ma’am. but cheer up, and do not take it so 
much to heart, and think what a little time you have to get ready in, 
and how impatient the signor is. holy st. mark! i hear the oar on the 
canal; and now they come nearer, and now they are dashing at the steps 
below; it is the gondola, sure enough.” 

annette hasten from the room; and emily prepared for this unexpected 
flight, as fast as her tremble hand would permit, not perceiving, 
that any change in her situation could possibly be for the worse. she 
had scarcely thrown her books and clothes into her travel trunk, 
when, receiving a second summons, she went down to her aunt’s 
dressing-room, where she found montoni impatient reproving his wife 
for delay. he went out, soon after, to give some further orders to his 
people, and emily then enquire the occasion of this hasty journey; but 
her aunt appear to be as ignorant as herself, and to undertake the 
journey with more reluctance. 

the family at length embarked, but neither count morano, nor cavigni, 
was of the party. somewhat revive by observing this, emily, when the 
gondolieri dashed their oar in the water, and put off from the steps 
of the portico, felt like a criminal, who receive a short reprieve. 
her heart beat yet lighter, when they emerge from the canal into the 
ocean, and lighter still, when they skim past the wall of st. mark, 
without have stop to take up count morano. 

the dawn now began to tint the horizon, and to break upon the shore of 
the adriatic. emily did not venture to ask any question of montoni, 
who sat, for some time, in gloomy silence, and then roll himself up 
in his cloak, as if to sleep, while madame montoni did the same; but 
emily, who could not sleep, undrew one of the little curtains of the 
gondola, and look out upon the sea. the rising dawn now enlightened 
the mountain-tops of friuli, but their lower sides, and the distant 
waves, that roll at their feet, were still in deep shadow. emily, 
sunk in tranquil melancholy, watch the strengthen light spread 
upon the ocean, showing successive venice and her islets, and the 
shore of italy, along which boats, with their pointed latin sails, 
began to move. 

the gondolieri were frequent hailed, at this early hour, by the 
market-people, as they glide by towards venice, and the lagune soon 
display a gay scene of innumerable little barks, passing from 
_terra-firma_ with provisions. emily gave a last look to that splendid 
city, but her mind was then occupy by considering the probable 
events, that await her, in the scenes, to which she was removing, and 
with conjectures, concerning the motive of this sudden journey. it 
appeared, upon calm consideration, that montoni was remove her to 
his secluded castle, because he could there, with more probability of 
success, attempt to terrify her into obedience; or, that, should its 
gloomy and sequester scene fail of this effect, her forced marriage 
with the count could there be solemnize with the secrecy, which was 
necessary to the honour of montoni. the little spirit, which this 
reprieve had recalled, now began to fail, and, when emily reach the 
shore, her mind had sunk into all its former depression. 

montoni did not embark on the brenta, but pursue his way in carriage 
across the country, towards the apennine; during which journey, his 
manner to emily was so particularly severe, that this alone would have 
confirmed her late conjecture, had any such confirmation been 
necessary. her senses were now dead to the beautiful country, through 
which she travelled. sometimes she was compel to smile at the 
_naïveté_ of annette, in her remark on what she saw, and sometimes to 
sigh, as a scene of peculiar beauty recall valancourt to her 
thoughts, who was indeed seldom absent from them, and of whom she could 
never hope to hear in the solitude, to which she was hastening. 

at length, the traveller began to ascend among the apennines. the 
immense pine-forests, which, at that period, overhung these mountains, 
and between which the road wound, exclude all view but of the cliff 
aspire above, except, that, now and then, an opening through the dark 
wood allow the eye a momentary glimpse of the country below. the 
gloom of these shades, their solitary silence, except when the breeze 
swept over their summits, the tremendous precipice of the mountains, 
that came partially to the eye, each assist to raise the solemnity of 
emily’s feelings into awe; she saw only image of gloomy grandeur, or 
of dreadful sublimity, around her; other images, equally gloomy and 
equally terrible, gleam on her imagination. she was go she 
scarcely knew whither, under the dominion of a person, from whose 
arbitrary disposition she had already suffer so much, to marry, 
perhaps, a man who possessed neither her affection, nor esteem; or to 
endure, beyond the hope of succour, whatever punishment revenge, and 
that italy revenge, might dictate.—the more she considered what might 
be the motive of the journey, the more she became convinced, that it 
was for the purpose of conclude her nuptials with count morano, with 
that secrecy, which her resolute resistance had made necessary to the 
honour, if not to the safety, of montoni. from the deep solitudes, into 
which she was emerging, and from the gloomy castle, of which she had 
heard some mysterious hints, her sick heart recoil in despair, and 
she experienced, that, though her mind was already occupy by peculiar 
distress, it was still alive to the influence of new and local 
circumstance; why else did she shudder at the idea of this desolate 
castle? 

as the traveller still ascend among the pine forests, steep rose 
over steep, the mountain seem to multiply, as they went, and what 
was the summit of one eminence prove to be only the base of another. 
at length, they reach a little plain, where the driver stop to 
rest the mules, whence a scene of such extent and magnificence open 
below, as drew even from madame montoni a note of admiration. emily 
lost, for a moment, her sorrows, in the immensity of nature. beyond the 
amphitheatre of mountains, that stretch below, whose tops appear as 
numerous almost, as the wave of the sea, and whose feet were conceal 
by the forests—extended the _campagna_ of italy, where city and 
rivers, and wood and all the glow of cultivation were mingle in gay 
confusion. the adriatic bound the horizon, into which the po and the 
brenta, after winding through the whole extent of the landscape, pour 
their fruitful waves. emily gaze long on the splendour of the world 
she was quitting, of which the whole magnificence seem thus given to 
her sight only to increase her regret on leave it; for her, 
valancourt alone was in that world; to him alone her heart turned, and 
for him alone fell her bitter tears. 

from this sublime scene the traveller continue to ascend among the 
pines, till they enter a narrow pass of the mountains, which shut out 
every feature of the distant country, and, in its stead, exhibit only 
tremendous crags, impending over the road, where no vestige of 
humanity, or even of vegetation, appeared, except here and there the 
trunk and scathe branch of an oak, that hung nearly headlong from 
the rock, into which its strong roots had fastened. this pass, which 
led into the heart of the apennine, at length open to day, and a 
scene of mountain stretch in long perspective, as wild as any the 
traveller had yet passed. still vast pine-forests hung upon their 
base, and crown the ridgy precipice, that rose perpendicular from 
the vale, while, above, the rolling mists caught the sunbeams, and 
touched their cliff with all the magical colouring of light and shade. 
the scene seem perpetual changing, and its features to assume new 
forms, as the winding road brought them to the eye in different 
attitudes; while the shift vapours, now partially conceal their 
minute beauty and now illuminating them with splendid tints, 
assist the illusion of the sight. 

though the deep valley between these mountain were, for the most 
part, clothe with pines, sometimes an abrupt opening present a 
perspective of only barren rocks, with a cataract flash from their 
summit among broken cliffs, till its waters, reach the bottom, 
foam along with uncease fury; and sometimes pastoral scene 
exhibit their “green delights” in the narrow vales, smile amid 
surrounding horror. there herd and flock of goat and sheep, browse 
under the shade of hanging woods, and the shepherd’s little cabin, 
rear on the margin of a clear stream, present a sweet picture of 
repose. 

wild and romantic as were these scenes, their character had far less of 
the sublime, that had those of the alps, which guard the entrance of 
italy. emily was often elevated, but seldom felt those emotion of 
indescribable awe which she had so continual experienced, in her 
passage over the alps. 

towards the close of day, the road wound into a deep valley. mountains, 
whose shaggy steep appear to be inaccessible, almost surround it. 
to the east, a vista opened, that exhibit the apennine in their 
darkest horrors; and the long perspective of retiring summits, rising 
over each other, their ridge clothe with pines, exhibit a strong 
image of grandeur, than any that emily had yet seen. the sun had just 
sunk below the top of the mountain she was descending, whose long 
shadow stretch athwart the valley, but his slope rays, shoot 
through an opening of the cliffs, touched with a yellow gleam the 
summit of the forest, that hung upon the opposite steeps, and stream 
in full splendour upon the tower and battlements of a castle, that 
spread its extensive rampart along the brow of a precipice above. the 
splendour of these illumine object was heighten by the contrast 
shade, which involved the valley below. 

“there,” said montoni, speak for the first time in several hours, 
“is udolpho.” 

emily gaze with melancholy awe upon the castle, which she understood 
to be montoni’s; for, though it was now light up by the setting sun, 
the gothic great of its features, and its moulder wall of dark 
grey stone, render it a gloomy and sublime object. as she gazed, the 
light die away on its walls, leave a melancholy purple tint, which 
spread deep and deeper, as the thin vapour crept up the mountain, 
while the battlements above were still tip with splendour. from 
those, too, the ray soon faded, and the whole edifice was invest 
with the solemn dusky of evening. silent, lonely, and sublime, it 
seem to stand the sovereign of the scene, and to frown defiance on 
all, who dare to invade its solitary reign. as the twilight deepened, 
its features became more awful in obscurity, and emily continue to 
gaze, till its cluster tower were alone seen, rising over the tops 
of the woods, beneath whose thick shade the carriage soon after began 
to ascend. 

the extent and dark of these tall wood awaken terrific image in 
her mind, and she almost expect to see banditti start up from under 
the trees. at length, the carriage emerge upon a heathy rock, and, 
soon after, reach the castle gates, where the deep tone of the portal 
bell, which was struck upon to give notice of their arrival, increase 
the fearful emotions, that had assail emily. while they wait till 
the servant within should come to open the gates, she anxious 
survey the edifice: but the gloom, that overspread it, allow her to 
distinguish little more than a part of its outline, with the massy 
wall of the ramparts, and to know, that it was vast, ancient and 
dreary. from the parts she saw, she judge of the heavy strength and 
extent of the whole. the gateway before her, leading into the courts, 
was of gigantic size, and was defend by two round towers, crown by 
overhang turrets, embattled, where, instead of banners, now wave 
long grass and wild plants, that had taken root among the moulder 
stones, and which seem to sigh, as the breeze roll past, over the 
desolate around them. the tower were united by a curtain, pierce 
and embattled also, below which appear the pointed arch of a huge 
portcullis, surmount the gates: from these, the wall of the 
rampart extend to other towers, overlook the precipice, whose 
shatter outline, appear on a gleam, that linger in the west, 
told of the ravages of war.—beyond these all was lost in the obscurity 
of evening. 

while emily gaze with awe upon the scene, footstep were heard within 
the gates, and the undrawe of bolts; after which an ancient servant 
of the castle appeared, force back the huge fold of the portal, to 
admit his lord. as the carriage-wheels roll heavy under the 
portcullis, emily’s heart sunk, and she seemed, as if she was go 
into her prison; the gloomy court, into which she passed, serve to 
confirm the idea, and her imagination, ever awake to circumstance, 
suggest even more terrors, than her reason could justify. 

another gate deliver them into the second court, grass-grown, and 
more wild than the first, where, as she survey through the twilight 
its desolation—its lofty walls, overtop with briony, moss and 
nightshade, and the embattled tower that rose above,—long-suffering 
and murder came to her thoughts. one of those instantaneous and 
unaccountable convictions, which sometimes conquer even strong minds, 
impress her with its horror. the sentiment was not diminished, when 
she enter an extensive gothic hall, obscure by the gloom of evening, 
which a light, glimmer at a distance through a long perspective of 
arches, only render more striking. as a servant brought the lamp 
near partial gleam fell upon the pillar and the pointed arches, 
form a strong contrast with their shadows, that stretch along the 
pavement and the walls. 

the sudden journey of montoni had prevent his people from making any 
other preparation for his reception, than could be had in the short 
interval, since the arrival of the servant, who had been sent forward 
from venice; and this, in some measure, may account for the air of 
extreme desolation, that everywhere appeared. 

the servant, who came to light montoni, bowed in silence, and the 
muscle of his countenance relax with no symptom of joy.—montoni 
notice the salutation by a slight motion of his hand, and pass on, 
while his lady, following, and look round with a degree of surprise 
and discontent, which she seem fearful of expressing, and emily, 
survey the extent and grandeur of the hall in timid wonder, 
approach a marble staircase. the arch here open to a lofty vault, 
from the centre of which hung a tripod lamp, which a servant was 
hasty lighting; and the rich fret-work of the roof, a corridor, 
leading into several upper apartments, and a paint window, stretch 
nearly from the pavement to the ceiling of the hall, became gradual 
visible. 

have cross the foot of the staircase, and pass through an 
ante-room, they enter a spacious apartment, whose walls, wainscot 
with black larch-wood, the growth of the neighbouring mountains, were 
scarcely distinguishable from dark itself. “bring more light,” said 
montoni, as he entered. the servant, setting down his lamp, was 
withdraw to obey him, when madame montoni observing, that the 
evening air of this mountainous region was cold, and that she should 
like a fire, montoni ordered that wood might be brought. 

while he pace the room with thoughtful steps, and madame montoni sat 
silent on a couch, at the upper end of it, wait till the servant 
returned, emily was observing the singular solemnity and desolate of 
the apartment, viewed, as it now was, by the glimmer of the single 
lamp, placed near a large venetian mirror, that dusky reflect the 
scene, with the tall figure of montoni passing slow along, his arms 
folded, and his countenance shade by the plume, that wave in his hat. 

from the contemplation of this scene, emily’s mind proceed to the 
apprehension of what she might suffer in it, till the remembrance of 
valancourt, far, far distant! came to her heart, and soften it into 
sorrow. a heavy sigh escape her: but, try to conceal her tears, she 
walk away to one of the high windows, that open upon the ramparts, 
below which, spread the wood she had pass in her approach to the 
castle. but the night-shade sat deep on the mountain beyond, and 
their indent outline alone could be faint trace on the horizon, 
where a red streak yet glimmer in the west. the valley between was 
sunk in darkness. 

the scene within, upon which emily turn on the opening of the door, 
was scarcely less gloomy. the old servant, who had received them at the 
gates, now entered, bend under a load of pine-branches, while two of 
montoni’s venetian servant follow with lights. 

“your _excellenza_ is welcome to the castle,” said the old man, as he 
raise himself from the hearth, where he had laid the wood: “it has 
been a lonely place a long while; but you will excuse it, signor, 
knowing we had but short notice. it is near two years, come next feast 
of st. mark, since your _excellenza_ was within these walls.” 

“you have a good memory, old carlo,” said montoni: “it is thereabout; 
and how hast thou contrived to live so long?” 

“a-well-a-day, sir, with much ado; the cold winds, that blow through 
the castle in winter, are almost too much for me; and i thought 
sometimes of ask your _excellenza_ to let me leave the mountains, 
and go down into the lowlands. but i don’t know how it is—i am loth to 
quit these old wall i have live in so long.” 

“well, how have you gone on in the castle, since i left it?” said 
montoni. 

“why much as usual, signor, only it wants a good deal of repairing. 
there is the north tower—some of the battlements have tumble down, and 
had like one day to have knock my poor wife (god rest her soul!) on 
the head. your _excellenza_ must know—” 

“well, but the repairs,” interrupt montoni. 

“aye, the repairs,” said carlo: “a part of the roof of the great hall 
has fallen in, and all the wind from the mountain rush through it 
last winter, and whistle through the whole castle so, that there was 
no keeping one’s self warm, be where one would. there, my wife and i 
use to sit shiver over a great fire in one corner of the little 
hall, ready to die with cold, and—” 

“but there are no more repair wanted,” said montoni, impatiently. 

“o lord! your _excellenza_, yes—the wall of the rampart has tumble 
down in three places; then, the stairs, that lead to the west gallery, 
have been a long time so bad, that it is dangerous to go up them; and 
the passage leading to the great oak chamber, that overhang the north 
rampart—one night last winter i venture to go there by myself, and 
your _excellenza_—” 

“well, well, enough of this,” said montoni, with quickness: “i will 
talk more with thee tomorrow.” 

the fire was now lighted; carlo swept the hearth, placed chairs, wipe 
the dust from a large marble table that stood near it, and then left 
the room. 

montoni and his family drew round the fire. madame montoni made several 
attempt at conversation, but his sullen answer repulse her, while 
emily sat endeavour to acquire courage enough to speak to him. at 
length, in a tremulous voice, she said, “may i ask, sir, the motive of 
this sudden journey?”—after a long pause, she recover sufficient 
courage to repeat the question. 

“it do not suit me to answer enquiries,” said montoni, “nor do it 
become you to make them; time may unfold them all: but i desire i may 
be no further harassed, and i recommend it to you to retire to your 
chamber, and to endeavour to adopt a more rational conduct, than that 
of yielding to fancies, and to a sensibility, which, to call it by the 
gentlest name, is only a weakness.” 

emily rose to withdraw. “good night, madam,” said she to her aunt, with 
an assume composure, that could not disguise her emotion. 

“good night, my dear,” said madame montoni, in a tone of kindness, 
which her niece had never before heard from her; and the unexpected 
endearment brought tear to emily’s eyes. she curtsy to montoni, and 
was retiring; “but you do not know the way to your chamber,” said her 
aunt. montoni call the servant, who wait in the ante-room, and bade 
him send madame montoni’s woman, with whom, in a few minutes, emily 
withdrew. 

“do you know which is my room?” said she to annette, as they cross 
the hall. 

“yes, i believe i do, ma’amselle; but this is such a strange rambling 
place! i have been lost in it already: they call it the double chamber, 
over the south rampart, and i went up this great staircase to it. my 
lady’s room is at the other end of the castle.” 

emily ascend the marble staircase, and came to the corridor, as they 
pass through which, annette resume her chat—“what a wild lonely 
place this is, ma’am! i shall be quite frightened to live in it. how 
often, and often have i wish myself in france again! i little 
thought, when i came with my lady to see the world, that i should ever 
be shut up in such a place as this, or i would never have left my own 
country! this way, ma’amselle, down this turning. i can almost believe 
in giant again, and such like, for this is just like one of their 
castles; and, some night or other, i suppose i shall see fairy too, 
hop about in that great old hall, that looks more like a church, 
with its huge pillars, than anything else.” 

“yes,” said emily, smiling, and glad to escape from more serious 
thought, “if we come to the corridor, about midnight, and look down 
into the hall, we shall certainly see it illuminate with a thousand 
lamps, and the fairy tripping in gay circle to the sound of 
delicious music; for it is in such place as this, you know, that they 
come to hold their revels. but i am afraid, annette, you will not be 
able to pay the necessary penance for such a sight: and, if once they 
hear your voice, the whole scene will vanish in an instant.” 

“o! if you will bear me company, ma’amselle, i will come to the 
corridor, this very night, and i promise you i will hold my tongue; it 
shall not be my fault if the show vanishes.—but do you think they will 
come?” 

“i cannot promise that with certainty, but i will venture to say, it 
will not be your fault if the enchantment should vanish.” 

“well, ma’amselle, that is saying more than i expect of you: but i am 
not so much afraid of fairies, as of ghosts, and they say there are a 
plentiful many of them about the castle: now i should be frightened to 
death, if i should chance to see any of them. but hush! ma’amselle, 
walk softly! i have thought, several times, something pass by me.” 

“ridiculous!” said emily, “you must not indulge such fancies.” 

“o ma’am! they are not fancies, for aught i know; benedetto say these 
dismal gallery and hall are fit for nothing but ghost to live in; 
and i verily believe, if i _live_ long in them i shall turn to one 
myself!” 

“i hope,” said emily, “you will not suffer signor montoni to hear of 
these weak fears; they would highly displease him.” 

“what, you know then, ma’amselle, all about it!” rejoin annette. “no, 
no, i do know better than to do so; though, if the signor can sleep 
sound, nobody else in the castle has any right to lie awake, i am 
sure.” emily did not appear to notice this remark. 

“down this passage, ma’amselle; this leads to a back staircase. o! if i 
see anything, i shall be frightened out of my wits!” 

“that will scarcely be possible,” said emily smiling, as she follow 
the winding of the passage, which open into another gallery: and then 
annette, perceive that she had miss her way, while she had been so 
eloquent harangue on ghost and fairies, wander about through 
other passage and galleries, till, at length, frightened by their 
intricacy and desolation, she call aloud for assistance: but they 
were beyond the hearing of the servants, who were on the other side of 
the castle, and emily now open the door of a chamber on the left. 

“o! do not go in there, ma’amselle,” said annette, “you will only lose 
yourself further.” 

“bring the light forward,” said emily, “we may possibly find our way 
through these rooms.” 

annette stood at the door, in an attitude of hesitation, with the light 
held up to show the chamber, but the feeble ray spread through not 
half of it. “why do you hesitate?” said emily, “let me see whither this 
room leads.” 

annette advanced reluctantly. it open into a suite of spacious and 
ancient apartments, some of which were hung with tapestry, and other 
wainscot with cedar and black larch-wood. what furniture there was, 
seem to be almost as old as the rooms, and retain an appearance of 
grandeur, though cover with dust, and drop to pieces with the 
damps, and with age. 

“how cold these rooms are, ma’amselle!” said annette: “nobody has live 
in them for many, many years, they say. do let us go.” 

“they may open upon the great staircase, perhaps,” said emily, passing 
on till she came to a chamber, hung with pictures, and took the light 
to examine that of a soldier on horseback in a field of battle.—he was 
dart his spear upon a man, who lay under the feet of the horse, and 
who held up one hand in a supplicate attitude. the soldier, whose 
beaver was up, regard him with a look of vengeance, and the 
countenance, with that expression, struck emily as resemble montoni. 
she shuddered, and turn from it. passing the light hasty over 
several other pictures, she came to one conceal by a veil of black 
silk. the singular of the circumstance struck her, and she stop 
before it, wish to remove the veil, and examine what could thus 
careful be concealed, but somewhat wanting courage. “holy virgin! 
what can this mean?” exclaim annette. “this is surely the picture 
they told me of at venice.” 

“what picture?” said emily. “why a picture—a picture,” reply annette, 
hesitatingly—“but i never could make out exactly what it was about, 
either.” 

“remove the veil, annette.” 

“what! i, ma’amselle!—i! not for the world!” emily, turning round, saw 
annette’s countenance grow pale. “and pray, what have you heard of this 
picture, to terrify you so, my good girl?” said she. “nothing, 
ma’amselle: i have heard nothing, only let us find our way out.” 

“certainly: but i wish first to examine the picture; take the light, 
annette, while i lift the veil.” annette took the light, and 
immediately walk away with it, disregard emily’s call to stay, 
who, not choose to be left alone in the dark chamber, at length 
follow her. “what is the reason of this, annette?” said emily, when 
she overtook her, “what have you heard concerning that picture, which 
make you so unwill to stay when i bid you?” 

“i don’t know what is the reason, ma’amselle,” reply annette, “nor 
anything about the picture, only i have heard there is something very 
dreadful belong to it—and that it has been cover up in black _ever 
since_—and that nobody has look at it for a great many years—and it 
somehow has to do with the owner of this castle before signor montoni 
came to the possession of it—and—” 

“well, annette,” said emily, smiling, “i perceive it is as you say—that 
you know nothing about the picture.” 

“no, nothing, indeed, ma’amselle, for they made me promise never to 
tell:—but—” 

“well,” rejoin emily, who observe that she was struggle between 
her inclination to reveal a secret, and her apprehension for the 
consequence, “i will enquire no further—” 

“no, pray, ma’am, do not.” 

“lest you should tell all,” interrupt emily. 

annette blushed, and emily smiled, and they pass on to the extremity 
of this suite of apartments, and found themselves, after some further 
perplexity, once more at the top of the marble staircase, where annette 
left emily, while she went to call one of the servant of the castle to 
show them to the chamber, for which they had been seeking. 

while she was absent, emily’s thought return to the picture; an 
unwilling to tamper with the integrity of a servant, had checked 
her enquiry on this subject, as well as concerning some alarm 
hints, which annette had drop respecting montoni; though her 
curiosity was entire awakened, and she had perceived, that her 
question might easily be answered. she was now, however, inclined to 
go back to the apartment and examine the picture; but the lonely of 
the hour and of the place, with the melancholy silence that reign 
around her, conspire with a certain degree of awe, excited by the 
mystery attend this picture, to prevent her. she determined, 
however, when daylight should have reanimate her spirits, to go 
thither and remove the veil. as she lean from the corridor, over the 
staircase, and her eyes wander round, she again observed, with 
wonder, the vast strength of the walls, now somewhat decayed, and the 
pillar of solid marble, that rose from the hall, and support the 
roof. 

a servant now appear with annette, and conduct emily to her 
chamber, which was in a remote part of the castle, and at the very end 
of the corridor, from whence the suite of apartments opened, through 
which they had been wandering. the lonely aspect of her room made emily 
unwill that annette should leave her immediately, and the damp 
of it chill her with more than fear. she beg caterina, the servant 
of the castle, to bring some wood and light a fire. 

“aye, lady, it’s many a year since a fire was light here,” said 
caterina. 

“you need not tell us that, good woman,” said annette; “every room in 
the castle feel like a well. i wonder how you contrive to live here; 
for my part, i wish myself at venice again.” emily wave her hand for 
caterina to fetch the wood. 

“i wonder, ma’am, why they call this the double chamber?” said annette, 
while emily survey it in silence and saw that it was lofty and 
spacious, like the other she had seen, and, like many of them, too, 
had its wall line with dark larch-wood. the bed and other furniture 
was very ancient, and had an air of gloomy grandeur, like all that she 
had seen in the castle. one of the high casements, which she opened, 
overlook a rampart, but the view beyond was hid in darkness. 

in the presence of annette, emily try to support her spirits, and to 
restrain the tears, which, every now and then, came to her eyes. she 
wish much to enquire when count morano was expect at the castle, 
but an unwilling to ask unnecessary questions, and to mention 
family concern to a servant, withheld her. meanwhile, annette’s 
thought were engaged upon another subject: she dearly love the 
marvellous, and had heard of a circumstance, connected with the castle, 
that highly gratify this taste. have been enjoin not to mention 
it, her inclination to tell it was so strong, that she was every 
instant on the point of speak what she had heard. such a strange 
circumstance, too, and to be oblige to conceal it, was a severe 
punishment; but she knew, that montoni might impose one much severer, 
and she fear to incur it by offend him. 

caterina now brought the wood, and its bright blaze dispelled, for a 
while, the gloom of the chamber. she told annette, that her lady had 
enquire for her, and emily was once again left to her own sad 
reflections. her heart was not yet harden against the stern manners 
of montoni, and she was nearly as much shock now, as she had been 
when she first witness them. the tender and affection, to which 
she had been accustomed, till she lost her parents, had made her 
particularly sensible to any degree of unkindness, and such a reverse 
as this no apprehension had prepared her to support. 

to call off her attention from subjects, that pressed heavy on her 
spirits, she rose and again examine her room and its furniture. as she 
walk round it, she pass a door, that was not quite shut, and, 
perceiving, that it was not the one, through which she entered, she 
brought the light forward to discover whither it led. she open it, 
and, go forward, had nearly fallen down a steep, narrow staircase 
that wound from it, between two stone walls. she wish to know to what 
it led, and was the more anxious, since it communicate so immediately 
with her apartment; but, in the present state of her spirits, she 
want courage to venture into the dark alone. close the door, 
therefore, she endeavour to fasten it, but, upon further examination, 
perceived, that it had no bolt on the chamber side, though it had two 
on the other. by place a heavy chair against it, she in some measure 
remedy the defect; yet she was still alarm at the thought of 
sleep in this remote room alone, with a door opening she knew not 
whither, and which could not be perfectly fasten on the inside. 
sometimes she wish to entreat of madame montoni, that annette might 
have leave to remain with her all night, but was deter by an 
apprehension of betray what would be thought childish fears, and by 
an unwilling to increase the apt terror of annette. 

her gloomy reflection were, soon after, interrupt by a footstep in 
the corridor, and she was glad to see annette enter with some supper, 
sent by madame montoni. have a table near the fire, she made the good 
girl sit down and sup with her; and, when their little repast was over, 
annette, encourage by her kindness and stirring the wood into a blaze, 
drew her chair upon the hearth, near to emily, and said—“did you ever 
hear, ma’amselle, of the strange accident, that made the signor lord of 
this castle?” 

“what wonderful story have you now to tell?” said emily, conceal the 
curiosity, occasion by the mysterious hint she had formerly heard on 
that subject. 

“i have heard all about it, ma’amselle,” said annette, look round 
the chamber and drawing close to emily; “benedetto told it me as we 
travelled together: say he, ‘annette, you don’t know about this castle 
here, that we are go to?’ ‘no,’ say i, ‘mr. benedetto, pray what do 
you know?’ but, ma’amselle, you can keep a secret, or i would not tell 
it you for the world; for i promise never to tell, and they say, that 
the signor do not like to have it talk of.” 

“if you promise to keep this secret,” said emily, “you do right not to 
mention it.” 

annette pause a moment, and then said, “o, but to you, ma’amselle, to 
you i may tell it safely, i know.” 

emily smiled, “i certainly shall keep it as faithful as yourself, 
annette.” 

annette reply very gravely, that would do, and proceeded—“this 
castle, you must know, ma’amselle, is very old, and very strong, and 
has stood out many siege as they say. now it was not signor montoni’s 
always, nor his father’s; no; but, by some law or other, it was to come 
to the signor, if the lady die unmarried.” 

“what lady?” said emily. 

“i am not come to that yet,” reply annette, “it is the lady i am 
go to tell you about, ma’amselle: but, as i was saying, this lady 
live in the castle, and had everything very grand about her, as you 
may suppose, ma’amselle. the signor use often to come to see her, and 
was in love with her, and offer to marry her; for, though he was 
somehow related, that did not signify. but she was in love with 
somebody else, and would not have him, which made him very angry, as 
they say, and you know, ma’amselle, what an ill-looking gentleman he 
is, when he is angry. perhaps she saw him in a passion, and therefore 
would not have him. but, as i was saying, she was very melancholy and 
unhappy, and all that, for a long while, and—holy virgin! what noise is 
that? did not you hear a sound, ma’amselle?” 

“it was only the wind,” said emily, “but do come to the end of your 
story.” 

“as i was saying—o, where was i?—as i was saying—she was very 
melancholy and unhappy a long while, and use to walk about upon the 
terrace, there, under the windows, by herself, and cry so! it would 
have done your heart good to hear her. that is—i don’t mean good, but 
it would have made you cry too, as they tell me.” 

“well, but, annette, do tell me the substance of your tale.” 

“all in good time, ma’am; all this i heard before at venice, but what 
is to come i never heard till today. this happen a great many years 
ago, when signor montoni was quite a young man. the lady—they call 
her signora laurentini, was very handsome, but she use to be in great 
passions, too, sometimes, as well as the signor. finding he could not 
make her listen to him—what do he do, but leave the castle, and never 
come near it for a long time! but it was all one to her; she was just 
as unhappy whether he was here or not, till one evening, holy st. 
peter! ma’amselle,” cry annette, “look at that lamp, see how blue it 
burns!” she look fearful round the chamber. “ridiculous girl!” said 
emily, “why will you indulge those fancies? pray let me hear the end of 
your story, i am weary.” 

annette still kept her eyes on the lamp, and proceed in a lower 
voice. “it was one evening, they say, at the latter end of the year, it 
might be about the middle of september, i suppose, or the beginning of 
october; nay, for that matter, it might be november, for that, too, is 
the latter end of the year, but that i cannot say for certain, because 
they did not tell me for certain themselves. however, it was at the 
latter end of the year, this grand lady walk out of the castle into 
the wood below, as she had often done before, all alone, only her maid 
was with her. the wind blew cold, and strew the leaves about, and 
whistle dismal among those great old chesnut trees, that we passed, 
ma’amselle, as we came to the castle—for benedetto show me the tree 
as he was talking—the wind blew cold, and her woman would have 
persuade her to return: but all would not do, for she was fond of 
walking in the woods, at evening time, and, if the leaves were fall 
about her, so much the better. 

“well, they saw her go down among the woods, but night came, and she 
did not return: ten o’clock, eleven o’clock, twelve o’clock came, and 
no lady! well, the servant thought to be sure, some accident had 
befallen her, and they went out to seek her. they search all night 
long, but could not find her, or any trace of her; and, from that day 
to this, ma’amselle, she has never been heard of.” 

“is this true, annette?” said emily, in much surprise. 

“true, ma’am!” said annette, with a look of horror, “yes, it is true, 
indeed. but they do say,” she added, lower her voice, “they do say, 
that the signora has been seen, several times since, walking in the 
wood and about the castle in the night: several of the old servants, 
who remain here some time after, declare they saw her; and, since 
then, she has been seen by some of the vassals, who have happen to be 
in the castle, at night. carlo, the old steward, could tell such 
things, they say, if he would.” 

“how contradictory is this, annette!” said emily, “you say nothing has 
been since known of her, and yet she has been seen!” 

“but all this was told me for a great secret,” rejoin annette, 
without notice the remark, “and i am sure, ma’am, you would not hurt 
either me or benedetto, so much as to go and tell it again.” emily 
remain silent, and annette repeated her last sentence. 

“you have nothing to fear from my indiscretion,” reply emily, “and 
let me advise you, my good annette, be discreet yourself, and never 
mention what you have just told me to any other person. signor montoni, 
as you say, may be angry if he hear of it. but what inquiry were 
made concerning the lady?” 

“o! a great deal, indeed, ma’amselle, for the signor laid claim to the 
castle directly, as being the next heir, and they said, that is, the 
judges, or the senators, or somebody of that sort, said, he could not 
take possession of it till so many years were gone by, and then, if, 
after all, the lady could not be found, why she would be as good as 
dead, and the castle would be his own; and so it is his own. but the 
story went round, and many strange report were spread, so very 
strange, ma’amselle, that i shall not tell them.” 

“that is stranger still, annette,” said emily, smiling, and rousing 
herself from her reverie. “but, when signora laurentini was afterwards 
seen in the castle, did nobody speak to her?” 

“speak—speak to her!” cry annette, with a look of terror; “no, to be 
sure.” 

“and why not?” rejoin emily, willing to hear further. 

“holy mother! speak to a spirit!” 

“but what reason had they to conclude it was a spirit, unless they had 
approached, and spoken to it?” 

“o ma’amselle, i cannot tell. how can you ask such shocking questions? 
but nobody ever saw it come in, or go out of the castle; and it was in 
one place now, and then the next minute in quite another part of the 
castle; and then it never spoke, and, if it was alive, what should it 
do in the castle if it never spoke? several parts of the castle have 
never been gone into since, they say, for that very reason.” 

“what, because it never spoke?” said emily, try to laugh away the 
fear that began to steal upon her. 

“no, ma’amselle, no;” reply annette, rather angry “but because 
something has been seen there. they say, too, there is an old chapel 
adjoin the west side of the castle, where, any time at midnight, you 
may hear such groans!—it make one shudder to think of them!—and 
strange sight have been seen there—” 

“pr’ythee, annette, no more of these silly tales,” said emily. 

“silly tales, ma’amselle! o, but i will tell you one story about this, 
if you please, that caterina told me. it was one cold winter’s night 
that caterina (she often came to the castle then, she says, to keep old 
carlo and his wife company, and so he recommend her afterwards to the 
signor, and she has live here ever since) caterina was sitting with 
them in the little hall, say carlo, ‘i wish we had some of those fig 
to roast, that lie in the store-closet, but it is a long way off, and i 
am loath to fetch them; do, caterina,’ say he, ‘for you are young and 
nimble, do bring us some, the fire is in nice trim for roasting them; 
they lie,’ say he, ‘in such a corner of the store-room, at the end of 
the north-gallery; here, take the lamp,’ say he, ‘and mind, as you go 
up the great staircase, that the wind, through the roof, do not blow 
it out.’ so, with that, caterina took the lamp—hush! ma’amselle, i 
surely heard a noise!” 

emily, whom annette had now infect with her own terrors, listen 
attentively; but everything was still, and annette proceeded: 

“caterina went to the north-gallery, that is the wide gallery we 
passed, ma’am, before we came to the corridor, here. as she went with 
the lamp in her hand, thinking of nothing at all—there, again!” cry 
annette suddenly—“i heard it again!—it was not fancy, ma’amselle!” 

“hush!” said emily, trembling. they listened, and, continue to sit 
quite still, emily heard a low knock against the wall. it came 
repeatedly. annette then scream loudly, and the chamber door slow 
opened.—it was caterina, come to tell annette, that her lady want 
her. emily, though she now perceive who it was, could not immediately 
overcome her terror; while annette, half laughing, half crying, scold 
caterina heartily for thus alarm them; and was also terrify lest 
what she had told had been overheard.—emily, whose mind was deep 
impress by the chief circumstance of annette’s relation, was 
unwill to be left alone, in the present state of her spirits; but, 
to avoid offend madame montoni, and betray her own weakness, she 
struggle to overcome the illusion of fear, and dismiss annette for 
the night. 

when she was alone, her thought recur to the strange history of 
signora laurentini and then to her own strange situation, in the wild 
and solitary mountain of a foreign country, in the castle, and the 
power of a man, to whom, only a few preceding months, she was an entire 
stranger; who had already exercise a usurp authority over her, and 
whose character she now regarded, with a degree of terror, apparently 
justified by the fear of others. she knew, that he had invention equal 
to the conception and talent to the execution of any project, and she 
greatly fear he had a heart too void of feeling to oppose the 
perpetrate of whatever his interest might suggest. she had long 
observe the unhappy of madame montoni, and had often been witness 
to the stern and contemptuous behaviour she received from her husband. 
to these circumstances, which conspire to give her just cause for 
alarm, were now add those thousand nameless terrors, which exist only 
in active imaginations, and which set reason and examination equally at 
defiance. 

emily remember all that valancourt had told her, on the eve of her 
departure from languedoc, respecting montoni, and all that he had said 
to dissuade her from venture on the journey. his fear had often 
since appear to her prophetic—now they seem confirmed. her heart, 
as it gave her back the image of valancourt, mourn in vain regret, 
but reason soon came with a consolation which, though feeble at first, 
acquire vigour from reflection. she considered, that, whatever might 
be her sufferings, she had withheld from involve him in misfortune, 
and that, whatever her future sorrow could be, she was, at least, free 
from self-reproach. 

her melancholy was assist by the hollow sigh of the wind along 
the corridor and round the castle. the cheerful blaze of the wood had 
long been extinguished, and she sat with her eyes fixed on the die 
embers, till a loud gust, that swept through the corridor, and shook 
the door and casements, alarm her, for its violence had move the 
chair she had placed as a fastening, and the door, leading to the 
private staircase stood half open. her curiosity and her fear were 
again awakened. she took the lamp to the top of the steps, and stood 
hesitate whether to go down; but again the profound still and the 
gloom of the place awed her, and, determine to enquire further, when 
daylight might assist the search, she closed the door, and placed 
against it a strong guard. 

she now retired to her bed, leave the lamp burning on the table; but 
its gloomy light, instead of dispel her fear, assist it; for, by 
its uncertain rays, she almost fancy she saw shape flit past her 
curtains and glide into the remote obscurity of her chamber.—the castle 
clock struck one before she closed her eyes to sleep. 



chapter vi 

i think it is the weakness of mine eyes, 
that shape this monstrous apparition. 
it come upon me! 
julius cÆsar 


daylight dispel from emily’s mind the gloom of superstition, but 
not those of apprehension. the count morano was the first image that 
occur to her waking thoughts, and then came a train of anticipate 
evils, which she could neither conquer, nor avoid. she rose, and, to 
relieve her mind from the busy ideas, that torment it, compel 
herself to notice external objects. from her case she look out 
upon the wild grandeur of the scene, closed nearly on all side by 
alpine steeps, whose tops, peep over each other, fade from the eye 
in misty hues, while the promontory below were dark with woods, that 
swept down to their base, and stretch along the narrow valleys. the 
rich pomp of these wood was particularly delightful to emily; and she 
view with astonishment the fortification of the castle spread 
along a vast extent of rock, and now partly in decay, the grandeur of 
the rampart below, and the tower and battlements and various features 
of the fabric above. from these her sight wander over the cliff and 
wood into the valley, along which foam a broad and rapid stream, 
seen fall among the crag of an opposite mountain, now flash in 
the sunbeams, and now shadow by over-arching pines, till it was 
entire conceal by their thick foliage. again it burst from beneath 
this dark in one broad sheet of foam, and fell thundering into the 
vale. nearer, towards the west, open the mountain-vista, which emily 
had view with such sublime emotion, on her approach to the castle: a 
thin dusky vapour, that rose from the valley, overspread its features 
with a sweet obscurity. as this ascend and caught the sunbeams, it 
kindle into a crimson tint, and touched with exquisite beauty the 
wood and cliffs, over which it pass to the summit of the mountains; 
then, as the veil drew up, it was delightful to watch the gleam 
objects, that progressive disclose themselves in the valley—the 
green turf—dark woods—little rocky recesses—a few peasants’ huts—the 
foam stream—a herd of cattle, and various image of pastoral beauty. 
then, the pine-forests brightened, and then the broad breast of the 
mountains, till, at length, the mist settled round their summit, 
touching them with a ruddy glow. the features of the vista now appear 
distinctly, and the broad deep shadows, that fell from the lower 
cliffs, gave strong effect to the stream splendour above; while the 
mountains, gradual sink in the perspective, appear to shelve 
into the adriatic sea, for such emily imagine to be the gleam of 
bluish light that terminate the view. 

thus she endeavour to amuse her fancy, and was not unsuccessful. the 
breezy fresh of the morning, too, revive her. she raise her 
thought in prayer, which she felt always most disposed to do, when 
view the sublime of nature, and her mind recover its strength. 

when she turn from the casement, her eyes glance upon the door she 
had so careful guarded, on the preceding night, and she now 
determined to examine whither it led; but, on advance to remove the 
chairs, she perceived, that they were already move a little way. her 
surprise cannot be easily imagined, when, in the next minute, she 
perceive that the door was fastened.—she felt, as if she had seen an 
apparition. the door of the corridor was lock as she had left it, but 
this door, which could be secure only on the outside, must have been 
bolted, during the night. she became seriously uneasy at the thought of 
sleep again in a chamber, thus liable to intrusion, so remote, too, 
as it was from the family, and she determined to mention the 
circumstance to madame montoni, and to request a change. 

after some perplexity she found her way into the great hall, and to the 
room, which she had left, on the preceding night, where breakfast was 
spread, and her aunt was alone, for montoni had been walking over the 
environs of the castle, examine the condition of its fortifications, 
and talk for some time with carlo. emily observe that her aunt had 
been weeping, and her heart soften towards her, with an affection, 
that show itself in her manner, rather than in words, while she 
careful avoid the appearance of have noticed, that she was 
unhappy. she seize the opportunity of montoni’s absence to mention the 
circumstance of the door, to request that she might be allow another 
apartment, and to enquire again, concerning the occasion of their 
sudden journey. on the first subject her aunt refer her to montoni, 
positively refuse to interfere in the affair; on the last, she 
professed utter ignorance. 

emily, then, with a wish of making her aunt more reconcile to her 
situation, praise the grandeur of the castle and the surrounding 
scenery, and endeavour to soften every unplease circumstance 
attend it. but, though misfortune had somewhat conquer the 
asperity of madame montoni’s temper, and, by increase her care for 
herself, had taught her to feel in some degree for others, the 
capricious love of rule, which nature had plant and habit had 
nourish in her heart, was not subdued. she could not now deny herself 
the gratification of tyrannise over the innocent and helpless emily, 
by attempt to ridicule the taste she could not feel. 

her satirical discourse was, however, interrupt by the entrance of 
montoni, and her countenance immediately assume a mingle expression 
of fear and resentment, while he seat himself at the breakfast-table, 
as if unconscious of there being any person but himself in the room. 

emily, as she observe him in silence, saw, that his countenance was 
dark and stern than usual. “o could i know,” said she to herself, 
“what pass in that mind; could i know the thoughts, that are known 
there, i should no long be condemn to this torture suspense!” 
their breakfast pass in silence, till emily venture to request, that 
another apartment might be allot to her, and related the 
circumstance which made her wish it. 

“i have no time to attend to these idle whims,” said montoni, “that 
chamber was prepared for you, and you must rest contented with it. it 
is not probable, that any person would take the trouble of go to 
that remote staircase, for the purpose of fastening a door. if it was 
not fastened, when you enter the chamber, the wind, perhaps, shook 
the door and made the bolt slide. but i know not why i should 
undertake to account for so trifling an occurrence.” 

this explanation was by no means satisfactory to emily, who had 
observed, that the bolt were rusted, and consequently could not be 
thus easily moved; but she forbore to say so, and repeated her request. 

“if you will not release yourself from the slavery of these fears,” 
said montoni, sternly, “at least forbear to torment other by the 
mention of them. conquer such whims, and endeavour to strengthen your 
mind. no existence is more contemptible than that, which is embitter 
by fear.” as he said this, his eye glance upon madame montoni, who 
coloured highly, but was still silent. emily, wound and disappointed, 
thought her fear were, in this instance, too reasonable to deserve 
ridicule; but, perceiving, that, however they might oppress her, she 
must endure them, she try to withdraw her attention from the subject. 

carlo soon after enter with some fruit: 

“your _excellenza_ is tired after your long ramble,” said he, as he set 
the fruit upon the table; “but you have more to see after breakfast. 
there is a place in the vaulted passage leading to—” 

montoni frown upon him, and wave his hand for him to leave the room. 
carlo stopped, look down, and then added, as he advanced to the 
breakfast-table, and took up the basket of fruit, “i made bold, your 
_excellenza_, to bring some cherries, here, for my honour lady and my 
young mistress. will your ladyship taste them, madam?” said carlo, 
present the basket, “they are very fine ones, though i gather them 
myself, and from an old tree, that catch all the south sun; they are 
as big as plums, your ladyship.” 

“very well, old carlo,” said madame montoni; “i am oblige to you.” 

“and the young signora, too, she may like some of them,” rejoin 
carlo, turning with the basket to emily, “it will do me good to see her 
eat some.” 

“thank you, carlo,” said emily, taking some cherries, and smile 
kindly. 

“come, come,” said montoni, impatiently, “enough of this. leave the 
room, but be in waiting. i shall want you presently.” 

carlo obeyed, and montoni, soon after, went out to examine further into 
the state of the castle; while emily remain with her aunt, patient 
enduring her ill humour, and endeavouring, with much sweetness, to 
soothe her affliction, instead of resent its effect. 

when madame montoni retired to her dressing-room, emily endeavour to 
amuse herself by a view of the castle. through a fold door she 
pass from the great hall to the ramparts, which extend along the 
brow of the precipice, round three side of the edifice; the fourth was 
guarded by the high wall of the courts, and by the gateway, through 
which she had passed, on the preceding evening. the grandeur of the 
broad ramparts, and the change scenery they overlooked, excited her 
high admiration; for the extent of the terrace allow the features of 
the country to be seen in such various points of view, that they 
appear to form new landscapes. she often pause to examine the gothic 
magnificence of udolpho, its proud irregularity, its lofty tower and 
battlements, its high-arched casements, and its slender watch-towers, 
perch upon the corner of turrets. then she would lean on the wall of 
the terrace, and, shuddering, measure with her eye the precipice below, 
till the dark summit of the wood arrest it. wherever she turned, 
appear mountain-tops, forest of pine and narrow glens, opening among 
the apennine and retiring from the sight into inaccessible regions. 

while she thus leaned, montoni, follow by two men, appeared, 
ascend a winding path, cut in the rock below. he stop upon a 
cliff, and, point to the ramparts, turn to his followers, and 
talk with much eager of gesticulation.—emily perceived, that one 
of these men was carlo; the other was in the dress of a peasant, and he 
alone seem to be receiving the directions of montoni. 

she withdrew from the walls, and pursue her walk, till she heard at a 
distance the sound of carriage wheels, and then the loud bell of the 
portal, when it instantly occur to her, that count morano was 
arrived. as she hasty pass the fold door from the terrace, 
towards her own apartment, several person enter the hall by an 
opposite door. she saw them at the extremities of the arcades, and 
immediately retreated; but the agitation of her spirits, and the extent 
and dusky of the hall, had prevent her from distinguish the 
person of the strangers. her fears, however, had but one object, and 
they had call up that object to her fancy:—she believe that she had 
seen count morano. 

when she thought that they had pass the hall, she venture again to 
the door, and proceeded, unobserved, to her room, where she remained, 
agitate with apprehensions, and listen to every distant sound. at 
length, hearing voice on the rampart, she hasten to her window, and 
observe montoni, with signor cavigni, walking below, converse 
earnestly, and often stopping and turning towards each other, at which 
time their discourse seem to be uncommonly interesting. 

of the several person who had appear in the hall, here was cavigni 
alone: but emily’s alarm was soon after heighten by the steps of some 
one in the corridor, who, she apprehended, brought a message from the 
count. in the next moment, annette appeared. 

“ah! ma’amselle,” said she, “here is the signor cavigni arrived! i am 
sure i rejoice to see a christian person in this place; and then he is 
so good nature too, he always take so much notice of me!—and here is 
also signor verezzi, and who do you think besides, ma’amselle?” 

“i cannot guess, annette; tell me quickly.” 

“nay, ma’am, do guess once.” 

“well, then,” said emily, with assume composure, “it is—count morano, 
i suppose.” 

“holy virgin!” cry annette, “are you ill, ma’amselle? you are go 
to faint! let me get some water.” 

emily sunk into a chair. “stay, annette,” said she, feebly, “do not 
leave me—i shall soon be better; open the casement.—the count, you 
say—he is come, then?” 

“who, i!—the count! no, ma’amselle, i did not say so.” 

“he is _not_ come then?” said emily eagerly. 

“no, ma’amselle.” 

“you are sure of it?” 

“lord bless me!” said annette, “you recover very suddenly, ma’am! why, 
i thought you were dying, just now.” 

“but the count—you are sure, is not come?” 

“o yes, quite sure of that, ma’amselle. why, i was look out through 
the grate in the north turret, when the carriage drove into the 
courtyard, and i never expect to see such a goodly sight in this 
dismal old castle! but here are master and servants, too, enough to 
make the place ring again. o! i was ready to leap through the rusty old 
bar for joy!—o! who would ever have thought of seeing a christian face 
in this huge dreary house? i could have kiss the very horse that 
brought them.” 

“well, annette, well, i am better now.” 

“yes, ma’amselle, i see you are. o! all the servant will lead merry 
lives here, now; we shall have singing and dance in the little hall, 
for the signor cannot hear us there—and droll stories—ludovico’s come, 
ma’am; yes, there is ludovico come with them! you remember ludovico, 
ma’am—a tall, handsome young man—signor cavigni’s lacquey—who always 
wear his cloak with such a grace, thrown round his left arm, and his 
hat set on so smartly, all on one side, and—” 

“no,” said emily, who was weary by her loquacity. 

“what, ma’amselle, don’t you remember ludovico—who row the 
cavaliero’s gondola, at the last regatta, and won the prize? and who 
use to sing such sweet verse about orlando and about the 
black-a-moors, too; and charly—charly—magne, yes, that was the name, 
all under my lattice, in the west portico, on the moonlight nights at 
venice? o! i have listen to him!—” 

“i fear, to thy peril, my good annette,” said emily; “for it seem his 
verse have stolen thy heart. but let me advise you; if it is so, keep 
the secret; never let him know it.” 

“ah—ma’amselle!—how can one keep such a secret as that?” 

“well, annette, i am now so much better, that you may leave me.” 

“o, but, ma’amselle, i forgot to ask—how did you sleep in this dreary 
old chamber last night?”—“as well as usual.”—“did you hear no 
noises?”—“none.”—“nor see anything?”—“nothing.”—“well, that is 
surprising!”—“not in the least: and now tell me, why you ask these 
questions.” 

“o, ma’amselle! i would not tell you for the world, nor all i have 
heard about this chamber, either; it would frighten you so.” 

“if that is all, you have frightened me already, and may therefore tell 
me what you know, without hurt your conscience.” 

“o lord! they say the room is haunted, and has been so these many 
years.” 

“it is by a ghost, then, who can draw bolts,” said emily, endeavour 
to laugh away her apprehensions; “for i left the door open, last night, 
and found it fasten this morning.” 

annette turn pale, and said not a word. 

“do you know whether any of the servant fasten this door in the 
morning, before i rose?” 

“no, ma’am, that i will be bound they did not; but i don’t know: shall 
i go and ask, ma’amselle?” said annette, moving hasty towards the 
corridor. 

“stay, annette, i have another question to ask; tell me what you have 
heard concerning this room, and whither that staircase leads.” 

“i will go and ask it all directly, ma’am; besides, i am sure my lady 
wants me. i cannot stay now, indeed, ma’am.” 

she hurried from the room, without wait emily’s reply, whose heart, 
lighten by the certainty, that morano was not arrived, allow her to 
smile at the superstitious terror, which had seize on annette; for, 
though she sometimes felt its influence herself, she could smile at it, 
when apparent in other persons. 

montoni have refuse emily another chamber, she determined to bear 
with patience the evil she could not remove, and, in order to make the 
room as comfortable as possible, unpack her books, her sweet delight 
in happy days, and her soothe resource in the hour of moderate 
sorrow: but there were hour when even these fail of their effect; 
when the genius, the taste, the enthusiasm of the sublimest writer 
were felt no longer. 

her little library being arrange on a high chest, part of the 
furniture of the room, she took out her drawing utensils, and was 
tranquil enough to be pleased with the thought of sketch the sublime 
scenes, beheld from her windows; but she sudden checked this 
pleasure, remember how often she had soothe herself by the 
intention of obtain amusement of this kind, and had been prevent 
by some new circumstance of misfortune. 

“how can i suffer myself to be delude by hope,” said she, “and, 
because count morano is not yet arrived, feel a momentary happiness? 
alas! what is it to me, whether he is here today, or tomorrow, if he 
come at all?—and that he will come—it were weakness to doubt.” 

to withdraw her thoughts, however, from the subject of her misfortunes, 
she attempt to read, but her attention wander from the page, and, 
at length, she threw aside the book, and determined to explore the 
adjoin chambers of the castle. her imagination was pleased with the 
view of ancient grandeur, and an emotion of melancholy awe awaken all 
its powers, as she walk through rooms, obscure and desolate, where no 
footstep had pass probably for many years, and remember the 
strange history of the former possessor of the edifice. this brought to 
her recollection the veiled picture, which had attract her curiosity, 
on the preceding night, and she resolve to examine it. as she pass 
through the chambers, that led to this, she found herself somewhat 
agitated; its connection with the late lady of the castle, and the 
conversation of annette, together with the circumstance of the veil, 
throw a mystery over the subject, that excited a faint degree of 
terror. but a terror of this nature, as it occupy and expand the 
mind, and elevate it to high expectation, is purely sublime, and leads 
us, by a kind of fascination, to seek even the object, from which we 
appear to shrink. 

emily pass on with falter steps, and have pause a moment at the 
door, before she attempt to open it, she then hasty enter the 
chamber, and went towards the picture, which appear to be enclose in 
a frame of uncommon size, that hung in a dark part of the room. she 
pause again, and then, with a timid hand, lift the veil; but 
instantly let it fall—perceiving that what it had conceal was no 
picture, and, before she could leave the chamber, she drop senseless 
on the floor. 

when she recover her recollection, the remembrance of what she had 
seen had nearly deprived her of it a second time. she had scarcely 
strength to remove from the room, and regain her own; and, when arrive 
there, want courage to remain alone. horror occupy her mind, and 
excluded, for a time, all sense of past, and dread of future 
misfortune: she seat herself near the casement, because from thence 
she heard voices, though distant, on the terrace, and might see people 
pass, and these, trifling as they were, were revive circumstances. 
when her spirits had recover their tone, she considered, whether she 
should mention what she had seen to madame montoni, and various and 
important motive urge her to do so, among which the least was the 
hope of the relief, which an overburden mind find in speak of the 
subject of its interest. but she was aware of the terrible 
consequences, which such a communication might lead to; and, dread 
the indiscretion of her aunt, at length, endeavour to arm herself 
with resolution to observe a profound silence on the subject. montoni 
and verezzi soon after pass under the casement, speak cheerfully, 
and their voice revive her. presently the signor bertolini and 
cavigni join the party on the terrace, and emily, supposing that 
madame montoni was then alone, went to seek her; for the solitude of 
her chamber, and its proximity to that where she had received so severe 
a shock, again affected her spirit. 

she found her aunt in her dressing-room, prepare for dinner. emily’s 
pale and affrighte countenance alarm even madame montoni; but she 
had sufficient strength of mind to be silent on the subject, that still 
made her shudder, and which was ready to burst from her lips. in her 
aunt’s apartment she remain till they both descended to dinner. there 
she met the gentlemen lately arrived, who had a kind of busy 
serious in their looks, which was somewhat unusual with them, while 
their thought seem too much occupy by some deep interest, to 
suffer them to bestow much attention either on emily or madame montoni. 
they spoke little, and montoni less. emily, as she now look on him, 
shuddered. the horror of the chamber rush on her mind. several times 
the colour fade from her cheeks, and she feared, that illness would 
betray her emotions, and compel her to leave the room; but the strength 
of her resolution remedy the weakness of her frame; she oblige 
herself to converse, and even try to look cheerful. 

montoni evidently labour under some vexation, such as would probably 
have agitate a weak mind or a more susceptible heart, but which 
appeared, from the stern of his countenance, only to bend up his 
faculty to energy and fortitude. 

it was a comfortless and silent meal. the gloom of the castle seem to 
have spread its contagion even over the gay countenance of cavigni, and 
with this gloom was mingle a fierce such as she had seldom seen 
him indicate. count morano was not named, and what conversation there 
was, turn chiefly upon the war which at that time agitate the 
italy states, the strength of the venetian armies, and the character 
of their generals. 

after dinner, when the servant had withdrawn, emily learned, that the 
cavalier, who had drawn upon himself the vengeance of orsino, had since 
die of his wounds, and that strict search was still making for his 
murderer. the intelligence seem to disturb montoni, who mused, and 
then enquired, where orsino had conceal himself. his guests, who all, 
except cavigni, were ignorant, that montoni had himself assist him to 
escape from venice, replied, that he had flee in the night with such 
precipitation and secrecy, that his most intimate companion knew not 
whither. montoni blame himself for have ask the question, for a 
second thought convinced him, that a man of orsino’s suspicious temper 
was not likely to trust any of the person present with the knowledge 
of his asylum. he considered himself, however, as entitle to his 
utmost confidence, and did not doubt, that he should soon hear of him. 

emily retired with madame montoni, soon after the cloth was withdrawn, 
and left the cavalier to their secret councils, but not before the 
significant frown of montoni had warn his wife to depart, who pass 
from the hall to the ramparts, and walked, for some time, in silence, 
which emily did not interrupt, for her mind was also occupy by 
interests of its own. it require all her resolution, to forbear 
communicate to madame montoni the terrible subject, which still 
thrill her every nerve with horror; and sometimes she was on the 
point of do so, merely to obtain the relief of a moment; but she 
knew how wholly she was in the power of montoni, and, considering, that 
the indiscretion of her aunt might prove fatal to them both, she 
compel herself to endure a present and an inferior evil, rather than 
to tempt a future and a heavy one. a strange kind of presentiment 
frequently, on this day, occur to her;—it seem as if her fate 
rest here, and was by some invisible means connected with this 
castle. 

“let me not accelerate it,” said she to herself: “for whatever i may be 
reserved, let me, at least, avoid self-reproach.” 

as she look on the massy wall of the edifice, her melancholy spirits 
represent it to be her prison; and she start as at a new 
suggestion, when she considered how far distant she was from her native 
country, from her little peaceful home, and from her only friend—how 
remote was her hope of happiness, how feeble the expectation of again 
seeing him! yet the idea of valancourt, and her confidence in his 
faithful love, had hitherto been her only solace, and she struggle 
hard to retain them. a few tear of agony start to her eyes, which 
she turn aside to conceal. 

while she afterwards lean on the wall of the rampart, some peasants, 
at a little distance, were seen examine a breach, before which lay a 
heap of stones, as if to repair it, and a rusty old cannon, that 
appear to have fallen from its station above. madame montoni stop 
to speak to the men, and enquire what they were go to do. “to 
repair the fortifications, your ladyship,” said one of them; a labour 
which she was somewhat surprised, that montoni should think necessary, 
particularly since he had never spoken of the castle, as of a place, at 
which he meant to reside for any considerable time; but she pass on 
towards a lofty arch, that led from the south to the east rampart, and 
which adjoin the castle, on one side, while, on the other, it 
support a small watch-tower, that entire command the deep valley 
below. as she approach this arch, she saw, beyond it, winding along 
the woody descent of a distant mountain, a long troop of horse and 
foot, whom she knew to be soldiers, only by the glitter of their pike 
and other arms, for the distance did not allow her to discover the 
colour of their liveries. as she gazed, the vanguard issue from the 
wood into the valley, but the train still continue to pour over the 
remote summit of the mountain, in endless succession; while, in the 
front, the military uniform became distinguishable, and the commanders, 
riding first, and seeming, by their gestures, to direct the march of 
those that followed, at length, approach very near to the castle. 

such a spectacle, in these solitary regions, both surprise and alarm 
madame montoni, and she hasten towards some peasants, who were 
employ in raise bastion before the south rampart, where the rock 
was less abrupt than elsewhere. these men could give no satisfactory 
answer to her enquiries, but, being rouse by them, gaze in stupid 
astonishment upon the long cavalcade. madame montoni, then thinking it 
necessary to communicate further the object of her alarm, sent emily to 
say, that she wish to speak to montoni; an errand her niece did not 
approve, for she dread his frowns, which she knew this message would 
provoke; but she obey in silence. 

as she drew near the apartment, in which he sat with his guests, she 
heard them in earnest and loud dispute, and she pause a moment, 
tremble at the displeasure, which her sudden interrupt would 
occasion. in the next, their voice sunk all together; she then 
venture to open the door, and, while montoni turn hasty and look 
at her, without speaking, she deliver her message. 

“tell madam montoni i am engaged,” said he. 

emily then thought it proper to mention the subject of her alarm. 
montoni and his companion rose instantly and went to the windows, but, 
these not afford them a view of the troops, they at length proceed 
to the ramparts, where cavigni conjecture it to be a legion of 
_condottieri_, on their march towards modena. 

one part of the cavalcade now extend along the valley, and another 
wound among the mountain towards the north, while some troops still 
linger on the woody precipices, where the first had appeared, so that 
the great length of the procession seem to include a whole army. 
while montoni and his family watch its progress, they heard the sound 
of trumpet and the clash of cymbal in the vale, and then others, 
answer from the heights. emily listen with emotion to the shrill 
blast, that woke the echo of the mountains, and montoni explain the 
signals, with which he appear to be well acquainted, and which meant 
nothing hostile. the uniform of the troops, and the kind of arms they 
bore, confirmed to him the conjecture of cavigni, and he had the 
satisfaction to see them pass by, without even stopping to gaze upon 
his castle. he did not, however, leave the rampart, till the bases of 
the mountain had shut them from his view, and the last murmur of the 
trumpet float away on the wind. cavigni and verezzi were inspirite 
by this spectacle, which seem to have rouse all the fire of their 
temper; montoni turn into the castle in thoughtful silence. 

emily’s mind had not yet sufficient recover from its late shock, to 
endure the lonely of her chamber, and she remain upon the 
ramparts; for madame montoni had not invite her to her dressing-room, 
whither she had gone evidently in low spirits, and emily, from her late 
experience, had lost all wish to explore the gloomy and mysterious 
recess of the castle. the ramparts, therefore, were almost her only 
retreat, and here she lingered, till the grey haze of evening was again 
spread over the scene. 

the cavalier sup by themselves, and madame montoni remain in her 
apartment, whither emily went, before she retired to her own. she found 
her aunt weeping, and in much agitation. the tender of emily was 
naturally so soothing, that it seldom fail to give comfort to the 
droop heart: but madame montoni’s was torn, and the softest accent 
of emily’s voice were lost upon it. with her usual delicacy, she did 
not appear to observe her aunt’s distress, but it gave an involuntary 
gentle to her manners, and an air of solicitude to her countenance, 
which madame montoni was vex to perceive, who seem to feel the pity 
of her niece to be an insult to her pride, and dismiss her as soon as 
she properly could. emily did not venture to mention again the 
reluctance she felt to her gloomy chamber, but she request that 
annette might be permit to remain with her till she retired to rest; 
and the request was somewhat reluctantly granted. annette, however, was 
now with the servants, and emily withdrew alone. 

with light and hasty steps she pass through the long galleries, while 
the feeble glimmer of the lamp she carry only show the gloom around 
her, and the passing air threaten to extinguish it. the lonely 
silence, that reign in this part of the castle, awed her; now and 
then, indeed, she heard a faint peal of laughter rise from a remote 
part of the edifice, where the servant were assembled, but it was soon 
lost, and a kind of breathless still remained. as she pass the 
suite of rooms which she had visit in the morning, her eyes glance 
fearful on the door, and she almost fancy she heard murmur 
sound within, but she pause not a moment to enquire. 

have reach her own apartment, where no blazing wood on the hearth 
dissipated the gloom, she sat down with a book, to enliven her 
attention, till annette should come, and a fire could be kindled. she 
continue to read till her light was nearly expired, but annette did 
not appear, and the solitude and obscurity of her chamber again 
affected her spirits, the more, because of its near to the scene of 
horror, that she had witness in the morning. gloomy and fantastic 
image came to her mind. she look fearful towards the door of the 
staircase, and then, examine whether it was still fastened, found 
that it was so. unable to conquer the uneasy she felt at the 
prospect of sleep again in this remote and insecure apartment, which 
some person seem to have enter during the preceding night, her 
impatience to see annette, whom she had bidden to enquire concerning 
this circumstance, became extremely painful. she wish also to 
question her, as to the object, which had excited so much horror in her 
own mind, and which annette on the preceding evening had appear to be 
in part acquaint with, though her words were very remote from the 
truth, and it appear plainly to emily, that the girl had been 
purposely misle by a false report: above all she was surprised, that 
the door of the chamber, which contained it, should be left unguarded. 
such an instance of negligence almost surpass belief. but her light 
was now expiring; the faint flash it threw upon the wall call up 
all the terror of fancy, and she rose to find her way to the habitable 
part of the castle, before it was quite extinguished. as she open the 
chamber door, she heard remote voices, and, soon after, saw a light 
issue upon the further end of the corridor, which annette and another 
servant approached. “i am glad you are come,” said emily: “what has 
detain you so long? pray light me a fire immediately.” 

“my lady want me, ma’amselle,” reply annette in some confusion; “i 
will go and get the wood.” 

“no,” said caterina, “that is my business,” and left the room 
instantly, while annette would have followed; but, being call back, 
she began to talk very loud, and laugh, and seem afraid to trust a 
pause of silence. 

caterina soon return with the wood, and then, when the cheerful blaze 
once more animate the room, and this servant had withdrawn, emily 
ask annette, whether she had made the enquiry she bade her. “yes, 
ma’amselle,” said annette, “but not a soul know anything about the 
matter: and old carlo—i watch him well, for they say he know strange 
things—old carlo look so as i don’t know how to tell, and he ask me 
again and again, if i was sure the door was ever unfastened. lord, say 
i—am i sure i am alive? and as for me, ma’am, i am all astounded, as 
one may say, and would no more sleep in this chamber, than i would on 
the great cannon at the end of the east rampart.” 

“and what objection have you to that cannon, more than to any of the 
rest?” said emily smiling: “the best would be rather a hard bed.” 

“yes, ma’amselle, any of them would be hard enough for that matter; but 
they do say, that something has been seen in the dead of night, 
standing beside the great cannon, as if to guard it.” 

“well! my good annette, the people who tell such stories, are happy in 
have you for an auditor, for i perceive you believe them all.” 

“dear ma’amselle! i will show you the very cannon; you can see it from 
these windows!” 

“well,” said emily, “but that do not prove, that an apparition guard 
it.” 

“what! not if i show you the very cannon! dear ma’am, you will believe 
nothing.” 

“nothing probably upon this subject, but what i see,” said 
emily.—“well, ma’am, but you shall see it, if you will only step this 
way to the casement.”—emily could not forbear laughing, and annette 
look surprised. perceive her extreme aptitude to credit the 
marvellous, emily forbore to mention the subject she had intended, lest 
it should overcome her with idle terrors, and she began to speak on a 
lively topic—the regatta of venice. 

“aye, ma’amselle, those rowing matches,” said annette, “and the fine 
moonlight nights, are all, that are worth seeing in venice. to be sure 
the moon is bright than any i ever saw; and then to hear such sweet 
music, too, as ludovico has often and often sung under the lattice by 
the west portico! ma’amselle, it was ludovico, that told me about that 
picture, which you want so to look at last night, and—” 

“what picture?” said emily, wish annette to explain herself. 

“o! that terrible picture with the black veil over it.” 

“you never saw it, then?” said emily. 

“who, i!—no, ma’amselle, i never did. but this morning,” continue 
annette, lower her voice, and look round the room, “this morning, 
as it was broad daylight, do you know, ma’am, i took a strange fancy to 
see it, as i had heard such odd hint about it, and i got as far as the 
door, and should have open it, if it had not been locked!” 

emily, endeavour to conceal the emotion this circumstance 
occasioned, enquire at what hour she went to the chamber, and found, 
that it was soon after herself had been there. she also ask further 
questions, and the answer convinced her, that annette, and probably 
her informer, were ignorant of the terrible truth, though in annette’s 
account something very like the truth, now and then, mingle with the 
falsehood. emily now began to fear, that her visit to the chamber had 
been observed, since the door had been closed, so immediately after her 
departure; and dread lest this should draw upon her the vengeance of 
montoni. her anxiety, also, was excited to know whence, and for what 
purpose, the delusive report, which had been impose upon annette, had 
originated, since montoni could only have wish for silence and 
secrecy; but she felt, that the subject was too terrible for this 
lonely hour, and she compel herself to leave it, to converse with 
annette, whose chat, simple as it was, she prefer to the still 
of total solitude. 

thus they sat, till near midnight, but not without many hint from 
annette, that she wish to go. the ember were now nearly burnt out; 
and emily heard, at a distance, the thundering sound of the hall doors, 
as they were shut for the night. she, therefore, prepared for rest, but 
was still unwill that annette should leave her. at this instant, the 
great bell of the portal sounded. they listen in fearful expectation, 
when, after a long pause of silence, it sound again. soon after, they 
heard the noise of carriage wheels in the courtyard. emily sunk almost 
lifeless in her chair; “it is the count,” said she. 

“what, at this time of night, ma’am!” said annette: “no, my dear lady. 
but, for that matter, it is a strange time of night for anybody to 
come!” 

“nay, pr’ythee, good annette, stay not talking,” said emily in a voice 
of agony—“go, pr’ythee, go, and see who it is.” 

annette left the room, and carry with her the light, leave emily in 
darkness, which a few moments before would have terrify her in this 
room, but was now scarcely observe by her. she listen and waited, in 
breathless expectation, and heard distant noises, but annette did not 
return. her patience, at length, exhausted, she try to find her way 
to the corridor, but it was long before she could touch the door of the 
chamber, and, when she had open it, the total dark without made 
her fear to proceed. voice were now heard, and emily even thought she 
distinguished those of count morano and montoni. soon after she heard 
steps approaching, and then a ray of light stream through the 
darkness, and annette appeared, whom emily went to meet. 

“yes, ma’amselle,” said she, “you were right, it is the count sure 
enough.” 

“it is he!” exclaim emily, lift her eyes towards heaven and 
support herself by annette’s arm. 

“good lord! my dear lady, don’t be in such a _fluster_, and look so 
pale, we shall soon hear more.” 

“we shall, indeed!” said emily, moving as fast as she was able towards 
her apartment. “i am not well; give me air.” annette open a casement, 
and brought water. the faint soon left emily, but she desire 
annette would not go till she heard from montoni. 

“dear ma’amselle! he surely will not disturb you at this time of night; 
why he must think you are asleep.” 

“stay with me till i am so, then,” said emily, who felt temporary 
relief from this suggestion, which appear probable enough, though her 
fear had prevent its occur to her. annette, with secret 
reluctance, consent to stay, and emily was now compose enough to ask 
her some questions; among others, whether she had seen the count. 

“yes, ma’am, i saw him alight, for i went from hence to the grate in 
the north turret, that overlook the inner courtyard, you know. there i 
saw the count’s carriage, and the count in it, wait at the great 
door,—for the porter was just gone to bed—with several men on horseback 
all by the light of the torch they carried.” 

emily was compel to smile. “when the door was opened, the count said 
something, that i could not make out, and then got out, and another 
gentleman with him. i thought, to be sure, the signor was gone to bed, 
and i hasten away to my lady’s dressing-room, to see what i could 
hear. but in the way i met ludovico, and he told me that the signor was 
up, counsel with his master and the other signors, in the room at 
the end of the north gallery; and ludovico held up his finger, and laid 
it on his lips, as much as to say—there is more go on, than you 
think of, annette, but you must hold your tongue. and so i did hold my 
tongue, ma’amselle, and came away to tell you directly.” 

emily enquire who the cavalier was, that accompany the count, and 
how montoni received them; but annette could not inform her. 

“ludovico,” she added, “had just been to call signor montoni’s valet, 
that he might tell him they were arrived, when i met him.” 

emily sat musing, for some time, and then her anxiety was so much 
increased, that she desire annette would go to the servants’ hall, 
where it was possible she might hear something of the count’s 
intention, respecting his stay at the castle. 

“yes, ma’am,” said annette with readiness; “but how am i to find the 
way, if i leave the lamp with you?” 

emily said she would light her, and they immediately quit the 
chamber. when they had reach the top of the great staircase, emily 
recollected, that she might be seen by the count, and, to avoid the 
great hall, annette conduct her through some private passage to a 
back staircase, which led directly to that of the servants. 

as she return towards her chamber, emily began to fear, that she 
might again lose herself in the intricacy of the castle, and again be 
shock by some mysterious spectacle; and, though she was already 
perplexed by the numerous turnings, she fear to open one of the many 
door that offered. while she step thoughtful along, she fancied, 
that she heard a low moan at no great distance, and, have pause a 
moment, she heard it again and distinctly. several door appear on 
the right hand of the passage. she advanced, and listened. when she 
came to the second, she heard a voice, apparently in complaint, within, 
to which she continue to listen, afraid to open the door, and 
unwill to leave it. convulsive sob followed, and then the piercing 
accent of an agonizing spirit burst forth. emily stood appalled, and 
look through the gloom, that surround her, in fearful expectation. 
the lamentation continued. pity now began to subdue terror; it was 
possible she might administer comfort to the sufferer, at least, by 
express sympathy, and she laid her hand on the door. while she 
hesitate she thought she knew this voice, disguise as it was by tone 
of grief. having, therefore, set down the lamp in the passage, she 
gently open the door, within which all was dark, except that from an 
inner apartment a partial light appeared; and she step soft on. 
before she reach it, the appearance of madame montoni, leaning on her 
dressing-table, weeping, and with a handkerchief held to her eyes, 
struck her, and she paused. 

some person was seat in a chair by the fire, but who it was she could 
not distinguish. he spoke, now and then, in a low voice, that did not 
allow emily to hear what was uttered, but she thought, that madame 
montoni, at those times, wept the more, who was too much occupy by 
her own distress, to observe emily, while the latter, though anxious to 
know what occasion this, and who was the person admitted at so late 
an hour to her aunt’s dressing-room, forbore to add to her suffering 
by surprising her, or to take advantage of her situation, by listen 
to a private discourse. she, therefore, step soft back, and, after 
some further difficulty, found the way to her own chamber, where near 
interests, at length, exclude the surprise and concern she had felt, 
respecting madame montoni. 

annette, however, return without satisfactory intelligence, for the 
servants, among whom she had been, were either entire ignorant, or 
affected to be so, concerning the count’s intended stay at the castle. 
they could talk only of the steep and broken road they had just passed, 
and of the numerous danger they had escape and express wonder how 
their lord could choose to encounter all these, in the dark of 
night; for they scarcely allowed, that the torch had serve for any 
other purpose but that of showing the dreary of the mountains. 
annette, finding she could gain no information, left them, making noisy 
petitions, for more wood on the fire and more supper on the table. 

“and now, ma’amselle,” add she, “i am so sleepy!—i am sure, if you 
were so sleepy, you would not desire me to sit up with you.” 

emily, indeed, began to think it was cruel to wish it; she had also 
wait so long, without receiving a summons from montoni, that it 
appear he did not mean to disturb her, at this late hour, and she 
determined to dismiss annette. but, when she again look round her 
gloomy chamber, and recollect certain circumstances, fear seize her 
spirits, and she hesitated. 

“and yet it were cruel of me to ask you to stay, till i am asleep, 
annette,” said she, “for i fear it will be very long before i forget 
myself in sleep.” 

“i dare say it will be very long, ma’amselle,” said annette. 

“but, before you go,” rejoin emily, “let me ask you—had signor 
montoni left count morano, when you quit the hall?” 

“o no, ma’am, they were alone together.” 

“have you been in my aunt’s dressing-room, since you left me?” 

“no, ma’amselle, i call at the door as i passed, but it was fastened; 
so i thought my lady was gone to bed.” 

“who, then, was with your lady just now?” said emily, forgetting, in 
surprise, her usual prudence. 

“nobody, i believe, ma’am,” reply annette, “nobody has been with her, 
i believe, since i left you.” 

emily took no further notice of the subject, and, after some struggle 
with imaginary fears, her good nature prevail over them so far, that 
she dismiss annette for the night. she then sat, muse upon her own 
circumstances and those of madame montoni, till her eye rest on the 
miniature picture, which she had found, after her father’s death, among 
the papers he had enjoin her to destroy. it was open upon the table, 
before her, among some loose drawings, having, with them, been taken 
out of a little box by emily, some hour before. the sight of it call 
up many interesting reflections, but the melancholy sweet of the 
countenance soothe the emotions, which these had occasioned. it was 
the same style of countenance as that of her late father, and, while 
she gaze on it with fond on this account, she even fancy a 
resemblance in the features. but this tranquill was sudden 
interrupted, when she recollect the words in the manuscript, that had 
been found with this picture, and which had formerly occasion her so 
much doubt and horror. at length, she rouse herself from the deep 
reverie, into which this remembrance had thrown her; but, when she rose 
to undress, the silence and solitude, to which she was left, at this 
midnight hour, for not even a distant sound was now heard, conspire 
with the impression the subject she had been considering had given to 
her mind, to appall her. annette’s hints, too, concerning this chamber, 
simple as they were, had not fail to affect her, since they follow 
a circumstance of peculiar horror, which she herself had witnessed, and 
since the scene of this was a chamber nearly adjoin her own. 

the door of the staircase was, perhaps, a subject of more reasonable 
alarm, and she now began to apprehend, such was the aptitude of her 
fears, that this staircase had some private communication with the 
apartment, which she shudder even to remember. determined not to 
undress, she lay down to sleep in her clothes, with her late father’s 
dog, the faithful _manchon_, at the foot of the bed, whom she 
considered as a kind of guard. 

thus circumstanced, she try to banish reflection, but her busy fancy 
would still hover over the subject of her interest, and she heard the 
clock of the castle strike two, before she closed her eyes. 

from the disturbed slumber, into which she then sunk, she was soon 
awaken by a noise, which seem to arise within her chamber; but the 
silence, that prevailed, as she fearful listened, inclined her to 
believe, that she had been alarm by such sound as sometimes occur in 
dreams, and she laid her head again upon the pillow. 

a return of the noise again disturbed her; it seem to come from that 
part of the room, which communicate with the private staircase, and 
she instantly remember the odd circumstance of the door have been 
fastened, during the preceding night, by some unknown hand. her late 
alarm suspicion, concerning its communication, also occur to her. 
her heart became faint with terror. half raise herself from the bed, 
and gently drawing aside the curtain, she look towards the door of 
the staircase, but the lamp, that burnt on the hearth, spread so feeble 
a light through the apartment, that the remote parts of it were lost in 
shadow. the noise, however, which, she was convinced, came from the 
door, continued. it seem like that made by the undrawe of rusty 
bolts, and often ceased, and was then renew more gently, as if the 
hand, that occasion it, was restrained by a fear of discovery. 

while emily kept her eyes fixed on the spot, she saw the door move, and 
then slow open, and perceive something enter the room, but the 
extreme dusky prevent her distinguish what it was. almost 
faint with terror, she had yet sufficient command over herself, to 
check the shriek, that was escape from her lips, and, letting the 
curtain drop from her hand, continue to observe in silence the motions 
of the mysterious form she saw. it seem to glide along the remote 
obscurity of the apartment, then paused, and, as it approach the 
hearth, she perceived, in the strong light, what appear to be a 
human figure. certain remembrance now struck upon her heart, and 
almost subdued the feeble remains of her spirits; she continued, 
however, to watch the figure, which remain for some time motionless, 
but then, advance slow towards the bed, stood silent at the feet, 
where the curtains, being a little open, allow her still to see it; 
terror, however, had now deprived her of the power of discrimination, 
as well as of that of utterance. 

have continue there a moment, the form retreat towards the hearth, 
when it took the lamp, held it up, survey the chamber, for a few 
moments, and then again advanced towards the bed. the light at that 
instant awakening the dog, that had slept at emily’s feet, he bark 
loudly, and, jump to the floor, flew at the stranger, who struck the 
animal smart with a sheathe sword, and, spring towards the bed, 
emily discovered—count morano! 

she gaze at him for a moment in speechless affright, while he, 
throw himself on his knee at the bedside, besought her to fear 
nothing, and, have thrown down his sword, would have taken her hand, 
when the faculties, that terror had suspended, sudden returned, and 
she sprung from the bed, in the dress, which surely a kind of prophetic 
apprehension had prevent her, on this night, from throw aside. 

morano rose, follow her to the door, through which he had entered, 
and caught her hand, as she reach the top of the staircase, but not 
before she had discovered, by the gleam of a lamp, another man half-way 
down the steps. she now scream in despair, and, believe herself 
given up by montoni, saw, indeed, no possibility of escape. 

the count, who still held her hand, led her back into the chamber. 

“why all this terror?” said he, in a tremulous voice. “hear me, emily: 
i come not to alarm you; no, by heaven! i love you too well—too well 
for my own peace.” 

emily look at him for a moment, in fearful doubt. 

“then leave me, sir,” said she, “leave me instantly.” 

“hear me, emily,” resume morano, “hear me! i love, and am in 
despair—yes—in despair. how can i gaze upon you, and know, that it is, 
perhaps, for the last time, without suffering all the frenzy of 
despair? but it shall not be so; you shall be mine, in spite of montoni 
and all his villany.” 

“in spite of montoni!” cry emily eagerly: “what is it i hear?” 

“you hear, that montoni is a villain,” exclaim morano with 
vehemence,—“a villain who would have sold you to my love!—who—” 

“and is he less, who would have bought me?” said emily, fix on the 
count an eye of calm contempt. “leave the room, sir, instantly,” she 
continue in a voice, tremble between joy and fear, “or i will alarm 
the family, and you may receive that from signor montoni’s vengeance, 
which i have vain supplicate from his pity.” but emily knew, that 
she was beyond the hearing of those, who might protect her. 

“you can never hope anything from his pity,” said morano, “he has use 
me infamously, and my vengeance shall pursue him. and for you, emily, 
for you, he has new plan more profitable than the last, no doubt.” the 
gleam of hope, which the count’s former speech had revived, was now 
nearly extinguish by the latter; and, while emily’s countenance 
betray the emotion of her mind, he endeavour to take advantage of 
the discovery. 

“i lose time,” said he: “i came not to exclaim against montoni; i came 
to solicit, to plead—to emily; to tell her all i suffer, to entreat her 
to save me from despair, and herself from destruction. emily! the 
scheme of montoni are insearchable, but, i warn you, they are 
terrible; he has no principle, when interest, or ambition leads. can i 
love you, and abandon you to his power? fly, then, fly from this gloomy 
prison, with a lover, who adore you! i have bribe a servant of the 
castle to open the gates, and, before tomorrow’s dawn, you shall be far 
on the way to venice.” 

emily, overcome by the sudden shock she had received, at the moment, 
too, when she had begun to hope for better days, now thought she saw 
destruction surround her on every side. unable to reply, and almost to 
think, she threw herself into a chair, pale and breathless. that 
montoni had formerly sold her to morano, was very probable; that he had 
now withdrawn his consent to the marriage, was evident from the count’s 
present conduct; and it was nearly certain, that a scheme of strong 
interest only could have induce the selfish montoni to forego a plan, 
which he had hitherto so strenuous pursued. these reflection made 
her tremble at the hints, which morano had just given, which she no 
long hesitate to believe; and, while she shrunk from the new scene 
of misery and oppression, that might await her in the castle of 
udolpho, she was compel to observe, that almost her only means of 
escape them was by submit herself to the protection of this man, 
with whom evil more certain and not less terrible appeared,—evils, 
upon which she could not endure to pause for an instant. 

her silence, though it was that of agony, encourage the hope of 
morano, who watch her countenance with impatience, took again the 
resist hand she had withdrawn, and, as he pressed it to his heart, 
again conjure her to determine immediately. “every moment we lose, 
will make our departure more dangerous,” said he: “these few moments 
lost may enable montoni to overtake us.” 

“i beseech you, sir, be silent,” said emily faintly: “i am indeed very 
wretched, and wretched i must remain. leave me—i command you, leave me 
to my fate.” 

“never!” cry the count vehemently: “let me perish first! but forgive 
my violence! the thought of lose you is madness. you cannot be 
ignorant of montoni’s character, you may be ignorant of his 
schemes—nay, you must be so, or you would not hesitate between my love 
and his power.” 

“nor do i hesitate,” said emily. 

“let us go, then,” said morano, eager kiss her hand, and rising, 
“my carriage waits, below the castle walls.” 

“you mistake me, sir,” said emily. “allow me to thank you for the 
interest you express in my welfare, and to decide by my own choice. i 
shall remain under the protection of signor montoni.” 

“under his protection!” exclaim morano, proudly, “his _protection!_ 
emily, why will you suffer yourself to be thus deluded? i have already 
told you what you have to expect from his _protection_.” 

“and pardon me, sir, if, in this instance, i doubt mere assertion, and, 
to be convinced, require something approach to proof.” 

“i have now neither the time, nor the means of adduce proof,” reply 
the count. 

“nor have i, sir, the inclination to listen to it, if you had.” 

“but you trifle with my patience and my distress,” continue morano. 
“is a marriage with a man, who adore you, so very terrible in your 
eyes, that you would prefer to it all the misery, to which montoni may 
condemn you in this remote prison? some wretch must have stolen those 
affections, which ought to be mine, or you would not thus obstinate 
persist in refuse an offer, that would place you beyond the reach of 
oppression.” morano walk about the room, with quick steps, and a 
disturbed air. 

“this discourse, count morano, sufficient proves, that my affection 
ought not to be yours,” said emily, mildly, “and this conduct, that i 
should not be placed beyond the reach of oppression, so long as i 
remain in your power. if you wish me to believe otherwise, cease to 
oppress me any long by your presence. if you refuse this, you will 
compel me to expose you to the resentment of signor montoni.” 

“yes, let him come,” cry morano furiously, “and brave _my_ 
resentment! let him dare to face once more the man he has so 
courageous injured; danger shall teach him morality, and vengeance 
justice—let him come, and receive my sword in his heart!” 

the vehemence, with which this was uttered, gave emily new cause of 
alarm, who arose from her chair, but her tremble frame refuse to 
support her, and she resume her seat;—the words die on her lips, and, 
when she look wistful towards the door of the corridor, which was 
locked, she considered it was impossible for her to leave the 
apartment, before morano would be apprise of, and able to counteract, 
her intention. 

without observing her agitation, he continue to pace the room in the 
utmost perturbation of spirits. his darken countenance express all 
the rage of jealousy and revenge; and a person, who had seen his 
features under the smile of ineffable tenderness, which he so lately 
assumed, would now scarcely have believe them to be the same. 

“count morano,” said emily, at length recover her voice, “calm, i 
entreat you, these transports, and listen to reason, if you will not to 
pity. you have equally misplace your love, and your hatred.—i never 
could have return the affection, with which you honour me, and 
certainly have never encourage it; neither has signor montoni injure 
you, for you must have known, that he had no right to dispose of my 
hand, had he even possessed the power to do so. leave, then, leave the 
castle, while you may with safety. spare yourself the dreadful 
consequence of an unjust revenge, and the remorse of have prolonged 
to me these moments of suffering.” 

“is it for mine, or for montoni’s safety, that you are thus alarmed?” 
said morano, coldly, and turning towards her with a look of acrimony. 

“for both,” reply emily, in a tremble voice. 

“unjust revenge!” cry the count, resume the abrupt tone of 
passion. “who, that looks upon that face, can imagine a punishment 
adequate to the injury he would have done me? yes, i will leave the 
castle; but it shall not be alone. i have trifle too long. since my 
prayer and my suffering cannot prevail, force shall. i have people in 
waiting, who shall convey you to my carriage. your voice will bring no 
succour; it cannot be heard from this remote part of the castle; 
submit, therefore, in silence, to go with me.” 

this was an unnecessary injunction, at present; for emily was too 
certain, that her call would avail her nothing; and terror had so 
entire disorder her thoughts, that she knew not how to plead to 
morano, but sat, mute and trembling, in her chair, till he advanced to 
lift her from it, when she sudden raise herself, and, with a 
repulsive gesture, and a countenance of forced serenity, said, “count 
morano! i am now in your power; but you will observe, that this is not 
the conduct which can win the esteem you appear so solicitous to 
obtain, and that you are prepare for yourself a load of remorse, in 
the misery of a friendless orphan, which can never leave you. do you 
believe your heart to be, indeed, so hardened, that you can look 
without emotion on the suffering, to which you would condemn me?—” 

emily was interrupt by the growl of the dog, who now came again 
from the bed, and morano look towards the door of the staircase, 
where no person appearing, he call aloud, “cesario!” 

“emily,” said the count, “why will you reduce me to adopt this conduct? 
how much more willing would i persuade, than compel you to become my 
wife! but, by heaven! i will not leave you to be sold by montoni. yet a 
thought glance across my mind, that bring madness with it. i know not 
how to name it. it is preposterous—it cannot be.—yet you tremble—you 
grow pale! it is! it is so;—you—you—love montoni!” cry morano, 
grasping emily’s wrist, and stamp his foot on the floor. 

an involuntary air of surprise appear on her countenance. “if you 
have indeed believe so,” said she, “believe so still.” 

“that look, those words confirm it,” exclaim morano, furiously. “no, 
no, no, montoni had a rich prize in view, than gold. but he shall not 
live to triumph over me!—this very instant—” 

he was interrupt by the loud bark of the dog. 

“stay, count morano,” said emily, terrify by his words, and by the 
fury express in his eyes, “i will save you from this error.—of all 
men, signor montoni is not your rival; though, if i find all other 
means of saving myself vain, i will try whether my voice may not arouse 
his servant to my succour.” 

“assertion,” reply morano, “at such a moment, is not to be depend 
upon. how could i suffer myself to doubt, even for an instant, that he 
could see you, and not love?—but my first care shall be to convey you 
from the castle. cesario! ho,—cesario!” 

a man now appear at the door of the staircase, and other steps were 
heard ascending. emily utter a loud shriek, as morano hurried her 
across the chamber, and, at the same moment, she heard a noise at the 
door, that open upon the corridor. the count pause an instant, as if 
his mind was suspend between love and the desire of vengeance; and, 
in that instant, the door gave way, and montoni, follow by the old 
steward and several other persons, burst into the room. 

“draw!” cry montoni to the count, who did not pause for a second 
bidding, but, give emily into the hand of the people, that appear 
from the staircase, turn fierce round. “this in thine heart, 
villain!” said he, as he made a thrust at montoni with his sword, who 
parry the blow, and aim another, while some of the persons, who had 
follow him into the room, endeavour to part the combatants, and 
other rescue emily from the hand of morano’s servants. 

“was it for this, count morano,” said montoni, in a cool sarcastic tone 
of voice, “that i received you under my roof, and permit you, though 
my declared enemy, to remain under it for the night? was it, that you 
might repay my hospitality with the treachery of a fiend, and rob me of 
my niece?” 

“who talks of treachery?” said morano, in a tone of unrestrained 
vehemence. “let him that does, show an unblushing face of innocence. 
montoni, you are a villain! if there is treachery in this affair, look 
to yourself as the author of it. _if_—do i say? _i_—whom you have 
wrong with unexampled baseness, whom you have injure almost beyond 
redress! but why do i use words?—come on, coward, and receive justice 
at my hands!” 

“coward!” cry montoni, burst from the people who held him, and 
rush on the count, when they both retreat into the corridor, where 
the fight continue so desperately, that none of the spectator dare 
approach them, montoni swearing, that the first who interfered, should 
fall by his sword. 

jealousy and revenge lent all their fury to morano, while the superior 
skill and the temperance of montoni enable him to wound his adversary, 
whom his servant now attempt to seize, but he would not be 
restrained, and, regardless of his wound, continue to fight. he seem 
to be insensible both of pain and loss of blood, and alive only to the 
energy of his passions. montoni, on the contrary, persevere in the 
combat, with a fierce, yet wary, valour; he received the point of 
morano’s sword on his arm, but, almost in the same instant, severe 
wound and disarm him. the count then fell back into the arms of his 
servant, while montoni held his sword over him, and bade him ask his 
life. morano, sink under the anguish of his wound, had scarcely 
reply by a gesture, and by a few words, feeble articulated, that he 
would not—when he fainted; and montoni was then go to have plunge 
the sword into his breast, as he lay senseless, but his arm was 
arrest by cavigni. to the interrupt he yield without much 
difficulty, but his complexion change almost to blackness, as he 
look upon his fallen adversary, and ordered, that he should be 
carry instantly from the castle. 

in the mean time, emily, who had been withheld from leave the chamber 
during the affray, now came forward into the corridor, and plead a 
cause of common humanity, with the feelings of the warmest benevolence, 
when she entreat montoni to allow morano the assistance in the 
castle, which his situation required. but montoni, who had seldom 
listen to pity, now seem rapacious of vengeance, and, with a 
monster’s cruelty, again ordered his defeat enemy to be taken from 
the castle, in his present state, though there were only the woods, or 
a solitary neighbouring cottage, to shelter him from the night. 

the count’s servant have declared, that they would not move him till 
he revived, montoni’s stood inactive, cavigni remonstrating, and emily, 
superior to montoni’s menaces, give water to morano, and direct 
the attendant to bind up his wound. at length, montoni had leisure to 
feel pain from his own hurt, and he withdrew to examine it. 

the count, meanwhile, have slow recovered, the first object he saw, 
on raise his eyes, was emily, bend over him with a countenance 
strong expressive of solicitude. he survey her with a look of 
anguish. 

“i have deserve this,” said he, “but not from montoni. it is from you, 
emily, that i have deserve punishment, yet i receive only pity!” he 
paused, for he had spoken with difficulty. after a moment, he 
proceeded. “i must resign you, but not to montoni. forgive me the 
suffering i have already occasion you! but for _that_ villain—his 
infamy shall not go unpunished. carry me from this place,” said he to 
his servants. “i am in no condition to travel: you must, therefore, 
take me to the nearest cottage, for i will not pass the night under his 
roof, although i may expire on the way from it.” 

cesario propose to go out, and enquire for a cottage, that might 
receive his master, before he attempt to remove him: but morano was 
impatient to be gone; the anguish of his mind seem to be even greater 
than that of his wound, and he rejected, with disdain, the offer of 
cavigni to entreat montoni, that he might be suffer to pass the night 
in the castle. cesario was now go to call up the carriage to the 
great gate, but the count forbade him. “i cannot bear the motion of a 
carriage,” said he: “call some other of my people, that they may 
assist in bearing me in their arms.” 

at length, however, morano submit to reason, and consented, that 
cesario should first prepare some cottage to receive him. emily, now 
that he had recover his senses, was about to withdraw from the 
corridor, when a message from montoni command her to do so, and also 
that the count, if he was not already gone, should quit the castle 
immediately. indignation flash from morano’s eyes, and flushed his 
cheeks. 

“tell montoni,” said he, “that i shall go when it suit my own 
convenience; that i quit the castle, he dare to call his, as i would 
the nest of a serpent, and that this is not the last he shall hear from 
me. tell him, i will not leave _another_ murder on his conscience, if i 
can help it.” 

“count morano! do you know what you say?” said cavigni. 

“yes, signor, i know well what i say, and he will understand well what 
i mean. his conscience will assist his understanding, on this 
occasion.” 

“count morano,” said verezzi, who had hitherto silent observe him, 
“dare again to insult my friend, and i will plunge this sword in your 
body.” 

“it would be an action worthy the friend of a villain!” said morano, as 
the strong impulse of his indignation enable him to raise himself from 
the arms of his servants; but the energy was momentary, and he sunk 
back, exhaust by the effort. montoni’s people, meanwhile, held 
verezzi, who seem inclined, even in this instant, to execute his 
threat; and cavigni, who was not so deprave as to abet the cowardly 
malignity of verezzi, endeavour to withdraw him from the corridor; 
and emily, whom a compassionate interest had thus long detained, was 
now quit it in new terror, when the supplicate voice of morano 
arrest her, and, by a feeble gesture, he beckon her to draw nearer. 
she advanced with timid steps, but the faint languor of his 
countenance again awaken her pity, and overcame her terror. 

“i am go from hence for ever,” said he: “perhaps, i shall never see 
you again. i would carry with me your forgiveness, emily; nay more—i 
would also carry your good wishes.” 

“you have my forgiveness, then,” said emily, “and my sincere wish for 
your recovery.” 

“and only for my recovery?” said morano, with a sigh. “for your general 
welfare,” add emily. 

“perhaps i ought to be contented with this,” he resumed; “i certainly 
have not deserve more; but i would ask you, emily, sometimes to think 
of me, and, forget my offence, to remember only the passion which 
occasion it. i would ask, alas! impossibilities: i would ask you to 
love me! at this moment, when i am about to part with you, and that, 
perhaps, for ever, i am scarcely myself. emily—may you never know the 
torture of a passion like mine! what do i say? o, that, for me, you 
might be sensible of such a passion!” 

emily look impatient to be gone. “i entreat you, count, to consult 
your own safety,” said she, “and linger here no longer. i tremble for 
the consequence of signor verezzi’s passion, and of montoni’s 
resentment, should he learn that you are still here.” 

morano’s face was overspread with a momentary crimson, his eyes 
sparkled, but he seem endeavour to conquer his emotion, and 
reply in a calm voice, “since you are interested for my safety, i 
will regard it, and be gone. but, before i go, let me again hear you 
say, that you wish me well,” said he, fix on her an earnest and 
mournful look. 

emily repeated her assurances. he took her hand, which she scarcely 
attempt to withdraw, and put it to his lips. “farewell, count 
morano!” said emily; and she turn to go, when a second message 
arrive from montoni, and she again conjure morano, as he value his 
life, to quit the castle immediately. he regard her in silence, with 
a look of fixed despair. but she had no time to enforce her 
compassionate entreaties, and, not daring to disobey the second command 
of montoni, she left the corridor, to attend him. 

he was in the cedar parlour, that adjoin the great hall, laid upon a 
couch, and suffering a degree of anguish from his wound, which few 
person could have disguised, as he did. his countenance, which was 
stern, but calm, express the dark passion of revenge, but no symptom 
of pain; bodily pain, indeed, he had always despised, and had yield 
only to the strong and terrible energy of the soul. he was attend 
by old carlo and by signor bertolini, but madame montoni was not with 
him. 

emily trembled, as she approach and received his severe rebuke, for 
not have obey his first summons; and perceived, also, that he 
attribute her stay in the corridor to a motive, that had not even 
occur to her artless mind. 

“this is an instance of female caprice,” said he, “which i ought to 
have foreseen. count morano, whose suit you obstinate rejected, so 
long as it was countenance by me, you favour, it seems, since you find 
i have dismiss him.” 

emily look astonished. “i do not comprehend you, sir,” said she, “you 
certainly do not mean to imply, that the design of the count to visit 
the double-chamber, was found upon any approbation of mine.” 

“to that i reply nothing,” said montoni; “but it must certainly be a 
more than common interest, that made you plead so warm in his cause, 
and that could detain you thus long in his presence, contrary to my 
express order—in the presence of a man, whom you have hitherto, on all 
occasions, most scrupulous shunned!” 

“i fear, sir, it was a more than common interest, that detain me,” 
said emily calmly; “for of late i have been inclined to think, that of 
compassion is an uncommon one. but how could i, could _you_, sir, 
witness count morano’s deplorable condition, and not wish to relieve 
it?” 

“you add hypocrisy to caprice,” said montoni, frowning, “and an attempt 
at satire, to both; but, before you undertake to regulate the morals of 
other persons, you should learn and practise the virtues, which are 
indispensable to a woman—sincerity, uniform of conduct and 
obedience.” 

emily, who had always endeavour to regulate her conduct by the nicest 
laws, and whose mind was finely sensible, not only of what is just in 
morals, but of whatever is beautiful in the female character, was 
shock by these words; yet, in the next moment, her heart swell with 
the consciousness of have deserve praise, instead of censure, and 
she was proud silent. montoni, acquaint with the delicacy of her 
mind, knew how keen she would feel his rebuke; but he was a stranger 
to the luxury of conscious worth, and, therefore, did not foresee the 
energy of that sentiment, which now repel his satire. turning to a 
servant who had lately enter the room, he ask whether morano had 
quit the castle. the man answered, that his servant were then 
remove him, on a couch, to a neighbouring cottage. montoni seem 
somewhat appeased, on hearing this; and, when ludovico appeared, a few 
moments after, and said, that morano was gone, he told emily she might 
retire to her apartment. 

she withdrew willing from his presence; but the thought of passing 
the remainder of the night in a chamber, which the door from the 
staircase made liable to the intrusion of any person, now alarm her 
more than ever, and she determined to call at madame montoni’s room, 
and request, that annette might be permit to be with her. 

on reach the great gallery, she heard voice seemingly in dispute, 
and, her spirits now apt to take alarm, she paused, but soon 
distinguished some words of cavigni and verezzi, and went towards them, 
in the hope of conciliate their difference. they were alone. 
verezzi’s face was still flushed with rage; and, as the first object of 
it was now remove from him, he appear willing to transfer his 
resentment to cavigni, who seem to be expostulating, rather than 
disputing, with him. 

verezzi was protesting, that he would instantly inform montoni of the 
insult, which morano had thrown out against him, and above all, that, 
wherein he had accused him of murder. 

“there is no answering,” said cavigni, “for the words of a man in a 
passion; little serious regard ought to be paid to them. if you persist 
in your resolution, the consequence may be fatal to both. we have now 
more serious interests to pursue, than those of a petty revenge.” 

emily join her entreaty to cavigni’s arguments, and they, at 
length, prevail so far, as that verezzi consent to retire, without 
seeing montoni. 

on calling at her aunt’s apartment, she found it fastened. in a few 
minutes, however, it was open by madame montoni herself. 

it may be remembered, that it was by a door leading into the bedroom 
from a back passage, that emily had secret enter a few hour 
preceding. she now conjectured, by the calm of madame montoni’s 
air, that she was not apprise of the accident, which had befallen her 
husband, and was beginning to inform her of it, in the tenderest manner 
she could, when her aunt interrupt her, by saying, she was acquaint 
with the whole affair. 

emily knew indeed, that she had little reason to love montoni, but 
could scarcely have believe her capable of such perfect apathy, as she 
now discover towards him; have obtain permission, however, for 
annette to sleep in her chamber, she went thither immediately. 

a track of blood appear along the corridor, leading to it; and on the 
spot, where the count and montoni had fought, the whole floor was 
stained. emily shuddered, and lean on annette, as she passed. when 
she reach her apartment, she instantly determined, since the door of 
the staircase had been left open, and that annette was now with her, to 
explore whither it led,—a circumstance now material connected with 
her own safety. annette accordingly, half curious and half afraid, 
propose to descend the stairs; but, on approach the door, they 
perceived, that it was already fasten without, and their care was 
then direct to the secure it on the inside also, by place against 
it as much of the heavy furniture of the room, as they could lift. 
emily then retired to bed, and annette continue on a chair by the 
hearth, where some feeble ember remained. 



chapter vii 

of aery tongues, that syllable men’s name 
on sands and shore and desert wildernesses. 
milton 


it is now necessary to mention some circumstances, which could not be 
related amidst the event of emily’s hasty departure from venice, or 
together with those, which so rapid succeed to her arrival in the 
castle. 

on the morning of her journey, count morano had gone at the appoint 
hour to the mansion of montoni, to demand his bride. when he reach 
it, he was somewhat surprise by the silence and solitary air of the 
portico, where montoni’s lacquey usually loitered; but surprise was 
soon change to astonishment, and astonishment to the rage of 
disappointment, when the door was open by an old woman, who told his 
servants, that her master and his family had left venice, early in the 
morning, for _terra-firma_. scarcely believe what his servant told, 
he left his gondola, and rush into the hall to enquire further. the 
old woman, who was the only person left in care of the mansion, 
persist in her story, which the silent and desert apartments soon 
convinced him was no fiction. he then seize her with a menace air, 
as if he meant to wreak all his vengeance upon her, at the same time 
ask her twenty question in a breath, and all these with a 
gesticulate so furious, that she was deprived of the power of 
answer them; then sudden letting her go, he stamp about the 
hall, like a madman, curse montoni and his own folly. 

when the good woman was at liberty, and had somewhat recover from her 
fright, she told him all she knew of the affair, which was, indeed, 
very little, but enough to enable morano to discover, that montoni was 
gone to his castle on the apennine. thither he followed, as soon as his 
servant could complete the necessary preparation for the journey, 
accompany by a friend, and attend by a number of his people, 
determined to obtain emily, or a full revenge on montoni. when his mind 
had recover from the first effervesce of rage, and his thought 
became less obscured, his conscience hint to him certain 
circumstances, which, in some measure, explain the conduct of 
montoni: but how the latter could have been led to suspect an 
intention, which, he had believed, was known only to himself, he could 
not even guess. on this occasion, however, he had been partly betray 
by that sympathetic intelligence, which may be said to exist between 
bad minds, and which teach one man to judge what another will do in 
the same circumstances. thus it was with montoni, who had now received 
indisputable proof of a truth, which he had some time suspected—that 
morano’s circumstances, instead of being affluent, as he had been 
bidden to believe, were greatly involved. montoni had been interested 
in his suit, by motive entire selfish, those of avarice and pride; 
the last of which would have been gratify by an alliance with a 
venetian nobleman, the former by emily’s estate in gascony, which he 
had stipulated, as the price of his favour, should be deliver up to 
him from the day of her marriage. in the meantime, he had been led to 
suspect the consequence of the count’s boundless extravagance; but it 
was not till the evening, preceding the intended nuptials, that he 
obtain certain information of his distress circumstances. he did 
not hesitate then to infer, that morano design to defraud him of 
emily’s estate; and in this supposition he was confirmed, and with 
apparent reason, by the subsequent conduct of the count, who, after 
have appoint to meet him on that night, for the purpose of sign 
the instrument, which was to secure to him his reward, fail in his 
engagement. such a circumstance, indeed, in a man of morano’s gay and 
thoughtless character, and at a time when his mind was engaged by the 
bustle of preparation for his nuptials, might have been attribute to a 
cause less decisive, than design; but montoni did not hesitate an 
instant to interpret it his own way, and, after vain wait the 
count’s arrival, for several hours, he gave orders for his people to be 
in readiness to set off at a moment’s notice. by hasten to udolpho 
he intended to remove emily from the reach of morano, as well as to 
break off the affair, without submit himself to useless 
altercation: and, if the count meant what he call honourably, he 
would doubtless follow emily, and sign the writings in question. if 
this was done, so little consideration had montoni for her welfare, 
that he would not have scruple to sacrifice her to a man of ruin 
fortune, since by that means he could enrich himself; and he forbore to 
mention to her the motive of his sudden journey, lest the hope it might 
revive should render her more intractable, when submission would be 
required. 

with these considerations, he had left venice; and, with other total 
different, morano had, soon after, pursue his steps across the rugged 
apennines. when his arrival was announce at the castle, montoni did 
not believe, that he would have presume to show himself, unless he had 
meant to fulfil his engagement, and he, therefore, readily admitted 
him; but the enrage countenance and expression of morano, as he 
enter the apartment, instantly undeceive him; and, when montoni had 
explained, in part, the motive of his abrupt departure from venice, 
the count still persist in demanding emily, and reproach montoni, 
without even name the former stipulation. 

montoni, at length, weary of the dispute, defer the settle of it 
till the morrow, and morano retired with some hope, suggest by 
montoni’s apparent indecision. when, however, in the silence of his own 
apartment, he began to consider the past conversation, the character of 
montoni, and some former instance of his duplicity, the hope, which he 
had admitted, vanished, and he determined not to neglect the present 
possibility of obtain emily by other means. to his confidential 
valet he told his design of carry away emily, and sent him back to 
montoni’s servant to find out one among them, who might enable him to 
execute it. the choice of this person he entrust to the fellow’s own 
discernment, and not imprudently; for he discover a man, whom montoni 
had, on some former occasion, treat harshly, and who was now ready to 
betray him. this man conduct cesario round the castle, through a 
private passage, to the staircase, that led to emily’s chamber; then 
show him a short way out of the building, and afterwards procure him 
the keys, that would secure his retreat. the man was well reward for 
his trouble; how the count was reward for his treachery, had already 
appeared. 

meanwhile, old carlo had overheard two of morano’s servants, who had 
been ordered to be in wait with the carriage, beyond the castle 
walls, express their surprise at their master’s sudden, and secret 
departure, for the valet had entrust them with no more of morano’s 
designs, than it was necessary for them to execute. they, however, 
indulge themselves in surmises, and in express them to each other; 
and from these carlo had drawn a just conclusion. but, before he 
venture to disclose his apprehension to montoni, he endeavour to 
obtain further confirmation of them, and, for this purpose, placed 
himself, with one of his fellow-servants, at the door of emily’s 
apartment, that open upon the corridor. he did not watch long in 
vain, though the growl of the dog had once nearly betray him. when 
he was convinced, that morano was in the room, and had listen long 
enough to his conversation, to understand his scheme, he immediately 
alarm montoni, and thus rescue emily from the designs of the count. 

montoni, on the following morning, appear as usual, except that he 
wore his wound arm in a sling; he went out upon the ramparts; 
overlook the men employ in repair them; gave orders for 
additional workmen, and then came into the castle to give audience to 
several persons, who were just arrived, and who were shown into a 
private apartment, where he communicate with them, for near an hour. 
carlo was then summoned, and ordered to conduct the stranger to a part 
of the castle, which, in former times, had been occupy by the upper 
servant of the family, and to provide them with every necessary 
refreshment.—when he had done this, he was bidden to return to his 
master. 

meanwhile, the count remain in a cottage in the skirt of the wood 
below, suffering under bodily and mental pain, and meditate deep 
revenge against montoni. his servant, whom he had dispatch for a 
surgeon to the nearest town, which was, however, at a considerable 
distance, did not return till the following day, when, his wound being 
examine and dressed, the practitioner refuse to deliver any positive 
opinion, concerning the degree of danger attend them; but give his 
patient a compose draught and order him to be quiet, remain at 
the cottage to watch the event. 

emily, for the remainder of the late eventful night, had been suffer 
to sleep, undisturbed; and, when her mind recover from the confusion 
of slumber, and she remembered, that she was now release from the 
address of count morano, her spirits were sudden relieved from a 
part of the terrible anxiety, that had long oppress them; that which 
remained, arose chiefly from a recollection of morano’s assertions, 
concerning the scheme of montoni. he had said, that plan of the 
latter, concerning emily, were insearchable, yet that he knew them to 
be terrible. at the time he utter this, she almost believe it to be 
design for the purpose of prevailing with her to throw herself into 
his protection, and she still thought it might be chiefly so account 
for; but his assertion had left an impression on her mind, which a 
consideration of the character and former conduct of montoni did not 
contribute to efface. she, however, checked her propensity to 
anticipate evil; and, determined to enjoy this respite from actual 
misfortune, try to dismiss thought, took her instrument for drawing, 
and placed herself at a window, to select into a landscape some 
features of the scenery without. 

as she was thus employed, she saw, walking on the rampart below, the 
men, who had so lately arrive at the castle. the sight of stranger 
surprise her, but still more, of stranger such as these. there was a 
singular in their dress, and a certain fierce in their air, that 
fixed all her attention. she withdrew from the casement, while they 
passed, but soon return to observe them further. their figures seem 
so well suit to the wild of the surrounding objects, that, as 
they stood survey the castle, she sketch them for banditti, amid 
the mountain-view of her picture, when she had finished which, she was 
surprise to observe the spirit of her group. but she had copy from 
nature. 

carlo, when he had placed refreshment before these men in the apartment 
assign to them, returned, as he was ordered, to montoni, who was 
anxious to discover by what servant the key of the castle had been 
deliver to morano, on the preceding night. but this man, though he 
was too faithful to his master quiet to see him injured, would not 
betray a fellow-servant even to justice; he, therefore, pretended to be 
ignorant who it was, that had conspire with count morano, and related, 
as before, that he had only overheard some of the stranger describe 
the plot. 

montoni’s suspicion naturally fell upon the porter, whom he ordered 
now to attend. carlo hesitated, and then with slow steps went to seek 
him. 

barnardine, the porter, deny the accusation with a countenance so 
steady and undaunted, that montoni could scarcely believe him guilty, 
though he knew not how to think him innocent. at length, the man was 
dismiss from his presence, and, though the real offender, escape 
detection. 

montoni then went to his wife’s apartment, whither emily follow soon 
after, but, finding them in high dispute, was instantly leave the 
room, when her aunt call her back, and desire her to stay.—“you 
shall be a witness,” said she, “of my opposition. now, sir, repeat the 
command, i have so often refuse to obey.” 

montoni turned, with a stern countenance, to emily, and bade her quit 
the apartment, while his wife persist in desiring, that she would 
stay. emily was eager to escape from this scene of contention, and 
anxious, also, to serve her aunt; but she despair of conciliate 
montoni, in whose eyes the rising tempest of his soul flash terribly. 

“leave the room,” said he, in a voice of thunder. emily obeyed, and, 
walking down to the rampart, which the stranger had now left, 
continue to meditate on the unhappy marriage of her father’s sister, 
and on her own desolate situation, occasion by the ridiculous 
imprudence of her, whom she had always wish to respect and love. 
madame montoni’s conduct had, indeed, render it impossible for emily 
to do either; but her gentle heart was touched by her distress, and, in 
the pity thus awakened, she forgot the injurious treatment she had 
received from her. 

as she saunter on the rampart, annette appear at the hall door, 
look cautious round, and then advanced to meet her. 

“dear ma’amselle, i have been look for you all over the castle,” 
said she. “if you will step this way, i will show you a picture.” 

“a picture!” exclaim emily, and shuddered. 

“yes, ma’am, a picture of the late lady of this place. old carlo just 
now told me it was her, and i thought you would be curious to see it. 
as to my lady, you know, ma’amselle, one cannot talk about such things 
to her.” 

“and so,” said emily smilingly, “as you must talk of them to somebody—” 

“why, yes, ma’amselle; what can one do in such a place as this, if one 
must not talk? if i was in a dungeon, if they would let me talk—it 
would be some comfort; nay, i would talk, if it was only to the walls. 
but come, ma’amselle, we lose time—let me show you the picture.” 

“is it veiled?” said emily, pausing. 

“dear ma’amselle!” said annette, fix her eyes on emily’s face, “what 
make you look so pale?—are you ill?” 

“no, annette, i am well enough, but i have no desire to see this 
picture; return into the hall.” 

“what! ma’am, not to see the lady of this castle?” said the girl; “the 
lady, who disappear to strangely? well! now, i would have run to the 
furthest mountain we can see, yonder, to have got a sight of such a 
picture; and, to speak my mind, that strange story is all, that make 
me care about this old castle, though it make me thrill all over, as 
it were, whenever i think of it.” 

“yes, annette, you love the wonderful; but do you know, that, unless 
you guard against this inclination, it will lead you into all the 
misery of superstition?” 

annette might have smile in her turn, at this sage observation of 
emily, who could tremble with ideal terrors, as much as herself, and 
listen almost as eager to the recital of a mysterious story. annette 
urge her request. 

“are you sure it is a picture?” said emily, “have you seen it?—is it 
veiled?” 

“holy maria! ma’amselle, yes, no, yes. i am sure it is a picture—i have 
seen it, and it is not veiled!” 

the tone and look of surprise, with which this was uttered, recall 
emily’s prudence; who conceal her emotion under a smile, and bade 
annette lead her to the picture. it was in an obscure chamber, 
adjoin that part of the castle, allot to the servants. several 
other portrait hung on the walls, covered, like this, with dust and 
cobweb. 

“that is it, ma’amselle,” said annette, in a low voice, and pointing. 
emily advanced, and survey the picture. it represent a lady in the 
flower of youth and beauty; her features were handsome and noble, full 
of strong expression, but had little of the captivate sweetness, that 
emily had look for, and still less of the pensive mild she loved. 
it was a countenance, which spoke the language of passion, rather than 
that of sentiment; a haughty impatience of misfortune—not the placid 
melancholy of a spirit injured, yet resigned. 

“how many years have passed, since this lady disappeared, annette?” 
said emily. 

“twenty years, ma’amselle, or thereabout, as they tell me; i know it is 
a long while ago.” emily continue to gaze upon the portrait. 

“i think,” resume annette, “the signor would do well to hang it in a 
better place, than this old chamber. now, in my mind, he ought to place 
the picture of a lady, who gave him all these riches, in the handsomest 
room in the castle. but he may have good reason for what he does: and 
some people do say that he has lost his riches, as well as his 
gratitude. but hush, ma’am, not a word!” add annette, lay her 
finger on her lips. emily was too much absorb in thought, to hear 
what she said. 

“’tis a handsome lady, i am sure,” continue annette: “the signor need 
not be ashamed to put her in the great apartment, where the veiled 
picture hangs.” emily turn round. “but for that matter, she would be 
as little seen there, as here, for the door is always locked, i find.” 

“let us leave this chamber,” said emily: “and let me caution you again, 
annette; be guarded in your conversation, and never tell, that you know 
anything of that picture.” 

“holy mother!” exclaim annette, “it is no secret; why all the 
servant have seen it already!” 

emily started. “how is this?” said she—“have seen it! when?—how?” 

“dear, ma’amselle, there is nothing surprising in that; we had all a 
little more _curiousness_ than you had.” 

“i thought you told me, the door was kept locked?” said emily. 

“if that was the case, ma’amselle,” reply annette, look about her, 
“how could we get here?” 

“oh, you mean _this_ picture,” said emily, with return calmness. 
“well, annette, here is nothing more to engage my attention; we will 
go.” 

emily, as she pass to her own apartment, saw montoni go down to the 
hall, and she turn into her aunt’s dressing-room, whom she found 
weeping and alone, grief and resentment struggle on her countenance. 
pride had hitherto restrained complaint. judge of emily’s disposition 
from her own, and from a consciousness of what her treatment of her 
deserved, she had believed, that her grief would be cause of triumph 
to her niece, rather than of sympathy; that she would despise, not pity 
her. but she knew not the tender and benevolence of emily’s heart, 
that had always taught her to forget her own injury in the 
misfortune of her enemy. the suffering of others, whoever they might 
be, call forth her ready compassion, which dissipated at once every 
obscure cloud to goodness, that passion or prejudice might have 
raise in her mind. 

madame montoni’s sufferings, at length, rose above her pride, and, when 
emily had before enter the room, she would have told them all, had 
not her husband prevent her; now that she was no long restrained by 
his presence, she pour forth all her complaint to her niece. 

“o emily!” she exclaimed, “i am the most wretched of women—i am indeed 
cruel treated! who, with my prospects of happiness, could have 
foreseen such a wretched fate as this?—who could have thought, when i 
married such a man as the signor, i should ever have to bewail my lot? 
but there is no judge what is for the best—there is no knowing what 
is for our good! the most flatter prospects often change—the best 
judgment may be deceived—who could have foreseen, when i married the 
signor, that i should ever repent my _generosity?_” 

emily thought she might have foreseen it, but this was not a thought of 
triumph. she placed herself in a chair near her aunt, took her hand, 
and, with one of those looks of soft compassion, which might 
characterise the countenance of a guardian angel, spoke to her in the 
tenderest accents. but these did not sooth madame montoni, whom 
impatience to talk made unwill to listen. she want to complain, 
not to be consoled; and it was by exclamation of complaint only, that 
emily learned the particular circumstances of her affliction. 

“ungrateful man!” said madame montoni, “he has deceive me in every 
respect; and now he has taken me from my country and friends, to shut 
me up in this old castle; and, here he think he can compel me to do 
whatever he designs! but he shall find himself mistaken, he shall find 
that no threat can alter—but who would have believed! who would have 
supposed, that a man of his family and apparent wealth had absolutely 
no fortune?—no, scarcely a sequin of his own! i did all for the best; i 
thought he was a man of consequence, of great property, or i am sure i 
would never have married him,—ungrateful, artful man!” she pause to 
take breath. 

“dear madam, be composed,” said emily: “the signor may not be so rich 
as you had reason to expect, but surely he cannot be very poor, since 
this castle and the mansion at venice are his. may i ask what are the 
circumstances, that particularly affect you?” 

“what are the circumstances!” exclaim madame montoni with resentment: 
“why is it not sufficient, that he had long ago ruin his own fortune 
by play, and that he has since lost what i brought him—and that now he 
would compel me to sign away my settlement (it was well i had the chief 
of my property settled on myself!) that he may lose this also, or throw 
it away in wild schemes, which nobody can understand but himself? and, 
and—is not all this sufficient?” 

“it is, indeed,” said emily, “but you must recollect, dear madam, that 
i knew nothing of all this.” 

“well, and is it not sufficient,” rejoin her aunt, “that he is also 
absolutely ruined, that he is sunk deep in debt, and that neither 
this castle, nor the mansion at venice, is his own, if all his debts, 
honourable and dishonourable, were paid!” 

“i am shock by what you tell me, madam,” said emily. 

“and is it not enough,” interrupt madame montoni, “that he has 
treat me with neglect, with cruelty, because i refuse to relinquish 
my settlements, and, instead of being frightened by his menaces, 
resolute defy him, and upbraid him with his shameful conduct? but 
i bore all meekly,—you know, niece, i never utter a word of 
complaint, till now; no! that such a disposition as mine should be so 
impose upon! that i, whose only fault are too much kindness, too much 
generosity, should be chain for life to such a vile, deceitful, cruel 
monster!” 

want of breath compel madame montoni to stop. if anything could have 
made emily smile in these moments, it would have been this speech of 
her aunt, deliver in a voice very little below a scream, and with a 
vehemence of gesticulate and of countenance, that turn the whole 
into burlesque. emily saw, that her misfortune did not admit of real 
consolation, and, contemn the commonplace terms of superficial 
comfort, she was silent; while madame montoni, jealous of her own 
consequence, mistook this for the silence of indifference, or of 
contempt, and reproach her with want of duty and feeling. 

“o! i suspect what all this boast sensibility would prove to be!” 
rejoin she; “i thought it would not teach you to feel either duty, or 
affection, for your relations, who have treat you like their own 
daughter!” 

“pardon me, madam,” said emily, mildly, “it is not natural to me to 
boast, and if it was, i am sure i would not boast of sensibility—a 
quality, perhaps, more to be feared, than desired.” 

“well, well, niece, i will not dispute with you. but, as i said, 
montoni threaten me with violence, if i any long refuse to sign away 
my settlements, and this was the subject of our contest, when you came 
into the room before. now, i am determined no power on earth shall make 
me do this. neither will i bear all this tamely. he shall hear his true 
character from me; i will tell him all he deserves, in spite of his 
threat and cruel treatment.” 

emily seize a pause of madame montoni’s voice, to speak. “dear madam,” 
said she, “but will not this serve to irritate the signor 
unnecessarily? will it not provoke the harsh treatment you dread?” 

“i do not care,” reply madame montoni, “it do not signify: i will 
not submit to such usage. you would have me give up my settlements, 
too, i suppose!” 

“no, madam, i do not exactly mean that.” 

“what is it you do mean then?” 

“you spoke of reproach the signor,”—said emily, with hesitation. 
“why, do he not deserve reproaches?” said her aunt. 

“certainly he does; but will it be prudent in you, madam, to make 
them?” 

“prudent!” exclaim madame montoni. “is this a time to talk of 
prudence, when one is threaten with all sort of violence?” 

“it is to avoid that violence, that prudence is necessary.” said emily. 

“of prudence!” continue madame montoni, without attend to her, “of 
prudence towards a man, who do not scruple to break all the common 
tie of humanity in his conduct to me! and is it for me to consider 
prudence in my behaviour towards him! i am not so mean.” 

“it is for your own sake, not for the signor’s, madam,” said emily 
modestly, “that you should consult prudence. your reproaches, however 
just, cannot punish him, but they may provoke him to further violence 
against you.” 

“what! would you have me submit, then, to whatever he commands—would 
you have me kneel down at his feet, and thank him for his cruelties? 
would you have me give up my settlements?” 

“how much you mistake me, madam!” said emily, “i am unequal to advise 
you on a point so important as the last: but you will pardon me for 
saying, that, if you consult your own peace, you will try to conciliate 
signor montoni, rather than to irritate him by reproaches.” 

“conciliate indeed! i tell you, niece, it is utterly impossible; i 
disdain to attempt it.” 

emily was shock to observe the pervert understanding and obstinate 
temper of madame montoni; but, not less grieve for her sufferings, she 
look round for some alleviate circumstance to offer her. “your 
situation is, perhaps, not so desperate, dear madam,” said emily, “as 
you may imagine. the signor may represent his affair to be worse than 
they are, for the purpose of pleading a strong necessity for his 
possession of your settlement. besides, so long as you keep this, you 
may look forward to it as a resource, at least, that will afford you a 
competence, should the signor’s future conduct compel you to sue for 
separation.” 

madame montoni impatient interrupt her. “unfeeling, cruel girl!” 
said she, “and so you would persuade me, that i have no reason to 
complain; that the signor is in very flourish circumstances, that my 
future prospects promise nothing but comfort, and that my grief are as 
fanciful and romantic as your own! is it the way to console me, to 
endeavour to persuade me out of my senses and my feelings, because you 
happen to have no feelings yourself? i thought i was opening my heart 
to a person, who could sympathise in my distress, but i find, that your 
people of sensibility can feel for nobody but themselves! you may 
retire to your chamber.” 

emily, without replying, immediately left the room, with a mingle 
emotion of pity and contempt, and hasten to her own, where she 
yield to the mournful reflections, which a knowledge of her aunt’s 
situation had occasioned. the conversation of the italy with 
valancourt, in france, again occur to her. his hints, respecting the 
broken fortune of montoni, were now completely justified; those, also, 
concerning his character, appear not less so, though the particular 
circumstances, connected with his fame, to which the stranger had 
alluded, yet remain to be explained. notwithstanding, that her own 
observations and the words of count morano had convinced her, that 
montoni’s situation was not what it formerly appear to be, the 
intelligence she had just received from her aunt on this point, struck 
her with all the force of astonishment, which was not weakened, when 
she considered the present style of montoni’s living, the number of 
servant he maintained, and the new expence he was incurring, by 
repair and fortify his castle. her anxiety for her aunt and for 
herself increase with reflection. several assertion of morano, which, 
on the preceding night, she had believe were prompt either by 
interest, or by resentment, now return to her mind with the strength 
of truth. she could not doubt, that montoni had formerly agree to give 
her to the count, for a pecuniary reward;—his character, and his 
distress circumstances justified the belief; these, also, seem to 
confirm morano’s assertion, that he now design to dispose of her, 
more advantageous for himself, to a rich suitor. 

amidst the reproaches, which morano had thrown out against montoni, he 
had said—he would not quit the castle _he dare to call his_, nor 
willing leave _another_ murder on his conscience—hints, which might 
have no other origin than the passion of the moment: but emily was now 
inclined to account for them more seriously, and she shudder to 
think, that she was in the hand of a man, to whom it was even possible 
they could apply. at length, considering, that reflection could neither 
release her from her melancholy situation, nor enable her to bear it 
with greater fortitude, she try to divert her anxiety, and took down 
from her little library a volume of her favourite ariosto; but his wild 
imagery and rich invention could not long enchant her attention; his 
spell did not reach her heart, and over her sleep fancy they 
played, without awakening it. 

she now put aside the book, and took her lute, for it was seldom that 
her suffering refuse to yield to the magic of sweet sounds; when they 
did so, she was oppress by sorrow, that came from excess of 
tender and regret; and there were times, when music had increase 
such sorrow to a degree, that was scarcely endurable; when, if it had 
not sudden ceased, she might have lost her reason. such was the time, 
when she mourn for her father, and heard the midnight strains, that 
float by her window near the convent in languedoc, on the night that 
follow his death. 

she continue to play, till annette brought dinner into her chamber, at 
which emily was surprised, and enquire whose order she obeyed. “my 
lady’s, ma’amselle,” reply annette: “the signor ordered her dinner to 
be carry to her own apartment, and so she has sent you yours. there 
have been sad doings between them, worse than ever, i think.” 

emily, not appear to notice what she said, sat down to the little 
table, that was spread for her. but annette was not to be silence thus 
easily. while she waited, she told of the arrival of the men, whom 
emily had observe on the ramparts, and express much surprise at 
their strange appearance, as well as at the manner, in which they had 
been attend by montoni’s order. “do they dine with the signor, then?” 
said emily. 

“no, ma’amselle, they dine long ago, in an apartment at the north end 
of the castle, but i know not when they are to go, for the signor told 
old carlo to see them provided with everything necessary. they have 
been walking all about the castle, and ask question of the workmen 
on the ramparts. i never saw such strange-looking men in my life; i am 
frightened whenever i see them.” 

emily enquired, if she had heard of count morano, and whether he was 
likely to recover: but annette only knew, that he was lodge in a 
cottage in the wood below, and that everybody said he must die. emily’s 
countenance discover her emotion. 

“dear ma’amselle,” said annette, “to see how young ladies will disguise 
themselves, when they are in love! i thought you hate the count, or i 
am sure i would not have told you; and i am sure you have cause enough 
to hate him.” 

“i hope i hate nobody,” reply emily, try to smile; “but certainly 
i do not love count morano. i should be shock to hear of any person 
die by violent means.” 

“yes, ma’amselle, but it is his own fault.” 

emily look displeased; and annette, mistake the cause of her 
displeasure, immediately began to excuse the count, in her way. “to be 
sure, it was very ungenteel behaviour,” said she, “to break into a 
lady’s room, and then, when he found his discourse was not agreeable 
to her, to refuse to go; and then, when the gentleman of the castle 
come to desire him to walk about his business—to turn round, and draw 
his sword, and swear he’ll run him through the body! to be sure it was 
very ungenteel behaviour, but then he was disguise in love, and so did 
not know what he was about.” 

“enough of this,” said emily, who now smile without an effort; and 
annette return to a mention of the disagreement between montoni, and 
her lady. “it is nothing new,” said she: “we saw and heard enough of 
this at venice, though i never told you of it, ma’amselle.” 

“well, annette, it was very prudent of you not to mention it then: be 
as prudent now; the subject is an unpleasant one.” 

“ah dear, ma’amselle!—to see now how considerate you can be about some 
folks, who care so little about you! i cannot bear to see you so 
deceived, and i must tell you. but it is all for your own good, and not 
to spite my lady, though, to speak truth, i have little reason to love 
her; but—” 

“you are not speak thus of my aunt, i hope, annette?” said emily, 
gravely. 

“yes, ma’amselle, but i am, though; and if you knew as much as i do, 
you would not look so angry. i have often, and often, heard the signor 
and her talk over your marriage with the count, and she always 
advise him never to give up to your foolish whims, as she was pleased 
to call them, but to be resolute, and compel you to be obedient, 
whether you would, or no. and i am sure, my heart has ache a thousand 
times, and i have thought, when she was so unhappy herself, she might 
have felt a little for other people, and—” 

“i thank you for your pity, annette,” said emily, interrupt her: 
“but my aunt was unhappy then, and that disturbed her temper perhaps, 
or i think—i am sure—you may take away, annette, i have done.” 

“dear ma’amselle, you have eat nothing at all! do try, and take a 
little bit more. disturbed her temper truly! why, her temper is always 
disturbed, i think. and at thoulouse i have heard my lady talk of 
you and mons. valancourt to madame merveille and madame vaison, often 
and often, in a very ill-natured way, as i thought, telling them what a 
deal of trouble she had to keep you in order, and what a fatigue and 
distress it was to her, and that she believe you would run away with 
mons. valancourt, if she was not to watch you closely; and that you 
connive at his coming about the house at night, and—” 

“good god!” exclaim emily, blush deeply, “it is surely impossible 
my aunt could thus have represent me!” 

“indeed, ma’am, i say nothing more than the truth, and not all of that. 
but i thought, myself, she might have found something better to 
discourse about, than the fault of her own niece, even if you had been 
in fault, ma’amselle; but i did not believe a word of what she said. 
but my lady do not care what she say against anybody, for that 
matter.” 

“however that may be, annette,” interrupt emily, recover her 
composure, “it do not become you to speak of the fault of my aunt to 
me. i know you have meant well, but—say no more.—i have quite dined.” 

annette blushed, look down, and then began slow to clear the table. 

“is this, then, the reward of my ingenuousness?” said emily, when she 
was alone; “the treatment i am to receive from a relation—an aunt—who 
ought to have been the guardian, not the slander of my 
reputation,—who, as a woman, ought to have respect the delicacy of 
female honour, and, as a relation, should have protect mine! but, to 
utter falsehood on so nice a subject—to repay the openness, and, i may 
say with honest pride, the propriety of my conduct, with 
slanders—required a depravity of heart, such as i could scarcely have 
believe existed, such as i weep to find in a relation. o! what a 
contrast do her character present to that of my beloved father; while 
envy and low cunning form the chief trait of hers, his was 
distinguished by benevolence and philosophical wisdom! but now, let me 
only remember, if possible, that she is unfortunate.” 

emily threw her veil over her, and went down to walk upon the ramparts, 
the only walk, indeed, which was open to her, though she often wished, 
that she might be permit to ramble among the wood below, and still 
more, that she might sometimes explore the sublime scene of the 
surrounding country. but, as montoni would not suffer her to pass the 
gate of the castle, she try to be contented with the romantic view 
she beheld from the walls. the peasants, who had been employ on the 
fortifications, had left their work, and the rampart were silent and 
solitary. their lonely appearance, together with the gloom of a 
lower sky, assist the muse of her mind, and threw over it a 
kind of melancholy tranquillity, such as she often love to indulge. 
she turn to observe a fine effect of the sun, as his rays, sudden 
stream from behind a heavy cloud, light up the west tower of the 
castle, while the rest of the edifice was in deep shade, except, that, 
through a lofty gothic arch, adjoin the tower, which led to another 
terrace, the beam dart in full splendour, and show the three 
stranger she had observe in the morning. perceive them, she 
started, and a momentary fear came over her, as she look up the long 
rampart, and saw no other persons. while she hesitated, they 
approached. the gate at the end of the terrace, whither they were 
advancing, she knew, was always locked, and she could not depart by the 
opposite extremity, without meeting them; but, before she pass them, 
she hasty drew a thin veil over her face, which did, indeed, but ill 
conceal her beauty. they look earnest at her, and spoke to each 
other in bad italian, of which she caught only a few words; but the 
fierce of their countenances, now that she was near enough to 
discriminate them, struck her yet more than the wild singular of 
their air and dress had formerly done. it was the countenance and 
figure of him, who walk between the other two, that chiefly seize 
her attention, which express a sullen haughty and a kind of dark 
watchful villany, that gave a thrill of horror to her heart. all this 
was so legible written on his features, as to be seen by a single 
glance, for she pass the group swiftly, and her timid eyes scarcely 
rest on them a moment. have reach the terrace, she stopped, and 
perceive the stranger standing in the shadow of one of the turrets, 
gaze after her, and seemingly, by their action, in earnest 
conversation. she immediately left the rampart, and retired to her 
apartment. 

in the evening, montoni sat late, carouse with his guest in the 
cedar chamber. his recent triumph over count morano, or, perhaps, some 
other circumstance, contribute to elevate his spirits to an unusual 
height. he fill the goblet often, and gave a loose to merriment and 
talk. the gaiety of cavigni, on the contrary, was somewhat cloud by 
anxiety. he kept a watchful eye upon verezzi, whom, with the utmost 
difficulty, he had hitherto restrained from exasperate montoni 
further against morano, by a mention of his late taunt words. 

one of the company exulting recur to the event of the preceding 
evening. verezzi’s eyes sparkled. the mention of morano led to that of 
emily, of whom they were all profuse in the praise, except montoni, who 
sat silent, and then interrupt the subject. 

when the servant had withdrawn, montoni and his friends enter into 
close conversation, which was sometimes checked by the irascible temper 
of verezzi, but in which montoni display his conscious superiority, 
by that decisive look and manner, which always accompany the vigour 
of his thought, and to which most of his companion submitted, as to a 
power, that they had no right to question, though of each other’s 
self-importance they were jealous scrupulous. amidst this 
conversation, one of them imprudent introduce again the name of 
morano; and verezzi, now more heated by wine, disregard the 
expressive looks of cavigni, and gave some dark hint of what had 
pass on the preceding night. these, however, montoni did not appear 
to understand, for he continue silent in his chair, without 
discover any emotion, while, the choler of verezzi increase with 
the apparent insensibility of montoni, he at length told the suggestion 
of morano, that this castle did not lawful belong to him, and that he 
would not willing leave another murder on his conscience. 

“am i to be insult at my own table, and by my own friends?” said 
montoni, with a countenance pale in anger. “why are the words of that 
madman repeated to me?” verezzi, who had expect to hear montoni’s 
indignation pour forth against morano, and answer by thanks to 
himself, look with astonishment at cavigni, who enjoy his 
confusion. “can you be weak enough to credit the assertion of a 
madman?” rejoin montoni, “or, what is the same thing, a man possessed 
by the spirit of vengeance? but he has succeed too well; you believe 
what he said.” 

“signor,” said verezzi, “we believe only what we know.”—“how!” 
interrupt montoni, sternly: “produce your proof.” 

“we believe only what we know,” repeated verezzi, “and we know nothing 
of what morano asserts.” montoni seem to recover himself. “i am 
hasty, my friends,” said he, “with respect to my honour; no man shall 
question it with impunity—you did not mean to question it. these 
foolish words are not worth your remembrance, or my resentment. 
verezzi, here is to your first exploit.” 

“success to your first exploit,” re-echoed the whole company. 

“noble signor,” reply verezzi, glad to find he had escape montoni’s 
resentment, “with my good will, you shall build your rampart of gold.” 

“pass the goblet,” cry montoni. “we will drink to signora st. 
aubert,” said cavigni. “by your leave we will first drink to the lady 
of the castle.” said bertolini.—montoni was silent. “to the lady of the 
castle,” said his guests. he bowed his head. 

“it much surprise me, signor,” said bertolini, “that you have so long 
neglect this castle; it is a noble edifice.” 

“it suit our purpose,” reply montoni, “and _is_ a noble edifice. you 
know not, it seems, by what mischance it came to me.” 

“it was a lucky mischance, be it what it may, signor,” reply 
bertolini, smiling. “i would, that one so lucky had befallen me.” 

montoni look grave at him. “if you will attend to what i say,” he 
resumed, “you shall hear the story.” 

the countenance of bertolini and verezzi express something more than 
curiosity; cavigni, who seem to feel none, had probably heard the 
relation before. 

“it is now near twenty years,” said montoni, “since this castle came 
into my possession. i inherit it by the female line. the lady, my 
predecessor, was only distantly related to me; i am the last of her 
family. she was beautiful and rich; i woo her; but her heart was 
fixed upon another, and she reject me. it is probable, however, that 
she was herself reject of the person, whoever he might be, on whom 
she bestow her favour, for a deep and settled melancholy took 
possession of her; and i have reason to believe she put a period to her 
own life. i was not at the castle at the time; but, as there are some 
singular and mysterious circumstances attend that event, i shall 
repeat them.” 

“repeat them!” said a voice. 

montoni was silent; the guest look at each other, to know who spoke; 
but they perceived, that each was making the same enquiry. montoni, at 
length, recover himself. “we are overheard,” said he: “we will finish 
this subject another time. pass the goblet.” 

the cavalier look round the wide chamber. 

“here is no person, but ourselves,” said verezzi: “pray, signor, 
proceed.” 

“did you hear anything?” said montoni. 

“we did,” said bertolini. 

“it could be only fancy,” said verezzi, look round again. “we see no 
person besides ourselves; and the sound i thought i heard seem within 
the room. pray, signor, go on.” 

montoni pause a moment, and then proceed in a lower voice, while 
the cavalier drew near to attend. 

“ye are to know, signors, that the lady laurentini had for some month 
shown symptom of a dejected mind, nay, of a disturbed imagination. her 
mood was very unequal; sometimes she was sunk in calm melancholy, and, 
at others, as i have been told, she betray all the symptom of 
frantic madness. it was one night in the month of october, after she 
had recover from one of those fit of excess, and had sunk again into 
her usual melancholy, that she retired alone to her chamber, and 
forbade all interruption. it was the chamber at the end of the 
corridor, signors, where we had the affray, last night. from that hour, 
she was seen no more.” 

“how! seen no more!” said bertolini, “was not her body found in the 
chamber?” 

“were her remains never found?” cry the rest of the company all 
together. 

“never!” reply montoni. 

“what reason were there to suppose she destroy herself, then?” said 
bertolini.—“aye, what reasons?” said verezzi.—“how happen it, that 
her remains were never found? although she kill herself, she could 
not bury herself.” montoni look indignant at verezzi, who began to 
apologise. 

“your pardon, signor,” said he: “i did not consider, that the lady was 
your relative, when i spoke of her so lightly.” 

montoni accept the apology. 

“but the signor will oblige us with the reasons, which urge him to 
believe, that the lady committed suicide.” 

“those i will explain hereafter,” said montoni: “at present let me 
relate a most extraordinary circumstance. this conversation go no 
further, signors. listen, then, to what i am go to say.” 

“listen!” said a voice. 

they were all again silent, and the countenance of montoni changed. 
“this is no illusion of the fancy,” said cavigni, at length break 
the profound silence.—“no,” said bertolini; “i heard it myself, now. 
yet here is no person in the room but ourselves!” 

“this is very extraordinary,” said montoni, sudden rising. “this is 
not to be borne; here is some deception, some trick. i will know what 
it means.” 

all the company rose from their chair in confusion. 

“it is very odd!” said bertolini. “here is really no stranger in the 
room. if it is a trick, signor, you will do well to punish the author 
of it severely.” 

“a trick! what else can it be?” said cavigni, affecting a laugh. 

the servant were now summoned, and the chamber was searched, but no 
person was found. the surprise and consternation of the company 
increased. montoni was discomposed. “we will leave this room,” said he, 
“and the subject of our conversation also; it is too solemn.” his 
guest were equally ready to quit the apartment; but the subject had 
rouse their curiosity, and they entreat montoni to withdraw to 
another chamber, and finish it; no entreaty could, however, prevail 
with him. notwithstanding his effort to appear at ease, he was visibly 
and greatly disordered. 

“why, signor, you are not superstitious,” cry verezzi, jeeringly; 
“you, who have so often laugh at the credulous of others!” 

“i am not superstitious,” reply montoni, regarding him with stern 
displeasure, “though i know how to despise the common-place sentences, 
which are frequent utter against superstition. i will enquire 
further into this affair.” he then left the room; and his guests, 
separate for the night, retired to their respective apartments. 



chapter viii 

he wear the rose of youth upon his cheek. 
shakespeare 


we now return to valancourt, who, it may be remembered, remain at 
thoulouse, some time after the departure of emily, restless and 
miserable. each morrow that approached, he design should carry him 
from thence; yet tomorrow and tomorrow came, and still saw him 
lingering in the scene of his former happiness. he could not 
immediately tear himself from the spot, where he had been accustomed to 
converse with emily, or from the object they had view together, 
which appear to him memorial of her affection, as well as a kind of 
surety for its faithfulness; and, next to the pain of bidding her 
adieu, was that of leave the scene which so powerful awaken her 
image. sometimes he had bribe a servant, who had been left in the care 
of madame montoni’s château, to permit him to visit the gardens, and 
there he would wander, for hour together, rapt in a melancholy, not 
unpleasing. the terrace, and the pavilion at the end of it, where he 
had taken leave of emily, on the eve of her departure from thoulouse, 
were his most favourite haunts. there, as he walked, or lean from the 
window of the building, he would endeavour to recollect all she had 
said, on that night; to catch the tone of her voice, as they faint 
vibrate on his memory, and to remember the exact expression of her 
countenance, which sometimes came sudden to his fancy, like a vision; 
that beautiful countenance, which awakened, as by instantaneous magic, 
all the tender of his heart, and seem to tell with irresistible 
eloquence—that he had lost her for ever! at these moments, his hurried 
steps would have discover to a spectator the despair of his heart. 
the character of montoni, such as he had received from hints, and such 
as his fear represent it, would rise to his view, together with all 
the danger it seem to threaten to emily and to his love. he blame 
himself, that he had not urge these more forcibly to her, while it 
might have been in his power to detain her, and that he had suffer an 
absurd and criminal delicacy, as he term it, to conquer so soon the 
reasonable argument he had oppose to this journey. any evil, that 
might have attend their marriage, seem so inferior to those, which 
now threaten their love, or even to the sufferings, that absence 
occasioned, that he wonder how he could have cease to urge his suit, 
till he had convinced her of its propriety; and he would certainly now 
have follow her to italy, if he could have been spare from his 
regiment for so long a journey. his regiment, indeed, soon remind 
him, that he had other duty to attend, than those of love. 

a short time after his arrival at his brother’s house, he was summon 
to join his brother officers, and he accompany a battalion to paris; 
where a scene of novelty and gaiety open upon him, such as, till 
then, he had only a faint idea of. but gaiety disgusted, and company 
fatigued, his sick mind; and he became an object of uncease raillery 
to his companions, from whom, whenever he could steal an opportunity, 
he escaped, to think of emily. the scene around him, however, and the 
company with whom he was oblige to mingle, engaged his attention, 
though they fail to amuse his fancy, and thus gradual weaken the 
habit of yielding to lamentation, till it appear less a duty to his 
love to indulge it. among his brother-officers were many, who add to 
the ordinary character of a france soldier’s gaiety some of those 
fascinating qualities, which too frequent throw a veil over folly, 
and sometimes even soften the features of vice into smiles. to these 
men the reserved and thoughtful manners of valancourt were a kind of 
tacit censure on their own, for which they rally him when present, 
and plot against him when absent; they glory in the thought of 
reduce him to their own level, and, considering it to be a spirited 
frolic, determined to accomplish it. 

valancourt was a stranger to the gradual progress of scheme and 
intrigue, against which he could not be on his guard. he had not been 
accustomed to receive ridicule, and he could ill endure its sting; he 
resent it, and this only drew upon him a loud laugh. to escape from 
such scenes, he flee into solitude, and there the image of emily met 
him, and revive the pang of love and despair. he then sought to renew 
those tasteful studies, which had been the delight of his early years; 
but his mind had lost the tranquillity, which is necessary for their 
enjoyment. to forget himself and the grief and anxiety, which the idea 
of her recalled, he would quit his solitude, and again mingle in the 
crowd—glad of a temporary relief, and rejoicing to snatch amusement for 
the moment. 

thus pass week after weeks, time gradual soften his sorrow, and 
habit strengthen his desire of amusement, till the scene around him 
seem to awaken into a new character, and valancourt, to have fallen 
among them from the clouds. 

his figure and address made him a welcome visitor, wherever he had been 
introduced, and he soon frequent the most gay and fashionable circle 
of paris. among these, was the assembly of the countess lacleur, a 
woman of eminent beauty and captivate manners. she had pass the 
spring of youth, but her wit prolonged the triumph of its reign, and 
they mutual assist the fame of each other; for those, who were 
charm by her loveliness, spoke with enthusiasm of her talents; and 
others, who admire her playful imagination, declared, that her 
personal graces were unrivalled. but her imagination was merely 
playful, and her wit, if such it could be called, was brilliant, rather 
than just; it dazzled, and its fallacy escape the detection of the 
moment; for the accents, in which she pronounced it, and the smile, 
that accompany them, were a spell upon the judgment of the auditors. 
her _petits soupers_ were the most tasteful of any in paris, and were 
frequent by many of the second class of literati. she was fond of 
music, was herself a scientific performer, and had frequent concert 
at her house. valancourt, who passionately love music, and who 
sometimes assist at these concerts, admire her execution, but 
remember with a sigh the eloquent simplicity of emily’s song and the 
natural expression of her manner, which wait not to be approve by 
the judgment, but found their way at once to the heart. 

madame _la comtesse_ had often deep play at her house, which she 
affected to restrain, but secret encouraged; and it was well known 
among her friends, that the splendour of her establishment was chiefly 
supply from the profit of her tables. but her _petits soupers_ were 
the most charming imaginable! here were all the delicacy of the four 
quarters of the world, all the wit and the lighter effort of genius, 
all the graces of conversation—the smile of beauty, and the charm of 
music; and valancourt pass his pleasantest, as well as most dangerous 
hour in these parties. 

his brother, who remain with his family in gascony, had contented 
himself with give him letters of introduction to such of his 
relations, reside at paris, as the latter was not already known to. 
all these were person of some distinction; and, as neither the person, 
mind, nor manners of valancourt the younger threaten to disgrace 
their alliance, they received him with as much kindness as their 
nature, harden by uninterrupted prosperity, would admit of; but their 
attention did not extend to acts of real friendship; for they were too 
much occupy by their own pursuits, to feel any interest in his; and 
thus he was set down in the midst of paris, in the pride of youth, with 
an open, unsuspicious temper and ardent affections, without one friend, 
to warn him of the dangers, to which he was exposed. emily, who, had 
she been present, would have save him from these evil by awakening 
his heart, and engaging him in worthy pursuits, now only increase his 
danger;—it was to lose the grief, which the remembrance of her 
occasioned, that he first sought amusement; and for this end he pursue 
it, till habit made it an object of abstract interest. 

there was also a marchioness champfort, a young widow, at whose 
assembly he pass much of his time. she was handsome, still more 
artful, gay and fond of intrigue. the society, which she drew round 
her, was less elegant and more vicious, than that of the countess 
lacleur: but, as she had address enough to throw a veil, though but a 
slight one, over the worst part of her character, she was still visit 
by many person of what is call distinction. valancourt was 
introduce to her party by two of his brother officers, whose late 
ridicule he had now forgiven so far, that he could sometimes join in 
the laugh, which a mention of his former manners would renew. 

the gaiety of the most splendid court in europe, the magnificence of 
the palaces, entertainments, and equipages, that surround him—all 
conspire to dazzle his imagination, and reanimate his spirits, and the 
example and maxim of his military associate to delude his mind. 
emily’s image, indeed, still live there; but it was no long the 
friend, the monitor, that save him from himself, and to which he 
retired to weep the sweet, yet melancholy, tear of tenderness. when he 
had recourse to it, it assume a countenance of mild reproach, that 
wrung his soul, and call forth tear of unmixed misery; his only 
escape from which was to forget the object of it, and he endeavoured, 
therefore, to think of emily as seldom as he could. 

thus dangerous circumstance was valancourt, at the time, when emily 
was suffering at venice, from the persecute address of count 
morano, and the unjust authority of montoni; at which period we leave 
him. 



chapter ix 

the image of a wicked, heinous fault 
lives in his eye; that close aspect of his 
do show the mood of a much-troubled breast. 
king john 


leave the gay scene of paris, we return to those of the gloomy 
apennine, where emily’s thought were still faithful to valancourt. 
look to him as to her only hope, she recollected, with jealous 
exactness, every assurance and every proof she had witness of his 
affection; read again and again the letters she had received from him; 
weighed, with intense anxiety, the force of every word, that spoke of 
his attachment; and dry her tears, as she trust in his truth. 

montoni, meanwhile, had made strict enquiry concerning the strange 
circumstance of his alarm, without obtain information; and was, at 
length, oblige to account for it by the reasonable supposition, that 
it was a mischievous trick play off by one of his domestics. his 
disagreement with madame montoni, on the subject of her settlements, 
were now more frequent than ever; he even confine her entire to her 
own apartment, and did not scruple to threaten her with much greater 
severity, should she persevere in a refusal. 

reason, had she consult it, would now have perplexed her in the 
choice of a conduct to be adopted. it would have pointed out the danger 
of irritate by further opposition a man, such as montoni had prove 
himself to be, and to whose power she had so entire committed 
herself; and it would also have told her, of what extreme importance to 
her future comfort it was, to reserve for herself those possessions, 
which would enable her to live independent of montoni, should she 
ever escape from his immediate control. but she was direct by a more 
decisive guide than reason—the spirit of revenge, which urge her to 
oppose violence to violence, and obstinacy to obstinacy. 

wholly confine to the solitude of her apartment, she was now reduce 
to solicit the society she had lately rejected; for emily was the only 
person, except annette, with whom she was permit to converse. 

generous anxious for her peace, emily, therefore, try to persuade, 
when she could not convince, and sought by every gentle means to induce 
her to forbear that asperity of reply, which so greatly irritate 
montoni. the pride of her aunt did sometimes soften to the soothe 
voice of emily, and there even were moments, when she regard her 
affectionate attention with goodwill. 

the scene of terrible contention, to which emily was frequent 
compel to be witness, exhaust her spirits more than any 
circumstances, that had occur since her departure from thoulouse. 
the gentle and goodness of her parents, together with the scene of 
her early happiness, often stole on her mind, like the vision of a 
higher world; while the character and circumstances, now passing 
beneath her eye, excited both terror and surprise. she could scarcely 
have imagined, that passion so fierce and so various, as those which 
montoni exhibited, could have been concentrated in one individual; yet 
what more surprise her, was, that, on great occasions, he could bend 
these passions, wild as they were, to the cause of his interest, and 
generally could disguise in his countenance their operation on his 
mind; but she had seen him too often, when he had thought it 
unnecessary to conceal his nature, to be deceive on such occasions. 

her present life appear like the dream of a distempered imagination, 
or like one of those frightful fictions, in which the wild genius of 
the poet sometimes delighted. reflection brought only regret, and 
anticipation terror. how often did she wish to “steal the lark’s wing, 
and mount the swiftest gale,” that languedoc and repose might once more 
be hers! 

of count morano’s health she made frequent enquiry; but annette heard 
only vague report of his danger, and that his surgeon had said he 
would never leave the cottage alive; while emily could not but be 
shock to think, that she, however innocently, might be the means of 
his death; and annette, who did not fail to observe her emotion, 
interpret it in her own way. 

but a circumstance soon occurred, which entire withdrew annette’s 
attention from this subject, and awaken the surprise and curiosity so 
natural to her. coming one day to emily’s apartment, with a countenance 
full of importance, “what can all this mean, ma’amselle?” said she. 
“would i was once safe in languedoc again, they should never catch me 
go on my travels any more! i must think it a fine thing, truly, to 
come abroad, and see foreign parts! i little thought i was coming to be 
catch up in an old castle, among such dreary mountains, with the 
chance of being murdered, or, what is as good, have my throat cut!” 

“what can all this mean, indeed, annette?” said emily, in astonishment. 

“aye, ma’amselle, you may look surprised; but you won’t believe it, 
perhaps, till they have murder you, too. you would not believe about 
the ghost i told you of, though i show you the very place, where it 
use to appear!—you will believe nothing, ma’amselle.” 

“not till you speak more reasonably, annette; for heaven’s sake, 
explain your meaning. you spoke of murder!” 

“aye, ma’amselle, they are coming to murder us all, perhaps; but what 
signify explaining?—you will not believe.” 

emily again desire her to relate what she had seen, or heard. 

“o, i have seen enough, ma’am, and heard too much, as ludovico can 
prove. poor soul! they will murder him, too! i little thought, when he 
sung those sweet verse under my lattice, at venice!”—emily look 
impatient and displeased. “well, ma’amselle, as i was saying, these 
preparation about the castle, and these strange-looking people, that 
are calling here every day, and the signor’s cruel usage of my lady, 
and his odd goings-on—all these, as i told ludovico, can bode no good. 
and he bid me hold my tongue. so, say i, the signor’s strange 
altered, ludovico, in this gloomy castle, to what he was in france; 
there, all so gay! nobody so gallant to my lady, then; and he could 
smile, too, upon a poor servant, sometimes, and jeer her, too, 
good-naturedly enough. i remember once, when he said to me, as i was 
go out of my lady’s dressing-room—annette, say he—” 

“never mind what the signor said,” interrupt emily; “but tell me, at 
once, the circumstance, which has thus alarm you.” 

“aye, ma’amselle,” rejoin annette, “that is just what ludovico said: 
say he, never mind what the signor say to you. so i told him what i 
thought about the signor. he is so strange altered, said i: for now 
he is so haughty, and so commanding, and so sharp with my lady; and, if 
he meet one, he’ll scarcely look at one, unless it be to frown. so 
much the better, say ludovico, so much the better. and to tell you the 
truth, ma’amselle, i thought this was a very ill-natured speech of 
ludovico: but i went on. and then, say i, he is always knitting his 
brows; and if one speak to him, he do not hear; and then he sit up 
counsel so, of a night, with the other signors—there they are, till 
long past midnight, discourse together! aye, but say ludovico, you 
don’t know what they are counsel about. no, said i, but i can 
guess—it is about my young lady. upon that, ludovico burst out 
a-laughing, quite loud; so he put me in a huff, for i did not like that 
either i or you, ma’amselle, should be laugh at; and i turn away 
quick, but he stop me. ‘don’t be affronted, annette,’ said he, ‘but 
i cannot help laughing;’ and with that he laugh again. ‘what!’ say 
he, ‘do you think the signor sit up, night after night, only to 
counsel about thy young lady! no, no, there is something more in the 
wind than that. and these repair about the castle, and these 
preparation about the ramparts—they are not making about young 
ladies.’ why, surely, said i, the signor, my master, is not go to 
make war? ‘make war!’ said ludovico, ‘what, upon the mountain and the 
woods? for here is no living soul to make war upon that i see.’ 

‘what are these preparation for, then?’ said i; why surely nobody is 
coming to take away my master’s castle! ‘then there are so many 
ill-looking fellow coming to the castle every day,’ say ludovico, 
without answer my question, ‘and the signor see them all, and talks 
with them all, and they all stay in the neighbourhood! by holy st. 
marco! some of them are the most cut-throat-looking dogs i ever set my 
eyes upon.’ 

“i ask ludovico again, if he thought they were coming to take away my 
master’s castle; and he said, no, he did not think they were, but he 
did not know for certain. ‘then yesterday,’ said he, but you must not 
tell this, ma’amselle, ‘yesterday, a party of these men came, and left 
all their horse in the castle stables, where, it seems, they are to 
stay, for the signor ordered them all to be entertain with the best 
provender in the manger; but the men are, most of them, in the 
neighbouring cottages.’ 

“so, ma’amselle, i came to tell you all this, for i never heard 
anything so strange in my life. but what can these ill-looking men be 
come about, if it is not to murder us? and the signor know this, or 
why should he be so civil to them? and why should he fortify the 
castle, and counsel so much with the other signors, and be so 
thoughtful?” 

“is this all you have to tell, annette?” said emily. “have you heard 
nothing else, that alarm you?” 

“nothing else, ma’amselle!” said annette; “why, is not this enough?” 
“quite enough for my patience, annette, but not quite enough to 
convince me we are all to be murdered, though i acknowledge here is 
sufficient food for curiosity.” she forbore to speak her apprehensions, 
because she would not encourage annette’s wild terrors; but the present 
circumstances of the castle both surprised, and alarm her. annette, 
have told her tale, left the chamber, on the wing for new wonders. 

in the evening, emily had pass some melancholy hour with madame 
montoni, and was retiring to rest, when she was alarm by a strange 
and loud knock at her chamber door, and then a heavy weight fell 
against it, that almost burst it open. she call to know who was 
there, and receiving no answer, repeated the call; but a chill 
silence followed. it occur to her—for, at this moment, she could not 
reason on the probability of circumstances—that some one of the 
strangers, lately arrive at the castle, had discover her apartment, 
and was come with such intent, as their looks render too possible—to 
rob, perhaps to murder, her. the moment she admitted this possibility, 
terror supply the place of conviction, and a kind of instinctive 
remembrance of her remote situation from the family heighten it to a 
degree, that almost overcame her senses. she look at the door, which 
led to the staircase, expect to see it open, and listening, in 
fearful silence, for a return of the noise, till she began to think it 
had proceed from this door, and a wish of escape through the 
opposite one rush upon her mind. she went to the gallery door, and 
then, fear to open it, lest some person might be silent lurk 
for her without, she stopped, but with her eyes fixed in expectation 
upon the opposite door of the staircase. as thus she stood, she heard a 
faint breathing near her, and became convinced, that some person was on 
the other side of the door, which was already locked. she sought for 
other fastening, but there was none. 

while she yet listened, the breathing was distinct heard, and her 
terror was not soothed, when, look round her wide and lonely 
chamber, she again considered her remote situation. as she stood 
hesitate whether to call for assistance, the continuance of the 
still surprise her; and her spirits would have revived, had she 
not continue to hear the faint breathing, that convinced her, the 
person, whoever it was, had not quit the door. 

at length, worn out with anxiety, she determined to call loud for 
assistance from her casement, and was advance to it, when, whether 
the terror of her mind gave her ideal sounds, or that real one did 
come, she thought footstep were ascend the private staircase; and, 
expect to see its door unclose, she forgot all other cause of alarm, 
and retreat towards the corridor. here she endeavour to make her 
escape, but, on opening the door, was very near fall over a person, 
who lay on the floor without. she screamed, and would have passed, but 
her tremble frame refuse to support her; and the moment, in which 
she lean against the wall of the gallery, allow her leisure to 
observe the figure before her, and to recognise the features of 
annette. fear instantly yield to surprise. she spoke in vain to the 
poor girl, who remain senseless on the floor, and then, lose all 
consciousness of her own weakness, hurried to her assistance. 

when annette recovered, she was help by emily into the chamber, but 
was still unable to speak, and look round her, as if her eyes 
follow some person in the room. emily try to sooth her disturbed 
spirits, and forbore, at present, to ask her any questions; but the 
faculty of speech was never long withheld from annette, and she 
explained, in broken sentences, and in her tedious way, the occasion of 
her disorder. she affirmed, and with a solemnity of conviction, that 
almost stagger the incredulity of emily, that she had seen an 
apparition, as she was passing to her bedroom, through the corridor. 

“i had heard strange story of that chamber before,” said annette: 
“but as it was so near yours, ma’amselle, i would not tell them to you, 
because they would frighten you. the servant had told me, often and 
often, that it was haunted, and that was the reason why it was shut up: 
nay, for that matter, why the whole string of these rooms, here, are 
shut up. i quake whenever i went by, and i must say, i did sometimes 
think i heard odd noise within it. but, as i said, as i was passing 
along the corridor, and not thinking a word about the matter, or even 
of the strange voice that the signor heard the other night, all of a 
sudden come a great light, and, look behind me, there was a tall 
figure, (i saw it as plainly, ma’amselle, as i see you at this moment), 
a tall figure gliding along (oh! i cannot describe how!) into the room, 
that is always shut up, and nobody has the key of it but the signor, 
and the door shut directly.” 

“then it doubtless was the signor,” said emily. 

“o no, ma’amselle, it could not be him, for i left him busy 
a-quarrelling in my lady’s dressing-room!” 

“you bring me strange tales, annette,” said emily: “it was but this 
morning, that you would have terrify me with the apprehension of 
murder; and now you would persuade me, you have seen a ghost! these 
wonderful story come too quickly.” 

“nay, ma’amselle, i will say no more, only, if i had not been 
frightened, i should not have faint dead away so. i ran as fast as i 
could, to get to your door; but, what was worst of all, i could not 
call out; then i thought something must be strange the matter with 
me, and directly i dropt down.” 

“was it the chamber where the black veil hangs?” said emily. “o! no, 
ma’amselle, it was one near to this. what shall i do, to get to my 
room? i would not go out into the corridor again, for the whole world!” 
emily, whose spirits had been severe shocked, and who, therefore, did 
not like the thought of passing the night alone, told her she might 
sleep where she was. “o, no, ma’amselle,” reply annette, “i would not 
sleep in the room now for a thousand sequins!” 

weary and disappointed, emily first ridiculed, though she shared, her 
fears, and then try to sooth them; but neither attempt succeeded, and 
the girl persist in believe and affirming, that what she had seen 
was nothing human. it was not till some time after emily had recover 
her composure, that she recollect the steps she had heard on the 
staircase—a remembrance, however, which made her insist that annette 
should pass the night with her, and, with much difficulty, she, at 
length, prevailed, assist by that part of the girl’s fear, which 
concerned the corridor. 

early on the following morning, as emily cross the hall to the 
ramparts, she heard a noisy bustle in the courtyard, and the clatter of 
horses’ hoofs. such unusual sound excited her curiosity; and, instead 
of go to the ramparts, she went to an upper casement, from whence 
she saw, in the court below, a large party of horsemen, dress in a 
singular, but uniform, habit, and completely, though variously, armed. 
they wore a kind of short jacket, compose of black and scarlet, and 
several of them had a cloak, of plain black, which, covering the person 
entirely, hung down to the stirrups. as one of these cloak glance 
aside, she saw, beneath, daggers, apparently of different sizes, tuck 
into the horseman’s belt. she further observed, that these were 
carried, in the same manner, by many of the horsemen without cloaks, 
most of whom bore also pikes, or javelins. on their heads, were the 
small italy caps, some of which were distinguished by black feathers. 
whether these cap gave a fierce air to the countenance, or that the 
countenance they surmount had naturally such an appearance, emily 
thought she had never, till then, seen an assemblage of face so savage 
and terrific. while she gazed, she almost fancy herself surround by 
banditti; and a vague thought glance athwart her fancy—that montoni 
was the captain of the group before her, and that this castle was to be 
the place of rendezvous. the strange and horrible supposition was but 
momentary, though her reason could supply none more probable, and 
though she discovered, among the band, the stranger she had formerly 
notice with so much alarm, who were now distinguished by the black 
plume. 

while she continue gazing, cavigni, verezzi, and bertolini came forth 
from the hall, habit like the rest, except that they wore hats, with 
a mixed plume of black and scarlet, and that their arms differ from 
those of the rest of the party. as they mount their horses, emily was 
struck with the exult joy, express on the visage of verezzi, while 
cavigni was gay, yet with a shade of thought on his countenance; and, 
as he manage his horse with dexterity, his graceful and commanding 
figure, which exhibit the majesty of a hero, had never appear to 
more advantage. emily, as she observe him, thought he somewhat 
resemble valancourt, in the spirit and dignity of his person; but she 
look in vain for the noble, benevolent countenance—the soul’s 
intelligence, which overspread the features of the latter. 

as she was hoping, she scarcely knew why, that montoni would accompany 
the party, he appear at the hall door, but un-accoutred. have 
careful observe the horsemen, converse awhile with the cavaliers, 
and bidden them farewell, the band wheel round the court, and, led by 
verezzi, issue forth under the portcullis; montoni following to the 
portal, and gaze after them for some time. emily then retired from 
the casement, and, now certain of being unmolested, went to walk on the 
ramparts, from whence she soon after saw the party winding among the 
mountain to the west, appear and disappear between the woods, 
till distance confuse their figures, consolidate their numbers, and 
only a dingy mass appear moving along the heights. 

emily observed, that no workmen were on the ramparts, and that the 
repair of the fortification seem to be completed. while she 
saunter thoughtful on, she heard distant footsteps, and, raise 
her eyes, saw several men lurk under the castle walls, who were 
evidently not workmen, but look as if they would have accord well 
with the party which was gone. wonder where annette had hid herself 
so long, who might have explain some of the late circumstances, and 
then considering that madame montoni was probably risen, she went to 
her dressing-room, where she mention what had occurred; but madame 
montoni either would not, or could not, give any explanation of the 
event. the signor’s reserve to his wife, on this subject, was probably 
nothing more than usual; yet, to emily, it gave an air of mystery to 
the whole affair, that seem to hint there was danger, if not villany, 
in his schemes. 

annette presently came, and, as usual, was full of alarm; to her lady’s 
eager enquiry of what she had heard among the servants, she replied: 

“ah, madam! nobody know what it is all about, but old carlo; he know 
well enough, i dare say, but he is as close as his master. some say the 
signor is go out to frighten the enemy, as they call it: but where 
is the enemy? then other say, he is go to take away somebody’s 
castle: but i am sure he has room enough in his own, without taking 
other people’s; and i am sure i should like it a great deal better, if 
there were more people to fill it.” 

“ah! you will soon have your wish, i fear,” reply madame montoni. 

“no, madam, but such ill-looking fellow are not worth having. i mean 
such gallant, smart, merry fellow as ludovico, who is always telling 
droll stories, to make one laugh. it was but yesterday, he told me such 
a _humoursome_ tale! i can’t help laugh at it now.—says he—” 

“well, we can dispense with the story,” said her lady. 

“ah!” continue annette, “he see a great way further than other 
people! now he see into all the signor’s meaning, without knowing a 
word about the matter!” 

“how is that?” said madame montoni. 

“why he says—but he made me promise not to tell, and i would not 
disoblige him for the world.” 

“what is it he made you promise not to tell?” said her lady, sternly. 
“i insist upon knowing immediately—what is it he made you promise?” 

“o madam,” cry annette, “i would not tell for the universe!” 

“i insist upon your telling this instant,” said madame montoni. 

“o dear madam! i would not tell for a hundred sequins! you would not 
have me forswear myself madam!” exclaim annette. 

“i will not wait another moment,” said madame montoni. annette was 
silent. 

“the signor shall be informed of this directly,” rejoin her mistress; 
“he will make you discover all.” 

“it is ludovico, who has discovered,” said annette: “but for mercy’s 
sake, madam, don’t tell the signor, and you shall know all directly.” 
madame montoni said, that she would not. 

“well then, madam, ludovico says, that the signor, my master, 
is—is—that is, he only think so, and anybody, you know, madam, is free 
to think—that the signor, my master, is—is—” 

“is what?” said her lady, impatiently. 

“that the signor, my master, is go to be—a great robber—that is—he 
is go to rob on his own account;—to be, (but i am sure i don’t 
understand what he means) to be a—captain of—robbers.” 

“art thou in thy senses, annette?” said madame montoni; “or is this a 
trick to deceive me? tell me, this instant, what ludovico _did_ say to 
thee;—no equivocation;—this instant.” 

“nay, madam,” cry annette, “if this is all i am to get for have 
told the secret—” her mistress thus continue to insist, and annette to 
protest, till montoni, himself, appeared, who bade the latter leave the 
room, and she withdrew, tremble for the fate of her story. emily also 
was retiring, but her aunt desire she would stay; and montoni had so 
often made her a witness of their contention, that he no long had 
scruple on that account. 

“i insist upon knowing this instant, signor, what all this means:” said 
his wife—“what are all these armed men, whom they tell me of, gone out 
about?” montoni answer her only with a look of scorn; and emily 
whisper something to her. “it do not signify,” said her aunt: “i 
will know; and i will know, too, what the castle has been fortify 
for.” 

“come, come,” said montoni, “other business brought me here. i must be 
trifle with no longer. i have immediate occasion for what i 
demand—those estate must be given up, without further contention; or i 
may find a way—” 

“they never shall be given up,” interrupt madame montoni: “they never 
shall enable you to carry on your wild schemes;—but what are these? i 
will know. do you expect the castle to be attacked? do you expect 
enemies? am i to be shut up here, to be kill in a siege?” 

“sign the writings,” said montoni, “and you shall know more.” 

“what enemy can be coming?” continue his wife. “have you enter into 
the service of the state? am i to be block up here to die?” 

“that may possibly happen,” said montoni, “unless you yield to my 
demand: for, come what may, you shall not quit the castle till then.” 
madame montoni burst into loud lamentation, which she as sudden 
checked, considering, that her husband’s assertion might be only 
artifices, employ to extort her consent. she hint this suspicion, 
and, in the next moment, told him also, that his designs were not so 
honourable as to serve the state, and that she believe he had only 
commence a captain of banditti, to join the enemy of venice, in 
plunder and lay waste the surrounding country. 

montoni look at her for a moment with a steady and stern countenance; 
while emily trembled, and his wife, for once, thought she had said too 
much. “you shall be removed, this night,” said he, “to the east turret: 
there, perhaps, you may understand the danger of offend a man, who 
has an unlimited power over you.” 

emily now fell at his feet, and, with tear of terror, supplicate for 
her aunt, who sat, tremble with fear, and indignation; now ready to 
pour forth execrations, and now to join the intercession of emily. 
montoni, however, soon interrupt these entreaty with a horrible 
oath; and, as he burst from emily, leave his cloak, in her hand, she 
fell to the floor, with a force, that occasion her a severe blow on 
the forehead. but he quit the room, without attempt to raise her, 
whose attention was call from herself, by a deep groan from madame 
montoni, who continue otherwise unmoved in her chair, and had not 
fainted. emily, hasten to her assistance, saw her eyes rolling, and 
her features convulsed. 

have spoken to her, without receiving an answer, she brought water, 
and support her head, while she held it to her lips; but the 
increase convulsion soon compel emily to call for assistance. on 
her way through the hall, in search of annette, she met montoni, whom 
she told what had happened, and conjure to return and comfort her 
aunt; but he turn silent away, with a look of indifference, and 
went out upon the ramparts. at length she found old carlo and annette, 
and they hasten to the dressing-room, where madame montoni had fallen 
on the floor, and was lie in strong convulsions. have lift her 
into the adjoin room, and laid her on the bed, the force of her 
disorder still made all their strength necessary to hold her, while 
annette tremble and sobbed, and old carlo look silent and 
piteous on, as his feeble hand grasp those of his mistress, till, 
turning his eyes upon emily, he exclaimed, “good god! signora, what is 
the matter?” 

emily look calm at him, and saw his enquiring eyes fixed on her: 
and annette, look up, scream loudly; for emily’s face was stain 
with blood, which continue to fall slow from her forehead: but her 
attention had been so entire occupy by the scene before her, that 
she had felt no pain from the wound. she now held a handkerchief to her 
face, and, notwithstanding her faintness, continue to watch madame 
montoni, the violence of whose convulsion was abating, till at length 
they ceased, and left her in a kind of stupor. 

“my aunt must remain quiet,” said emily. “go, good carlo; if we should 
want your assistance, i will send for you. in the mean time, if you 
have an opportunity, speak kindly of your mistress to your master.” 

“alas!” said carlo, “i have seen too much! i have little influence with 
the signor. but do, dear young lady, take some care of yourself; that 
is an ugly wound, and you look sadly.” 

“thank you, my friend, for your consideration,” said emily, smile 
kindly: “the wound is trifling, it came by a fall.” 

carlo shook his head, and left the room; and emily, with annette, 
continue to watch by her aunt. “did my lady tell the signor what 
ludovico said, ma’amselle?” ask annette in a whisper; but emily 
quiet her fear on the subject. 

“i thought what this quarrel would come to,” continue annette: “i 
suppose the signor has been beating my lady.” 

“no, no, annette, you are total mistaken, nothing extraordinary has 
happened.” 

“why, extraordinary things happen here so often, ma’amselle, that there 
is nothing in them. here is another legion of those ill-looking 
fellows, come to the castle, this morning.” 

“hush! annette, you will disturb my aunt; we will talk of that by and 
bye.” 

they continue watch silently, till madame montoni utter a low 
sigh, when emily took her hand, and spoke soothing to her; but the 
former gaze with unconscious eyes, and it was long before she knew her 
niece. her first words then enquire for montoni; to which emily 
reply by an entreaty, that she would compose her spirits, and consent 
to be kept quiet, adding, that, if she wish any message to be 
convey to him, she would herself deliver it. “no,” said her aunt 
faintly, “no—i have nothing new to tell him. do he persist in saying 
i shall be remove from my chamber?” 

emily reply that he had not spoken on the subject since madame 
montoni heard him; and then she try to divert her attention to some 
other topic; but her aunt seem to be inattentive to what she said, 
and lost in secret thoughts. emily, have brought her some 
refreshment, now left her to the care of annette, and went in search of 
montoni, whom she found on a remote part of the rampart, converse 
among a group of the men describe by annette. they stood round him 
with fierce, yet subjugated, looks, while he, speak earnestly, and 
point to the walls, did not perceive emily, who remain at some 
distance, wait till he should be at leisure, and observing 
involuntary the appearance of one man, more savage than his fellows, 
who stood rest on his pike, and looking, over the shoulder of a 
comrade, at montoni, to whom he listen with uncommon earnestness. 
this man was apparently of low condition; yet his looks appear not to 
acknowledge the superior of montoni, as did those of his companions; 
and sometimes they even assume an air of authority, which the decisive 
manner of the signor could not repress. some few words of montoni then 
pass in the wind; and, as the men were separating, she heard him say, 
“this evening, then, begin the watch at sunset.” 

“at sunset, signor,” reply one or two of them, and walk away; while 
emily approach montoni, who appear desirous of avoid her: but, 
though she observe this, she had courage to proceed. she endeavour 
to intercede once more for her aunt, represent to him her sufferings, 
and urge the danger of expose her to a cold apartment in her present 
state. “she suffer by her own folly,” said montoni, “and is not to be 
pitied;—she know how she may avoid these suffering in future—if she 
is remove to the turret, it will be her own fault. let her be 
obedient, and sign the writings you heard of, and i will think no more 
of it.” 

when emily venture still to plead, he stern silence and rebuke her 
for interfere in his domestic affairs, but, at length, dismiss her 
with this concession—that he would not remove madame montoni, on the 
ensue night, but allow her till the next to consider, whether she 
would resign her settlements, or be imprison in the east turret of 
the castle, “where she shall find,” he added, “a punishment she may not 
expect.” 

emily then hasten to inform her aunt of this short respite and of the 
alternative, that await her, to which the latter made no reply, but 
appear thoughtful, while emily, in consideration of her extreme 
languor, wish to sooth her mind by leading it to less interesting 
topics: and, though these effort were unsuccessful, and madame montoni 
became peevish, her resolution, on the contend point, seem somewhat 
to relax, and emily recommended, as her only means of safety, that she 
should submit to montoni’s demand. “you know not what you advise,” said 
her aunt. “do you understand, that these estate will descend to you at 
my death, if i persist in a refusal?” 

“i was ignorant of that circumstance, madam,” reply emily, “but the 
knowledge of it cannot withhold me from advise you to adopt the 
conduct, which not only your peace, but, i fear, your safety requires, 
and i entreat, that you will not suffer a consideration comparatively 
so trifling, to make you hesitate a moment in resign them.” 

“are you sincere, niece?” “is it possible you can doubt it, madam?” her 
aunt appear to be affected. “you are not unworthy of these estates, 
niece,” said she: “i would wish to keep them for your sake—you show a 
virtue i did not expect.” 

“how have i deserve this reproof, madam?” said emily sorrowfully. 

“reproof!” reply madame montoni: “i meant to praise your virtue.” 

“alas! here is no exertion of virtue,” rejoin emily, “for here is no 
temptation to be overcome.” 

“yet monsieur valancourt—” said her aunt. “o, madam!” interrupt 
emily, anticipate what she would have said, “do not let me glance on 
that subject: do not let my mind be stain with a wish so shocking 
self-interested.” she immediately change the topic, and continue with 
madame montoni, till she withdrew to her apartment for the night. 

at that hour, the castle was perfectly still, and every inhabitant of 
it, except herself, seem to have retired to rest. as she pass along 
the wide and lonely galleries, dusky and silent, she felt forlorn and 
apprehensive of—she scarcely knew what; but when, enter the 
corridor, she recollect the incident of the preceding night, a dread 
seize her, lest a subject of alarm, similar to that, which had 
befallen annette, should occur to her, and which, whether real, or 
ideal, would, she felt, have an almost equal effect upon her weaken 
spirits. the chamber, to which annette had alluded, she did not exactly 
know, but understood it to be one of those she must pass in the way to 
her own; and, send a fearful look forward into the gloom, she 
step lightly and cautious along, till, coming to a door, from 
whence issue a low sound, she hesitate and paused; and, during the 
delay of that moment, her fear so much increased, that she had no 
power to move from the spot. believing, that she heard a human voice 
within, she was somewhat revived; but, in the next moment, the door was 
opened, and a person, whom she conceive to be montoni, appeared, who 
instantly start back, and closed it, though not before she had seen, 
by the light that burn in the chamber, another person, sitting in a 
melancholy attitude by the fire. her terror vanished, but her 
astonishment only began, which was now rouse by the mysterious secrecy 
of montoni’s manner, and by the discovery of a person, whom he thus 
visit at midnight, in an apartment, which had long been shut up, and 
of which such extraordinary report were circulated. 

while she thus continue hesitating, strong prompt to watch 
montoni’s motions, yet fear to irritate him by appear to notice 
them, the door was again open cautiously, and as instantly closed as 
before. she then step soft to her chamber, which was the next but 
one to this, but, have put down her lamp, return to an obscure 
corner of the corridor, to observe the proceedings of this half-seen 
person, and to ascertain, whether it was indeed montoni. 

have wait in silent expectation for a few minutes, with her eyes 
fixed on the door, it was again opened, and the same person appeared, 
whom she now knew to be montoni. he look cautious round, without 
perceive her, then, step forward, closed the door, and left the 
corridor. soon after, emily heard the door fasten on the inside, and 
she withdrew to her chamber, wonder at what she had witnessed. 

it was now twelve o’clock. as she closed her casement, she heard 
footstep on the terrace below, and saw imperfectly, through the gloom, 
several person advancing, who pass under the casement. she then 
heard the clink of arms, and, in the next moment, the watch-word; when, 
recollect the command she had overheard from montoni, and the hour 
of the night, she understood, that these men were, for the first time, 
relieve guard in the castle. have listen till all was again 
still, she retired to sleep. 



chapter x 

and shall no lay of death 
with pleasing murmur sooth 
her part soul? 
shall no tear wet her grave? 
say 


on the following morning, emily went early to the apartment of madame 
montoni, who had slept well, and was much recovered. her spirits had 
also return with her health, and her resolution to oppose montoni’s 
demand revived, though it yet struggle with her fears, which emily, 
who tremble for the consequence of further opposition, endeavour to 
confirm. 

her aunt, as has been already shown, had a disposition, which delight 
in contradiction, and which taught her, when unpleasant circumstances 
were offer to her understanding, not to enquire into their truth, but 
to seek for arguments, by which she might make them appear false. long 
habit had so entire confirmed this natural propensity, that she was 
not conscious of possess it. emily’s remonstrance and 
representations, therefore, rouse her pride, instead of alarming, or 
convincing her judgment, and she still rely upon the discovery of 
some means, by which she might yet avoid submit to the demand of 
her husband. considering, that, if she could once escape from his 
castle, she might defy his power, and, obtain a decisive separation, 
live in comfort on the estates, that yet remain for her, she 
mention this to her niece, who accord with her in the wish, but 
differ from her, as to the probability of its completion. she 
represent the impossible of passing the gates, secure and guarded 
as they were, and the extreme danger of commit her design to the 
discretion of a servant, who might either purposely betray, or 
accidental disclose it.—montoni’s vengeance would also disdain 
restraint, if her intention was detected: and, though emily wished, as 
fervent as she could do, to regain her freedom, and return to france, 
she consult only madame montoni’s safety, and persevere in advise 
her to relinquish her settlement, without brave further outrage. 

the struggle of contrary emotions, however, continue to rage in her 
aunt’s bosom, and she still brood over the chance of effect an 
escape. while she thus sat, montoni enter the room, and, without 
notice his wife’s indisposition, said, that he came to remind her of 
the impolicy of trifling with him, and that he gave her only till the 
evening to determine, whether she would consent to his demand, or 
compel him, by a refusal, to remove her to the east turret. he added, 
that a party of cavalier would dine with him, that day, and that he 
expect that she would sit at the head of the table, where emily, 
also, must be present. madame montoni was now on the point of utter 
an absolute refusal, but, sudden considering, that her liberty, 
during this entertainment, though circumscribed, might favour her 
further plans, she acquiesced, with seeming reluctance, and montoni, 
soon after, left the apartment. his command struck emily with surprise 
and apprehension, who shrank from the thought of being expose to the 
gaze of strangers, such as her fancy represent these to be, and the 
words of count morano, now again recollected, did not sooth her fears. 

when she withdrew to prepare for dinner, she dress herself with even 
more simplicity than usual, that she might escape observation—a policy, 
which did not avail her, for, as she repass to her aunt’s apartment, 
she was met by montoni, who censure what he call her prudish 
appearance, and insisted, that she should wear the most splendid dress 
she had, even that, which had been prepared for her intended nuptials 
with count morano, and which, it now appeared, her aunt had careful 
brought with her from venice. this was made, not in the venetian, but, 
in the neapolitan fashion, so as to set off the shape and figure, to 
the utmost advantage. in it, her beautiful chestnut tresses were 
negligent bound up in pearls, and suffer to fall back again on her 
neck. the simplicity of a better taste, than madame montoni’s, was 
conspicuous in this dress, splendid as it was, and emily’s unaffected 
beauty never had appear more captivatingly. she had now only to hope, 
that montoni’s order was prompted, not by any extraordinary design, but 
by an ostentation of display his family, richly attired, to the eyes 
of strangers; yet nothing less than his absolute command could have 
prevail with her to wear a dress, that had been design for such an 
offensive purpose, much less to have worn it on this occasion. as she 
descended to dinner, the emotion of her mind threw a faint blush over 
her countenance, and heighten its interesting expression; for 
timid had made her linger in her apartment, till the utmost moment, 
and, when she enter the hall, in which a kind of state dinner was 
spread, montoni and his guest were already seat at the table. she 
was then go to place herself by her aunt; but montoni wave his 
hand, and two of the cavalier rose, and seat her between them. 

the eldest of these was a tall man, with strong italy features, an 
aquiline nose, and dark penetrating eyes, that flash with fire, when 
his mind was agitated, and, even in its state of rest, retain 
somewhat of the wild of the passions. his visage was long and 
narrow, and his complexion of a sickly yellow. 

the other, who appear to be about forty, had features of a different 
cast, yet italian, and his look was slow, subtle and penetrating; his 
eyes, of a dark grey, were small, and hollow; his complexion was a 
sun-burnt brown, and the contour of his face, though inclined to oval, 
was irregular and ill-formed. 

eight other guest sat round the table, who were all dress in a 
uniform, and had all an expression, more or less, of wild fierceness, 
of subtle design, or of licentious passions. as emily timid survey 
them, she remember the scene of the preceding morning, and again 
almost fancy herself surround by banditti; then, look back to 
the tranquill of her early life, she felt scarcely less 
astonishment, than grief, at her present situation. the scene, in which 
they sat, assist the illusion; it was an ancient hall, gloomy from 
the style of its architecture, from its great extent, and because 
almost the only light it received was from one large gothic window, and 
from a pair of fold doors, which, being open, admitted likewise a 
view of the west rampart, with the wild mountain of the apennine 
beyond. 

the middle compartment of this hall rose into a vaulted roof, enrich 
with fretwork, and supported, on three sides, by pillar of marble; 
beyond these, long colonnade retired in gloomy grandeur, till their 
extent was lost in twilight. the lightest footstep of the servants, as 
they advanced through these, were return in whisper echoes, and 
their figures, seen at a distance imperfect through the dusk, 
frequent awaken emily’s imagination. she look alternate at 
montoni, at his guest and on the surrounding scene; and then, 
remember her dear native province, her pleasant home and the 
simplicity and goodness of the friends, whom she had lost, grief and 
surprise again occupy her mind. 

when her thought could return from these considerations, she fancy 
she observe an air of authority towards his guests, such as she had 
never before seen him assume, though he had always been distinguished 
by a haughty carriage; there was something also in the manners of the 
strangers, that seem perfectly, though not servilely, to acknowledge 
his superiority. 

during dinner, the conversation was chiefly on war and politics. they 
talk with energy of the state of venice, its dangers, the character 
of the reign doge and of the chief senators; and then spoke of the 
state of rome. when the repast was over, they rose, and, each filling 
his goblet with wine from the gilded ewer, that stood beside him, drank 
“success to our exploits!” montoni was lift his goblet to his lip 
to drink this toast, when sudden the wine hissed, rose to the brim, 
and, as he held the glass from him, it burst into a thousand pieces. 

to him, who constant use that sort of venice glass, which had the 
quality of breaking, upon receiving poison liquor, a suspicion, that 
some of his guest had endeavour to betray him, instantly occurred, 
and he ordered all the gate to be closed, drew his sword, and, look 
round on them, who stood in silent amazement, exclaimed, “here is a 
traitor among us; let those, that are innocent, assist in discover 
the guilty.” 

indignation flash from the eyes of the cavaliers, who all drew their 
swords; and madame montoni, terrify at what might ensue, was 
hasten from the hall, when her husband command her to stay; but 
his further words could not now be distinguished, for the voice of 
every person rose together. his order, that all the servant should 
appear, was at length obeyed, and they declared their ignorance of any 
deceit—a protestation which could not be believed; for it was evident, 
that, as montoni’s liquor, and his only, had been poisoned, a 
deliberate design had been form against his life, which could not 
have been carry so far towards its accomplishment, without the 
connivance of the servant, who had the care of the wine ewers. 

this man, with another, whose face betray either the consciousness of 
guilt, or the fear of punishment, montoni ordered to be chain 
instantly, and confine in a strong room, which had formerly been use 
as a prison. thither, likewise, he would have sent all his guests, had 
he not foreseen the consequence of so bold and unjustifiable a 
proceeding. as to those, therefore, he contented himself with swearing, 
that no man should pass the gates, till this extraordinary affair had 
been investigated, and then stern bade his wife retire to her 
apartment, whither he suffer emily to attend her. 

in about half an hour, he follow to the dressing-room; and emily 
observed, with horror, his dark countenance and quiver lip, and 
heard him denounce vengeance on her aunt. 

“it will avail you nothing,” said he to his wife, “to deny the fact; i 
have proof of your guilt. your only chance of mercy rest on a full 
confession;—there is nothing to hope from sullenness, or falsehood; 
your accomplice has confessed all.” 

emily’s faint spirits were rouse by astonishment, as she heard her 
aunt accused of a crime so atrocious, and she could not, for a moment, 
admit the possibility of her guilt. meanwhile madame montoni’s 
agitation did not permit her to reply; alternate her complexion 
varied from livid pale to a crimson flush; and she trembled,—but, 
whether with fear, or with indignation, it were difficult to decide. 

“spare your words,” said montoni, seeing her about to speak, “your 
countenance make full confession of your crime.—you shall be instantly 
remove to the east turret.” 

“this accusation,” said madame montoni, speak with difficulty, “is 
use only as an excuse for your cruelty; i disdain to reply to it. you 
do not believe me guilty.” 

“signor!” said emily solemnly, “this dreadful charge, i would answer 
with my life, is false. nay, signor,” she added, observing the severity 
of his countenance, “this is no moment for restraint, on my part; i do 
not scruple to tell you, that you are deceived—most wicked deceived, 
by the suggestion of some person, who aim at the ruin of my aunt:—it 
is impossible, that you could yourself have imagine a crime so 
hideous.” 

montoni, his lip tremble more than before, reply only, “if you 
value your own safety,” address emily, “you will be silent. i shall 
know how to interpret your remonstrances, should you persevere in 
them.” 

emily raise her eyes calm to heaven. “here is, indeed, then, nothing 
to hope!” said she. 

“peace!” cry montoni, “or you shall find there is something to fear.” 

he turn to his wife, who had now recover her spirits, and who 
vehement and wildly remonstrate upon this mysterious suspicion: but 
montoni’s rage heighten with her indignation, and emily, dread the 
event of it, threw herself between them, and clasp his knee in 
silence, look up in his face with an expression, that might have 
soften the heart of a fiend. whether his was harden by a conviction 
of madame montoni’s guilt, or that a bare suspicion of it made him 
eager to exercise vengeance, he was total and alike insensible to the 
distress of his wife, and to the pleading looks of emily, whom he made 
no attempt to raise, but was vehement menace both, when he was 
call out of the room by some person at the door. as he shut the door, 
emily heard him turn the lock and take out the key; so that madame 
montoni and herself were now prisoners; and she saw that his designs 
became more and more terrible. her endeavour to explain his motive 
for this circumstance were almost as ineffectual as those to sooth the 
distress of her aunt, whose innocence she could not doubt; but she, at 
length, account for montoni’s readiness to suspect his wife by his 
own consciousness of cruelty towards her, and for the sudden violence 
of his present conduct against both, before even his suspicion could 
be completely formed, by his general eager to effect sudden 
whatever he was led to desire and his careless of justice, or 
humanity, in accomplish it. 

madame montoni, after some time, again look round, in search of a 
possibility of escape from the castle, and converse with emily on the 
subject, who was now willing to encounter any hazard, though she 
forbore to encourage a hope in her aunt, which she herself did not 
admit. how strong the edifice was secured, and how vigilant 
guarded, she knew too well; and tremble to commit their safety to the 
caprice of the servant, whose assistance they must solicit. old carlo 
was compassionate, but he seem to be too much in his master’s 
interest to be trust by them; annette could of herself do little, and 
emily knew ludovico only from her report. at present, however, these 
consideration were useless, madame montoni and her niece being shut up 
from all intercourse, even with the persons, whom there might be these 
reason to reject. 

in the hall, confusion and tumult still reigned. emily, as she listen 
anxious to the murmur, that sound along the gallery, sometimes 
fancy she heard the clash of swords, and, when she considered the 
nature of the provocation, given by montoni, and his impetuosity, it 
appear probable, that nothing less than arms would terminate the 
contention. madame montoni, have exhaust all her expression of 
indignation, and emily, hers of comfort, they remain silent, in that 
kind of breathless stillness, which, in nature, often succeed to the 
uproar of conflict elements; a stillness, like the morning, that 
dawn upon the ruins of an earthquake. 

an uncertain kind of terror pervade emily’s mind; the circumstances of 
the past hour still came dim and confused to her memory; and her 
thought were various and rapid, though without tumult. 

from this state of waking vision she was recall by a knock at the 
chamber-door, and, enquiring who was there, heard the whisper voice 
of annette. 

“dear madam, let me come in, i have a great deal to say,” said the poor 
girl. 

“the door is locked,” answer the lady. 

“yes, ma’am, but do pray open it.” 

“the signor has the key,” said madame montoni. 

“o blessed virgin! what will become of us?” exclaim annette. 

“assist us to escape,” said her mistress. “where is ludovico?” 

“below in the hall, ma’am, amongst them all, fight with the best of 
them!” 

“fighting! who are fighting?” cry madame montoni. 

“why the signor, ma’am, and all the signors, and a great many more.” 

“is any person much hurt?” said emily, in a tremulous voice. “hurt! 
yes, ma’amselle,—there they lie bleeding, and the sword are clashing, 
and—o holy saints! do let me in, ma’am, they are coming this way—i 
shall be murdered!” 

“fly!” cry emily, “fly! we cannot open the door.” 

annette repeated, that they were coming, and in the same moment fled. 

“be calm, madam,” said emily, turning to her aunt, “i entreat you to be 
calm, i am not frightened—not frightened in the least, do not you be 
alarmed.” 

“you can scarcely support yourself,” reply her aunt; “merciful god! 
what is it they mean to do with us?” 

“they come, perhaps, to liberate us,” said emily, “signor montoni 
perhaps is—is conquered.” 

the belief of his death gave her spirits a sudden shock, and she grew 
faint as she saw him in imagination, expire at her feet. 

“they are coming!” cry madame montoni—“i hear their steps—they are at 
the door!” 

emily turn her languid eyes to the door, but terror deprived her of 
utterance. the key sound in the lock; the door opened, and montoni 
appeared, follow by three ruffian-like men. “execute your orders,” 
said he, turning to them, and point to his wife, who shrieked, but 
was immediately carry from the room; while emily sunk, senseless, on 
a couch, by which she had endeavour to support herself. when she 
recovered, she was alone, and recollect only, that madame montoni had 
been there, together with some unconnected particulars of the preceding 
transaction, which were, however, sufficient to renew all her terror. 
she look wildly round the apartment, as if in search of some means of 
intelligence, concerning her aunt, while neither her own danger, nor an 
idea of escape from the room, immediately occurred. 

when her recollection was more complete, she raise herself and went, 
but with only a faint hope, to examine whether the door was unfastened. 
it was so, and she then step timid out into the gallery, but 
pause there, uncertain which way she should proceed. her first wish 
was to gather some information, as to her aunt, and she, at length, 
turn her steps to go to the lesser hall, where annette and the other 
servant usually waited. 

everywhere, as she passed, she heard, from a distance, the uproar of 
contention, and the figures and faces, which she met, hurry along 
the passages, struck her mind with dismay. emily might now have 
appeared, like an angel of light, encompass by fiends. at length, she 
reach the lesser hall, which was silent and deserted, but, pant 
for breath, she sat down to recover herself. the total still of 
this place was as awful as the tumult, from which she had escaped: but 
she had now time to recall her scattered thoughts, to remember her 
personal danger, and to consider of some means of safety. she 
perceived, that it was useless to seek madame montoni, through the wide 
extent and intricacy of the castle, now, too, when every avenue 
seem to be beset by ruffians; in this hall she could not resolve to 
stay, for she knew not how soon it might become their place of 
rendezvous; and, though she wish to go to her chamber, she dread 
again to encounter them on the way. 

thus she sat, tremble and hesitating, when a distant murmur broke on 
the silence, and grew loud and louder, till she distinguished voice 
and steps approaching. she then rose to go, but the sound came along 
the only passage, by which she could depart, and she was compel to 
await in the hall, the arrival of the persons, whose steps she heard. 
as these advanced, she distinguished groans, and then saw a man borne 
slow along by four others. her spirits falter at the sight, and she 
lean against the wall for support. the bearers, meanwhile, enter 
the hall, and, being too busy occupy to detain, or even notice 
emily, she attempt to leave it, but her strength failed, and she 
again sat down on the bench. a damp chill came over her; her sight 
became confused; she knew not what had passed, or where she was, yet 
the groan of the wound person still vibrate on her heart. in a few 
moments, the tide of life seem again to flow; she began to breathe 
more freely, and her senses revived. she had not fainted, nor had ever 
total lost her consciousness, but had contrived to support herself on 
the bench; still without courage to turn her eyes upon the unfortunate 
object, which remain near her, and about whom the men were yet too 
much engaged to attend to her. 

when her strength returned, she rose, and was suffer to leave the 
hall, though her anxiety, have produce some vain enquiries, 
concerning madame montoni, had thus made a discovery of herself. 
towards her chamber she now hastened, as fast as her steps would bear 
her, for she still perceived, upon her passage, the sound of confusion 
at a distance, and she endeavoured, by taking her way through some 
obscure rooms, to avoid encounter the persons, whose looks had 
terrify her before, as well as those parts of the castle, where the 
tumult might still rage. 

at length, she reach her chamber, and, have secure the door of the 
corridor, felt herself, for a moment, in safety. a profound still 
reign in this remote apartment, which not even the faint murmur of 
the most distant sound now reached. she sat down, near one of the 
casements, and, as she gaze on the mountain-view beyond, the deep 
repose of its beauty struck her with all the force of contrast, and she 
could scarcely believe herself so near a scene of savage discord. the 
contend elements seem to have retired from their natural spheres, 
and to have collected themselves into the mind of men, for there alone 
the tempest now reigned. 

emily try to tranquillize her spirits, but anxiety made her 
constant listen for some sound, and often look out upon the ramparts, 
where all, however, was lonely and still. as a sense of her own 
immediate danger had decreased, her apprehension concerning madame 
montoni heightened, who, she remembered, had been fierce threaten 
with confinement in the east turret, and it was possible, that her 
husband had satisfy his present vengeance with this punishment. she, 
therefore, determined, when night should return, and the inhabitant of 
the castle should be asleep, to explore the way to the turret, which, 
as the direction it stood in was mentioned, appear not very difficult 
to be done. she knew, indeed, that although her aunt might be there, 
she could afford her no effectual assistance, but it might give her 
some comfort even to know, that she was discovered, and to hear the 
sound of her niece’s voice; for herself, any certainty, concerning 
madame montoni’s fate, appear more tolerable, than this exhaust 
suspense. 

meanwhile, annette did not appear, and emily was surprised, and 
somewhat alarm for her, whom, in the confusion of the late scene, 
various accident might have befallen, and it was improbable, that she 
would have fail to come to her apartment, unless something 
unfortunate had happened. 

thus the hour pass in solitude, in silence, and in anxious 
conjecturing. being not once disturbed by a message, or a sound, it 
appeared, that montoni had wholly forgotten her, and it gave her some 
comfort to find, that she could be so unnoticed. she endeavour to 
withdraw her thought from the anxiety, that prey upon them, but they 
refuse control; she could neither read, nor draw, and the tone of her 
lute were so utterly discordant with the present state of her feelings, 
that she could not endure them for a moment. 

the sun, at length, set behind the western mountains; his fiery beam 
fade from the clouds, and then a dun melancholy purple drew over them, 
and gradual involved the features of the country below. soon after, 
the sentinel pass on the rampart to commence the watch. 

twilight had now spread its gloom over every object; the dismal 
obscurity of her chamber recall fearful thoughts, but she remembered, 
that to procure a light she must pass through a great extent of the 
castle, and, above all, through the halls, where she had already 
experienced so much horror. darkness, indeed, in the present state of 
her spirits, made silence and solitude terrible to her; it would also 
prevent the possibility of her finding her way to the turret, and 
condemn her to remain in suspense, concerning the fate of her aunt; yet 
she dare not to venture forth for a lamp. 

continue at the casement, that she might catch the last lingering 
gleam of evening, a thousand vague image of fear float on her fancy. 
“what if some of these ruffians,” said she, “should find out the 
private staircase, and in the dark of night steal into my chamber!” 
then, recollect the mysterious inhabitant of the neighbouring 
apartment, her terror change its object. “he is not a prisoner,” said 
she, “though he remains in one chamber, for montoni did not fasten the 
door, when he left it; the unknown person himself did this; it is 
certain, therefore, he can come out when he pleases.” 

she paused, for, notwithstanding the terror of darkness, she 
considered it to be very improbable, whoever he was, that he could have 
any interest in intrude upon her retirement; and again the subject of 
her emotion changed, when, remember her near to the chamber, 
where the veil had formerly disclose a dreadful spectacle, she doubt 
whether some passage might not communicate between it and the insecure 
door of the staircase. 

it was now entire dark, and she left the casement. as she sat with 
her eyes fixed on the hearth, she thought she perceive there a spark 
of light; it twinkle and disappeared, and then again was visible. at 
length, with much care, she fan the ember of a wood fire, that had 
been light in the morning, into flame, and, have communicate it to 
a lamp, which always stood in her room, felt a satisfaction not to be 
conceived, without a review of her situation. her first care was to 
guard the door of the staircase, for which purpose she placed against 
it all the furniture she could move, and she was thus employed, for 
some time, at the end of which she had another instance how much more 
oppressive misfortune is to the idle, than to the busy; for, have 
then leisure to think over all the circumstances of her present 
afflictions, she imagine a thousand evil for futurity, and these real 
and ideal subject of distress alike wound her mind. 

thus heavy move the hour till midnight, when she count the sullen 
note of the great clock, as they roll along the rampart, unmingled 
with any sound, except the distant foot-fall of a sentinel, who came to 
relieve guard. she now thought she might venture towards the turret, 
and, have gently open the chamber door to examine the corridor, and 
to listen if any person was stirring in the castle, found all around in 
perfect stillness. yet no soon had she left the room, than she 
perceive a light flash on the wall of the corridor, and, without 
wait to see by whom it was carried, she shrunk back, and closed her 
door. no one approaching, she conjectured, that it was montoni go to 
pay his midnight visit to her unknown neighbour, and she determined to 
wait, till he should have retired to his own apartment. 

when the chime had toll another half hour, she once more open the 
door, and, perceive that no person was in the corridor, hasty 
cross into a passage, that led along the south side of the castle 
towards the staircase, whence she believe she could easily find her 
way to the turret. often pause on her way, listen apprehensive 
to the murmur of the wind, and look fearful onward into the gloom 
of the long passages, she, at length, reach the staircase; but there 
her perplexity began. two passage appeared, of which she knew not how 
to prefer one, and was compelled, at last, to decide by chance, rather 
than by circumstances. that she entered, open first into a wide 
gallery, along which she pass lightly and swiftly; for the lonely 
aspect of the place awed her, and she start at the echo of her own 
steps. 

on a sudden, she thought she heard a voice, and, not distinguish 
from whence it came, fear equally to proceed, or to return. for some 
moments, she stood in an attitude of listen expectation, shrink 
almost from herself and scarcely daring to look round her. the voice 
came again, but, though it was now near her, terror did not allow her 
to judge exactly whence it proceeded. she thought, however, that it was 
the voice of complaint, and her belief was soon confirmed by a low 
moan sound, that seem to proceed from one of the chambers, opening 
into the gallery. it instantly occur to her, that madame montoni 
might be there confined, and she advanced to the door to speak, but was 
checked by considering, that she was, perhaps, go to commit herself 
to a stranger, who might discover her to montoni; for, though this 
person, whoever it was, seem to be in affliction, it did not follow, 
that he was a prisoner. 

while these thought pass over her mind, and left her still in 
hesitation, the voice spoke again, and, calling “ludovico,” she then 
perceive it to be that of annette; on which, no long hesitating, she 
went in joy to answer her. 

“ludovico!” cry annette, sobbing—“ludovico!” 

“it is not ludovico, it is i—mademoiselle emily.” 

annette cease sobbing, and was silent. 

“if you can open the door, let me in,” said emily, “here is no person 
to hurt you.” 

“ludovico!—o, ludovico!” cry annette. 

emily now lost her patience, and her fear of being overheard 
increasing, she was even nearly about to leave the door, when she 
considered, that annette might, possibly, know something of the 
situation of madame montoni, or direct her to the turret. at length, 
she obtain a reply, though little satisfactory, to her questions, for 
annette knew nothing of madame montoni, and only conjure emily to tell 
her what was become of ludovico. of him she had no information to give, 
and she again ask who had shut annette up. 

“ludovico,” said the poor girl, “ludovico shut me up. when i ran away 
from the dressing-room door today, i went i scarcely knew where, for 
safety; and, in this gallery, here, i met ludovico, who hurried me into 
this chamber, and lock me up to keep me out of harm, as he said. but 
he was in such a hurry himself, he hardly spoke ten words, but he told 
me he would come, and let me out, when all was quiet, and he took away 
the key with him. now all these hour are passed, and i have neither 
seen, nor heard a word of him; they have murder him—i know they 
have!” 

emily sudden remember the wound person, whom she had seen borne 
into the servants’ hall, and she scarcely doubted, that he was 
ludovico, but she conceal the circumstance from annette, and 
endeavour to comfort her. then, impatient to learn something of her 
aunt, she again enquire the way to the turret. 

“o! you are not going, ma’amselle,” said annette, “for heaven’s sake, 
do not go, and leave me here by myself.” 

“nay, annette, you do not think i can wait in the gallery all night,” 
reply emily. “direct me to the turret; in the morning i will 
endeavour to release you.” 

“o holy mary!” exclaim annette, “am i to stay here by myself all 
night! i shall be frightened out of my senses, and i shall die of 
hunger; i have had nothing to eat since dinner!” 

emily could scarcely forbear smile at the heterogeneous distress of 
annette, though she sincerely pity them, and said what she could to 
sooth her. at length, she obtain something like a direction to the 
east turret, and quit the door, from whence, after many intricacy 
and perplexities, she reach the steep and winding stairs of the 
turret, at the foot of which she stop to rest, and to reanimate her 
courage with a sense of her duty. as she survey this dismal place, 
she perceive a door on the opposite side of the staircase, and, 
anxious to know whether it would lead her to madame montoni, she try 
to undraw the bolts, which fasten it. a fresher air came to her face, 
as she unclosed the door, which open upon the east rampart, and the 
sudden current had nearly extinguish her light, which she now remove 
to a distance; and again, look out upon the obscure terrace, she 
perceive only the faint outline of the wall and of some towers, 
while, above, heavy clouds, borne along the wind, seem to mingle with 
the stars, and wrap the night in thick darkness. as she gazed, now 
willing to defer the moment of certainty, from which she expect only 
confirmation of evil, a distant footstep remind her, that she might 
be observe by the men on watch, and, hasty close the door, she 
took her lamp, and pass up the staircase. tremble came upon her, as 
she ascend through the gloom. to her melancholy fancy this seem to 
be a place of death, and the chill silence, that reigned, confirmed 
its character. her spirits faltered. “perhaps,” said she, “i am come 
hither only to learn a dreadful truth, or to witness some horrible 
spectacle; i feel that my senses would not survive such an addition of 
horror.” 

the image of her aunt murdered—murdered, perhaps, by the hand of 
montoni, rose to her mind; she trembled, gasp for breath—repented 
that she had dare to venture hither, and checked her steps. but, after 
she had pause a few minutes, the consciousness of her duty returned, 
and she went on. still all was silent. at length a track of blood, upon 
a stair, caught her eye; and instantly she perceived, that the wall and 
several other steps were stained. she paused, again struggle to 
support herself, and the lamp almost fell from her tremble hand. 
still no sound was heard, no living being seem to inhabit the turret; 
a thousand times she wish herself again in her chamber; dread to 
enquire farther—dreaded to encounter some horrible spectacle, and yet 
could not resolve, now that she was so near the termination of her 
efforts, to desist from them. have again collected courage to 
proceed, after ascend about half way up the turret, she came to 
another door, but here again she stop in hesitation; listen for 
sound within, and then, summon all her resolution, unclosed it, and 
enter a chamber, which, as her lamp shot its feeble ray through the 
darkness, seem to exhibit only dew-stained and desert walls. as she 
stood examine it, in fearful expectation of discover the remains 
of her unfortunate aunt, she perceive something lie in an obscure 
corner of the room, and, struck with a horrible conviction, she became, 
for an instant, motionless and nearly insensible. then, with a kind of 
desperate resolution, she hurried towards the object that excited her 
terror, when, perceive the clothes of some person, on the floor, she 
caught hold of them, and found in her grasp the old uniform of a 
soldier, beneath which appear a heap of pike and other arms. 
scarcely daring to trust her sight, she continued, for some moments, to 
gaze on the object of her late alarm, and then left the chamber, so 
much comfort and occupy by the conviction, that her aunt was not 
there, that she was go to descend the turret, without enquiring 
farther; when, on turning to do so, she observe upon some steps on the 
second flight an appearance of blood, and remembering, that there was 
yet another chamber to be explored, she again follow the winding of 
the ascent. still, as she ascended, the track of blood glare upon the 
stairs. 

it led her to the door of a landing-place, that terminate them, but 
she was unable to follow it farther. now that she was so near the 
sought-for certainty, she dread to know it, even more than before, 
and had not fortitude sufficient to speak, or to attempt opening the 
door. 

have listened, in vain, for some sound, that might confirm, or 
destroy her fears, she, at length, laid her hand on the lock, and, 
finding it fastened, call on madame montoni; but only a chill 
silence ensued. 

“she is dead!” she cried,—“murdered!—her blood is on the stairs!” 

emily grew very faint; could support herself no longer, and had 
scarcely presence of mind to set down the lamp, and place herself on a 
step. 

when her recollection returned, she spoke again at the door, and again 
attempt to open it, and, have linger for some time, without 
receiving any answer, or hearing a sound, she descended the turret, 
and, with all the swift her feeble would permit, sought her own 
apartment. 

as she turn into the corridor, the door of a chamber opened, from 
whence montoni came forth; but emily, more terrify than ever to 
behold him, shrunk back into the passage soon enough to escape being 
noticed, and heard him close the door, which she had perceive was the 
same she formerly observed. have here listen to his depart 
steps, till their faint sound was lost in distance, she venture to her 
apartment, and, secure it once again, retired to her bed, leave the 
lamp burning on the hearth. but sleep was flee from her harass mind, 
to which image of horror alone occurred. she endeavour to think it 
possible, that madame montoni had not been taken to the turret; but, 
when she recollect the former menace of her husband and the terrible 
spirit of vengeance, which he had display on a late occasion; when 
she remember his general character, the looks of the men, who had 
forced madame montoni from her apartment, and the written trace on the 
stairs of the turret—she could not doubt, that her aunt had been 
carry thither, and could scarcely hope, that she had not been carry 
to be murdered. 

the grey of morning had long dawn through her casements, before emily 
closed her eyes in sleep; when weary nature, at length, yield her a 
respite from suffering. 



chapter xi 

who rear the bloody hand? 
say 


emily remain in her chamber, on the following morning, without 
receiving any notice from montoni, or seeing a human being, except the 
armed men, who sometimes pass on the terrace below. have taste no 
food since the dinner of the preceding day, extreme faint made her 
feel the necessity of quit the asylum of her apartment to obtain 
refreshment, and she was also very anxious to procure liberty for 
annette. willing, however, to defer venture forth, as long as 
possible, and considering, whether she should apply to montoni, or to 
the compassion of some other person, her excessive anxiety concerning 
her aunt, at length, overcame her abhorrence of his presence, and she 
determined to go to him, and to entreat, that he would suffer her to 
see madame montoni. 

meanwhile, it was too certain, from the absence of annette, that some 
accident had befallen ludovico, and that she was still in confinement; 
emily, therefore, resolve also to visit the chamber, where she had 
spoken to her, on the preceding night, and, if the poor girl was yet 
there, to inform montoni of her situation. 

it was near noon, before she venture from her apartment, and went 
first to the south gallery, whither she pass without meeting a single 
person, or hearing a sound, except, now and then, the echo of a distant 
footstep. 

it was unnecessary to call annette, whose lamentation were audible 
upon the first approach to the gallery, and who, bewail her own and 
ludovico’s fate, told emily, that she should certainly be starve to 
death, if she was not let out immediately. emily replied, that she was 
go to beg her release of montoni; but the terror of hunger now 
yield to those of the signor, and, when emily left her, she was 
loud entreating, that her place of refuge might be conceal from 
him. 

as emily drew near the great hall, the sound she heard and the people 
she met in the passage renew her alarm. the latter, however, were 
peaceable, and did not interrupt her, though they look earnest at 
her, as she passed, and sometimes spoke. on crossing the hall towards 
the cedar room, where montoni usually sat, she perceived, on the 
pavement, fragment of swords, some tattered garment stain with 
blood, and almost expect to have seen among them a dead body; but 
from such a spectacle she was, at present, spared. as she approach 
the room, the sound of several voice issue from within, and a dread 
of appear before many strangers, as well as of irritate montoni by 
such an intrusion, made her pause and falter from her purpose. she 
look up through the long arcade of the hall, in search of a servant, 
who might bear a message, but no one appeared, and the urgent of what 
she had to request made her still linger near the door. the voice 
within were not in contention, though she distinguished those of 
several of the guest of the preceding day; but still her resolution 
failed, whenever she would have tap at the door, and she had 
determined to walk in the hall, till some person should appear, who 
might call montoni from the room, when, as she turn from the door, it 
was sudden open by himself. emily trembled, and was confused, while 
he almost start with surprise, and all the terror of his countenance 
unfold themselves. she forgot all she would have said, and neither 
enquire for her aunt, nor entreat for annette, but stood silent and 
embarrassed. 

after close the door he reprove her for a meanness, of which she had 
not been guilty, and stern question her what she had overheard; an 
accusation, which revive her recollection so far, that she assured him 
she had not come thither with an intention to listen to his 
conversation, but to entreat his compassion for her aunt, and for 
annette. montoni seem to doubt this assertion, for he regard her 
with a scrutinize look; and the doubt evidently arose from no 
trifling interest. emily then further explain herself, and conclude 
with entreat him to inform her, where her aunt was placed, and to 
permit, that she might visit her; but he look upon her only with a 
malignant smile, which instantaneous confirmed her worst fear for 
her aunt, and, at that moment, she had not courage to renew her 
entreaties. 

“for annette,” said he,—“if you go to carlo, he will release the girl; 
the foolish fellow, who shut her up, die yesterday.” emily 
shuddered.—“but my aunt, signor”—said she, “o tell me of my aunt!” 

“she is taken care of,” reply montoni hastily, “i have no time to 
answer idle questions.” 

he would have pass on, but emily, in a voice of agony, that could not 
be wholly resisted, conjure him to tell her, where madame montoni was; 
while he paused, and she anxious watch his countenance, a trumpet 
sounded, and, in the next moment, she heard the heavy gate of the 
portal open, and then the clatter of horses’ hoof in the court, 
with the confusion of many voices. she stood for a moment hesitate 
whether she should follow montoni, who, at the sound of the trumpet, 
had pass through the hall, and, turning her eyes whence it came, she 
saw through the door, that open beyond a long perspective of arch 
into the courts, a party of horsemen, whom she judged, as well as the 
distance and her embarrassment would allow, to be the same she had seen 
depart, a few days before. but she staid not to scrutinize, for, when 
the trumpet sound again, the chevalier rush out of the cedar room, 
and men came running into the hall from every quarter of the castle. 
emily once more hurried for shelter to her own apartment. thither she 
was still pursue by image of horror. she reconsider montoni’s 
manner and words, when he had spoken of his wife, and they serve only 
to confirm her most terrible suspicions. tear refuse any long to 
relieve her distress, and she had sat for a considerable time absorb 
in thought, when a knock at the chamber door arouse her, on opening 
which she found old carlo. 

“dear young lady,” said he, “i have been so flurried, i never once 
thought of you till just now. i have brought you some fruit and wine, 
and i am sure you must stand in need of them by this time.” 

“thank you, carlo,” said emily, “this is very good of you. did the 
signor remind you of me?” 

“no, signora,” reply carlo, “his _excellenza_ has business enough on 
his hands.” emily then renew her enquiries, concerning madame 
montoni, but carlo had been employ at the other end of the castle, 
during the time, that she was removed, and he had heard nothing since, 
concerning her. 

while he spoke, emily look steady at him, for she scarcely knew 
whether he was really ignorant, or conceal his knowledge of the truth 
from a fear of offend his master. to several questions, concerning 
the contention of yesterday, he gave very limited answers; but told, 
that the dispute were now amicable settled, and that the signor 
believe himself to have been mistaken in his suspicion of his guests. 
“the fight was about that, signora,” said carlo; “but i trust i 
shall never see such another day in this castle, though strange things 
are about to be done.” 

on her enquiring his meaning, “ah, signora!” add he, “it is not for 
me to betray secrets, or tell all i think, but time will tell.” 

she then desire him to release annette, and, have describe the 
chamber in which the poor girl was confined, he promise to obey her 
immediately, and was departing, when she remember to ask who were the 
person just arrived. her late conjecture was right; it was verezzi, 
with his party. 

her spirits were somewhat soothe by this short conversation with 
carlo; for, in her present circumstances, it afford some comfort to 
hear the accent of compassion, and to meet the look of sympathy. 

an hour pass before annette appeared, who then came weeping and 
sobbing. “o ludovico—ludovico!” cry she. 

“my poor annette!” said emily, and made her sit down. 

“who could have foreseen this, ma’amselle? o miserable, wretched, 
day—that ever i should live to see it!” and she continue to moan and 
lament, till emily thought it necessary to check her excess of grief. 
“we are continual lose dear friends by death,” said she, with a 
sigh, that came from her heart. “we must submit to the will of 
heaven—our tears, alas! cannot recall the dead!” 

annette took the handkerchief from her face. 

“you will meet ludovico in a better world, i hope,” add emily. 

“yes—yes,—ma’amselle,” sob annette, “but i hope i shall meet him 
again in this—though he is so wounded!” 

“wounded!” exclaim emily, “does he live?” 

“yes, ma’am, but—but he has a terrible wound, and could not come to let 
me out. they thought him dead, at first, and he has not been rightly 
himself, till within this hour.” 

“well, annette, i rejoice to hear he lives.” 

“lives! holy saints! why he will not die, surely!” 

emily said she hope not, but this expression of hope annette thought 
imply fear, and her own increase in proportion, as emily endeavour 
to encourage her. to enquiries, concerning madame montoni, she could 
give no satisfactory answers. 

“i quite forgot to ask among the servants, ma’amselle,” said she, “for 
i could think of nobody but poor ludovico.” 

annette’s grief was now somewhat assuaged, and emily sent her to make 
enquiries, concerning her lady, of whom, however, she could obtain no 
intelligence, some of the people she spoke with being really ignorant 
of her fate, and other have probably received orders to conceal it. 

this day pass with emily in continue grief and anxiety for her aunt; 
but she was unmolested by any notice from montoni; and, now that 
annette was liberated, she obtain food, without expose herself to 
danger, or impertinence. 

two following days pass in the same manner, unmarked by any 
occurrence, during which she obtain no information of madame montoni. 
on the evening of the second, have dismiss annette, and retired to 
bed, her mind became haunt by the most dismal images, such as her 
long anxiety, concerning her aunt, suggested; and, unable to forget 
herself, for a moment, or to vanquish the phantoms, that torment her, 
she rose from her bed, and went to one of the case of her chamber, 
to breathe a free air. 

all without was silent and dark, unless that could be call light, 
which was only the faint glimmer of the stars, showing imperfect the 
outline of the mountains, the western tower of the castle and the 
rampart below, where a solitary sentinel was pacing. what an image of 
repose did this scene present! the fierce and terrible passions, too, 
which so often agitate the inhabitant of this edifice, seem now 
hush in sleep;—those mysterious workings, that rouse the elements of 
man’s nature into tempest—were calm. emily’s heart was not so; but her 
sufferings, though deep, partook of the gentle character of her mind. 
hers was a silent anguish, weeping, yet enduring; not the wild energy 
of passion, inflame imagination, bearing down the barrier of reason 
and living in a world of its own. 

the air refresh her, and she continue at the casement, look on 
the shadowy scene, over which the planet burn with a clear light, 
amid the deep blue æther, as they silent move in their destined 
course. she remember how often she had gaze on them with her dear 
father, how often he had pointed out their way in the heavens, and 
explain their laws; and these reflection led to others, which, in an 
almost equal degree, awaken her grief and astonishment. 

they brought a retrospect of all the strange and mournful events, which 
had occur since she live in peace with her parents. and to emily, 
who had been so tender educated, so tender loved, who once knew 
only goodness and happiness—to her, the late event and her present 
situation—in a foreign land—in a remote castle—surrounded by vice and 
violence—seemed more like the vision of a distempered imagination, 
than the circumstances of truth. she wept to think of what her parent 
would have suffered, could they have foreseen the event of her future 
life. 

while she raise her stream eyes to heaven, she observe the same 
planet, which she had seen in languedoc, on the night, preceding her 
father’s death, rise above the eastern tower of the castle, while she 
remember the conversation, which has passed, concerning the probable 
state of departed souls; remembered, also, the solemn music she had 
heard, and to which the tender of her spirits had, in spite of her 
reason, given a superstitious meaning. at these recollection she wept 
again, and continue musing, when sudden the note of sweet music 
pass on the air. a superstitious dread stole over her; she stood 
listening, for some moments, in tremble expectation, and then 
endeavour to recollect her thoughts, and to reason herself into 
composure; but human reason cannot establish her law on subjects, lost 
in the obscurity of imagination, any more than the eye can ascertain 
the form of objects, that only glimmer through the dim of night. 

her surprise, on hearing such soothe and delicious sounds, was, at 
least, justifiable; for it was long—very long, since she had listen 
to anything like melody. the fierce trumpet and the shrill fife were 
the only instrument she had heard, since her arrival at udolpho. 

when her mind was somewhat more composed, she try to ascertain from 
what quarter the sound proceeded, and thought they came from below; 
but whether from a room of the castle, or from the terrace, she could 
not with certainty judge. fear and surprise now yield to the 
enchantment of a strain, that float on the silent night, with the 
most soft and melancholy sweetness. suddenly, it seem remove to a 
distance, tremble faintly, and then entire ceased. 

she continue to listen, sunk in that pleasing repose, which soft music 
leaves on the mind—but it came no more. upon this strange circumstance 
her thought were long engaged, for strange it certainly was to hear 
music at midnight, when every inhabitant of the castle had long since 
retired to rest, and in a place, where nothing like harmony had been 
heard before, probably, for many years. long suffering had made her 
spirits peculiarly sensible to terror, and liable to be affected by the 
illusion of superstition.—it now seem to her, as if her dead father 
had spoken to her in that strain, to inspire her with comfort and 
confidence, on the subject, which had then occupy her mind. yet 
reason told her, that this was a wild conjecture, and she was inclined 
to dismiss it; but, with the inconsistent so natural, when imagination 
guide the thoughts, she then waver towards a belief as wild. she 
remember the singular event, connected with the castle, which had 
given it into the possession of its present owner; and, when she 
considered the mysterious manner, in which its late possessor had 
disappeared, and that she had never since been heard of, her mind was 
impress with a high degree of solemn awe; so that, though there 
appear no clue to connect that event with the late music, she was 
inclined fanciful to think they had some relation to each other. at 
this conjecture, a sudden chill ran through her frame; she look 
fearful upon the dusky of her chamber, and the dead silence, that 
prevail there, heighten to her fancy its gloomy aspect. 

at length, she left the casement, but her steps faltered, as she 
approach the bed, and she stop and look round. the single lamp, 
that burn in her spacious chamber, was expiring; for a moment, she 
shrunk from the dark beyond; and then, ashamed of the weakness, 
which, however, she could not wholly conquer, went forward to the bed, 
where her mind did not soon know the soothe of sleep. she still 
muse on the late occurrence, and look with anxiety to the next 
night, when, at the same hour, she determined to watch whether the 
music returned. “if those sound were human,” said she, “i shall 
probably hear them again.” 



chapter xii 

then, oh, you blessed minister above, 
keep me in patience; and, in ripen’d time, 
unfold the evil which is here wrapt up 
in countenance. 
shakespeare 


annette came almost breathless to emily’s apartment in the morning. “o 
ma’amselle!” said she, in broken sentences, “what news i have to tell! 
i have found out who the prisoner is—but he was no prisoner, 
neither;—he that was shut up in the chamber i told you of. i must think 
him a ghost, forsooth!” 

“who was the prisoner?” enquire emily, while her thought glance back 
to the circumstance of the preceding night. 

“you mistake, ma’am,” said annette; “he was not a prisoner, after all.” 

“who is the person, then?” 

“holy saints!” rejoin annette; “how i was surprised! i met him just 
now, on the rampart below, there. i never was so surprise in my life! 
ah! ma’amselle! this is a strange place! i should never have done 
wondering, if i was to live here a hundred years. but, as i was saying, 
i met him just now on the rampart, and i was thinking of nobody less 
than of him.” 

“this trifling is insupportable,” said emily; “pr’ythee, annette, do 
not torture my patience any longer.” 

“nay, ma’amselle, guess—guess who it was; it was somebody you know very 
well.” 

“i cannot guess,” said emily impatiently. 

“nay, ma’amselle, i’ll tell you something to guess by—a tall signor, 
with a longish face, who walk so stately, and use to wear such a high 
feather in his hat; and use often to look down upon the ground, when 
people spoke to him; and to look at people from under his eyebrows, as 
it were, all so dark and frowning. you have seen him, often and often, 
at venice, ma’am. then he was so intimate with the signor, too. and, 
now i think of it, i wonder what he could be afraid of in this lonely 
old castle, that he should shut himself up for. but he is come abroad 
now, for i met him on the rampart just this minute. i tremble when i 
saw him, for i always was afraid of him, somehow; but i determined i 
would not let him see it; so i went up to him, and made him a low 
curtesy, ‘you are welcome to the castle, signor orsino,’ said i.” 

“o, it was signor orsino, then!” said emily. 

“yes, ma’amselle, signor orsino, himself, who cause that venetian 
gentleman to be killed, and has been pop about from place to place, 
ever since, as i hear.” 

“good god!” exclaim emily, recover from the shock of this 
intelligence; “and is _he_ come to udolpho! he do well to endeavour 
to conceal himself.” 

“yes, ma’amselle, but if that was all, this desolate place would 
conceal him, without his shut himself up in one room. who would 
think of coming to look for him here? i am sure i should as soon think 
of go to look for anybody in the other world.” 

“there is some truth in that,” said emily, who would now have conclude 
it was orsino’s music, which she had heard, on the preceding night, had 
she not known, that he had neither taste, nor skill in the art. but, 
though she was unwill to add to the number of annette’s surprises, 
by mention the subject of her own, she enquired, whether any person 
in the castle play on a musical instrument? 

“o yes, ma’amselle! there is benedetto play the great drum to 
admiration; and then, there is launcelot the trumpeter; nay, for that 
matter, ludovico himself can play on the trumpet;—but he is ill now. i 
remember once—” 

emily interrupt her; “have you heard no other music since you came to 
the castle—none last night?” 

“why, did _you_ hear any last night, ma’amselle?” 

emily evade this question, by repeating her own. 

“why, no, ma’am,” reply annette; “i never heard any music here, i 
must say, but the drum and the trumpet; and, as for last night, i did 
nothing but dream i saw my late lady’s ghost.” 

“your _late_ lady’s,” said emily in a tremulous voice; “you have heard 
more, then. tell me—tell me all, annette, i entreat; tell me the worst 
at once.” 

“nay, ma’amselle, you know the worst already.” 

“i know nothing,” said emily. 

“yes, you do, ma’amselle; you know, that nobody know anything about 
her; and it is plain, therefore, she is gone, the way of the first lady 
of the castle—nobody ever knew anything about her.” 

emily lean her head upon her hand, and was, for some time, silent; 
then, telling annette she wish to be alone, the latter left the room. 

the remark of annette had revive emily’s terrible suspicion, 
concerning the fate of madame montoni; and she resolve to make another 
effort to obtain certainty on this subject, by apply to montoni once 
more. 

when annette returned, a few hour after, she told emily, that the 
porter of the castle wish very much to speak with her, for that he 
had something of importance to say; her spirits had, however, of late 
been so subject to alarm, that any new circumstance excited it; and 
this message from the porter, when her first surprise was over, made 
her look round for some lurk danger, the more suspiciously, perhaps, 
because she had frequent remark the unpleasant air and countenance 
of this man. she now hesitated, whether to speak with him, doubt 
even, that this request was only a pretext to draw her into some 
danger; but a little reflection show her the improbability of this, 
and she blush at her weak fears. 

“i will speak to him, annette,” said she; “desire him to come to the 
corridor immediately.” 

annette departed, and soon after returned. 

“barnardine, ma’amselle,” said she, “dare not come to the corridor, 
lest he should be discovered, it is so far from his post; and he dare 
not even leave the gate for a moment now; but, if you will come to him 
at the portal, through some roundabout passage he told me of, without 
crossing the courts, he has that to tell, which will surprise you. but 
you must not come through the courts, lest the signor should see you.” 

emily, neither approve these “roundabout passage,” nor the other part 
of the request, now positively refuse to go. “tell him,” said she, “if 
he has anything of consequence to impart, i will hear him in the 
corridor, whenever he has an opportunity of coming thither.” 

annette went to deliver this message, and was absent a considerable 
time. when she returned, “it won’t do, ma’amselle,” said she. 
“barnardine has been considering all this time what can be done, for it 
is as much as his place is worth to leave his post now. but, if you 
will come to the east rampart in the dusk of the evening, he can, 
perhaps, steal away, and tell you all he has to say.” 

emily was surprise and alarmed, at the secrecy which this man seem 
to think so necessary, and hesitate whether to meet him, till, 
considering, that he might mean to warn her of some serious danger, she 
resolve to go. 

“soon after sunset,” said she, “i will be at the end of the east 
rampart. but then the watch will be set,” she added, recollect 
herself, “and how can barnardine pass unobserved?” 

“that is just what i said to him, ma’am, and he answer me, that he 
had the key of the gate, at the end of the rampart, that leads towards 
the courts, and could let himself through that way; and as for the 
sentinels, there were none at this end of the terrace, because the 
place is guarded enough by the high wall of the castle, and the east 
turret; and he said those at the other end were too far off to see him, 
if it was pretty duskyish.” 

“well,” said emily, “i must hear what he has to tell; and, therefore, 
desire you will go with me to the terrace, this evening.” 

“he desire it might be pretty duskyish, ma’amselle,” repeated annette, 
“because of the watch.” 

emily paused, and then said she would be on the terrace, an hour after 
sunset;—“and tell barnardine,” she added, “to be punctual to the time; 
for that i, also, may be observe by signor montoni. where is the 
signor? i would speak with him.” 

“he is in the cedar chamber, ma’am, counsel with the other signors. 
he is go to give them a sort of treat today, to make up for what 
pass at the last, i suppose; the people are all very busy in the 
kitchen.” 

emily now enquired, if montoni expect any new guests? and annette 
believe that he did not. “poor ludovico!” add she, “he would be as 
merry as the best of them, if he was well; but he may recover yet. 
count morano was wound as bad, as he, and he is got well again, and 
is gone back to venice.” 

“is he so?” said emily, “when did you hear this?” 

“i heard it last night, ma’amselle, but i forgot to tell it.” 

emily ask some further questions, and then, desire annette would 
observe and inform her, when montoni was alone, the girl went to 
deliver her message to barnardine. 

montoni was, however, so much engaged, during the whole day, that emily 
had no opportunity of seek a release from her terrible suspense, 
concerning her aunt. annette was employ in watch his steps, and in 
attend upon ludovico, whom she, assist by caterina, nurse with 
the utmost care; and emily was, of course, left much alone. her 
thought dwelt often on the message of the porter, and were employ in 
conjecture the subject, that occasion it, which she sometimes 
imagine concerned the fate of madame montoni; at others, that it 
related to some personal danger, which threaten herself. the cautious 
secrecy which barnardine observe in his conduct, inclined her to 
believe the latter. 

as the hour of appointment drew near, her impatience increased. at 
length, the sun set; she heard the passing steps of the sentinel go 
to their posts; and wait only for annette to accompany her to the 
terrace, who, soon after, came, and they descended together. when emily 
express apprehension of meeting montoni, or some of his guests, “o, 
there is no fear of that, ma’amselle,” said annette, “they are all set 
in to feast yet, and that barnardine knows.” 

they reach the first terrace, where the sentinel demand who 
passed; and emily, have answered, walk on to the east rampart, at 
the entrance of which they were again stopped; and, have again 
replied, were permit to proceed. but emily did not like to expose 
herself to the discretion of these men, at such an hour; and, impatient 
to withdraw from the situation, she step hasty on in search of 
barnardine. he was not yet come. she lean pensive on the wall of 
the rampart, and wait for him. the gloom of twilight sat deep on the 
surrounding objects, blend in soft confusion the valley, the 
mountains, and the woods, whose tall heads, stir by the evening 
breeze, gave the only sounds, that stole on silence, except a faint, 
faint chorus of distant voices, that arose from within the castle. 

“what voice are those?” said emily, as she fearful listened. 

“it is only the signor and his guests, carousing,” reply annette. 

“good god!” thought emily, “can this man’s heart be so gay, when he has 
made another being so wretched; if, indeed, my aunt is yet suffer to 
feel her wretchedness? o! whatever are my own sufferings, may my heart 
never, never be harden against those of others!” 

she look up, with a sensation of horror, to the east turret, near 
which she then stood; a light glimmer through the grate of the lower 
chamber, but those of the upper one were dark. presently, she perceive 
a person moving with a lamp across the lower room; but this 
circumstance revive no hope, concerning madame montoni, whom she had 
vain sought in that apartment, which had appear to contain only 
soldiers’ accoutrements. emily, however, determined to attempt the 
outer door of the turret, as soon as barnardine should withdraw; and, 
if it was unfastened, to make another effort to discover her aunt. 

the moments passed, but still barnardine did not appear; and emily, 
becoming uneasy, hesitate whether to wait any longer. she would have 
sent annette to the portal to hasten him, but fear to be left alone, 
for it was now almost dark, and a melancholy streak of red, that still 
linger in the west, was the only vestige of departed day. the strong 
interest, however, which barnardine’s message had awakened, overcame 
other apprehensions, and still detain her. 

while she was conjecture with annette what could thus occasion his 
absence, they heard a key turn in the lock of the gate near them, and 
presently saw a man advancing. it was barnardine, of whom emily hasty 
enquire what he had to communicate, and desired, that he would tell 
her quickly, “for i am chill with this evening air,” said she. 

“you must dismiss your maid, lady,” said the man in a voice, the deep 
tone of which shock her, “what i have to tell is to you only.” 

emily, after some hesitation, desire annette to withdraw to a little 
distance. “now, my friend, what would you say?” 

he was silent a moment, as if considering, and then said,— 

“that which would cost me my place, at least, if it came to the 
signor’s ears. you must promise, lady, that nothing shall ever make you 
tell a syllable of the matter; i have been trust in this affair, and, 
if it was known, that i betray my trust, my life, perhaps, might 
answer it. but i was concerned for you, lady, and i resolve to tell 
you.” he paused.— 

emily thank him, assured him that he might repose on her discretion, 
and entreat him to dispatch. 

“annette told us in the hall how unhappy you were about signora 
montoni, and how much you wish to know what was become of her.” 

“most true,” said emily eagerly, “and you can inform me. i conjure you 
tell me the worst, without hesitation.” she rest her tremble arm 
upon the wall. 

“i can tell you,” said barnardine, and paused.— 

emily had no power to enforce her entreaties. 

“i _can_ tell you,” resume barnardine,—“but—” 

“but what?” exclaim emily, recover her resolution. 

“here i am, ma’amselle,” said annette, who, have heard the eager 
tone, in which emily pronounced these words, came running towards her. 

“retire!” said barnardine, sternly; “you are not wanted;” and, as emily 
said nothing, annette obeyed. 

“i _can_ tell you,” repeated the porter,—“but i know not how—you were 
afflict before.—” 

“i am prepared for the worst, my friend,” said emily, in a firm and 
solemn voice. “i can support any certainty better than this suspense.” 

“well, signora, if that is the case, you shall hear.—you know, i 
suppose, that the signor and his lady use sometimes to disagree. it is 
none of my concern to enquire what it was about, but i believe you 
know it was so.” 

“well,” said emily, “proceed.” 

“the signor, it seems, had lately been very wrath against her. i saw 
all, and heard all,—a great deal more than people thought for; but it 
was none of my business, so i said nothing. a few days ago, the signor 
sent for me. ‘barnardine,’ say he, ‘you are—an honest man, i think i 
can trust you.’ i assured his _excellenza_ that he could. ‘then,’ say 
he, as near as i can remember, ‘i have an affair in hand, which i want 
you to assist me in.’—then he told me what i was to do; but that i 
shall say nothing about—it concerned only the signora.” 

“o heavens!” exclaim emily—“what have you done?” 

barnardine hesitated, and was silent. 

“what fiend could tempt him, or you, to such an act!” cry emily, 
chill with horror, and scarcely able to support her faint spirits. 

“it was a fiend,” said barnardine in a gloomy tone of voice. they were 
now both silent;—emily had not courage to enquire further, and 
barnardine seem to shrink from telling more. at length he said, “it 
is of no use to think of the past; the signor was cruel enough, but he 
would be obeyed. what signify my refusing? he would have found 
others, who had no scruples.” 

“you have murder her, then!” said emily, in a hollow and inward 
voice—“i am talk with a murderer!” barnardine stood silent; while 
emily turn from him, and attempt to leave the place. 

“stay, lady!” said he, “you deserve to think so still—since you can 
believe me capable of such a deed.” 

“if you are innocent, tell me quickly,” said emily, in faint accents, 
“for i feel i shall not be able to hear you long.” 

“i will tell you no more,” said he, and walk away. emily had just 
strength enough to bid him stay, and then to call annette, on whose arm 
she leaned, and they walk slow up the rampart, till they heard 
steps behind them. it was barnardine again. 

“send away the girl,” said he, “and i will tell you more.” 

“she must not go,” said emily; “what you have to say, she may hear.” 

“may she so, lady?” said he. “you shall know no more, then;” and he was 
going, though slowly, when emily’s anxiety, overcome the resentment 
and fear, which the man’s behaviour had roused, she desire him to 
stay, and bade annette retire. 

“the signora is alive,” said he, “for me. she is my prisoner, though; 
his _excellenza_ has shut her up in the chamber over the great gate of 
the court, and i have the charge of her. i was go to have told you, 
you might see her—but now—” 

emily, relieved from an unutterable load of anguish by this speech, had 
now only to ask barnardine’s forgiveness, and to conjure, that he would 
let her visit her aunt. 

he comply with less reluctance, than she expected, and told her, 
that, if she would repair, on the following night, when the signor was 
retired to rest, to the postern-gate of the castle, she should, 
perhaps, see madame montoni. 

amid all the thankfulness, which emily felt for this concession, she 
thought she observe a malicious triumph in his manner, when he 
pronounced the last words; but, in the next moment, she dismiss the 
thought, and, have again thank him, commend her aunt to his pity, 
and assured him, that she would herself reward him, and would be 
punctual to her appointment, she bade him good night, and retired, 
unobserved, to her chamber. it was a considerable time, before the 
tumult of joy, which barnardine’s unexpected intelligence had 
occasioned, allow emily to think with clearness, or to be conscious 
of the real dangers, that still surround madame montoni and herself. 
when this agitation subsided, she perceived, that her aunt was yet the 
prisoner of a man, to whose vengeance, or avarice, she might fall a 
sacrifice; and, when she further considered the savage aspect of the 
person, who was appoint to guard madame montoni, her doom appear to 
be already sealed, for the countenance of barnardine seem to bear the 
stamp of a murderer; and, when she had look upon it, she felt 
inclined to believe, that there was no deed, however black, which he 
might not be prevail upon to execute. these reflection brought to 
her remembrance the tone of voice, in which he had promise to grant 
her request to see his prisoner; and she muse upon it long in 
uneasy and doubt. sometimes, she even hesitated, whether to trust 
herself with him at the lonely hour he had appointed; and once, and 
only once, it struck her, that madame montoni might be already 
murdered, and that this ruffian was appoint to decoy herself to some 
secret place, where her life also was to be sacrifice to the avarice 
of montoni, who then would claim secure the contest estate in 
languedoc. the consideration of the enormity of such guilt did, at 
length, relieve her from the belief of its probability, but not from 
all the doubt and fears, which a recollection of barnardine’s manner 
had occasioned. from these subjects, her thoughts, at length, pass to 
others; and, as the evening advanced, she remembered, with somewhat 
more than surprise, the music she had heard, on the preceding night, 
and now await its return, with more than curiosity. 

she distinguished, till a late hour, the distant carousal of montoni 
and his companions—the loud contest, the dissolute laugh and the choral 
song, that made the hall re-echo. at length, she heard the heavy gate 
of the castle shut for the night, and those sound instantly sunk into 
a silence, which was disturbed only by the whisper steps of persons, 
passing through the gallery to their remote rooms. emily now judge 
it to be about the time, when she had heard the music, on the preceding 
night, dismiss annette, and gently open the case to watch for 
its return. the planet she had so particularly noticed, at the 
recurrence of the music, was not yet risen; but, with superstitious 
weakness, she kept her eyes fixed on that part of the hemisphere, where 
it would rise, almost expecting, that, when it appeared, the sound 
would return. at length, it came, serene bright, over the eastern 
tower of the castle. her heart trembled, when she perceive it, and 
she had scarcely courage to remain at the casement, lest the return 
music should confirm her terror, and subdue the little strength she yet 
retained. the clock soon after struck one, and, knowing this to be 
about the time, when the sound had occurred, she sat down in a chair, 
near the casement, and endeavour to compose her spirits; but the 
anxiety of expectation yet disturbed them. everything, however, 
remain still; she heard only the solitary step of a sentinel, and the 
lull murmur of the wood below, and she again lean from the 
casement, and again looked, as if for intelligence, to the planet, 
which was now risen high above the towers. 

emily continue to listen, but no music came. “those were surely no 
mortal sounds!” said she, recollect their entrance melody. “no 
inhabitant of this castle could utter such; and, where is the feeling, 
that could modulate such exquisite expression? we all know, that it has 
been affirm celestial sound have sometimes been heard on earth. 
father pierre and father antoine declared, that they had sometimes 
heard them in the still of night, when they alone were waking to 
offer their orison to heaven. nay, my dear father himself, once said, 
that, soon after my mother’s death, as he lay watchful in grief, sound 
of uncommon sweet call him from his bed; and, on opening his 
window, he heard lofty music pass along the midnight air. it soothe 
him, he said; he look up with confidence to heaven, and resigned her 
to his god.” 

emily pause to weep at this recollection. “perhaps,” resume she, 
“perhaps, those strain i heard were sent to comfort,—to encourage me! 
never shall i forget those i heard, at this hour, in languedoc! 
perhaps, my father watches over me, at this moment!” she wept again in 
tenderness. thus pass the hour in watchful and solemn thought; 
but no sound returned; and, after remain at the casement, till the 
light tint of dawn began to edge the mountain-tops and steal upon the 
night-shade, she concluded, that they would not return, and retired 
reluctantly to repose. 



volume 3 



chapter i 

i will advise you where to plant yourselves; 
acquaint you with the perfect spy o’ the time, 
the moment on ’t; for ’t must be done tonight. 
macbeth 


emily was somewhat surprised, on the following day, to find that 
annette had heard of madame montoni’s confinement in the chamber over 
the portal, as well as of her purpose visit there, on the approach 
night. that the circumstance, which barnardine had so solemn enjoin 
her to conceal, he had himself told to so indiscreet a hearer as 
annette, appear very improbable, though he had now charged her with a 
message, concerning the intended interview. he requested, that emily 
would meet him, unattended, on the terrace, at a little after midnight, 
when he himself would lead her to the place he had promised; a 
proposal, from which she immediately shrunk, for a thousand vague fear 
dart athwart her mind, such as had torment her on the preceding 
night, and which she neither knew how to trust, nor to dismiss. it 
frequent occur to her, that barnardine might have deceive her, 
concerning madame montoni, whose murderer, perhaps, he really was; and 
that he had deceive her by order of montoni, the more easily to draw 
her into some of the desperate designs of the latter. the terrible 
suspicion, that madame montoni no long lived, thus came, accompany 
by one not less dreadful for herself. unless the crime, by which the 
aunt had suffered, was instigate merely by resentment, unconnected 
with profit, a motive, upon which montoni did not appear very likely to 
act, its object must be unattained, till the niece was also dead, to 
whom montoni knew that his wife’s estate must descend. emily 
remember the words, which had informed her, that the contest 
estate in france would devolve to her, if madame montoni died, without 
consign them to her husband, and the former obstinate perseverance 
of her aunt made it too probable, that she had, to the last, withheld 
them. at this instant, recollect barnardine’s manner, on the 
preceding night, she now believed, what she had then fancied, that it 
express malignant triumph. she shudder at the recollection, which 
confirmed her fears, and determined not to meet him on the terrace. 
soon after, she was inclined to consider these suspicion as the 
extravagant exaggeration of a timid and harass mind, and could not 
believe montoni liable to such preposterous depravity as that of 
destroying, from one motive, his wife and her niece. she blame herself 
for suffering her romantic imagination to carry her so far beyond the 
bounds of probability, and determined to endeavour to check its rapid 
flights, lest they should sometimes extend into madness. still, 
however, she shrunk from the thought of meeting barnardine, on the 
terrace, at midnight; and still the wish to be relieved from this 
terrible suspense, concerning her aunt, to see her, and to sooth her 
sufferings, made her hesitate what to do. 

“yet how is it possible, annette, i can pass to the terrace at that 
hour?” said she, recollect herself, “the sentinel will stop me, and 
signor montoni will hear of the affair.” 

“o ma’amselle! that is well thought of,” reply annette. “that is what 
barnardine told me about. he gave me this key, and bade me say it 
unlock the door at the end of the vaulted gallery, that open near the 
end of the east rampart, so that you need not pass any of the men on 
watch. he bade me say, too, that his reason for request you to come 
to the terrace was, because he could take you to the place you want to 
go to, without opening the great door of the hall, which grate so 
heavily.” 

emily’s spirits were somewhat calm by this explanation, which seem 
to be honestly given to annette. “but why did he desire i would come 
alone, annette?” said she. 

“why that was what i ask him myself, ma’amselle. say i, ‘why is my 
young lady to come alone?—surely i may come with her!—what harm can _i_ 
do?’ but he said ‘no—no—i tell you not,’ in his gruff way. nay, say i, 
i have been trust in as great affair as this, i warrant, and it’s a 
hard matter if i can’t keep a secret now. still he would say nothing 
but—‘no—no—no.’ well, say i, if you will only trust me, i will tell 
you a great secret, that was told me a month ago, and i have never 
open my lip about it yet—so you need not be afraid of telling me. 
but all would not do. then, ma’amselle, i went so far as to offer him a 
beautiful new sequin, that ludovico gave me for a keepsake, and i would 
not have part with it for all st. marco’s place; but even that would 
not do! now what can be the reason of this? but i know, you know, 
ma’am, who you are go to see.” 

“pray did barnardine tell you this?” 

“he! no, ma’amselle, that he did not.” 

emily enquire who did, but annette showed, that she _could_ keep a 
secret. 

during the remainder of the day, emily’s mind was agitate with doubt 
and fear and contrary determinations, on the subject of meeting this 
barnardine on the rampart, and submit herself to his guidance, she 
scarcely knew whither. pity for her aunt and anxiety for herself 
alternate sway her determination, and night came, before she had 
decided upon her conduct. she heard the castle clock strike 
eleven—twelve—and yet her mind wavered. the time, however, was now 
come, when she could hesitate no longer: and then the interest she felt 
for her aunt overcame other considerations, and, bidding annette follow 
her to the outer door of the vaulted gallery, and there await her 
return, she descended from her chamber. the castle was perfectly still, 
and the great hall, where so lately she had witness a scene of 
dreadful contention, now return only the whisper footstep of the 
two solitary figures gliding fearful between the pillars, and gleam 
only to the feeble lamp they carried. emily, deceive by the long 
shadow of the pillar and by the catching lights between, often 
stopped, imagine she saw some person, moving in the distant obscurity 
of the perspective; and, as she pass these pillars, she fear to 
turn her eyes toward them, almost expect to see a figure start out 
from behind their broad shaft. she reached, however, the vaulted 
gallery, without interruption, but unclosed its outer door with a 
tremble hand, and, charge annette not to quit it and to keep it a 
little open, that she might be heard if she called, she deliver to 
her the lamp, which she did not dare to take herself because of the men 
on watch, and, alone, step out upon the dark terrace. everything was 
so still, that she feared, lest her own light steps should be heard by 
the distant sentinels, and she walk cautious towards the spot, 
where she had before met barnardine, listen for a sound, and look 
onward through the gloom in search of him. at length, she was startle 
by a deep voice, that spoke near her, and she paused, uncertain whether 
it was his, till it spoke again, and she then recognise the hollow 
tone of barnardine, who had been punctual to the moment, and was at 
the appoint place, rest on the rampart wall. after chide her for 
not coming sooner, and saying that he had been wait nearly half an 
hour, he desire emily, who made no reply, to follow him to the door 
through which he had enter the terrace. 

while he unlock it, she look back to that she had left, and, 
observing the ray of the lamp stream through a small opening, was 
certain, that annette was still there. but her remote situation could 
little befriend emily, after she had quit the terrace; and, when 
barnardine unclosed the gate, the dismal aspect of the passage beyond, 
shown by a torch burning on the pavement, made her shrink from 
following him alone, and she refuse to go, unless annette might 
accompany her. this, however, barnardine absolutely refuse to permit, 
mingle at the same time with his refusal such artful circumstances to 
heighten the pity and curiosity of emily towards her aunt, that she, at 
length, consent to follow him alone to the portal. 

he then took up the torch, and led her along the passage, at the 
extremity of which he unlock another door, whence they descended, a 
few steps, into a chapel, which, as barnardine held up the torch to 
light her, emily observe to be in ruins, and she immediately 
recollect a former conversation of annette, concerning it, with very 
unpleasant emotions. she look fearful on the almost roofless walls, 
green with damps, and on the gothic points of the windows, where the 
ivy and the briony had long supply the place of glass, and ran 
mantle among the broken capitals of some columns, that had once 
support the roof. barnardine stumble over the broken pavement, and 
his voice, as he utter a sudden oath, was return in hollow echoes, 
that made it more terrific. emily’s heart sunk; but she still follow 
him, and he turn out of what had been the principal aisle of the 
chapel. “down these steps, lady,” said barnardine, as he descended a 
flight, which appear to lead into the vaults; but emily pause on the 
top, and demanded, in a tremulous tone, whither he was conduct her. 

“to the portal,” said barnardine. 

“cannot we go through the chapel to the portal?” said emily. 

“no, signora, that leads to the inner court, which i don’t choose to 
unlock. this way, and we shall reach the outer court presently.” 

emily still hesitated; fear not only to go on, but, since she had 
gone thus far, to irritate barnardine by refuse to go further. 

“come, lady,” said the man, who had nearly reach the bottom of the 
flight, “make a little haste; i cannot wait here all night.” 

“whither do these steps lead?” said emily, yet pausing. 

“to the portal,” repeated barnardine, in an angry tone, “i will wait no 
longer.” as he said this, he move on with the light, and emily, 
fear to provoke him by further delay, reluctantly followed. from the 
steps, they proceed through a passage, adjoin the vaults, the 
wall of which were drop with unwholesome dews, and the vapours, 
that crept along the ground, made the torch burn so dimly, that emily 
expect every moment to see it extinguished, and barnardine could 
scarcely find his way. as they advanced, these vapours thickened, and 
barnardine, believe the torch was expiring, stop for a moment to 
trim it. as he then rest against a pair of iron gates, that open 
from the passage, emily saw, by uncertain flash of light, the vault 
beyond, and, near her, heap of earth, that seem to surround an open 
grave. such an object, in such a scene, would, at any time, have 
disturbed her; but now she was shock by an instantaneous 
presentiment, that this was the grave of her unfortunate aunt, and that 
the treacherous barnardine was leading herself to destruction. the 
obscure and terrible place, to which he had conduct her, seem to 
justify the thought; it was a place suit for murder, a receptacle for 
the dead, where a deed of horror might be committed, and no vestige 
appear to proclaim it. emily was so overwhelm with terror, that, for 
a moment, she was unable to determine what conduct to pursue. she then 
considered that it would be vain to attempt an escape from barnardine 
by flight, since the length and the intricacy of the way she had pass 
would soon enable him to overtake her, who was unacquainted with the 
turnings, and whose feeble would not suffer her to run long with 
swiftness. she fear equally to irritate him by a disclosure of her 
suspicions, which a refusal to accompany him further certainly would 
do; and, since she was already as much in his power as it was possible 
she could be, if she proceeded, she, at length, determined to suppress, 
as far as she could, the appearance of apprehension, and to follow 
silent whither he design to lead her. pale with horror and anxiety, 
she now wait till barnardine had trim the torch, and, as her sight 
glance again upon the grave, she could not forbear enquiring, for whom 
it was prepared. he took his eyes from the torch, and fixed them upon 
her face without speaking. she faint repeated the question, but the 
man, shake the torch, pass on; and she followed, trembling, to a 
second flight of steps, have ascend which, a door deliver them 
into the first court of the castle. as they cross it, the light 
show the high black wall around them, fringe with long grass and 
dank weeds, that found a scanty soil among the moulder stones; the 
heavy buttresses, with, here and there, between them, a narrow grate, 
that admitted a free circulation of air to the court, the massy iron 
gates, that led to the castle, whose cluster turret appear above, 
and, opposite, the huge tower and arch of the portal itself. in this 
scene the large, uncouth person of barnardine, bearing the torch, 
form a characteristic figure. this barnardine was wrapt in a long 
dark cloak, which scarcely allow the kind of half-boots, or sandals, 
that were lace upon his legs, to appear, and show only the point of 
a broad sword, which he usually wore, slung in a belt across his 
shoulders. on his head was a heavy flat velvet cap, somewhat resemble 
a turban, in which was a short feather; the visage beneath it show 
strong features, and a countenance furrow with the lines of cunning 
and darken by habitual discontent. 

the view of the court, however, reanimate emily, who, as she cross 
silent towards the portal, began to hope, that her own fears, and not 
the treachery of barnardine, had deceive her. she look anxious up 
at the first casement, that appear above the lofty arch of the 
portcullis; but it was dark, and she enquired, whether it belong to 
the chamber where madame montoni was confined. emily spoke low, and 
barnardine, perhaps, did not hear her question, for he return no 
answer; and they, soon after, enter the postern door of the gateway, 
which brought them to the foot of a narrow staircase that wound up one 
of the towers. 

“up this staircase the signora lies,” said barnardine. 

“lies!” repeated emily faintly, as she began to ascend. 

“she lie in the upper chamber,” said barnardine. 

as they pass up, the wind, which pour through the narrow cavity 
in the wall, made the torch flare, and it threw a strong gleam upon 
the grim and sallow countenance of barnardine, and discover more 
fully the desolate of the place—the rough stone walls, the spiral 
stairs, black with age, and a suit of ancient armour, with an iron 
visor, that hung upon the walls, and appear a trophy of some former 
victory. 

have reach a landing-place, “you may wait here, lady,” said he, 
apply a key to the door of a chamber, “while i go up, and tell the 
signora you are coming.” 

“that ceremony is unnecessary,” reply emily, “my aunt will rejoice to 
see me.” 

“i am not so sure of that,” said barnardine, point to the room he 
had opened: “come in here, lady, while i step up.” 

emily, surprise and somewhat shocked, did not dare to oppose him 
further, but, as he was turning away with the torch, desire he would 
not leave her in darkness. he look around, and, observing a tripod 
lamp, that stood on the stairs, light and gave it to emily, who 
step forward into a large old chamber, and he closed the door. as 
she listen anxious to his depart steps, she thought he 
descended, instead of ascending, the stairs; but the gust of wind, 
that whistle round the portal, would not allow her to hear distinct 
any other sound. still, however, she listened, and, perceive no step 
in the room above, where he had affirm madame montoni to be, her 
anxiety increased, though she considered, that the thickness of the 
floor in this strong building might prevent any sound reach her from 
the upper chamber. the next moment, in a pause of the wind, she 
distinguished barnardine’s step descend to the court, and then 
thought she heard his voice; but, the rising gust again overcome 
other sounds, emily, to be certain on this point, move soft to the 
door, which, on attempt to open it, she discover was fastened. all 
the horrid apprehensions, that had lately assail her, return at 
this instant with redouble force, and no long appear like the 
exaggeration of a timid spirit, but seem to have been sent to warn 
her of her fate. she now did not doubt, that madame montoni had been 
murdered, perhaps in this very chamber; or that she herself was brought 
hither for the same purpose. the countenance, the manners and the 
recollect words of barnardine, when he had spoken of her aunt, 
confirmed her worst fears. for some moments, she was incapable of 
considering of any means, by which she might attempt an escape. still 
she listened, but heard footstep neither on the stairs, nor in the 
room above; she thought, however, that she again distinguished 
barnardine’s voice below, and went to a grate window, that open upon 
the court, to enquire further. here, she plainly heard his hoarse 
accents, mingle with the blast, that swept by, but they were lost 
again so quickly, that their meaning could not be interpreted; and then 
the light of a torch, which seem to issue from the portal below, 
flash across the court, and the long shadow of a man, who was under 
the arch-way, appear upon the pavement. emily, from the huge of 
this sudden portrait, conclude it to be that of barnardine; but other 
deep tones, which pass in the wind, soon convinced her he was not 
alone, and that his companion was not a person very liable to pity. 

when her spirits had overcome the first shock of her situation, she 
held up the lamp to examine, if the chamber afford a possibility of 
an escape. it was a spacious room, whose walls, wainscot with rough 
oak, show no case but the grate one, which emily had left, and 
no other door than that, by which she had entered. the feeble ray of 
the lamp, however, did not allow her to see at once its full extent; 
she perceive no furniture, except, indeed, an iron chair, fasten in 
the centre of the chamber, immediately over which, depend on a chain 
from the ceiling, hung an iron ring. have gaze upon these, for some 
time, with wonder and horror, she next observe iron bar below, made 
for the purpose of confine the feet, and on the arms of the chair 
were ring of the same metal. as she continue to survey them, she 
concluded, that they were instrument of torture, and it struck her, 
that some poor wretch had once been fasten in this chair, and had 
there been starve to death. she was chill by the thought; but, what 
was her agony, when, in the next moment, it occur to her, that her 
aunt might have been one of these victims, and that she herself might 
be the next! an acute pain seize her head, she was scarcely able to 
hold the lamp, and, look round for support, was seating herself, 
unconsciously, in the iron chair itself; but sudden perceive where 
she was, she start from it in horror, and sprung towards a remote end 
of the room. here again she look round for a seat to sustain her, and 
perceive only a dark curtain, which, descend from the ceiling to 
the floor, was drawn along the whole side of the chamber. ill as she 
was, the appearance of this curtain struck her, and she pause to gaze 
upon it, in wonder and apprehension. 

it seem to conceal a recess of the chamber; she wished, yet dreaded, 
to lift it, and to discover what it veiled: twice she was withheld by a 
recollection of the terrible spectacle her daring hand had formerly 
unveil in an apartment of the castle, till, sudden conjecturing, 
that it conceal the body of her murder aunt, she seize it, in a 
fit of desperation, and drew it aside. beyond, appear a corpse, 
stretch on a kind of low couch, which was crimson with human blood, 
as was the floor beneath. the features, deform by death, were ghastly 
and horrible, and more than one livid wound appear in the face. 
emily, bend over the body, gazed, for a moment, with an eager, 
frenzied eye; but, in the next, the lamp drop from her hand, and she 
fell senseless at the foot of the couch. 

when her senses returned, she found herself surround by men, among 
whom was barnardine, who were lift her from the floor, and then bore 
her along the chamber. she was sensible of what passed, but the extreme 
languor of her spirits did not permit her to speak, or move, or even to 
feel any distinct fear. they carry her down the staircase, by which 
she had ascended; when, have reach the arch-way, they stopped, and 
one of the men, taking the torch from barnardine, open a small door, 
that was cut in the great gate, and, as he step out upon the road, 
the light he bore show several men on horseback, in waiting. whether 
it was the fresh of the air, that revive emily, or that the 
object she now saw rouse the spirit of alarm, she sudden spoke, and 
made an ineffectual effort to disengage herself from the grasp of the 
ruffians, who held her. 

barnardine, meanwhile, call loud for the torch, while distant 
voice answered, and several person approached, and, in the same 
instant, a light flash upon the court of the castle. again he 
vociferate for the torch, and the men hurried emily through the gate. 
at a short distance, under the shelter of the castle walls, she 
perceive the fellow, who had taken the light from the porter, holding 
it to a man, busy employ in alter the saddle of a horse, round 
which were several horsemen, look on, whose harsh features received 
the full glare of the torch; while the broken ground beneath them, the 
opposite walls, with the tuft shrubs, that overhung their summits, 
and an embattled watch-tower above, were redden with the gleam, 
which, fade gradual away, left the remote rampart and the wood 
below to the obscurity of night. 

“what do you waste time for, there?” said barnardine with an oath, as 
he approach the horsemen. “dispatch—dispatch!” 

“the saddle will be ready in a minute,” reply the man who was 
buckle it, at whom barnardine now swore again, for his negligence, 
and emily, calling feeble for help, was hurried towards the horses, 
while the ruffian dispute on which to place her, the one design for 
her not being ready. at this moment a cluster of lights issue from the 
great gates, and she immediately heard the shrill voice of annette 
above those of several other persons, who advanced. in the same moment, 
she distinguished montoni and cavigni, follow by a number of 
ruffian-faced fellows, to whom she no long look with terror, but 
with hope, for, at this instant, she did not tremble at the thought of 
any dangers, that might await her within the castle, whence so lately, 
and so anxious she had wish to escape. those, which threaten her 
from without, had engross all her apprehensions. 

a short contest ensue between the parties, in which that of montoni, 
however, were presently victors, and the horsemen, perceive that 
numbers were against them, and being, perhaps, not very warm 
interested in the affair they had undertaken, gallop off, while 
barnardine had run far enough to be lost in the darkness, and emily was 
led back into the castle. as she repass the courts, the remembrance 
of what she had seen in the portal-chamber came, with all its horror, 
to her mind; and when, soon after, she heard the gate close, that shut 
her once more within the castle walls, she shudder for herself, and, 
almost forget the danger she had escaped, could scarcely think, 
that anything less precious than liberty and peace was to be found 
beyond them. 

montoni ordered emily to await him in the cedar parlour, whither he 
soon followed, and then stern question her on this mysterious 
affair. though she now view him with horror, as the murder of her 
aunt, and scarcely knew what she said in reply to his impatient 
enquiries, her answer and her manner convinced him, that she had not 
taken a voluntary part in the late scheme, and he dismiss her upon 
the appearance of his servants, whom he had ordered to attend, that he 
might enquire further into the affair, and discover those, who had been 
accomplice in it. 

emily had been some time in her apartment, before the tumult of her 
mind allow her to remember several of the past circumstances. then, 
again, the dead form, which the curtain in the portal-chamber had 
disclosed, came to her fancy, and she utter a groan, which terrify 
annette the more, as emily forbore to satisfy her curiosity, on the 
subject of it, for she fear to trust her with so fatal a secret, lest 
her indiscretion should call down the immediate vengeance of montoni on 
herself. 

thus compel to bear within her own mind the whole horror of the 
secret, that oppress it, her reason seem to totter under the 
intolerable weight. she often fixed a wild and vacant look on annette, 
and, when she spoke, either did not hear her, or answer from the 
purpose. long fit of abstraction succeeded; annette spoke repeatedly, 
but her voice seem not to make any impression on the sense of the 
long agitate emily, who sat fixed and silent, except that, now and 
then, she heave a heavy sigh, but without tears. 

terrify at her condition, annette, at length, left the room, to 
inform montoni of it, who had just dismiss his servants, without 
have made any discovery on the subject of his enquiry. the wild 
description, which this girl now gave of emily, induce him to follow 
her immediately to the chamber. 

at the sound of his voice, emily turn her eyes, and a gleam of 
recollection seem to shoot athwart her mind, for she immediately rose 
from her seat, and move slow to a remote part of the room. he spoke 
to her in accent somewhat soften from their usual harshness, but she 
regard him with a kind of half curious, half terrify look, and 
answer only “yes,” to whatever he said. her mind still seem to 
retain no other impression, than that of fear. 

of this disorder annette could give no explanation, and montoni, have 
attempted, for some time, to persuade emily to talk, retired, after 
order annette to remain with her, during the night, and to inform 
him, in the morning, of her condition. 

when he was gone, emily again came forward, and ask who it was, that 
had been there to disturb her. annette said it was the signor—signor 
montoni. emily repeated the name after her, several times, as if she 
did not recollect it, and then sudden groaned, and relapse into 
abstraction. 

with some difficulty, annette led her to the bed, which emily examine 
with an eager, frenzied eye, before she lay down, and then, pointing, 
turn with shudder emotion, to annette, who, now more terrified, 
went towards the door, that she might bring one of the female servant 
to pass the night with them; but emily, observing her going, call her 
by name, and then in the naturally soft and plaintive tone of her 
voice, begged, that she, too, would not forsake her.—“for since my 
father died,” add she, sighing, “everybody forsake me.” 

“your father, ma’amselle!” said annette, “he was dead before you knew 
me.” 

“he was, indeed!” rejoin emily, and her tear began to flow. she now 
wept silent and long, after which, becoming quite calm, she at length 
sunk to sleep, annette have had discretion enough not to interrupt 
her tears. this girl, as affectionate as she was simple, lost in these 
moments all her former fear of remain in the chamber, and watch 
alone by emily, during the whole night. 



chapter ii 

unfold 
what worlds, or what vast regions, hold 
th’ immortal mind, that hath forsook 
her mansion in this fleshly nook! 
il penseroso 


emily’s mind was refresh by sleep. on waking in the morning, she 
look with surprise on annette, who sat sleep in a chair beside the 
bed, and then endeavour to recollect herself; but the circumstances 
of the preceding night were swept from her memory, which seem to 
retain no trace of what had passed, and she was still gaze with 
surprise on annette, when the latter awoke. 

“o dear ma’amselle! do you know me?” cry she. 

“know you! certainly,” reply emily, “you are annette; but why are you 
sitting by me thus?” 

“o you have been very ill, ma’amselle,—very ill indeed! and i am sure i 
thought—” 

“this is very strange!” said emily, still try to recollect the 
past.—“but i think i do remember, that my fancy has been haunt by 
frightful dreams. good god!” she added, sudden starting—“surely it 
was nothing more than a dream!” 

she fixed a terrify look upon annette, who, intend to quiet her, 
said “yes, ma’amselle, it was more than a dream, but it is all over 
now.” 

“she _is_ murdered, then!” said emily in an inward voice, and 
shudder instantaneously. annette screamed; for, being ignorant of 
the circumstance to which emily referred, she attribute her manner to 
a disorder fancy; but, when she had explain to what her own speech 
alluded, emily, recollect the attempt that had been made to carry 
her off, ask if the contrive of it had been discovered. annette 
replied, that he had not, though he might easily be guess at; and 
then told emily she might thank her for her deliverance, who, 
endeavour to command the emotion, which the remembrance of her aunt 
had occasioned, appear calm to listen to annette, though, in truth, 
she heard scarcely a word that was said. 

“and so, ma’amselle,” continue the latter, “i was determined to be 
even with barnardine for refuse to tell me the secret, by finding it 
out myself; so i watch you, on the terrace, and, as soon as he had 
open the door at the end, i stole out from the castle, to try to 
follow you; for, say i, i am sure no good can be planned, or why all 
this secrecy? so, sure enough, he had not bolt the door after him, 
and, when i open it, i saw, by the glimmer of the torch, at the other 
end of the passage, which way you were going. i follow the light, at 
a distance, till you came to the vault of the chapel, and there i was 
afraid to go further, for i had heard strange things about these 
vaults. but then, again, i was afraid to go back, all in darkness, by 
myself; so by the time barnardine had trim the light, i had resolve 
to follow you, and i did so, till you came to the great court, and 
there i was afraid he would see me; so i stop at the door again, and 
watch you across to the gates, and, when you were gone up the stairs, 
i whipt after. there, as i stood under the gateway, i heard horses’ 
feet without, and several men talking; and i heard them swear at 
barnardine for not bring you out, and just then, he had like to have 
caught me, for he came down the stairs again, and i had hardly time to 
get out of his way. but i had heard enough of his secret now, and i 
determined to be even with him, and to save you, too, ma’amselle, for i 
guess it to be some new scheme of count morano, though he was gone 
away. i ran into the castle, but i had hard work to find my way through 
the passage under the chapel, and what is very strange, i quite forgot 
to look for the ghost they had told me about, though i would not go 
into that place again by myself for all the world! lucky the signor 
and signor cavigni were up, so we had soon a train at our heels, 
sufficient to frighten that barnardine and his rogues, all together.” 

annette cease to speak, but emily still appear to listen. at length 
she said, suddenly, “i think i will go to him myself;—where is he?” 

annette ask who was meant. 

“signor montoni,” reply emily. “i would speak with him;” and annette, 
now remember the order he had given, on the preceding night, 
respecting her young lady, rose, and said she would seek him herself. 

this honest girl’s suspicion of count morano were perfectly just; 
emily, too, when she thought on the scheme, had attribute it to him; 
and montoni, who had not a doubt on this subject, also, began to 
believe, that it was by the direction of morano, that poison had 
formerly been mingle with his wine. 

the profession of repentance, which morano had made to emily, under 
the anguish of his wound, was sincere at the moment he offer them; 
but he had mistaken the subject of his sorrow, for, while he thought he 
was condemn the cruelty of his late design, he was lament only 
the state of suffering, to which it had reduce him. as these 
suffering abated, his former view revived, till, his health being 
re-established, he again found himself ready for enterprise and 
difficulty. the porter of the castle, who had serve him, on a former 
occasion, willing accept a second bribe; and, have concerted the 
means of drawing emily to the gates, morano public left the hamlet, 
whither he had been carry after the affray, and withdrew with his 
people to another at several mile distance. from thence, on a night 
agree upon by barnardine, who had discover from the thoughtless 
prattle of annette, the most probable means of decoy emily, the 
count sent back his servant to the castle, while he await her 
arrival at the hamlet, with an intention of carry her immediately to 
venice. how this, his second scheme, was frustrated, has already 
appeared; but the violent, and various passion with which this italy 
lover was now agitated, on his return to that city, can only be 
imagined. 

annette have made her report to montoni of emily’s health and of her 
request to see him, he replied, that she might attend him in the cedar 
room, in about an hour. it was on the subject, that pressed so heavy 
on her mind, that emily wish to speak to him, yet she did not 
distinct know what good purpose this could answer, and sometimes she 
even recoil in horror from the expectation of his presence. she 
wished, also, to petition, though she scarcely dare to believe the 
request would be granted, that he would permit her, since her aunt was 
no more, to return to her native country. 

as the moment of interview approached, her agitation increase so much, 
that she almost resolve to excuse herself under what could scarcely be 
call a pretence of illness; and, when she considered what could be 
said, either concerning herself, or the fate of her aunt, she was 
equally hopeless as to the event of her entreaty, and terrify as to 
its effect upon the vengeful spirit of montoni. yet, to pretend 
ignorance of her death, appeared, in some degree, to be share its 
criminality, and, indeed, this event was the only ground, on which 
emily could rest her petition for leave udolpho. 

while her thought thus wavered, a message was brought, importing, that 
montoni could not see her, till the next day; and her spirits were then 
relieved, for a moment, from an almost intolerable weight of 
apprehension. annette said, she fancy the chevalier were go out 
to the war again, for the courtyard was fill with horses, and she 
heard, that the rest of the party, who went out before, were expect 
at the castle. “and i heard one of the soldiers, too,” add she, “say 
to his comrade, that he would warrant they’d bring home a rare deal of 
booty.—so, think i, if the signor can, with a safe conscience, send 
his people out a-robbing—why it is no business of mine. i only wish i 
was once safe out of this castle; and, if it had not been for poor 
ludovico’s sake, i would have let count morano’s people run away with 
us both, for it would have been serving you a good turn, ma’amselle, as 
well as myself.” 

annette might have continue thus talk for hour for any 
interrupt she would have received from emily, who was silent, 
inattentive, absorb in thought, and pass the whole of this day in a 
kind of solemn tranquillity, such as is often the result of faculty 
overstraine by suffering. 

when night returned, emily recollect the mysterious strain of music, 
that she had lately heard, in which she still felt some degree of 
interest, and of which she hope to hear again the soothe sweetness. 
the influence of superstition now gain on the weakness of her 
long-harassed mind; she looked, with enthusiast expectation, to the 
guardian spirit of her father, and, have dismiss annette for the 
night, determined to watch alone for their return. it was not yet, 
however, near the time when she had heard the music on a former night, 
and anxious to call off her thought from distressing subjects, she sat 
down with one of the few books, that she had brought from france; but 
her mind, refuse control, became restless and agitated, and she went 
often to the case to listen for a sound. once, she thought she 
heard a voice, but then, everything without the case remain 
still, she concluded, that her fancy had deceive her. 

thus pass the time, till twelve o’clock, soon after which the distant 
sounds, that murmur through the castle, ceased, and sleep seem to 
reign over all. emily then seat herself at the casement, where she 
was soon recall from the reverie, into which she sunk, by very 
unusual sounds, not of music, but like the low mourning of some person 
in distress. as she listened, her heart falter in terror, and she 
became convinced, that the former sound was more than imaginary. still, 
at intervals, she heard a kind of feeble lamentation, and sought to 
discover whence it came. there were several rooms underneath, adjoin 
the rampart, which had been long shut up, and, as the sound probably 
rose from one of these, she lean from the case to observe, 
whether any light was visible there. the chambers, as far as she could 
perceive, were quite dark, but, at a little distance, on the rampart 
below, she thought she saw something moving. 

the faint twilight, which the stars shed, did not enable her to 
distinguish what it was; but she judge it to be a sentinel, on watch, 
and she remove her light to a remote part of the chamber, that she 
might escape notice, during her further observation. 

the same object still appeared. presently, it advanced along the 
rampart, towards her window, and she then distinguished something like 
a human form, but the silence, with which it moved, convinced her it 
was no sentinel. as it drew near, she hesitate whether to retire; a 
thrill curiosity inclined her to stay, but a dread of she scarcely 
knew what warn her to withdraw. 

while she paused, the figure came opposite to her casement, and was 
stationary. everything remain quiet; she had not heard even a 
foot-fall; and the solemnity of this silence, with the mysterious form 
she saw, subdued her spirits, so that she was moving from the casement, 
when, on a sudden, she observe the figure start away, and glide down 
the rampart, after which it was soon lost in the obscurity of night. 
emily continue to gaze, for some time, on the way it had passed, and 
then retired within her chamber, muse on this strange circumstance, 
and scarcely doubting, that she had witness a supernatural 
appearance. 

when her spirits recover composure, she look round for some other 
explanation. remember what she had heard of the daring enterprise 
of montoni, it occur to her, that she had just seen some unhappy 
person, who, have been plunder by his banditti, was brought hither 
a captive; and that the music she had formerly heard, came from him. 
yet, if they had plunder him, it still appear improbable, that they 
should have brought him to the castle, and it was also more consistent 
with the manners of banditti to murder those they rob, than to make 
them prisoners. but what, more than any other circumstance, 
contradict the supposition, that it was a prisoner, was that it 
wander on the terrace, without a guard: a consideration, which made 
her dismiss immediately her first surmise. 

afterwards, she was inclined to believe, that count morano had obtain 
admittance into the castle; but she soon recollect the difficulty 
and dangers, that must have oppose such an enterprise, and that, if he 
had so far succeeded, to come alone and in silence to her case at 
midnight was not the conduct he would have adopted, particularly since 
the private staircase, communicate with her apartment, was known to 
him; neither would he have utter the dismal sound she had heard. 

another suggestion represented, that this might be some person, who had 
designs upon the castle; but the mournful sound destroyed, also, that 
probability. thus, enquiry only perplexed her. who, or what, it could 
be that haunt this lonely hour, complain in such doleful accent 
and in such sweet music (for she was still inclined to believe, that 
the former strain and the late appearance were connected), she had no 
means of ascertaining; and imagination again assume her empire, and 
rouse the mystery of superstition. 

she determined, however, to watch on the following night, when her 
doubt might, perhaps, be clear up; and she almost resolve to 
address the figure, if it should appear again. 



chapter iii 

such are those thick and gloomy shadow damp, 
oft seen in charnel-vaults and sepulchres, 
lingering, and sitting, by a new-made grave. 
milton 


on the following day, montoni sent a second excuse to emily, who was 
surprise at the circumstance. “this is very strange!” said she to 
herself. “his conscience tell him the purport of my visit, and he 
defer it, to avoid an explanation.” she now almost resolve to throw 
herself in his way, but terror checked the intention, and this day 
passed, as the preceding one, with emily, except that a degree of awful 
expectation, concerning the approach night, now somewhat disturbed 
the dreadful calm that had pervade her mind. 

towards evening, the second part of the band, which had made the first 
excursion among the mountains, return to the castle, where, as they 
enter the courts, emily, in her remote chamber, heard their loud 
shout and strain of exultation, like the orgy of fury over some 
horrid sacrifice. she even fear they were about to commit some 
barbarous deed; a conjecture from which, however, annette soon relieved 
her, by telling, that the people were only exult over the plunder 
they had brought with them. this circumstance still further confirmed 
her in the belief, that montoni had really commence to be a captain of 
banditti, and meant to retrieve his broken fortune by the plunder of 
travellers! indeed, when she considered all the circumstances of his 
situation—in an armed, and almost inaccessible castle, retired far 
among the recess of wild and solitary mountains, along whose distant 
skirt were scattered towns, and cities, whither wealthy traveller 
were continual passing—this appear to be the situation of all 
other most suit for the success of scheme of rapine, and she 
yield to the strange thought, that montoni was become a captain of 
robbers. his character also, unprincipled, dauntless, cruel and 
enterprising, seem to fit him for the situation. delight in the 
tumult and in the struggle of life, he was equally a stranger to pity 
and to fear; his very courage was a sort of animal ferocity; not the 
noble impulse of a principle, such as inspirit the mind against the 
oppressor, in the cause of the oppressed; but a constitutional 
hardiness of nerve, that cannot feel, and that, therefore, cannot fear. 

emily’s supposition, however natural, was in part erroneous, for she 
was a stranger to the state of this country and to the circumstances, 
under which its frequent war were partly conducted. the revenue of 
the many states of italy being, at that time, insufficient to the 
support of standing armies, even during the short periods, which the 
turbulent habit both of the government and the people permit to 
pass in peace, an order of men arose not known in our age, and but 
faint describe in the history of their own. of the soldiers, 
disband at the end of every war, few return to the safe, but 
unprofitable occupations, then usual in peace. sometimes they pass 
into other countries, and mingle with armies, which still kept the 
field. sometimes they form themselves into band of robbers, and 
occupy remote fortresses, where their desperate character, the 
weakness of the government which they offended, and the certainty, 
that they could be recall to the armies, when their presence should 
be again wanted, prevent them from being much pursue by the civil 
power; and, sometimes, they attach themselves to the fortune of a 
popular chief, by whom they were led into the service of any state, 
which could settle with him the price of their valour. from this latter 
practice arose their name—_condottieri_; a term formidable all over 
italy, for a period, which conclude in the early part of the 
seventeenth century, but of which it is not so easy to ascertain the 
commencement. 

contest between the small states were then, for the most part, 
affair of enterprise alone, and the probability of success were 
estimated, not from the skill, but from the personal courage of the 
general, and the soldiers. the ability, which was necessary to the 
conduct of tedious operations, was little valued. it was enough to know 
how a party might be led towards their enemies, with the greatest 
secrecy, or conduct from them in the compactest order. the officer 
was to precipitate himself into a situation, where, but for his 
example, the soldier might not have ventured; and, as the oppose 
party knew little of each other’s strength, the event of the day was 
frequent determined by the bold of the first movements. in such 
service the _condottieri_ were eminent, and in these, where plunder 
always follow success, their character acquire a mixture of 
intrepid and profligacy, which awed even those whom they served. 

when they were not thus engaged, their chief had usually his own 
fortress, in which, or in its neighbourhood, they enjoy an irksome 
rest; and, though their wants were, at one time, partly supply from 
the property of the inhabitants, the lavish distribution of their 
plunder at others, prevent them from being obnoxious; and the 
peasant of such district gradual share the character of their 
warlike visitors. the neighbouring government sometimes professed, but 
seldom endeavoured, to suppress these military communities; both 
because it was difficult to do so, and because a disguise protection 
of them ensured, for the service of their wars, a body of men, who 
could not otherwise be so cheap maintained, or so perfectly 
qualified. the commander sometimes even rely so far upon this policy 
of the several powers, as to frequent their capitals; and montoni, 
have met them in the game party of venice and padua, conceive a 
desire to emulate their characters, before his ruin fortune tempt 
him to adopt their practices. it was for the arrangement of his present 
plan of life, that the midnight council were held at his mansion in 
venice, and at which orsino and some other member of the present 
community then assist with suggestions, which they had since execute 
with the wreck of their fortunes. 

on the return of night, emily resume her station at the casement. 
there was now a moon; and, as it rose over the tuft woods, its yellow 
light serve to show the lonely terrace and the surrounding objects, 
more distinctly, than the twilight of the stars had done, and promise 
emily to assist her observations, should the mysterious form return. on 
this subject, she again waver in conjecture, and hesitate whether to 
speak to the figure, to which a strong and almost irresistible interest 
urge her; but terror, at intervals, made her reluctant to do so. 

“if this is a person who has designs upon the castle,” said she, “my 
curiosity may prove fatal to me; yet the mysterious music, and the 
lamentation i heard, must surely have proceed from him: if so, he 
cannot be an enemy.” 

she then thought of her unfortunate aunt, and, shudder with grief 
and horror, the suggestion of imagination seize her mind with all the 
force of truth, and she believed, that the form she had seen was 
supernatural. she trembled, breathe with difficulty, an icy cold 
touched her cheeks, and her fear for a while overcame her judgment. 
her resolution now forsook her, and she determined, if the figure 
should appear, not to speak to it. 

thus the time passed, as she sat at her casement, awed by expectation, 
and by the gloom and still of midnight; for she saw obscure in 
the moonlight only the mountain and woods, a cluster of towers, that 
form the west angle of the castle, and the terrace below; and heard 
no sound, except, now and then, the lonely watch-word, pass by the 
sentinel on duty, and afterwards the steps of the men who came to 
relieve guard, and whom she knew at a distance on the rampart by their 
pikes, that glitter in the moonbeam, and then, by the few short 
words, in which they hail their fellow of the night. emily retired 
within her chamber, while they pass the casement. when she return 
to it, all was again quiet. it was now very late, she was weary with 
watching, and began to doubt the reality of what she had seen on the 
preceding night; but she still linger at the window, for her mind was 
too perturb to admit of sleep. the moon shone with a clear lustre, 
that afford her a complete view of the terrace; but she saw only a 
solitary sentinel, pace at one end of it; and, at length, tired with 
expectation, she withdrew to seek rest. 

such, however, was the impression, left on her mind by the music, and 
the complain she had formerly heard, as well as by the figure, which 
she fancy she had seen, that she determined to repeat the watch, on 
the following night. 

montoni, on the next day, took no notice of emily’s appoint visit, 
but she, more anxious than before to see him, sent annette to enquire, 
at what hour he would admit her. he mention eleven o’clock, and emily 
was punctual to the moment; at which she call up all her fortitude to 
support the shock of his presence and the dreadful recollection it 
enforced. he was with several of his officers, in the cedar room; on 
observing whom she paused; and her agitation increased, while he 
continue to converse with them, apparently not observing her, till 
some of his officers, turning round, saw emily, and utter an 
exclamation. she was hasty retiring, when montoni’s voice arrest 
her, and, in a faultere accent, she said,—“i would speak with you, 
signor montoni, if you are at leisure.” 

“these are my friends,” he replied, “whatever you would say, they may 
hear.” 

emily, without replying, turn from the rude gaze of the chevaliers, 
and montoni then follow her to the hall, whence he led her to a small 
room, of which he shut the door with violence. as she look on his 
dark countenance, she again thought she saw the murder of her aunt; 
and her mind was so convulse with horror, that she had not power to 
recall thought enough to explain the purport of her visit; and to trust 
herself with the mention of madame montoni was more than she dared. 

montoni at length impatient enquire what she had to say? “i have no 
time for trifling,” he added, “my moments are important.” 

emily then told him, that she wish to return to france, and came to 
beg, that he would permit her to do so.—but when he look surprised, 
and enquire for the motive of the request, she hesitated, became pale 
than before, trembled, and had nearly sunk at his feet. he observe her 
emotion, with apparent indifference, and interrupt the silence by 
telling her, he must be gone. emily, however, recall her spirits 
sufficient to enable her to repeat her request. and, when montoni 
absolutely refuse it, her slumber mind was roused. 

“i can no long remain here with propriety, sir,” said she, “and i may 
be allow to ask, by what right you detain me.” 

“it is my will that you remain here,” said montoni, lay his hand on 
the door to go; “let that suffice you.” 

emily, considering that she had no appeal from this will, forbore to 
dispute his right, and made a feeble effort to persuade him to be just. 
“while my aunt lived, sir,” said she, in a tremulous voice, “my 
residence here was not improper; but now, that she is no more, i may 
surely be permit to depart. my stay cannot benefit you, sir, and 
will only distress me.” 

“who told you, that madame montoni was dead?” said montoni, with an 
inquisitive eye. emily hesitated, for nobody had told her so, and she 
did not dare to avow the have seen that spectacle in the 
portal-chamber, which had compel her to the belief. 

“who told you so?” he repeated, more sternly. 

“alas! i know it too well,” reply emily: “spare me on this terrible 
subject!” 

she sat down on a bench to support herself. 

“if you wish to see her,” said montoni, “you may; she lie in the east 
turret.” 

he now left the room, without await her reply, and return to the 
cedar chamber, where such of the chevalier as had not before seen 
emily, began to rally him, on the discovery they had made; but montoni 
did not appear disposed to bear this mirth, and they change the 
subject. 

have talk with the subtle orsino, on the plan of an excursion, 
which he meditate for a future day, his friend advised, that they 
should lie in wait for the enemy, which verezzi impetuous opposed, 
reproach orsino with want of spirit, and swore, that, if montoni 
would let him lead on fifty men, he would conquer all that should 
oppose him. 

orsino smile contemptuously; montoni smile too, but he also listened. 
verezzi then proceed with vehement declamation and assertion, till he 
was stop by an argument of orsino, which he knew not how to answer 
better than by invective. his fierce spirit detest the cunning 
caution of orsino, whom he constant opposed, and whose inveterate, 
though silent, hatred he had long ago incurred. and montoni was a calm 
observer of both, whose different qualifications he knew, and how to 
bend their opposite character to the perfection of his own designs. but 
verezzi, in the heat of opposition, now did not scruple to accuse 
orsino of cowardice, at which the countenance of the latter, while he 
made no reply, was overspread with a livid paleness; and montoni, who 
watch his lurk eye, saw him put his hand hasty into his bosom. 
but verezzi, whose face, glowing with crimson, form a striking 
contrast to the complexion of orsino, remark not the action, and 
continue bold declaim against coward to cavigni, who was sly 
laugh at his vehemence, and at the silent mortification of orsino, 
when the latter, retiring a few steps behind, drew forth a stilletto to 
stab his adversary in the back. montoni arrest his half-extended arm, 
and, with a significant look, made him return the poniard into his 
bosom, unseen by all except himself; for most of the party were 
dispute at a distant window, on the situation of a dell where they 
meant to form an ambuscade. 

when verezzi had turn round, the deadly hatred, express on the 
features of his opponent, raising, for the first time, a suspicion of 
his intention, he laid his hand on his sword, and then, seeming to 
recollect himself, strode up to montoni. 

“signor,” said he, with a significant look at orsino, “we are not a 
band of assassins; if you have business for brave men, employ me on 
this expedition: you shall have the last drop of my blood; if you have 
only work for cowards—keep him,” point to orsino, “and let me quit 
udolpho.” 

orsino, still more incensed, again drew forth his stilletto, and rush 
towards verezzi, who, at the same instant, advanced with his sword, 
when montoni and the rest of the party interfere and separate them. 

“this is the conduct of a boy,” said montoni to verezzi, “not of a man: 
be more moderate in your speech.” 

“moderation is the virtue of cowards,” retort verezzi; “they are 
moderate in everything—but in fear.” 

“i accept your words,” said montoni, turning upon him with a fierce and 
haughty look, and drawing his sword out of the scabbard. 

“with all my heart,” cry verezzi, “though i did not mean them for 
you.” 

he direct a pass at montoni; and, while they fought, the villain 
orsino made another attempt to stab verezzi, and was again prevented. 

the combatant were, at length, separated; and, after a very long and 
violent dispute, reconciled. montoni then left the room with orsino, 
whom he detain in private consultation for a considerable time. 

emily, meanwhile, stun by the last words of montoni, forgot, for the 
moment, his declaration, that she should continue in the castle, while 
she thought of her unfortunate aunt, who, he had said, was laid in the 
east turret. in suffering the remains of his wife to lie thus long 
unburied, there appear a degree of brutality more shocking than she 
had suspect even montoni could practise. 

after a long struggle, she determined to accept his permission to visit 
the turret, and to take a last look of her ill-fated aunt: with which 
design she return to her chamber, and, while she wait for annette 
to accompany her, endeavour to acquire fortitude sufficient to 
support her through the approach scene; for, though she tremble to 
encounter it, she knew that to remember the performance of this last 
act of duty would hereafter afford her console satisfaction. 

annette came, and emily mention her purpose, from which the former 
endeavour to dissuade her, though without effect, and annette was, 
with much difficulty, prevail upon to accompany her to the turret; 
but no consideration could make her promise to enter the chamber of 
death. 

they now left the corridor, and, have reach the foot of the 
staircase, which emily had formerly ascended, annette declared she 
would go no further, and emily proceed alone. when she saw the track 
of blood, which she had before observed, her spirits fainted, and, 
being compel to rest on the stairs, she almost determined to proceed 
no further. the pause of a few moments restore her resolution, and she 
went on. 

as she drew near the landing-place, upon which the upper chamber 
opened, she remembered, that the door was formerly fastened, and 
apprehended, that it might still be so. in this expectation, however, 
she was mistaken; for the door open at once, into a dusky and silent 
chamber, round which she fearful looked, and then slow advanced, 
when a hollow voice spoke. emily, who was unable to speak, or to move 
from the spot, utter no sound of terror. the voice spoke again; and, 
then, thinking that it resemble that of madame montoni, emily’s 
spirits were instantly roused; she rush towards a bed, that stood in 
a remote part of the room, and drew aside the curtains. within, 
appear a pale and emaciate face. she start back, then again 
advanced, shudder as she took up the skeleton hand, that lay 
stretch upon the quilt; then let it drop, and then view the face 
with a long, unsettled gaze. it was that of madame montoni, though so 
change by illness, that the resemblance of what it had been, could 
scarcely be trace in what it now appeared. she was still alive, and, 
raise her heavy eyes, she turn them on her niece. 

“where have you been so long?” said she, in the same tone, “i thought 
you had forsaken me.” 

“do you indeed live,” said emily, at length, “or is this but a terrible 
apparition?” she received no answer, and again she snatch up the 
hand. “this is substance,” she exclaimed, “but it is cold—cold as 
marble!” she let it fall. “o, if you really live, speak!” said emily, 
in a voice of desperation, “that i may not lose my senses—say you know 
me!” 

“i do live,” reply madame montoni, “but—i feel that i am about to 
die.” 

emily clasp the hand she held, more eagerly, and groaned. they were 
both silent for some moments. then emily endeavour to soothe her, and 
enquire what had reduce her to this present deplorable state. 

montoni, when he remove her to the turret under the improbable 
suspicion of have attempt his life, had ordered the men employ on 
the occasion, to observe a strict secrecy concerning her. to this he 
was influence by a double motive. he meant to debar her from the 
comfort of emily’s visits, and to secure an opportunity of private 
dispatch her, should any new circumstances occur to confirm the 
present suggestion of his suspect mind. his consciousness of the 
hatred he deserve it was natural enough should at first lead him to 
attribute to her the attempt that had been made upon his life; and, 
though there was no other reason to believe that she was concerned in 
that atrocious design, his suspicion remained; he continue to confine 
her in the turret, under a strict guard; and, without pity or remorse, 
had suffer her to lie, forlorn and neglected, under a rage fever, 
till it had reduce her to the present state. 

the track of blood, which emily had seen on the stairs, had flow from 
the unbound wound of one of the men employ to carry madame montoni, 
and which he had received in the late affray. at night these men, 
have contented themselves with secure the door of their prisoner’s 
room, had retired from guard; and then it was, that emily, at the time 
of her first enquiry, had found the turret so silent and deserted. 

when she had attempt to open the door of the chamber, her aunt was 
sleeping, and this occasion the silence, which had contribute to 
delude her into a belief, that she was no more; yet had her terror 
permit her to persevere long in the call, she would probably have 
awaken madame montoni, and have been spare much suffering. the 
spectacle in the portal-chamber, which afterwards confirmed emily’s 
horrible suspicion, was the corpse of a man, who had fallen in the 
affray, and the same which had been borne into the servants’ hall, 
where she took refuge from the tumult. this man had linger under his 
wound for some days; and, soon after his death, his body had been 
remove on the couch, on which he died, for interment in the vault 
beneath the chapel, through which emily and barnardine had pass to 
the chamber. 

emily, after ask madame montoni a thousand question concerning 
herself, left her, and sought montoni; for the more solemn interest she 
felt for her aunt, made her now regardless of the resentment her 
remonstrance might draw upon herself, and of the improbability of his 
grant what she meant to entreat. 

“madame montoni is now dying, sir,” said emily, as soon as she saw 
him—“your resentment, surely will not pursue her to the last moment! 
suffer her to be remove from that forlorn room to her own apartment, 
and to have necessary comfort administered.” 

“of what service will that be, if she is dying?” said montoni, with 
apparent indifference. 

“the service, at leave, of saving you, sir, from a few of those pang 
of conscience you must suffer, when you shall be in the same 
situation,” said emily, with imprudent indignation, of which montoni 
soon made her sensible, by commanding her to quit his presence. then, 
forget her resentment, and impress only by compassion for the 
piteous state of her aunt, die without succour, she submit to 
humble herself to montoni, and to adopt every persuasive means, that 
might induce him to relent towards his wife. 

for a considerable time he was proof against all she said, and all she 
looked; but at length the divinity of pity, beam in emily’s eyes, 
seem to touch his heart. he turn away, ashamed of his better 
feelings, half sullen and half relenting; but finally consented, that 
his wife should be remove to her own apartment, and that emily should 
attend her. dread equally, that this relief might arrive too late, 
and that montoni might retract his concession, emily scarcely staid to 
thank him for it, but, assist by annette, she quick prepared madame 
montoni’s bed, and they carry her a cordial, that might enable her 
feeble frame to sustain the fatigue of a removal. 

madame was scarcely arrive in her own apartment, when an order was 
given by her husband, that she should remain in the turret; but emily, 
thankful that she had made such dispatch, hasten to inform him of it, 
as well as that a second removal would instantly prove fatal, and he 
suffer his wife to continue where she was. 

during this day, emily never left madame montoni, except to prepare 
such little nourish things as she judge necessary to sustain her, 
and which madame montoni received with quiet acquiescence, though she 
seem sensible that they could not save her from approach 
dissolution, and scarcely appear to wish for life. emily meanwhile 
watch over her with the most tender solicitude, no long seeing her 
imperious aunt in the poor object before her, but the sister of her 
late beloved father, in a situation that call for all her compassion 
and kindness. when night came, she determined to sit up with her aunt, 
but this the latter positively forbade, commanding her to retire to 
rest, and annette alone to remain in her chamber. rest was, indeed, 
necessary to emily, whose spirits and frame were equally weary by the 
occurrence and exertion of the day; but she would not leave madame 
montoni, till after the turn of midnight, a period then thought so 
critical by the physicians. 

soon after twelve, have enjoin annette to be wakeful, and to call 
her, should any change appear for the worse, emily sorrowful bade 
madame montoni good night, and withdrew to her chamber. her spirits 
were more than usually depressed by the piteous condition of her aunt, 
whose recovery she scarcely dare to expect. to her own misfortune she 
saw no period, inclose as she was, in a remote castle, beyond the 
reach of any friends, had she possessed such, and beyond the pity even 
of strangers; while she knew herself to be in the power of a man 
capable of any action, which his interest, or his ambition, might 
suggest. 

occupy by melancholy reflection and by anticipation as sad, she did 
not retire immediately to rest, but lean thoughtful on her open 
casement. the scene before her of wood and mountains, repose in the 
moonlight, form a regret contrast with the state of her mind; but 
the lonely murmur of these woods, and the view of this sleep 
landscape, gradual soothe her emotion and soften her to tears. 

she continue to weep, for some time, lost to everything, but to a 
gentle sense of her misfortunes. when she, at length, took the 
handkerchief from her eyes, she perceived, before her, on the terrace 
below, the figure she had formerly observed, which stood fixed and 
silent, immediately opposite to her casement. on perceive it, she 
start back, and terror for some time overcame curiosity;—at length, 
she return to the casement, and still the figure was before it, which 
she now compel herself to observe, but was utterly unable to speak, 
as she had formerly intended. the moon shone with a clear light, and it 
was, perhaps, the agitation of her mind, that prevent her 
distinguishing, with any degree of accuracy, the form before her. it 
was still stationary, and she began to doubt, whether it was really 
animated. 

her scattered thought were now so far return as to remind her, that 
her light expose her to dangerous observation, and she was step 
back to remove it, when she perceive the figure move, and then wave 
what seem to be its arm, as if to beckon her; and, while she gazed, 
fixed in fear, it repeated the action. she now attempt to speak, but 
the words die on her lips, and she went from the case to remove 
her light; as she was do which, she heard, from without, a faint 
groan. listening, but not daring to return, she presently heard it 
repeated. 

“good god!—what can this mean!” said she. 

again she listened, but the sound came no more; and, after a long 
interval of silence, she recover courage enough to go to the 
casement, when she again saw the same appearance! it beckon again, 
and again utter a low sound. 

“that groan was surely human!” said she. “i _will_ speak.” “who is it,” 
cry emily in a faint voice, “that wander at this late hour?” 

the figure raise its head but sudden start away, and glide down 
the terrace. she watch it, for a long while, passing swift in the 
moonlight, but heard no footstep, till a sentinel from the other 
extremity of the rampart walk slow along. the man stop under her 
window, and, look up, call her by name. she was retiring 
precipitately, but, a second summons induce her to reply, the soldier 
then respectful ask if she had seen anything pass. on her 
answering, that she had; he said no more, but walk away down the 
terrace, emily following him with her eyes, till he was lost in the 
distance. but, as he was on guard, she knew he could not go beyond the 
rampart, and, therefore, resolve to await his return. 

soon after, his voice was heard, at a distance, calling loudly; and 
then a voice still more distant answered, and, in the next moment, the 
watch-word was given, and pass along the terrace. as the soldier 
move hasty under the casement, she call to enquire what had 
happened, but they pass without regarding her. 

emily’s thought return to the figure she had seen, “it cannot be a 
person, who has designs upon the castle,” said she; “such a one would 
conduct himself very differently. he would not venture where sentinel 
were on watch, nor fix himself opposite to a window, where he perceive 
he must be observed; much less would he beckon, or utter a sound of 
complaint. yet it cannot be a prisoner, for how could he obtain the 
opportunity to wander thus?” 

if she had been subject to vanity, she might have supposed this figure 
to be some inhabitant of the castle, who wander under her case in 
the hope of seeing her, and of being allow to declare his admiration; 
but this opinion never occur to emily, and, if it had, she would 
have dismiss it as improbable, on considering, that, when the 
opportunity of speak had occurred, it had been suffer to pass in 
silence; and that, even at the moment in which she had spoken, the form 
had abrupt quit the place. 

while she mused, two sentinel walk up the rampart in earnest 
conversation, of which she caught a few words, and learned from these, 
that one of their comrade had fallen down senseless. soon after, three 
other soldier appear slow advance from the bottom of the 
terrace, but she heard only a low voice, that came at intervals. as 
they drew near, she perceive this to be the voice of him, who walk 
in the middle, apparently support by his comrades; and she again 
call to them, enquiring what had happened. at the sound of her voice, 
they stopped, and look up, while she repeated her question, and was 
told, that roberto, their fellow of the watch, had been seize with a 
fit, and that his cry, as he fell, had cause a false alarm. 

“is he subject to fits?” said emily. 

“yes, signora,” reply roberto; “but if i had not, what i saw was 
enough to have frightened the pope himself.” 

“what was it?” enquire emily, trembling. 

“i cannot tell what it was, lady, or what i saw, or how it vanished,” 
reply the soldier, who seem to shudder at the recollection. 

“was it the person, whom you follow down the rampart, that has 
occasion you this alarm?” said emily, endeavour to conceal her 
own. 

“person!” exclaim the man,—“it was the devil, and this is not the 
first time i have seen him!” 

“nor will it be the last,” observe one of his comrades, laughing. 

“no, no, i warrant not,” said another. 

“well,” rejoin roberto, “you may be as merry now, as you please; you 
were none so jocose the other night, sebastian, when you were on watch 
with launcelot.” 

“launcelot need not talk of that,” reply sebastian, “let him remember 
how he stood trembling, and unable to give the _word_, till the man was 
gone. if the man had not come so silent upon us, i would have seize 
him, and soon made him tell who he was.” 

“what man?” enquire emily. 

“it was no man, lady,” said launcelot, who stood by, “but the devil 
himself, as my comrade says. what man, who do not live in the castle, 
could get within the wall at midnight? why, i might just as well 
pretend to march to venice, and get among all the senators, when they 
are counselling; and i warrant i should have more chance of get out 
again alive, than any fellow, that we should catch within the gate 
after dark. so i think i have prove plainly enough, that this can be 
nobody that lives out of the castle; and now i will prove, that it can 
be nobody that lives in the castle—for, if he did—why should he be 
afraid to be seen? so after this, i hope nobody will pretend to tell me 
it was anybody. no, i say again, by holy pope! it was the devil, and 
sebastian, there, know this is not the first time we have seen him.” 

“when did you see the figure, then, before?” said emily half smiling, 
who, though she thought the conversation somewhat too much, felt an 
interest, which would not permit her to conclude it. 

“about a week ago, lady,” said sebastian, taking up the story. 

“and where?” 

“on the rampart, lady, higher up.” 

“did you pursue it, that it fled?” 

“no, signora. launcelot and i were on watch together, and everything 
was so still, you might have heard a mouse stir, when, suddenly, 
launcelot says—sebastian! do you see nothing? i turn my head a little 
to the left, as it might be—thus. no, say i. hush! said 
launcelot,—look yonder—just by the last cannon on the rampart! i 
looked, and then thought i did see something move; but there being no 
light, but what the stars gave, i could not be certain. we stood quite 
silent, to watch it, and presently saw something pass along the castle 
wall just opposite to us!” 

“why did you not seize it, then?” cry a soldier, who had scarcely 
spoken till now. 

“aye, why did you not seize it?” said roberto. 

“you should have been there to have done that,” reply sebastian. “you 
would have been bold enough to have taken it by the throat, though it 
had been the devil himself; we could not take such a liberty, perhaps, 
because we are not so well acquaint with him, as you are. but, as i 
was saying, it stole by us so quickly, that we had not time to get rid 
of our surprise, before it was gone. then, we knew it was in vain to 
follow. we kept constant watch all that night, but we saw it no more. 
next morning, we told some of our comrades, who were on duty on other 
parts of the ramparts, what we had seen; but they had seen nothing, and 
laugh at us, and it was not till tonight, that the same figure walk 
again.” 

“where did you lose it, friend?” said emily to roberto. 

“when i left you, lady,” reply the man, “you might see me go down the 
rampart, but it was not till i reach the east terrace, that i saw 
anything. then, the moon shining bright, i saw something like a shadow 
flit before me, as it were, at some distance. i stopped, when i 
turn the corner of the east tower, where i had seen this figure not a 
moment before,—but it was gone! as i stood, look through the old 
arch which leads to the east rampart, and where i am sure it had 
passed, i heard, all of a sudden, such a sound!—it was not like a 
groan, or a cry, or a shout, or anything i ever heard in my life. i 
heard it only once, and that was enough for me; for i know nothing that 
happen after, till i found my comrades, here, about me.” 

“come,” said sebastian, “let us go to our posts—the moon is setting. 
good night, lady!” 

“aye, let us go,” rejoin roberto. “good night, lady.” 

“good night; the holy mother guard you!” said emily, as she closed her 
case and retired to reflect upon the strange circumstance that had 
just occurred, connect which with what had happen on former 
nights, she endeavour to derive from the whole something more 
positive, than conjecture. but her imagination was inflamed, while her 
judgment was not enlightened, and the terror of superstition again 
pervade her mind. 



chapter iv 

there is one within, 
besides the things that we have heard and seen, 
recount most horrid sights, seen by the watch. 
julius cÆsar 


in the morning, emily found madame montoni nearly in the same 
condition, as on the preceding night; she had slept little, and that 
little had not refresh her; she smile on her niece, and seem 
cheer by her presence, but spoke only a few words, and never name 
montoni, who, however, soon after, enter the room. his wife, when she 
understood that he was there, appear much agitated, but was entire 
silent, till emily rose from a chair at the bedside, when she begged, 
in a feeble voice, that she would not leave her. 

the visit of montoni was not to sooth his wife, whom he knew to be 
dying, or to console, or to ask her forgiveness, but to make a last 
effort to procure that signature, which would transfer her estate in 
languedoc, after her death, to him rather than to emily. this was a 
scene, that exhibited, on his part, his usual inhumanity, and, on that 
of madame montoni, a persevering spirit, contend with a feeble 
frame; while emily repeatedly declared to him her willing to resign 
all claim to those estates, rather than that the last hour of her aunt 
should be disturbed by contention. montoni, however, did not leave the 
room, till his wife, exhaust by the obstinate dispute, had fainted, 
and she lay so long insensible, that emily began to fear that the spark 
of life was extinguished. at length, she revived, and, look feeble 
up at her niece, whose tear were fall over her, made an effort to 
speak, but her words were unintelligible, and emily again apprehend 
she was dying. afterwards, however, she recover her speech, and, 
being somewhat restore by a cordial, converse for a considerable 
time, on the subject of her estate in france, with clear and 
precision. she direct her niece where to find some papers relative to 
them, which she had hitherto conceal from the search of montoni, and 
earnest charged her never to suffer these papers to escape her. 

soon after this conversation, madame montoni sunk into a dose, and 
continue slumbering, till evening, when she seem better than she had 
been since her removal from the turret. emily never left her, for a 
moment, till long after midnight, and even then would not have quit 
the room, had not her aunt entreated, that she would retire to rest. 
she then obeyed, the more willingly, because her patient appear 
somewhat recruit by sleep; and, give annette the same injunction, 
as on the preceding night, she withdrew to her own apartment. but her 
spirits were wakeful and agitated, and, finding it impossible to sleep, 
she determined to watch, once more, for the mysterious appearance, that 
had so much interested and alarm her. 

it was now the second watch of the night, and about the time when the 
figure had before appeared. emily heard the passing steps of the 
sentinels, on the rampart, as they change guard; and, when all was 
again silent, she took her station at the casement, leave her lamp in 
a remote part of the chamber, that she might escape notice from 
without. the moon gave a faint and uncertain light, for heavy vapours 
surround it, and, often rolling over the disk, left the scene below 
in total darkness. it was in one of these moments of obscurity, that 
she observe a small and lambent flame, moving at some distance on the 
terrace. while she gazed, it disappeared, and, the moon again emerge 
from the lurid and heavy thunder clouds, she turn her attention to 
the heavens, where the vivid lightning dart from cloud to cloud, and 
flash silent on the wood below. she love to catch, in the 
momentary gleam, the gloomy landscape. sometimes, a cloud open its 
light upon a distant mountain, and, while the sudden splendour 
illumine all its recess of rock and wood, the rest of the scene 
remain in deep shadow; at others, partial features of the castle were 
reveal by the glimpse—the ancient arch leading to the east rampart, 
the turret above, or the fortification beyond; and then, perhaps, the 
whole edifice with all its towers, its dark massy wall and pointed 
case would appear, and vanish in an instant. 

emily, look again upon the rampart, perceive the flame she had seen 
before; it move onward; and, soon after, she thought she heard a 
footstep. the light appear and disappear frequently, while, as she 
watched, it glide under her casements, and, at the same instant, she 
was certain, that a footstep passed, but the dark did not permit 
her to distinguish any object except the flame. it move away, and 
then, by a gleam of lightning, she perceive some person on the 
terrace. all the anxiety of the preceding night returned. this person 
advanced, and the play flame alternate appear and vanished. 
emily wish to speak, to end her doubts, whether this figure were 
human or supernatural; but her courage fail as often as she attempt 
utterance, till the light move again under the casement, and she 
faint demanded, who passed. 

“a friend,” reply a voice. 

“what friend?” said emily, somewhat encourage “who are you, and what 
is that light you carry?” 

“i am anthonio, one of the signor’s soldiers,” reply the voice. 

“and what is that taper light you bear?” said emily, “see how it 
darts upwards,—and now it vanishes!” 

“this light, lady,” said the soldier, “has appear tonight as you see 
it, on the point of my lance, ever since i have been on watch; but what 
it means i cannot tell.” 

“this is very strange!” said emily. 

“my fellow-guard,” continue the man, “has the same flame on his arms; 
he say he has sometimes seen it before. i never did; i am but lately 
come to the castle, for i have not been long a soldier.” 

“how do your comrade account for it?” said emily. 

“he say it is an omen, lady, and bode no good.” 

“and what harm can it bode?” rejoin emily. 

“he know not so much as that, lady.” 

whether emily was alarm by this omen, or not, she certainly was 
relieved from much terror by discover this man to be only a soldier 
on duty, and it immediately occur to her, that it might be he, who 
had occasion so much alarm on the preceding night. there were, 
however, some circumstances, that still require explanation. as far as 
she could judge by the faint moonlight, that had assist her 
observation, the figure she had seen did not resemble this man either 
in shape or size; besides, she was certain it had carry no arms. the 
silence of its steps, if steps it had, the moan sounds, too, which 
it had uttered, and its strange disappearance, were circumstances of 
mysterious import, that did not apply, with probability, to a soldier 
engaged in the duty of his guard. 

she now enquire of the sentinel, whether he had seen any person 
besides his fellow watch, walking on the terrace, about midnight; and 
then brief related what she had herself observed. 

“i was not on guard that night, lady,” reply the man, “but i heard of 
what happened. there are amongst us, who believe strange things. 
strange stories, too, have long been told of this castle, but it is no 
business of mine to repeat them; and, for my part, i have no reason to 
complain; our chief do nobly by us.” 

“i commend your prudence,” said emily. “good night, and accept this 
from me,” she added, throw him a small piece of coin, and then 
close the case to put an end to the discourse. 

when he was gone, she open it again, listen with a gloomy pleasure 
to the distant thunder, that began to murmur among the mountains, and 
watch the arrowy lightnings, which broke over the remote scene. the 
peal thunder roll onward, and then, reverbe by the mountains, 
other thunder seem to answer from the opposite horizon; while the 
accumulate clouds, entire conceal the moon, assume a red 
sulphureous tinge, that foretold a violent storm. 

emily remain at her casement, till the vivid lightning, that now, 
every instant, reveal the wide horizon and the landscape below, made 
it no long safe to do so, and she went to her couch; but, unable to 
compose her mind to sleep, still listen in silent awe to the 
tremendous sounds, that seem to shake the castle to its foundation. 

she had continue thus for a considerable time, when, amidst the uproar 
of the storm, she thought she heard a voice, and, raise herself to 
listen, saw the chamber door open, and annette enter with a countenance 
of wild affright. 

“she is dying, ma’amselle, my lady is dying!” said she. 

emily start up, and ran to madame montoni’s room. when she entered, 
her aunt appear to have fainted, for she was quite still, and 
insensible; and emily with a strength of mind, that refuse to yield to 
grief, while any duty require her activity, applied every means that 
seem likely to restore her. but the last struggle was over—she was 
gone for ever. 

when emily perceived, that all her effort were ineffectual, she 
interrogate the terrify annette, and learned, that madame montoni 
had fallen into a doze soon after emily’s departure, in which she had 
continued, until a few minutes before her death. 

“i wondered, ma’amselle,” said annette, “what was the reason my lady 
did not seem frightened at the thunder, when i was so terrified, and i 
went often to the bed to speak to her, but she appear to be asleep; 
till presently i heard a strange noise, and, on go to her, saw she 
was dying.” 

emily, at this recital, shed tears. she had no doubt but that the 
violent change in the air, which the tempest produced, had effect 
this fatal one, on the exhaust frame of madame montoni. 

after some deliberation, she determined that montoni should not be 
informed of this event till the morning, for she considered, that he 
might, perhaps, utter some inhuman expressions, such as in the present 
temper of her spirits she could not bear. with annette alone, 
therefore, whom she encourage by her own example, she perform some 
of the last solemn offices for the dead, and compel herself to watch 
during the night, by the body of her deceased aunt. during this solemn 
period, render more awful by the tremendous storm that shook the air, 
she frequent address herself to heaven for support and protection, 
and her pious prayers, we may believe, were accept of the god, that 
giveth comfort. 



chapter v 

the midnight clock has toll’d; and hark, the bell 
of death beat slow! heard ye the note profound? 
it pause now; and now with rising knell 
fling to the hollow gale its sullen sound. 
mason 


when montoni was informed of the death of his wife, and considered that 
she had die without give him the signature so necessary to the 
accomplishment of his wishes, no sense of decency restrained the 
expression of his resentment. emily anxious avoid his presence, and 
watched, during two days and two nights, with little intermission, by 
the corpse of her late aunt. her mind deep impress with the unhappy 
fate of this object, she forgot all her faults, her unjust and 
imperious conduct to herself; and, remember only her sufferings, 
thought of her only with tender compassion. sometimes, however, she 
could not avoid muse upon the strange infatuation that had prove so 
fatal to her aunt, and had involved herself in a labyrinth of 
misfortune, from which she saw no means of escaping,—the marriage with 
montoni. but, when she considered this circumstance, it was “more in 
sorrow than in anger,”—more for the purpose of indulge lamentation, 
than reproach. 

in her pious care she was not disturbed by montoni, who not only 
avoid the chamber, where the remains of his wife were laid, but that 
part of the castle adjoin to it, as if he had apprehend a 
contagion in death. he seem to have given no orders respecting the 
funeral, and emily began to fear he meant to offer a new insult to the 
memory of madame montoni; but from this apprehension she was relieved, 
when, on the evening of the second day, annette informed her, that the 
interment was to take place that night. she knew, that montoni would 
not attend; and it was so very grievous to her to think that the 
remains of her unfortunate aunt would pass to the grave without one 
relative, or friend to pay them the last decent rites, that she 
determined to be deter by no consideration for herself, from 
observing this duty. she would otherwise have shrunk from the 
circumstance of following them to the cold vault, to which they were to 
be carry by men whose air and countenance seem to stamp them for 
murderers, at the midnight hour of silence and privacy, which montoni 
had chosen for committing, if possible, to oblivion the relique of a 
woman, whom his harsh conduct had, at least, contribute to destroy. 

emily, shudder with emotion of horror and grief, assist by 
annette, prepared the corpse for interment; and, have wrapt it in 
cerements, and cover it with a winding-sheet, they watch beside it, 
till past midnight, when they heard the approach footstep of the 
men, who were to lay it in its earthy bed. it was with difficulty that 
emily overcame her emotion, when, the door of the chamber being thrown 
open, their gloomy countenance were seen by the glare of the torch 
they carried, and two of them, without speaking, lift the body on 
their shoulders, while the third preceding them with the light, 
descended through the castle towards the grave, which was in the lower 
vault of the chapel within the castle walls. 

they had to cross two courts, towards the east wing of the castle, 
which, adjoin the chapel, was, like it, in ruins: but the silence 
and gloom of these court had now little power over emily’s mind, 
occupy as it was, with more mournful ideas; and she scarcely heard 
the low and dismal hoot of the night-birds, that roost among the 
ivied battlements of the ruin, or perceive the still flit of the 
bat, which frequent cross her way. but, when, have enter the 
chapel, and pass between the moulder pillar of the aisles, the 
bearer stop at a flight of steps, that led down to a low arch 
door, and, their comrade have descended to unlock it, she saw 
imperfect the gloomy abyss beyond;—saw the corpse of her aunt carry 
down these steps, and the ruffian-like figure, that stood with a torch 
at the bottom to receive it—all her fortitude was lost in emotion of 
inexpressible grief and terror. she turn to lean upon annette, who 
was cold and tremble like herself, and she linger so long on the 
summit of the flight, that the gleam of the torch began to die away on 
the pillar of the chapel, and the men were almost beyond her view. 
then, the gloom around her awakening other fears, and a sense of what 
she considered to be her duty overcome her reluctance, she descended 
to the vaults, following the echo of footstep and the faint ray, that 
pierce the darkness, till the harsh grating of a distant door, that 
was open to receive the corpse, again appall her. 

after the pause of a moment, she went on, and, as she enter the 
vaults, saw between the arches, at some distance, the men lay down the 
body near the edge of an open grave, where stood another of montoni’s 
men and a priest, whom she did not observe, till he began the burial 
service; then, lift her eyes from the ground, she saw the venerable 
figure of the friar, and heard him in a low voice, equally solemn and 
affecting, perform the service for the dead. at the moment, in which 
they let down the body into the earth, the scene was such as only the 
dark pencil of a domenichino, perhaps, could have done justice to. the 
fierce features and wild dress of the _condottieri_, bend with their 
torch over the grave, into which the corpse was descending, were 
contrast by the venerable figure of the monk, wrapt in long black 
garments, his cowl thrown back from his pale face, on which the light 
gleam strong show the lines of affliction soften by piety, and 
the few grey locks, which time had spare on his temples: while, beside 
him, stood the soft form of emily, who lean for support upon 
annette; her face half averted, and shade by a thin veil, that fell 
over her figure; and her mild and beautiful countenance fixed in grief 
so solemn as admitted not of tears, while she thus saw committed 
untimely to the earth her last relative and friend. the gleams, thrown 
between the arch of the vaults, where, here and there, the broken 
ground marked the spot in which other body had been recently 
interred, and the general obscurity beyond were circumstances, that 
alone would have led on the imagination of a spectator to scene more 
horrible than even that which was picture at the grave of the 
misguided and unfortunate madame montoni. 

when the service was over, the friar regard emily with attention and 
surprise, and look as if he wish to speak to her, but was 
restrained by the presence of the _condottieri_, who, as they now led 
the way to the courts, amuse themselves with joke upon his holy 
order, which he endure in silence, demanding only to be conduct 
safe to his convent, and to which emily listen with concern and 
even horror. when they reach the court, the monk gave her his 
blessing, and, after a lingering look of pity, turn away to the 
portal, whither one of the men carry a torch; while annette, lighting 
another, precede emily to her apartment. the appearance of the friar 
and the expression of tender compassion, with which he had regard 
her, had interested emily, who, though it was at her earnest 
supplication, that montoni had consent to allow a priest to perform 
the last rite for his deceased wife, knew nothing concerning this 
person, till annette now informed her, that he belong to a monastery, 
situated among the mountain at a few mile distance. the superior, who 
regard montoni and his associates, not only with aversion, but with 
terror, had probably fear to offend him by refuse his request, and 
had, therefore, ordered a monk to officiate at the funeral, who, with 
the meek spirit of a christian, had overcome his reluctance to enter 
the wall of such a castle, by the wish of perform what he 
considered to be his duty, and, as the chapel was built on consecrate 
ground, had not object to commit to it the remains of the late 
unhappy madame montoni. 

several days pass with emily in total seclusion, and in a state of 
mind partake both of terror for herself, and grief for the departed. 
she, at length, determined to make other effort to persuade montoni to 
permit her return to france. why he should wish to detain her, she 
could scarcely dare to conjecture; but it was too certain that he did 
so, and the absolute refusal he had formerly given to her departure 
allow her little hope, that he would now consent to it. but the 
horror, which his presence inspired, made her defer, from day to day, 
the mention of this subject; and at last she was awaken from her 
inactive only by a message from him, desire her attendance at a 
certain hour. she began to hope he meant to resign, now that her aunt 
was no more, the authority he had usurp over her; till she 
recollected, that the estates, which had occasion so much contention, 
were now hers, and she then fear montoni was about to employ some 
stratagem for obtain them, and that he would detain her his 
prisoner, till he succeeded. this thought, instead of overcome her 
with despondency, rouse all the latent powers of her fortitude into 
action; and the property, which she would willing have resigned to 
secure the peace of her aunt, she resolved, that no common suffering 
of her own should ever compel her to give to montoni. for valancourt’s 
sake also she determined to preserve these estates, since they would 
afford that competency, by which she hope to secure the comfort of 
their future lives. as she thought of this, she indulge the tender 
of tears, and anticipate the delight of that moment, when, with 
affectionate generosity, she might tell him they were his own. she saw 
the smile, that light up his features—the affectionate regard, which 
spoke at once his joy and thanks; and, at this instant, she believe 
she could brave any suffering, which the evil spirit of montoni might 
be prepare for her. remember then, for the first time since her 
aunt’s death, the papers relative to the estate in question, she 
determined to search for them, as soon as her interview with montoni 
was over. 

with these resolution she met him at the appoint time, and wait to 
hear his intention before she renew her request. with him were orsino 
and another officer, and both were standing near a table, cover with 
papers, which he appear to be examining. 

“i sent for you, emily,” said montoni, raise his head, “that you 
might be a witness in some business, which i am transact with my 
friend orsino. all that is require of you will be to sign your name to 
this paper:” he then took one up, hurried unintelligib over some 
lines, and, lay it before her on the table, offer her a pen. she 
took it, and was go to write—when the design of montoni came upon 
her mind like a flash of lightning; she trembled, let the pen fall, and 
refuse to sign what she had not read. montoni affected to laugh at her 
scruples, and, taking up the paper, again pretended to read; but emily, 
who still tremble on perceive her danger, and was astonished, that 
her own credulous had so nearly betray her, positively refuse to 
sign any paper whatever. montoni, for some time, persevere in 
affecting to ridicule this refusal; but, when he perceive by her 
steady perseverance, that she understood his design, he change his 
manner, and bade her follow him to another room. there he told her, 
that he had been willing to spare himself and her the trouble of 
useless contest, in an affair, where his will was justice, and where 
she should find it law; and had, therefore, endeavour to persuade, 
rather than to compel, her to the practice of her duty. 

“i, as the husband of the late signora montoni,” he added, “am the heir 
of all she possessed; the estates, therefore, which she refuse to me 
in her life-time, can no long be withheld, and, for your own sake, i 
would undeceive you, respecting a foolish assertion she once made to 
you in my hearing—that these estate would be yours, if she die 
without resign them to me. she knew at that moment, she had no power 
to withhold them from me, after her decease; and i think you have more 
sense, than to provoke my resentment by advance an unjust claim. i am 
not in the habit of flattering, and you will, therefore, receive, as 
sincere, the praise i bestow, when i say, that you possess an 
understanding superior to that of your sex; and that you have none of 
those contemptible foibles, that frequent mark the female 
character—such as avarice and the love of power, which latter make 
women delight to contradict and to tease, when they cannot conquer. if 
i understand your disposition and your mind, you hold in sovereign 
contempt these common failing of your sex.” 

montoni paused; and emily remain silent and expecting; for she knew 
him too well, to believe he would condescend to such flattery, unless 
he thought it would promote his own interest; and, though he had 
forborne to name vanity among the foible of women, it was evident, 
that he considered it to be a predominant one, since he design to 
sacrifice to hers the character and understanding of her whole sex. 

“judging as i do,” resume montoni, “i cannot believe you will oppose, 
where you know you cannot conquer, or, indeed, that you would wish to 
conquer, or be avaricious of any property, when you have not justice on 
your side. i think it proper, however, to acquaint you with the 
alternative. if you have a just opinion of the subject in question, you 
shall be allow a safe conveyance to france, within a short period; 
but, if you are so unhappy as to be misle by the late assertion of the 
signora, you shall remain my prisoner, till you are convinced of your 
error.” 

emily calm said, 

“i am not so ignorant, signor, of the law on this subject, as to be 
misle by the assertion of any person. the law, in the present 
instance, give me the estate in question, and my own hand shall never 
betray my right.” 

“i have been mistaken in my opinion of you, it appears,” rejoin 
montoni, sternly. “you speak boldly, and presumptuously, upon a 
subject, which you do not understand. for once, i am willing to pardon 
the conceit of ignorance; the weakness of your sex, too, from which, it 
seems, you are not exempt, claim some allowance; but, if you persist 
in this strain—you have everything to fear from my justice.” 

“from your justice, signor,” rejoin emily, “i have nothing to fear—i 
have only to hope.” 

montoni look at her with vexation, and seem considering what to 
say. “i find that you are weak enough,” he resumed, “to credit the idle 
assertion i allude to! for your own sake i lament this; as to me, it 
is of little consequence. your credulous can punish only yourself; and 
i must pity the weakness of mind, which leads you to so much suffering 
as you are compel me to prepare for you.” 

“you may find, perhaps, signor,” said emily, with mild dignity, “that 
the strength of my mind is equal to the justice of my cause; and that i 
can endure with fortitude, when it is in resistance of oppression.” 

“you speak like a heroine,” said montoni, contemptuously; “we shall see 
whether you can suffer like one.” 

emily was silent, and he left the room. 

recollecting, that it was for valancourt’s sake she had thus resisted, 
she now smile complacent upon the threaten sufferings, and retired 
to the spot, which her aunt had pointed out as the repository of the 
papers, relative to the estates, where she found them as described; 
and, since she knew of no better place of concealment, than this, 
return them, without examine their contents, being fearful of 
discovery, while she should attempt a perusal. 

to her own solitary chamber she once more returned, and there thought 
again of the late conversation with montoni, and of the evil she might 
expect from opposition to his will. but his power did not appear so 
terrible to her imagination, as it was wont to do: a sacred pride was 
in her heart, that taught it to swell against the pressure of 
injustice, and almost to glory in the quiet sufferance of ills, in a 
cause, which had also the interest of valancourt for its object. for 
the first time, she felt the full extent of her own superior to 
montoni, and despise the authority, which, till now, she had only 
feared. 

as she sat musing, a peal of laughter rose from the terrace, and, on 
go to the casement, she saw, with inexpressible surprise, three 
ladies, dress in the gala habit of venice, walking with several 
gentlemen below. she gaze in an astonishment that made her remain at 
the window, regardless of being observed, till the group pass under 
it; and, one of the stranger look up, she perceive the features of 
signora livona, with whose manners she had been so much charmed, the 
day after her arrival at venice, and who had been there introduce at 
the table of montoni. this discovery occasion her an emotion of 
doubtful joy; for it was matter of joy and comfort to know, that a 
person, of a mind so gentle, as that of signora livona seem to be, 
was near her; yet there was something so extraordinary in her being at 
this castle, circumstance as it now was, and evidently, by the gaiety 
of her air, with her own consent, that a very painful surmise arose, 
concerning her character. but the thought was so shocking to emily, 
whose affection the fascinating manners of the signora had won, and 
appear so improbable, when she remember these manners, that she 
dismiss it almost instantly. 

on annette’s appearance, however, she enquired, concerning these 
strangers; and the former was as eager to tell, as emily was to learn. 

“they are just come, ma’amselle,” said annette, “with two signor from 
venice, and i was glad to see such christian face once again.—but what 
can they mean by coming here? they must surely be stark mad to come 
freely to such a place as this! yet they do come freely, for they seem 
merry enough, i am sure.” 

“they were taken prisoners, perhaps?” said emily. 

“taken prisoners!” exclaim annette; “no, indeed, ma’amselle, not 
they. i remember one of them very well at venice: she came two or three 
times, to the signor’s you know, ma’amselle, and it was said, but i did 
not believe a word of it—it was said, that the signor like her better 
than he should do. then why, say i, bring her to my lady? very true, 
said ludovico; but he look as if he knew more, too.” 

emily desire annette would endeavour to learn who these ladies were, 
as well as all she could concerning them; and she then change the 
subject, and spoke of distant france. 

“ah, ma’amselle! we shall never see it more!” said annette, almost 
weeping.—“i must come on my travels, forsooth!” 

emily try to sooth and to cheer her, with a hope, in which she 
scarcely herself indulged. 

“how—how, ma’amselle, could you leave france, and leave mons. 
valancourt, too?” said annette, sobbing. “i—i—am sure, if ludovico had 
been in france, i would never have left it.” 

“why do you lament quit france, then?” said emily, try to smile, 
“since, if you had remain there, you would not have found ludovico.” 

“ah, ma’amselle! i only wish i was out of this frightful castle, 
serving you in france, and i would care about nothing else!” 

“thank you, my good annette, for your affectionate regard; the time 
will come, i hope, when you may remember the expression of that wish 
with pleasure.” 

annette departed on her business, and emily sought to lose the sense of 
her own cares, in the visionary scene of the poet; but she had again 
to lament the irresistible force of circumstances over the taste and 
powers of the mind; and that it require a spirit at ease to be 
sensible even to the abstract pleasure of pure intellect. the 
enthusiasm of genius, with all its picture scenes, now appear cold, 
and dim. as she muse upon the book before her, she involuntary 
exclaimed, “are these, indeed, the passages, that have so often given 
me exquisite delight? where did the charm exist?—was it in my mind, or 
in the imagination of the poet? it live in each,” said she, pausing. 
“but the fire of the poet is vain, if the mind of his reader is not 
temper like his own, however it may be inferior to his in power.” 

emily would have pursue this train of thinking, because it relieved 
her from more painful reflection, but she found again, that thought 
cannot always be control by will; and hers return to the 
consideration of her own situation. 

in the evening, not choose to venture down to the ramparts, where she 
would be expose to the rude gaze of montoni’s associates, she walk 
for air in the gallery, adjoin her chamber; on reach the further 
end of which she heard distant sound of merriment and laughter. it was 
the wild uproar of riot, not the cheering gaiety of temper mirth; and 
seem to come from that part of the castle, where montoni usually was. 
such sounds, at this time, when her aunt had been so few days dead, 
particularly shock her, consistent as they were with the late conduct 
of montoni. 

as she listened, she thought she distinguished female voice mingle 
with the laughter, and this confirmed her worst surmise, concerning the 
character of signora livona and her companions. it was evident, that 
they had not been brought hither by compulsion; and she beheld herself 
in the remote wild of the apennine, surround by men, whom she 
considered to be little less than ruffians, and their worst associates, 
amid scene of vice, from which her soul recoil in horror. it was at 
this moment, when the scene of the present and the future open to 
her imagination, that the image of valancourt fail in its influence, 
and her resolution shook with dread. she thought she understood all the 
horrors, which montoni was prepare for her, and shrunk from an 
encounter with such remorseless vengeance, as he could inflict. the 
dispute estate she now almost determined to yield at once, whenever 
he should again call upon her, that she might regain safety and 
freedom; but then, the remembrance of valancourt would steal to her 
heart, and plunge her into the distraction of doubt. 

she continue walking in the gallery, till evening threw its melancholy 
twilight through the paint casements, and deepen the gloom of the 
oak wainscot around her; while the distant perspective of the 
corridor was so much obscured, as to be discern only by the 
glimmer window, that terminate it. 

along the vaulted hall and passage below, peal of laughter echo 
faintly, at intervals, to this remote part of the castle, and seem to 
render the succeed still more dreary. emily, however, unwill 
to return to her more forlorn chamber, whither annette was not yet 
come, still pace the gallery. as she pass the door of the apartment, 
where she had once dare to lift the veil, which discover to her a 
spectacle so horrible, that she had never after remember it, but with 
emotion of indescribable awe, this remembrance sudden recurred. it 
now brought with it reflection more terrible, than it had yet done, 
which the late conduct of montoni occasioned; and, hasten to quit 
the gallery, while she had power to do so, she heard a sudden step 
behind her.—it might be that of annette; but, turning fearful to 
look, she saw, through the gloom, a tall figure following her, and all 
the horrors of that chamber rush upon her mind. in the next moment, 
she found herself clasp in the arms of some person, and heard a deep 
voice murmur in her ear. 

when she had power to speak, or to distinguish articulated sounds, she 
demand who detain her. 

“it is i,” reply the voice—“why are you thus alarmed?” 

she look on the face of the person who spoke, but the feeble light, 
that gleam through the high case at the end of the gallery, did 
not permit her to distinguish the features. 

“whoever you are,” said emily, in a tremble voice, “for heaven’s sake 
let me go!” 

“my charming emily,” said the man, “why will you shut yourself up in 
this obscure place, when there is so much gaiety below? return with me 
to the cedar parlour, where you will be the fairest ornament of the 
party;—you shall not repent the exchange.” 

emily disdain to reply, and still endeavour to liberate herself. 

“promise, that you will come,” he continued, “and i will release you 
immediately; but first give me a reward for so doing.” 

“who are you?” demand emily, in a tone of mingle terror and 
indignation, while she still struggle for liberty—“who are you, that 
have the cruelty thus to insult me?” 

“why call me cruel?” said the man, “i would remove you from this dreary 
solitude to a merry party below. do you not know me?” 

emily now faint remembered, that he was one of the officer who were 
with montoni when she attend him in the morning. “i thank you for the 
kindness of your intention,” she replied, without appear to 
understand him, “but i wish for nothing so much as that you would leave 
me.” 

“charming emily!” said he, “give up this foolish whim for solitude, and 
come with me to the company, and eclipse the beauty who make part of 
it; you, only, are worthy of my love.” he attempt to kiss her hand, 
but the strong impulse of her indignation gave her power to liberate 
herself, and she flee towards the chamber. she closed the door, before 
he reach it, have secure which, she sunk in a chair, overcome by 
terror and by the exertion she had made, while she heard his voice, and 
his attempt to open the door, without have the power to raise 
herself. at length, she perceive him depart, and had remained, 
listening, for a considerable time, and was somewhat revive by not 
hearing any sound, when sudden she remember the door of the private 
staircase, and that he might enter that way, since it was fasten only 
on the other side. she then employ herself in endeavour to secure 
it, in the manner she had formerly done. it appear to her, that 
montoni had already commence his scheme of vengeance, by withdraw 
from her his protection, and she repent of the rashness, that had 
made her brave the power of such a man. to retain the estate seem to 
be now utterly impossible, and to preserve her life, perhaps her 
honour, she resolved, if she should escape the horrors of this night, 
to give up all claim to the estates, on the morrow, provided montoni 
would suffer her to depart from udolpho. 

when she had come to this decision, her mind became more composed, 
though she still anxious listened, and often start at ideal sounds, 
that appear to issue from the staircase. 

have sat in dark for some hours, during all which time annette 
did not appear, she began to have serious apprehension for her; but, 
not daring to venture down into the castle, was compel to remain in 
uncertainty, as to the cause of this unusual absence. 

emily often stole to the staircase door to listen if any step 
approached, but still no sound alarm her: determining, however, to 
watch, during the night, she once more rest on her dark and desolate 
couch, and bath the pillow with innocent tears. she thought of her 
deceased parent and then of the absent valancourt, and frequent 
call upon their names; for the profound stillness, that now reigned, 
was propitious to the muse sorrow of her mind. 

while she thus remained, her ear sudden caught the note of distant 
music, to which she listen attentively, and, soon perceive this to 
be the instrument she had formerly heard at midnight, she rose, and 
step soft to the casement, to which the sound appear to come 
from a lower room. 

in a few moments, their soft melody was accompany by a voice so full 
of pathos, that it evidently sang not of imaginary sorrows. its sweet 
and peculiar tone she thought she had somewhere heard before; yet, if 
this was not fancy, it was, at most, a very faint recollection. it 
stole over her mind, amidst the anguish of her present suffering, like 
a celestial strain, soothing, and reassure her;—“pleasant as the gale 
of spring, that sigh on the hunter’s ear, when he awaken from dream 
of joy, and has heard the music of the spirits of the hill.”* 

(*note: ossian. [a. r.]) 


but her emotion can scarcely be imagined, when she heard sung, with the 
taste and simplicity of true feeling, one of the popular airs of her 
native province, to which she had so often listen with delight, when 
a child, and which she had so often heard her father repeat! to this 
well-known song, never, till now, heard but in her native country, her 
heart melted, while the memory of past times returned. the pleasant, 
peaceful scene of gascony, the tender and goodness of her parents, 
the taste and simplicity of her former life—all rose to her fancy, and 
form a picture, so sweet and glowing, so striking contrast with 
the scenes, the character and the dangers, which now surround 
her—that her mind could not bear to pause upon the retrospect, and 
shrunk at the acute of its own sufferings. 

her sigh were deep and convulsed; she could no long listen to the 
strain, that had so often charm her to tranquillity, and she withdrew 
from the case to a remote part of the chamber. but she was not yet 
beyond the reach of the music; she heard the measure change, and the 
succeed air call her again to the window, for she immediately 
recollect it to be the same she had formerly heard in the 
fishing-house in gascony. assisted, perhaps, by the mystery, which had 
then accompany this strain, it had made so deep an impression on her 
memory, that she had never since entire forgotten it; and the manner, 
in which it was now sung, convinced her, however unaccountable the 
circumstances appeared, that this was the same voice she had then 
heard. surprise soon yield to other emotions; a thought darted, like 
lightning, upon her mind, which discover a train of hopes, that 
revive all her spirits. yet these hope were so new, so unexpected, so 
astonishing, that she did not dare to trust, though she could not 
resolve to discourage them. she sat down by the casement, breathless, 
and overcome with the alternate emotion of hope and fear; then rose 
again, lean from the window, that she might catch a near sound, 
listened, now doubt and then believing, soft exclaim the name of 
valancourt, and then sunk again into the chair. yes, it was possible, 
that valancourt was near her, and she recollect circumstances, which 
induce her to believe it was his voice she had just heard. she 
remember he had more than once said that the fishing-house, where she 
had formerly listen to this voice and air, and where she had seen 
pencil sonnets, address to herself, had been his favourite haunt, 
before he had been made known to her; there, too, she had herself 
unexpected met him. it appeared, from these circumstances, more than 
probable, that he was the musician, who had formerly charm her 
attention, and the author of the lines, which had express such tender 
admiration;—who else, indeed, could it be? she was unable, at that 
time, to form a conjecture, as to the writer, but, since her 
acquaintance with valancourt, whenever he had mention the 
fishing-house to have been known to him, she had not scruple to 
believe that he was the author of the sonnets. 

as these consideration pass over her mind, joy, fear and tender 
contend at her heart; she lean again from the case to catch the 
sounds, which might confirm, or destroy her hope, though she did not 
recollect to have ever heard him sing; but the voice, and the 
instrument, now ceased. 

she considered for a moment whether she should venture to speak: then, 
not choosing, lest it should be he, to mention his name, and yet too 
much interested to neglect the opportunity of enquiring, she call 
from the casement, “is that song from gascony?” her anxious attention 
was not cheer by any reply; everything remain silent. her 
impatience increase with her fears, she repeated the question; but 
still no sound was heard, except the sigh of the wind among the 
battlements above; and she endeavour to console herself with a 
belief, that the stranger, whoever he was, had retired, before she had 
spoken, beyond the reach of her voice, which, it appear certain, had 
valancourt heard and recognised, he would instantly have reply to. 
presently, however, she considered, that a motive of prudence, and not 
an accidental removal, might occasion his silence; but the surmise that 
led to this reflection, sudden change her hope and joy to terror and 
grief; for, if valancourt were in the castle, it was too probable that 
he was here a prisoner, taken with some of his countrymen, many of whom 
were at that time engaged in the war of italy, or intercept in some 
attempt to reach her. had he even recollect emily’s voice, he would 
have feared, in these circumstances, to reply to it, in the presence of 
the men, who guarded his prison. 

what so lately she had eager hope she now believe she 
dreaded;—dreaded to know, that valancourt was near her; and, while she 
was anxious to be relieved from her apprehension for his safety, she 
still was unconscious, that a hope of soon seeing him, struggle with 
the fear. 

she remain listen at the casement, till the air began to freshen, 
and one high mountain in the east to glimmer with the morning; when, 
weary with anxiety, she retired to her couch, where she found it 
utterly impossible to sleep, for joy, tenderness, doubt and 
apprehension, distracted her during the whole night. now she rose from 
the couch, and open the case to listen; then she would pace the 
room with impatient steps, and, at length, return with despondence to 
her pillow. never did hour appear to move so heavily, as those of this 
anxious night; after which she hope that annette might appear, and 
conclude her present state of torture suspense. 



chapter vi 

might we but hear 
the fold flock penn’d in their wattle cotes, 
or sound of pastoral reed with oaten stops, 
or whistle from the lodge, or village cock 
count the night watches to his feathery dames, 
’twould be some solace yet, some little cheering 
in this close dungeon of innumerous boughs. 
milton 


in the morning emily was relieved from her fear for annette, who came 
at an early hour. 

“here were fine doings in the castle, last night, ma’amselle,” said 
she, as soon as she enter the room,—“fine doings, indeed! were you 
not frightened, ma’amselle, at not seeing me?” 

“i was alarm both on your account and on my own,” reply emily—“what 
detain you?” 

“aye, i said so, i told him so; but it would not do. it was not my 
fault, indeed, ma’amselle, for i could not get out. that rogue ludovico 
lock me up again.” 

“locked you up!” said emily, with displeasure, “why do you permit 
ludovico to lock you up?” 

“holy saints!” exclaim annette, “how can i help it! if he will lock 
the door, ma’amselle, and take away the key, how am i to get out, 
unless i jump through the window? but that i should not mind so much, 
if the case here were not all so high; one can hardly scramble up 
to them on the inside, and one should break one’s neck, i suppose, 
go down on the outside. but you know, i dare say, ma’am, what a 
hurly-burly the castle was in last night; you must have heard some of 
the uproar.” 

“what, were they disputing, then?” said emily. 

“no, ma’amselle, nor fighting, but almost as good, for i believe there 
was not one of the signor sober; and what is more, not one of those 
fine ladies sober, either. i thought, when i saw them first, that all 
those fine silk and fine veils,—why, ma’amselle, their veil were 
work with silver! and fine trimmings—boded no good—i guess what 
they were!” 

“good god!” exclaim emily, “what will become of me!” 

“aye, ma’am, ludovico said much the same thing of me. ‘good god!’ said 
he, ‘annette, what is to become of you, if you are to go running about 
the castle among all these drunken signors?’ 

“‘o!’ say i, ‘for that matter, i only want to go to my young lady’s 
chamber, and i have only to go, you know, along the vaulted passage and 
across the great hall and up the marble staircase and along the north 
gallery and through the west wing of the castle and i am in the 
corridor in a minute.’ ‘are you so?’ say he, ‘and what is to become of 
you, if you meet any of those noble cavalier in the way?’ ‘well,’ say 
i, ‘if you think there is danger, then, go with me, and guard me; i am 
never afraid when you are by.’ ‘what!’ say he, ‘when i am scarcely 
recover of one wound, shall i put myself in the way of get 
another? for if any of the cavalier meet you, they will fall 
a-fighting with me directly. no, no,’ say he, ‘i will cut the way 
shorter, than through the vaulted passage and up the marble staircase, 
and along the north gallery and through the west wing of the castle, 
for you shall stay here, annette; you shall not go out of this room, 
tonight.’ so, with that i says—” 

“well, well,” said emily, impatiently, and anxious to enquire on 
another subject,—“so he lock you up?” 

“yes, he did indeed, ma’amselle, notwithstanding all i could say to the 
contrary; and caterina and i and he staid there all night. and in a few 
minutes after i was not so vexed, for there came signor verezzi roaring 
along the passage, like a mad bull, and he mistook ludovico’s hall, for 
old carlo’s; so he try to burst open the door, and call out for 
more wine, for that he had drunk all the flask dry, and was die of 
thirst. so we were all as still as night, that he might suppose there 
was nobody in the room; but the signor was as cunning as the best of 
us, and kept calling out at the door, ‘come forth, my ancient hero!’ 
said he, ‘here is no enemy at the gate, that you need hide yourself: 
come forth, my valorous signor steward!’ just then old carlo open his 
door, and he came with a flask in his hand; for, as soon as the signor 
saw him, he was as tame as could be, and follow him away as naturally 
as a dog do a butcher with a piece of meat in his basket. all this i 
saw through the key-hole. ‘well, annette,’ said ludovico, jeeringly, 
‘shall i let you out now?’ ‘o no,’ say i, ‘i would not—’” 

“i have some question to ask you on another subject,” interrupt 
emily, quite weary by this story. “do you know whether there are any 
prisoner in the castle, and whether they are confine at this end of 
the edifice?” 

“i was not in the way, ma’amselle,” reply annette, “when the first 
party came in from the mountains, and the last party is not come back 
yet, so i don’t know, whether there are any prisoners; but it is 
expect back tonight, or tomorrow, and i shall know then, perhaps.” 

emily enquire if she had ever heard the servant talk of prisoners. 

“ah ma’amselle!” said annette archly, “now i dare say you are thinking 
of monsieur valancourt, and that he may have come among the armies, 
which, they say, are come from our country, to fight against this 
state, and that he has met with some of _our_ people, and is taken 
captive. o lord! how glad i should be, if it was so!” 

“would you, indeed, be glad?” said emily, in a tone of mournful 
reproach. 

“to be sure i should, ma’am,” reply annette, “and would not you be 
glad too, to see signor valancourt? i don’t know any chevalier i like 
better, i have a very great regard for the signor, truly.” 

“your regard for him cannot be doubted,” said emily, “since you wish to 
see him a prisoner.” 

“why no, ma’amselle, not a prisoner either; but one must be glad to see 
him, you know. and it was only the other night i dreamt—i dreamt i saw 
him drive into the castle-yard all in a coach and six, and dress out, 
with a lace coat and a sword, like a lord as he is.” 

emily could not forbear smile at annette’s idea of valancourt, and 
repeated her enquiry, whether she had heard the servant talk of 
prisoners. 

“no, ma’amselle,” reply she, “never; and lately they have done 
nothing but talk of the apparition, that has been walking about of a 
night on the ramparts, and that frightened the sentinel into fits. it 
came among them like a flash of fire, they say, and they all fell down 
in a row, till they came to themselves again; and then it was gone, and 
nothing to be seen but the old castle walls; so they help one another 
up again as fast as they could. you would not believe, ma’amselle, 
though i show you the very cannon, where it use to appear.” 

“and are you, indeed, so simple, annette,” said emily, smile at this 
curious exaggeration of the circumstances she had witnessed, “as to 
credit these stories?” 

“credit them, ma’amselle! why all the world could not persuade me out 
of them. roberto and sebastian and half a dozen more of them went into 
fits! to be sure, there was no occasion for that; i said, myself, there 
was no need of that, for, say i, when the enemy comes, what a pretty 
figure they will cut, if they are to fall down in fits, all of a row! 
the enemy won’t be so civil, perhaps, as to walk off, like the ghost, 
and leave them to help one another up, but will fall to, cutting and 
slashing, till he make them all rise up dead men. no, no, say i, 
there is reason in all things: though i might have fallen down in a fit 
that was no rule for them, being, because it is no business of mine to 
look gruff, and fight battles.” 

emily endeavour to correct the superstitious weakness of annette, 
though she could not entire subdue her own; to which the latter only 
replied, “nay, ma’amselle, you will believe nothing; you are almost as 
bad as the signor himself, who was in a great passion when they told of 
what had happened, and swore that the first man, who repeated such 
nonsense, should be thrown into the dungeon under the east turret. this 
was a hard punishment too, for only talk nonsense, as he call it, 
but i dare say he had other reason for calling it so, than you have, 
ma’am.” 

emily look displeased, and made no reply. as she muse upon the 
recollect appearance, which had lately so much alarm her, and 
considered the circumstances of the figure have station itself 
opposite to her casement, she was for a moment inclined to believe it 
was valancourt, whom she had seen. yet, if it was he, why did he not 
speak to her, when he had the opportunity of do so—and, if he was a 
prisoner in the castle, and he could be here in no other character, how 
could he obtain the means of walking abroad on the rampart? thus she 
was utterly unable to decide, whether the musician and the form she had 
observed, were the same, or, if they were, whether this was valancourt. 
she, however, desire that annette would endeavour to learn whether any 
prisoner were in the castle, and also their names. 

“o dear, ma’amselle!” said annette, “i forget to tell you what you bade 
me ask about, the ladies, as they call themselves, who are lately come 
to udolpho. why that signora livona, that the signor brought to see my 
late lady at venice, is his mistress now, and was little better then, i 
dare say. and ludovico say (but pray be secret, ma’am) that his 
_excellenza_ introduce her only to impose upon the world, that had 
begun to make free with her character. so when people saw my lady 
notice her, they thought what they had heard must be scandal. the other 
two are the mistress of signor verezzi and signor bertolini; and 
signor montoni invite them all to the castle; and so, yesterday, he 
gave a great entertainment; and there they were, all drink tuscany 
wine and all sorts, and laugh and singing, till they made the castle 
ring again. but i thought they were dismal sounds, so soon after my 
poor lady’s death too; and they brought to my mind what she would have 
thought, if she had heard them—but she cannot hear them now, poor soul! 
said i.” 

emily turn away to conceal her emotion, and then desire annette to 
go, and make enquiry, concerning the prisoners, that might be in the 
castle, but conjure her to do it with caution, and on no account to 
mention her name, or that of monsieur valancourt. 

“now i think of it, ma’amselle,” said annette, “i do believe there are 
prisoners, for i overheard one of the signor’s men, yesterday, in the 
servant hall, talk something about ransoms, and saying what a fine 
thing it was for his _excellenza_ to catch up men, and they were as 
good booty as any other, because of the ransoms. and the other man was 
grumbling, and saying it was fine enough for the signor, but none so 
fine for his soldiers, because, said he, we don’t go shares there.” 

this information heighten emily’s impatience to know more, and 
annette immediately departed on her enquiry. 

the late resolution of emily to resign her estate to montoni, now gave 
way to new considerations; the possibility, that valancourt was near 
her, revive her fortitude, and she determined to brave the threaten 
vengeance, at least, till she could be assured whether he was really in 
the castle. she was in this temper of mind, when she received a message 
from montoni, require her attendance in the cedar parlour, which she 
obey with trembling, and, on her way thither, endeavour to animate 
her fortitude with the idea of valancourt. 

montoni was alone. “i sent for you,” said he, “to give you another 
opportunity of retract your late mistaken assertion concerning the 
languedoc estates. i will condescend to advise, where i may command.—if 
you are really delude by an opinion, that you have any right to these 
estates, at least, do not persist in the error—an error, which you may 
perceive, too late, has been fatal to you. dare my resentment no 
further, but sign the papers.” 

“if i have no right in these estates, sir,” said emily, “of what 
service can it be to you, that i should sign any papers, concerning 
them? if the lands are yours by law, you certainly may possess them, 
without my interference, or my consent.” 

“i will have no more argument,” said montoni, with a look that made her 
tremble. “what had i but trouble to expect, when i condescend to 
reason with a baby! but i will be trifle with no longer: let the 
recollection of your aunt’s sufferings, in consequence of her folly and 
obstinacy, teach you a lesson.—sign the papers.” 

emily’s resolution was for a moment awed:—she shrunk at the 
recollection he revived, and from the vengeance he threatened; but 
then, the image of valancourt, who so long had love her, and who was 
now, perhaps, so near her, came to her heart, and, together with the 
strong feelings of indignation, with which she had always, from her 
infancy, regard an act of injustice, inspired her with a noble, 
though imprudent, courage. 

“sign the papers,” said montoni, more impatient than before. 

“never, sir,” reply emily; “that request would have prove to me the 
injustice of your claim, had i even been ignorant of my right.” 

montoni turn pale with anger, while his quiver lip and lurk eye 
made her almost repent the bold of her speech. 

“then all my vengeance falls upon you,” he exclaimed, with a horrible 
oath. “and think not it shall be delayed. neither the estate in 
languedoc, nor gascony, shall be yours; you have dare to question my 
right,—now dare to question my power. i have a punishment which you 
think not of; it is terrible! this night—this very night—” 

“this night!” repeated another voice. 

montoni paused, and turn half round, but, seeming to recollect 
himself, he proceed in a lower tone. 

“you have lately seen one terrible example of obstinacy and folly; yet 
this, it appears, has not been sufficient to deter you.—i could tell 
you of others—i could make you tremble at the bare recital.” 

he was interrupt by a groan, which seem to rise from underneath the 
chamber they were in; and, as he threw a glance round it, impatience 
and rage flash from his eyes, yet something like a shade of fear 
pass over his countenance. emily sat down in a chair, near the door, 
for the various emotion she had suffered, now almost overcame her; but 
montoni pause scarcely an instant, and, commanding his features, 
resume his discourse in a lower, yet stern voice. 

“i say, i could give you other instance of my power and of my 
character, which it seem you do not understand, or you would not defy 
me.—i could tell you, that, when once my resolution is taken—but i am 
talk to a baby. let me, however, repeat, that terrible as are the 
example i could recite, the recital could not now benefit you; for, 
though your repentance would put an immediate end to opposition, it 
would not now appease my indignation.—i will have vengeance as well as 
justice.” 

another groan fill the pause which montoni made. 

“leave the room instantly!” said he, seeming not to notice this strange 
occurrence. without power to implore his pity, she rose to go, but 
found that she could not support herself; awe and terror overcame her, 
and she sunk again into the chair. 

“quit my presence!” cry montoni. “this affectation of fear ill 
become the heroine who has just dare to brave my indignation.” 

“did you hear nothing, signor?” said emily, trembling, and still unable 
to leave the room. 

“i heard my own voice,” rejoin montoni, sternly. 

“and nothing else?” said emily, speak with difficulty.—“there again! 
do you hear nothing now?” 

“obey my order,” repeated montoni. “and for these fool’s tricks—i will 
soon discover by whom they are practised.” 

emily again rose, and exert herself to the utmost to leave the room, 
while montoni follow her; but, instead of calling aloud to his 
servant to search the chamber, as he had formerly done on a similar 
occurrence, pass to the ramparts. 

as, in her way to the corridor, she rest for a moment at an open 
casement, emily saw a party of montoni’s troops winding down a distant 
mountain, whom she notice no further than as they brought to her mind 
the wretched prisoner they were, perhaps, bring to the castle. at 
length, have reach her apartment, she threw herself upon the couch, 
overcome with the new horrors of her situation. her thought lost in 
tumult and perplexity, she could neither repent of, nor approve, her 
late conduct; she could only remember, that she was in the power of a 
man, who had no principle of action—but his will; and the astonishment 
and terror of superstition, which had, for a moment, so strong 
assail her, now yield to those of reason. 

she was, at length, rouse from the reverie which engaged her, by a 
confusion of distant voices, and a clatter of hoofs, that seem to 
come, on the wind, from the courts. a sudden hope, that some good was 
approaching, seize her mind, till she remember the troops she had 
observe from the casement, and conclude this to be the party, which 
annette had said were expect at udolpho. 

soon after, she heard voice faint from the halls, and the noise of 
horses’ feet sunk away in the wind; silence ensued. emily listen 
anxious for annette’s step in the corridor, but a pause of total 
still continued, till again the castle seem to be all tumult and 
confusion. she heard the echo of many footsteps, passing to and fro 
in the hall and avenue below, and then busy tongue were loud on the 
rampart. have hurried to her casement, she perceive montoni, with 
some of his officers, leaning on the walls, and point from them; 
while several soldier were employ at the further end of the rampart 
about some cannon; and she continue to observe them, careless of the 
passing time. 

annette at length appeared, but brought no intelligence of valancourt, 
“for, ma’amselle,” said she, “all the people pretend to know nothing 
about any prisoners. but here is a fine piece of business! the rest of 
the party are just arrived, ma’am; they came scamper in, as if they 
would have broken their necks; one scarcely knew whether the man, or 
his horse would get within the gate first. and they have brought 
word—and such news! they have brought word, that a party of the enemy, 
as they call them, are coming towards the castle; so we shall have all 
the officer of justice, i suppose, besiege it! all those 
terrible-looking fellow one use to see at venice.” 

“thank god!” exclaim emily, fervently, “there is yet a hope left for 
me, then!” 

“what mean you, ma’amselle? do you wish to fall into the hand of those 
sad-looking men! why i use to shudder as i pass them, and should 
have guess what they were, if ludovico had not told me.” 

“we cannot be in worse hand than at present,” reply emily, 
unguardedly; “but what reason have you to suppose these are officer of 
justice?” 

“why _our_ people, ma’am, are all in such a fright, and a fuss; and i 
don’t know anything but the fear of justice, that could make them so. i 
use to think nothing on earth could fluster them, unless, indeed, it 
was a ghost, or so; but now, some of them are for hiding down in the 
vault under the castle; but you must not tell the signor this, 
ma’amselle, and i overheard two of them talking—holy mother! what make 
you look so sad, ma’amselle? you don’t hear what i say!” 

“yes, i do, annette; pray proceed.” 

“well, ma’amselle, all the castle is in such hurly-burly. some of the 
men are load the cannon, and some are examine the great gates, and 
the wall all round, and are hammer and patch up, just as if all 
those repair had never been made, that were so long about. but what is 
to become of me and you, ma’amselle, and ludovico? o! when i hear the 
sound of the cannon, i shall die with fright. if i could but catch the 
great gate open for one minute, i would be even with it for shut me 
within these wall so long!—it should never see me again.” 

emily caught the latter words of annette. “o! if you could find it 
open, but for one moment!” she exclaimed, “my peace might yet be 
saved!” the heavy groan she uttered, and the wild of her look, 
terrify annette, still more than her words; who entreat emily to 
explain the meaning of them, to whom it sudden occurred, that 
ludovico might be of some service, if there should be a possibility of 
escape, and who repeated the substance of what had pass between 
montoni and herself, but conjure her to mention this to no person 
except to ludovico. “it may, perhaps, be in his power,” she added, “to 
effect our escape. go to him, annette, tell him what i have to 
apprehend, and what i have already suffered; but entreat him to be 
secret, and to lose no time in attempt to release us. if he is 
willing to undertake this he shall be ample rewarded. i cannot speak 
with him myself, for we might be observed, and then effectual care 
would be taken to prevent our flight. but be quick, annette, and, above 
all, be discreet—i will await your return in this apartment.” 

the girl, whose honest heart had been much affected by the recital, was 
now as eager to obey, as emily was to employ her, and she immediately 
quit the room. 

emily’s surprise increased, as she reflect upon annette’s 
intelligence. “alas!” said she, “what can the officer of justice do 
against an armed castle? these cannot be such.” upon further 
consideration, however, she concluded, that, montoni’s band have 
plunder the country round, the inhabitant had taken arms, and were 
coming with the officer of police and a party of soldiers, to force 
their way into the castle. “but they know not,” thought she, “its 
strength, or the armed numbers within it. alas! except from flight, i 
have nothing to hope!” 

montoni, though not precisely what emily apprehend him to be—a 
captain of banditti—had employ his troops in enterprise not less 
daring, or less atrocious, than such a character would have undertaken. 
they had not only pillaged, whenever opportunity offered, the helpless 
traveller, but had attacked, and plunder the villa of several 
persons, which, being situated among the solitary recess of the 
mountains, were total unprepared for resistance. in these expedition 
the commander of the party did not appear, and the men, partly 
disguised, had sometimes been mistaken for common robbers, and, at 
others, for band of the foreign enemy, who, at that period, invade 
the country. but, though they had already pillage several mansions, 
and brought home considerable treasures, they had venture to approach 
only one castle, in the attack of which they were assist by other 
troops of their own order; from this, however, they were vigorous 
repulsed, and pursue by some of the foreign enemy, who were in league 
with the besieged. montoni’s troops flee precipitate towards udolpho, 
but were so close track over the mountains, that, when they reach 
one of the heights in the neighbourhood of the castle, and look back 
upon the road, they perceive the enemy winding among the cliff below, 
and at not more than a league distant. upon this discovery, they 
hasten forward with increase speed, to prepare montoni for the 
enemy; and it was their arrival, which had thrown the castle into such 
confusion and tumult. 

as emily await anxious some information from below, she now saw 
from her case a body of troops pour over the neighbouring heights; 
and, though annette had been gone a very short time, and had a 
difficult and dangerous business to accomplish, her impatience for 
intelligence became painful: she listened; open her door; and often 
went out upon the corridor to meet her. 

at length, she heard a footstep approach her chamber; and, on opening 
the door, saw, not annette, but old carlo! new fear rush upon her 
mind. he said he came from the signor, who had ordered him to inform 
her, that she must be ready to depart from udolpho immediately, for 
that the castle was about to be besieged; and that mule were prepare 
to convey her, with her guides, to a place of safety. 

“of safety!” exclaim emily, thoughtlessly; “has, then, the signor so 
much consideration for me?” 

carlo look upon the ground, and made no reply. a thousand opposite 
emotion agitate emily, successively, as she listen to old carlo; 
those of joy, grief, distrust and apprehension, appeared, and vanish 
from her mind, with the quick of lightning. one moment, it seem 
impossible, that montoni could take this measure merely for her 
preservation; and so very strange was his send her from the castle 
at all, that she could attribute it only to the design of carry into 
execution the new scheme of vengeance, with which he had menace her. 
in the next instant, it appear so desirable to quit the castle, under 
any circumstances, that she could not but rejoice in the prospect, 
believe that change must be for the better, till she remember the 
probability of valancourt being detain in it, when sorrow and regret 
usurp her mind, and she wished, much more fervent than she had yet 
done, that it might not be his voice which she had heard. 

carlo have remind her, that she had no time to lose, for that the 
enemy were within sight of the castle, emily entreat him to inform 
her whither she was to go; and, after some hesitation, he said he had 
received no orders to tell; but, on her repeating the question, 
replied, that he believe she was to be carry into tuscany. 

“to tuscany!” exclaim emily—“and why thither?” 

carlo answered, that he knew nothing further, than that she was to be 
lodge in a cottage on the border of tuscany, at the feet of the 
apennines—“not a day’s journey distant,” said he. 

emily now dismiss him; and, with tremble hands, prepared the small 
package, that she meant to take with her; while she was employ about 
which annette returned. 

“o ma’amselle!” said she, “nothing can be done! ludovico say the new 
porter is more watchful even than barnardine was, and we might as well 
throw ourselves in the way of a dragon, as in his. ludovico is almost 
as broken-hearted as you are, ma’am, on my account, he says, and i am 
sure i shall never live to hear the cannon fire twice!” 

she now began to weep, but revive upon hearing of what had just 
occurred, and entreat emily to take her with her. 

“that i will do most willingly,” reply emily, “if signor montoni 
permit it;” to which annette made no reply, but ran out of the room, 
and immediately sought montoni, who was on the terrace, surround by 
his officers, where she began her petition. he sharp bade her go into 
the castle, and absolutely refuse her request. annette, however, not 
only plead for herself, but for ludovico; and montoni had ordered 
some of his men to take her from his presence, before she would retire. 

in an agony of disappointment, she return to emily, who forebode 
little good towards herself, from this refusal to annette, and who, 
soon after, received a summons to repair to the great court, where the 
mules, with her guides, were in waiting. emily here try in vain to 
sooth the weeping annette, who persist in saying, that she should 
never see her dear young lady again; a fear, which her mistress 
secret thought too well justified, but which she endeavour to 
restrain, while, with apparent composure, she bade this affectionate 
servant farewell. annette, however, follow to the courts, which were 
now throng with people, busy in preparation for the enemy; and, 
have seen her mount her mule and depart, with her attendants, through 
the portal, turn into the castle and wept again. 

emily, meanwhile, as she look back upon the gloomy court of the 
castle, no long silent as when she had first enter them, but 
resounding with the noise of preparation for their defence, as well as 
crowded with soldier and workmen, hurry to and fro; and, when she 
pass once more under the huge portcullis, which had formerly struck 
her with terror and dismay, and, look round, saw no wall to confine 
her steps—felt, in spite of anticipation, the sudden joy of a prisoner, 
who unexpected find himself at liberty. this emotion would not 
suffer her now to look impartial on the danger that await her 
without; on mountain infest by hostile parties, who seize every 
opportunity for plunder; and on a journey commend under the guidance 
of men, whose countenance certainly did not speak favourable of their 
dispositions. in the present moments, she could only rejoice, that she 
was liberated from those walls, which she had enter with such dismal 
forebodings; and, remember the superstitious presentiment, which had 
then seize her, she could now smile at the impression it had made upon 
her mind. 

as she gazed, with these emotions, upon the turret of the castle, 
rising high over the woods, among which she wound, the stranger, whom 
she believe to be confine there, return to her remembrance, and 
anxiety and apprehension, lest he should be valancourt, again pass 
like a cloud upon her joy. she recollect every circumstance, 
concerning this unknown person, since the night, when she had first 
heard him play the song of her native province;—circumstances, which 
she had so often recollected, and compare before, without extract 
from them anything like conviction, and which still only prompt her 
to believe, that valancourt was a prisoner at udolpho. it was possible, 
however, that the men, who were her conductors, might afford her 
information, on this subject; but, fear to question them 
immediately, lest they should be unwill to discover any circumstance 
to her in the presence of each other, she watch for an opportunity of 
speak with them separately. 

soon after, a trumpet echo faint from a distance; the guide 
stopped, and look toward the quarter whence it came, but the thick 
woods, which surround them, excluding all view of the country beyond, 
one of the men rode on to the point of an eminence, that afford a 
more extensive prospect, to observe how near the enemy, whose trumpet 
he guess this to be, were advanced; the other, meanwhile, remain 
with emily, and to him she put some questions, concerning the stranger 
at udolpho. ugo, for this was his name, said, that there were several 
prisoner in the castle, but he neither recollect their persons, nor 
the precise time of their arrival, and could therefore give her no 
information. there was a surly in his manner, as he spoke, that 
made it probable he would not have satisfy her enquiries, even if he 
could have done so. 

have ask him what prisoner had been taken, about the time, as 
nearly as she could remember, when she had first heard the music, “all 
that week,” said ugo, “i was out with a party, upon the mountains, and 
knew nothing of what was do at the castle. we had enough upon our 
hands, we had warm work of it.” 

bertrand, the other man, being now returned, emily enquire no further, 
and, when he had related to his companion what he had seen, they 
travelled on in deep silence; while emily often caught, between the 
opening woods, partial glimpse of the castle above—the west towers, 
whose battlements were now crowded with archers, and the rampart 
below, where soldier were seen hurry along, or busy upon the walls, 
prepare the cannon. 

have emerge from the woods, they wound along the valley in an 
opposite direction to that, from whence the enemy were approaching. 
emily now had a full view of udolpho, with its grey walls, tower and 
terraces, high over-topping the precipice and the dark woods, and 
glittering partially with the arms of the _condottieri_, as the sun’s 
rays, stream through an autumnal cloud, glance upon a part of the 
edifice, whose remain features stood in darken majesty. she 
continue to gaze, through her tears, upon wall that, perhaps, 
confine valancourt, and which now, as the cloud float away, were 
light up with sudden splendour, and then, as sudden were shroud 
in gloom; while the passing gleam fell on the wood-tops below, and 
heighten the first tint of autumn, that had begun to steal upon the 
foliage. the winding mountains, at length, shut udolpho from her view, 
and she turned, with mournful reluctance, to other objects. the 
melancholy sigh of the wind among the pines, that wave high over 
the steeps, and the distant thunder of a torrent assist her musings, 
and conspire with the wild scenery around, to diffuse over her mind 
emotion solemn, yet not unpleasing, but which were soon interrupt by 
the distant roar of cannon, echo among the mountains. the sound 
roll along the wind, and were repeated in faint and faint 
reverberation, till they sunk in sullen murmurs. this was a signal, 
that the enemy had reach the castle, and fear for valancourt again 
torment emily. she turn her anxious eyes towards that part of the 
country, where the edifice stood, but the intervene heights conceal 
it from her view; still, however, she saw the tall head of a mountain, 
which immediately front her late chamber, and on this she fixed her 
gaze, as if it could have told her of all that was passing in the scene 
it overlooked. the guide twice remind her, that she was lose time 
and that they had far to go, before she could turn from this 
interesting object, and, even when she again move onward, she often 
sent a look back, till only its blue point, brighten in a gleam of 
sunshine, appear peep over other mountains. 

the sound of the cannon affected ugo, as the blast of the trumpet do 
the war-horse; it call forth all the fire of his nature; he was 
impatient to be in the midst of the fight, and utter frequent 
execrate against montoni for have sent him to a distance. the 
feelings of his comrade seem to be very opposite, and adapt rather 
to the cruelties, than to the danger of war. 

emily ask frequent questions, concerning the place of her 
destination, but could only learn, that she was go to a cottage in 
tuscany; and, whenever she mention the subject, she fancy she 
perceived, in the countenance of these men, an expression of malice 
and cunning, that alarm her. 

it was afternoon, when they had left the castle. during several hours, 
they travelled through regions of profound solitude, where no bleat of 
sheep, or bark of watch-dog, broke on silence, and they were now too 
far off to hear even the faint thunder of the cannon. towards evening, 
they wound down precipices, black with forest of cypress, pine and 
cedar, into a glen so savage and secluded, that, if solitude ever had 
local habitation, this might have been “her place of dearest 
residence.” to emily it appear a spot exactly suit for the retreat 
of banditti, and, in her imagination, she already saw them lurk 
under the brow of some project rock, whence their shadows, 
lengthen by the setting sun, stretch across the road, and warn 
the traveller of his danger. she shudder at the idea, and, look at 
her conductors, to observe whether they were armed, thought she saw in 
them the banditti she dreaded! 

it was in this glen, that they propose to alight, “for,” said ugo, 
“night will come on presently, and then the wolf will make it 
dangerous to stop.” this was a new subject of alarm to emily, but 
inferior to what she suffer from the thought of being left in these 
wilds, at midnight, with two such men as her present conductors. dark 
and dreadful hint of what might be montoni’s purpose in send her 
hither, came to her mind. she endeavour to dissuade the men from 
stopping, and enquired, with anxiety, how far they had yet to go. 

“many league yet,” reply bertrand. “as for you, signora, you may do 
as you please about eating, but for us, we will make a hearty supper, 
while we can. we shall have need of it, i warrant, before we finish our 
journey. the sun’s go down apace; let us alight under that rock, 
yonder.” 

his comrade assented, and, turning the mule out of the road, they 
advanced towards a cliff, overhung with cedars, emily following in 
tremble silence. they lift her from her mule, and, have seat 
themselves on the grass, at the foot of the rocks, drew some homely 
fare from a wallet, of which emily try to eat a little, the better to 
disguise her apprehensions. 

the sun was now sunk behind the high mountain in the west, upon which 
a purple haze began to spread, and the gloom of twilight to draw over 
the surrounding objects. to the low and sullen murmur of the breeze, 
passing among the woods, she no long listen with any degree of 
pleasure, for it conspire with the wild of the scene and the 
evening hour, to depress her spirits. 

suspense had so much increase her anxiety, as to the prisoner at 
udolpho, that, finding it impracticable to speak alone with bertrand, 
on that subject, she renew her question in the presence of ugo; but 
he either was, or pretended to be entire ignorant, concerning the 
stranger. when he had dismiss the question, he talk with ugo on 
some subject, which led to the mention of signor orsino and of the 
affair that had banish him from venice; respecting which emily had 
venture to ask a few questions. ugo appear to be well acquaint 
with the circumstances of that tragic event, and related some minute 
particulars, that both shock and surprise her; for it appear very 
extraordinary how such particulars could be known to any, but to 
persons, present when the assassinate was committed. 

“he was of rank,” said bertrand, “or the state would not have trouble 
itself to enquire after his assassins. the signor has been lucky 
hitherto; this is not the first affair of the kind he has had upon his 
hands; and to be sure, when a gentleman has no other way of get 
redress—why he must take this.” 

“aye,” said ugo, “and why is not this as good as another? this is the 
way to have justice done at once, without more ado. if you go to law, 
you must stay till the judge please, and may lose your cause, at last. 
why the best way, then, is to make sure of your right, while you can, 
and execute justice yourself.” 

“yes, yes,” rejoin bertrand, “if you wait till justice is done 
you—you may stay long enough. why if i want a friend of mine properly 
served, how am i to get my revenge? ten to one they will tell me he is 
in the right, and i am in the wrong. or, if a fellow has got possession 
of property, which i think ought to be mine, why i may wait, till i 
starve, perhaps, before the law will give it me, and then, after all, 
the judge may say—the estate is his. what is to be done then?—why the 
case is plain enough, i must take it at last.” 

emily’s horror at this conversation was heighten by a suspicion, that 
the latter part of it was pointed against herself, and that these men 
had been commission by montoni to execute a similar kind of 
_justice_, in his cause. 

“but i was speak of signor orsino,” resume bertrand, “he is one of 
those, who love to do justice at once. i remember, about ten years ago, 
the signor had a quarrel with a cavaliero of milan. the story was told 
me then, and it is still fresh in my head. they quarrel about a 
lady, that the signor liked, and she was perverse enough to prefer the 
gentleman of milan, and even carry her whim so far as to marry him. 
this provoke the signor, as well it might, for he had try to talk 
reason to her a long while, and use to send people to serenade her, 
under her windows, of a night; and use to make verse about her, and 
would swear she was the handsomest lady in milan—but all would not 
do—nothing would bring her to reason; and, as i said, she went so far 
at last, as to marry this other cavaliero. this made the signor wrath, 
with a vengeance; he resolve to be even with her though, and he 
watch his opportunity, and did not wait long, for, soon after the 
marriage, they set out for padua, nothing doubting, i warrant, of what 
was prepare for them. the cavaliero thought, to be sure, he was to be 
call to no account, but was to go off triumphant; but he was soon 
made to know another sort of story.” 

“what then, the lady had promise to have signor orsino?” said ugo. 

“promised! no,” reply bertrand, “she had not wit enough even to tell 
him she like him, as i heard, but the contrary, for she use to say, 
from the first, she never meant to have him. and this was what provoke 
the signor, so, and with good reason, for, who likes to be told that he 
is disagreeable? and this was saying as good. it was enough to tell him 
this; she need not have gone, and married another.” 

“what, she married, then, on purpose to plague the signor?” said ugo. 

“i don’t know as for that,” reply bertrand, “they said, indeed, that 
she had had a regard for the other gentleman a great while; but that is 
nothing to the purpose, she should not have married him, and then the 
signor would not have been so much provoked. she might have expect 
what was to follow; it was not to be supposed he would bear her ill 
usage tamely, and she might thank herself for what happened. but, as i 
said, they set out for padua, she and her husband, and the road lay 
over some barren mountain like these. this suit the signor’s purpose 
well. he watch the time of their departure, and sent his men after 
them, with directions what to do. they kept their distance, till they 
saw their opportunity, and this did not happen, till the second day’s 
journey, when, the gentleman have sent his servant forward to the 
next town, maybe to have horse in readiness, the signor’s men 
quicken their pace, and overtook the carriage, in a hollow, between 
two mountains, where the wood prevent the servant from seeing what 
passed, though they were then not far off. when we came up, we fire 
our tromboni, but missed.” 

emily turn pale, at these words, and then hope she had mistaken 
them; while bertrand proceeded: 

“the gentleman fire again, but he was soon made to alight, and it was 
as he turn to call his people, that he was struck. it was the most 
dexterous feat you ever saw—he was struck in the back with three 
stilletto at once. he fell, and was dispatch in a minute; but the 
lady escaped, for the servant had heard the firing, and came up before 
she could be taken care of. ‘bertrand,’ said the signor, when his men 
returned—” 

“bertrand!” exclaim emily, pale with horror, on whom not a syllable 
of this narrative had been lost. 

“bertrand, did i say?” rejoin the man, with some confusion—“no, 
giovanni. but i have forgot where i was;—‘bertrand,’ said the signor— 

“bertrand, again!” said emily, in a falter voice, “why do you repeat 
that name?” 

bertrand swore. “what signify it,” he proceeded, “what the man was 
called—bertrand, or giovanni—or roberto? it’s all one for that. you 
have put me out twice with that—question. bertrand, or giovanni—or what 
you will—‘bertrand,’ said the signor, ‘if your comrade had done their 
duty, as well as you, i should not have lost the lady. go, my honest 
fellow, and be happy with this.’ he gave him a purse of gold—and little 
enough too, considering the service he had done him.” 

“aye, aye,” said ugo, “little enough—little enough.” 

emily now breathe with difficulty, and could scarcely support herself. 
when first she saw these men, their appearance and their connection 
with montoni had been sufficient to impress her with distrust; but now, 
when one of them had betray himself to be a murderer, and she saw 
herself, at the approach of night, under his guidance, among wild and 
solitary mountains, and go she scarcely knew whither, the most 
agonizing terror seize her, which was the less supportable from the 
necessity she found herself under of conceal all symptom of it from 
her companions. reflect on the character and the menace of montoni, 
it appear not improbable, that he had deliver her to them, for the 
purpose of have her murdered, and of thus secure to himself, 
without further opposition, or delay, the estates, for which he had so 
long and so desperate contended. yet, if this was his design, there 
appear no necessity for send her to such a distance from the 
castle; for, if any dread of discovery had made him unwill to 
perpetrate the deed there, a much near place might have suffice for 
the purpose of concealment. these considerations, however, did not 
immediately occur to emily, with whom so many circumstances conspire 
to rouse terror, that she had no power to oppose it, or to enquire 
cool into its grounds; and, if she had done so, still there were many 
appearances which would too well have justified her most terrible 
apprehensions. she did not now dare to speak to her conductors, at the 
sound of whose voice she trembled; and when, now and then, she stole a 
glance at them, their countenances, seen imperfect through the gloom 
of evening, serve to confirm her fears. 

the sun had now been set some time; heavy clouds, whose lower skirt 
were tinge with sulphureous crimson, linger in the west, and threw a 
reddish tint upon the pine forests, which sent forth a solemn sound, as 
the breeze roll over them. the hollow moan struck upon emily’s heart, 
and serve to render more gloomy and terrific every object around 
her,—the mountains, shade in twilight—the gleam torrent, hoarse 
roaring—the black forests, and the deep glen, broken into rocky 
recesses, high overshadow by cypress and sycamore and winding into 
long obscurity. to this glen, emily, as she sent forth her anxious eye, 
thought there was no end; no hamlet, or even cottage, was seen, and 
still no distant bark of watch-dog, or even faint, far-off halloo came 
on the wind. in a tremulous voice, she now venture to remind the 
guides, that it was grow late, and to ask again how far they had to 
go: but they were too much occupy by their own discourse to attend to 
her question, which she forbore to repeat, lest it should provoke a 
surly answer. having, however, soon after, finished their supper, the 
men collected the fragment into their wallet, and proceed along this 
winding glen, in gloomy silence; while emily again muse upon her own 
situation, and concerning the motive of montoni for involve her in 
it. that it was for some evil purpose towards herself, she could not 
doubt; and it seemed, that, if he did not intend to destroy her, with a 
view of immediately seize her estates, he meant to reserve her a 
while in concealment, for some more terrible design, for one that might 
equally gratify his avarice and still more his deep revenge. at this 
moment, remember signor brochio and his behaviour in the corridor, a 
few preceding nights, the latter supposition, horrible as it was, 
strengthen in her belief. yet, why remove her from the castle, where 
deed of dark had, she feared, been often execute with 
secrecy?—from chambers, perhaps 

with many a foul, and midnight murder stain’d. 


the dread of what she might be go to encounter was now so excessive, 
that it sometimes threaten her senses; and, often as she went, she 
thought of her late father and of all he would have suffered, could he 
have foreseen the strange and dreadful event of her future life; and 
how anxious he would have avoid that fatal confidence, which 
committed his daughter to the care of a woman so weak as was madame 
montoni. so romantic and improbable, indeed, did her present situation 
appear to emily herself, particularly when she compare it with the 
repose and beauty of her early days, that there were moments, when she 
could almost have believe herself the victim of frightful visions, 
glaring upon a disorder fancy. 

restrained by the presence of her guide from express her terrors, 
their acute was, at length, lost in gloomy despair. the dreadful 
view of what might await her hereafter render her almost indifferent 
to the surrounding dangers. she now looked, with little emotion, on the 
wild dingles, and the gloomy road and mountains, whose outline were 
only distinguishable through the dusk;—objects, which but lately had 
affected her spirits so much, as to awaken horrid view of the future, 
and to tinge these with their own gloom. 

it was now so nearly dark, that the travellers, who proceed only by 
the slowest pace, could scarcely discern their way. the clouds, which 
seem charged with thunder, pass slow along the heavens, showing, 
at intervals, the tremble stars; while the grove of cypress and 
sycamore, that overhung the rocks, wave high in the breeze, as it 
swept over the glen, and then rush among the distant woods. emily 
shiver as it passed. 

“where is the torch?” said ugo, “it grow dark.” 

“not so dark yet,” reply bertrand, “but we may find our way, and ’tis 
best not light the torch, before we can help, for it may betray us, if 
any straggle party of the enemy is abroad.” 

ugo mutter something, which emily did not understand, and they 
proceed in darkness, while she almost wished, that the enemy might 
discover them; for from change there was something to hope, since she 
could scarcely imagine any situation more dreadful than her present 
one. 

as they move slow along, her attention was surprise by a thin 
taper flame, that appeared, by fits, at the point of the pike, which 
bertrand carried, resemble what she had observe on the lance of the 
sentinel, the night madame montoni died, and which he had said was an 
omen. the event immediately following it appear to justify the 
assertion, and a superstitious impression had remain on emily’s mind, 
which the present appearance confirmed. she thought it was an omen of 
her own fate, and watch it successive vanish and return, in gloomy 
silence, which was at length interrupt by bertrand. 

“let us light the torch,” said he, “and get under shelter of the 
woods;—a storm is coming on—look at my lance.” 

he held it forth, with the flame taper at its point.* 

(*note: see the abbé berthelon on electricity. [a. r.]) 


“aye,” said ugo, “you are not one of those, that believe in omens: we 
have left coward at the castle, who would turn pale at such a sight. i 
have often seen it before a thunder-storm, it is an omen of that, and 
one is coming now, sure enough. the cloud flash fast already.” 

emily was relieved by this conversation from some of the terror of 
superstition, but those of reason increased, as, wait while ugo 
search for a flint, to strike fire, she watch the pale lightning 
gleam over the wood they were about to enter, and illumine the harsh 
countenance of her companions. ugo could not find a flint, and 
bertrand became impatient, for the thunder sound hollow at a 
distance, and the lightning was more frequent. sometimes, it reveal 
the near recess of the woods, or, display some opening in their 
summits, illumine the ground beneath with partial splendour, the thick 
foliage of the tree preserve the surrounding scene in deep shadow. 

at length, ugo found a flint, and the torch was lighted. the men then 
dismounted, and, have assist emily, led the mule towards the 
woods, that skirt the glen, on the left, over broken ground, 
frequent interrupt with brush-wood and wild plants, which she was 
often oblige to make a circuit to avoid. 

she could not approach these woods, without experience keen sense 
of her danger. their deep silence, except when the wind swept among 
their branches, and impenetrable gloom shown partially by the sudden 
flash, and then, by the red glare of the torch, which serve only to 
make “darkness visible,” were circumstances, that contribute to renew 
all her most terrible apprehensions; she thought, too, that, at this 
moment, the countenance of her conductor display more than their 
usual fierceness, mingle with a kind of lurk exultation, which they 
seem endeavour to disguise. to her affrighte fancy it occurred, 
that they were leading her into these wood to complete the will of 
montoni by her murder. the horrid suggestion call a groan from her 
heart, which surprise her companions, who turn round quick towards 
her, and she demand why they led her thither, beseech them to 
continue their way along the open glen, which she represent to be 
less dangerous than the woods, in a thunder-storm. 

“no, no,” said bertrand, “we know best where the danger lies. see how 
the cloud open over our heads. besides, we can glide under cover of 
the wood with less hazard of being seen, should any of the enemy be 
wandering this way. by holy st. peter and all the rest of them, i’ve as 
stout a heart as the best, as many a poor devil could tell, if he were 
alive again—but what can we do against numbers?” 

“what are you whine about?” said ugo, contemptuously, “who fear 
numbers! let them come, though they were as many as the signor’s castle 
could hold; i would show the knave what fight is. for you—i would 
lay you quiet in a dry ditch, where you might peep out, and see me 
put the rogue to flight.—who talks of fear!” 

bertrand replied, with a horrible oath, that he did not like such 
jesting, and a violent altercation ensued, which was, at length, 
silence by the thunder, whose deep volley was heard afar, rolling 
onward till it burst over their head in sounds, that seem to shake 
the earth to its centre. the ruffian paused, and look upon each 
other. between the bole of the trees, the blue lightning flash and 
quiver along the ground, while, as emily look under the boughs, the 
mountain beyond, frequent appear to be clothe in livid flame. at 
this moment, perhaps, she felt less fear of the storm, than did either 
of her companions, for other terror occupy her mind. 

the men now rest under an enormous chesnut-tree, and fixed their 
pike in the ground, at some distance, on the iron points of which 
emily repeatedly observe the lightning play, and then glide down them 
into the earth. 

“i would we were well in the signor’s castle!” said bertrand, “i know 
not why he should send us on this business. hark! how it rattle above, 
there! i could almost find in my heart to turn priest, and pray. ugo, 
hast got a rosary?” 

“no,” reply ugo, “i leave it to coward like thee, to carry 
rosaries—i carry a sword.” 

“and much good may it do thee in fight against the storm!” said 
bertrand. 

another peal, which was reverberate in tremendous echo among the 
mountains, silence them for a moment. as it roll away, ugo propose 
go on. “we are only lose time here,” said he, “for the thick 
bough of the wood will shelter us as well as this chesnut-tree.” 

they again led the mule forward, between the bole of the trees, and 
over pathless grass, that conceal their high knot roots. the 
rising wind was now heard contend with the thunder, as it rush 
furiously among the branch above, and brighten the red flame of the 
torch, which threw a strong light forward among the woods, and show 
their gloomy recess to be suitable resort for the wolves, of which 
ugo had formerly spoken. 

at length, the strength of the wind seem to drive the storm before 
it, for the thunder roll away into distance, and was only faint 
heard. after travel through the wood for nearly an hour, during 
which the elements seem to have return to repose, the travellers, 
gradual ascend from the glen, found themselves upon the open brow 
of a mountain, with a wide valley, extend in misty moonlight, at 
their feet, and above, the blue sky, tremble through the few thin 
clouds, that linger after the storm, and were sink slow to the 
verge of the horizon. 

emily’s spirits, now that she had quit the woods, began to revive; 
for she considered, that, if these men had received an order to destroy 
her, they would probably have execute their barbarous purpose in the 
solitary wild, from whence they had just emerged, where the deed would 
have been shroud from every human eye. reassure by this reflection, 
and by the quiet demeanour of her guides, emily, as they proceed 
silently, in a kind of sheep track, that wound along the skirt of the 
woods, which ascend on the right, could not survey the sleep 
beauty of the vale, to which they were declining, without a momentary 
sensation of pleasure. it seem varied with woods, pastures, and 
slope grounds, and was screen to the north and the east by an 
amphitheatre of the apennines, whose outline on the horizon was here 
broken into varied and elegant forms; to the west and the south, the 
landscape extend indistinct into the lowland of tuscany. 

“there is the sea yonder,” said bertrand, as if he had known that emily 
was examine the twilight view, “yonder in the west, though we cannot 
see it.” 

emily already perceive a change in the climate, from that of the wild 
and mountainous tract she had left; and, as she continue descending, 
the air became perfume by the breath of a thousand nameless flower 
among the grass, call forth by the late rain. so soothing beautiful 
was the scene around her, and so striking contrast to the gloomy 
grandeur of those, to which she had long been confined, and to the 
manners of the people, who move among them, that she could almost have 
fancy herself again at la vallée, and, wonder why montoni had sent 
her hither, could scarcely believe, that he had select so enchanting 
a spot for any cruel design. it was, however, probably not the spot, 
but the persons, who happen to inhabit it, and to whose care he could 
safe commit the execution of his plans, whatever they might be, that 
had determined his choice. 

she now venture again to enquire, whether they were near the place of 
their destination, and was answer by ugo, that they had not far to 
go. “only to the wood of chesnut in the valley yonder,” said he, 
“there, by the brook, that sparkle with the moon; i wish i was once at 
rest there, with a flask of good wine, and a slice of tuscany bacon.” 

emily’s spirits revived, when she heard, that the journey was so nearly 
concluded, and saw the wood of chesnut in an open part of the vale, on 
the margin of the stream. 

in a short time they reach the entrance of the wood, and perceived, 
between the twinkling leaves, a light, stream from a distant cottage 
window. they proceed along the edge of the brook to where the trees, 
crowd over it, exclude the moonbeams, but a long line of light, 
from the cottage above, was seen on its dark tremulous surface. 
bertrand now step on first, and emily heard him knock, and call 
loud at the door. as she reach it, the small upper casement, where 
the light appeared, was unclosed by a man, who, have enquire what 
they wanted, immediately descended, let them into a neat rustic cot, 
and call up his wife to set refreshments before the travellers. as 
this man conversed, rather apart, with bertrand, emily anxious 
survey him. he was a tall, but not robust, peasant, of a sallow 
complexion, and had a shrewd and cunning eye; his countenance was not 
of a character to win the ready confidence of youth, and there was 
nothing in his manner, that might conciliate a stranger. 


ugo call impatient for supper, and in a tone as if he knew his 
authority here to be unquestionable. “i expect you an hour ago,” said 
the peasant, “for i have had signor montoni’s letter these three hours, 
and i and my wife had given you up, and gone to bed. how did you fare 
in the storm?” 

“ill enough,” reply ugo, “ill enough and we are like to fare ill 
enough here, too, unless you will make more haste. get us more wine, 
and let us see what you have to eat.” 

the peasant placed before them all that his cottage afforded—ham, wine, 
figs, and grape of such size and flavour, as emily had seldom tasted. 

after taking refreshment, she was shown by the peasant’s wife to her 
little bed-chamber, where she ask some question concerning montoni, 
to which the woman, whose name was dorina, gave reserved answers, 
pretend ignorance of his _excellenza_’s intention in send emily 
hither, but acknowledge that her husband had been apprize of the 
circumstance. perceive that she could obtain no intelligence 
concerning her destination, emily dismiss dorina, and retired to 
repose; but all the busy scene of her past and the anticipate one of 
the future came to her anxious mind, and conspire with the sense of 
her new situation to banish sleep. 



chapter vii 

was nought around but image of rest, 
sleep-soothing grove and quiet lawn between, 
and flowery bed that slumbrous influence kept, 
from poppy breath’d, and bank of pleasant green, 
where never yet was creep creature seen. 
meantime unnumbered glittering streamlet play’d, 
and hurl everywhere their water’s sheen, 
that, as they bicker’d through the sunny glade, 
though restless still themselves, a lull murmur made. 
thomson 


when emily, in the morning, open her casement, she was surprise to 
observe the beauties, that surround it. the cottage was nearly 
embowered in the woods, which were chiefly of chesnut intermixe with 
some cypress, larch and sycamore. beneath the dark and spread 
branch appear to the north and to the east the woody apennines, 
rising in majestic amphitheatre, not black with pines, as she had been 
accustomed to see them, but their loftiest summit crown with ancient 
forest of chesnut, oak, and oriental plane, now animate with the rich 
tint of autumn, and which swept downward to the valley 
uninterruptedly, except where some bold rocky promontory look out 
from among the foliage, and caught the passing gleam. vineyard 
stretch along the feet of the mountains, where the elegant villa of 
the tuscan nobility frequent adorn the scene, and overlook slope 
clothe with grove of olive, mulberry, orange and lemon. the plain, to 
which these declined, was coloured with the riches of cultivation, 
whose mingle hue were mellow into harmony by an italy sun. vines, 
their purple cluster blush between the russet foliage, hung in 
luxuriant festoon from the branch of standard fig and cherry trees, 
while pasture of verdure, such as emily had seldom seen in italy, 
enrich the bank of a stream that, after descend from the 
mountains, wound along the landscape, which it reflected, to a bay of 
the sea. there, far in the west, the waters, fade into the sky, 
assume a tint of the faintest purple, and the line of separation 
between them was, now and then, discern only by the progress of a 
sail, brighten with the sunbeam, along the horizon. 

the cottage, which was shade by the wood from the intense ray of 
the sun, and was open only to his evening light, was cover entire 
with vines, fig-trees and jessamine, whose flower surpass in size 
and fragrance any that emily had seen. these and ripen cluster of 
grape hung round her little casement. the turf, that grew under the 
woods, was inlaid with a variety of wild flower and perfume herbs, 
and, on the opposite margin of the stream, whose current diffuse 
fresh beneath the shades, rose a grove of lemon and orange trees. 
this, though nearly opposite to emily’s window, did not interrupt her 
prospect, but rather heightened, by its dark verdure, the effect of the 
perspective; and to her this spot was a bower of sweets, whose charm 
communicate imperceptible to her mind somewhat of their own serenity. 

she was soon summon to breakfast, by the peasant’s daughter, a girl 
about seventeen, of a pleasant countenance, which, emily was glad to 
observe, seem animate with the pure affection of nature, though the 
others, that surround her, expressed, more or less, the worst 
qualities—cruelty, ferocity, cunning and duplicity; of the latter style 
of countenance, especially, were those of the peasant and his wife. 
maddelina spoke little, but what she said was in a soft voice, and with 
an air of modesty and complacency, that interested emily, who 
breakfast at a separate table with dorina, while ugo and bertrand 
were taking a repast of tuscany bacon and wine with their host, near 
the cottage door; when they had finished which, ugo, rising hastily, 
enquire for his mule, and emily learned that he was to return to 
udolpho, while bertrand remain at the cottage; a circumstance, which, 
though it did not surprise, distress her. 

when ugo was departed, emily propose to walk in the neighbouring 
woods; but, on being told, that she must not quit the cottage, without 
have bertrand for her attendant, she withdrew to her own room. there, 
as her eyes settled on the towering apennines, she recollect the 
terrific scenery they had exhibit and the horrors she had suffered, 
on the preceding night, particularly at the moment when bertrand had 
betray himself to be an assassin; and these remembrance awaken a 
train of images, which, since they abstracted her from a consideration 
of her own situation, she pursue for some time, and then arrange in 
the following lines; pleased to have discover any innocent means, by 
which she could beguile an hour of misfortune. 

the pilgrim* 

slow o’er the apennine, with bleeding feet, 
a patient pilgrim wound his lonely way, 
to deck the lady of loretto’s seat 
with all the little wealth his zeal could pay. 
from mountain-tops cold die the evening ray, 
and, stretch’d in twilight, slept the vale below; 
and now the last, last purple streak of day 
along the melancholy west fade slow. 
high o’er his head, the restless pine complain, 
as on their summit rolls the breeze of night; 
beneath, the hoarse stream chide the rocks in vain: 
the pilgrim pause on the dizzy height. 
then to the vale his cautious step he press’d, 
for there a hermit’s cross was dim seen, 
crest the rock, and there his limb might rest, 
cheer’d in the good man’s cave, by faggot’s sheen, 
on leafy beds, nor guile his sleep molest. 
unhappy luke! he trust a treacherous clue! 
behind the cliff the lurk robber stood; 
no friendly moon his giant shadow threw 
athwart the road, to save the pilgrim’s blood; 
on as he went a vesper-hymn he sang, 
the hymn, that nightly sooth’d him to repose. 
fierce on his harmless prey the ruffian sprang! 
the pilgrim bleed to death, his eye-lids close. 
yet his meek spirit knew no vengeful care, 
but, dying, for his murd’rer breath’d—a sainted pray’r! 


(*note: this poem and that entitle _the traveller_ in vol. ii, have 
already appear in a periodical publication. [a. r.]) 


prefer the solitude of her room to the company of the person below 
stairs, emily dine above, and maddelina was suffer to attend her, 
from whose simple conversation she learned, that the peasant and his 
wife were old inhabitant of this cottage, which had been purchase for 
them by montoni, in reward of some service, render him, many years 
before, by marco, to whom carlo, the steward at the castle, was nearly 
related. “so many years ago, signora,” add maddelina, “that i know 
nothing about it; but my father did the signor a great good, for my 
mother has often said to him, this cottage was the least he ought to 
have had.” 

to the mention of this circumstance emily listen with a painful 
interest, since it appear to give a frightful colour to the character 
of marco, whose service, thus reward by montoni, she could scarcely 
doubt have been criminal; and, if so, had too much reason to believe, 
that she had been committed into his hand for some desperate purpose. 
“did you ever hear how many years it is,” said emily, who was 
considering of signora laurentini’s disappearance from udolpho, “since 
your father perform the service you spoke of?” 

“it was a little before he came to live at the cottage, signora,” 
reply maddelina, “and that is about eighteen years ago.” 

this was near the period, when signora laurentini had been said to 
disappear, and it occur to emily, that marco had assist in that 
mysterious affair, and, perhaps, had been employ in a murder! this 
horrible suggestion fixed her in such profound reverie, that maddelina 
quit the room, unperceived by her, and she remain unconscious of 
all around her, for a considerable time. tears, at length, came to her 
relief, after indulge which, her spirits becoming calmer, she cease 
to tremble at a view of evils, that might never arrive; and had 
sufficient resolution to endeavour to withdraw her thought from the 
contemplation of her own interests. remember the few books, which 
even in the hurry of her departure from udolpho she had put into her 
little package, she sat down with one of them at her pleasant casement, 
whence her eyes often wander from the page to the landscape, whose 
beauty gradual soothe her mind into gentle melancholy. 

here, she remain alone, till evening, and saw the sun descend the 
western sky, throw all his pomp of light and shadow upon the mountains, 
and gleam upon the distant ocean and the steal sails, as he sunk 
amidst the waves. then, at the muse hour of twilight, her soften 
thought return to valancourt; she again recollect every 
circumstance, connected with the midnight music, and all that might 
assist her conjecture, concerning his imprison at the castle, and, 
becoming confirmed in the supposition, that it was his voice she had 
heard there, she look back to that gloomy abode with emotion of 
grief and momentary regret. 

refresh by the cool and fragrant air, and her spirits soothe to a 
state of gentle melancholy by the still murmur of the brook below and 
of the wood around, she linger at her case long after the sun 
had set, watch the valley sink into obscurity, till only the 
grand outline of the surrounding mountains, shadow upon the horizon, 
remain visible. but a clear moonlight, that succeeded, gave to the 
landscape, what time give to the scene of past life, when it soften 
all their harsh features, and throw over the whole the mellow 
shade of distant contemplation. the scene of la vallée, in the early 
morn of her life, when she was protect and beloved by parent equally 
loved, appear in emily’s memory tender beautiful, like the prospect 
before her, and awaken mournful comparisons. unwill to encounter 
the coarse behaviour of the peasant’s wife, she remain supperless in 
her room, while she wept again over her forlorn and perilous situation, 
a review of which entire overcame the small remains of her fortitude, 
and, reduce her to temporary despondence, she wish to be release 
from the heavy load of life, that had so long oppress her, and pray 
to heaven to take her, in its mercy, to her parents. 

weary with weeping, she, at length, lay down on her mattress, and 
sunk to sleep, but was soon awaken by a knock at her chamber door, 
and, start up in terror, she heard a voice calling her. the image of 
bertrand, with a stilletto in his hand, appear to her alarm fancy, 
and she neither open the door nor answered, but listen in profound 
silence, till, the voice repeating her name in the same low tone, she 
demand who called. “it is i, signora,” reply the voice, which she 
now distinguished to be maddelina’s, “pray open the door. don’t be 
frightened, it is i.” 

“and what bring you here so late, maddelina?” said emily, as she let 
her in. 

“hush! signora, for heaven’s sake hush!—if we are overheard i shall 
never be forgiven. my father and mother and bertrand are all gone to 
bed,” continue maddelina, as she gently shut the door, and crept 
forward, “and i have brought you some supper, for you had none, you 
know, signora, below stairs. here are some grape and fig and half a 
cup of wine.” emily thank her, but express apprehension lest this 
kindness should draw upon her the resentment of dorina, when she 
perceive the fruit was gone. “take it back, therefore, maddelina,” 
add emily, “i shall suffer much less from the want of it, than i 
should do, if this act of good-nature was to subject you to your 
mother’s displeasure.” 

“o signora! there is no danger of that,” reply maddelina, “my mother 
cannot miss the fruit, for i save it from my own supper. you will make 
me very unhappy, if you refuse to take it, signora.” emily was so much 
affected by this instance of the good girl’s generosity, that she 
remain for some time unable to reply, and maddelina watch her in 
silence, till, mistake the cause of her emotion, she said, “do not 
weep so, signora! my mother, to be sure, is a little cross, sometimes, 
but then it is soon over,—so don’t take it so much to heart. she often 
scold me, too, but then i have learned to bear it, and, when she has 
done, if i can but steal out into the woods, and play upon my sticcado, 
i forget it all directly.” 

emily, smile through her tears, told maddelina, that she was a good 
girl, and then accept her offering. she wish anxious to know, 
whether bertrand and dorina had spoken of montoni, or of his designs, 
concerning herself, in the presence of maddelina, but disdain to 
tempt the innocent girl to a conduct so mean, as that of betray the 
private conversation of her parents. when she was departing, emily 
requested, that she would come to her room as often as she dared, 
without offend her mother, and maddelina, after promising that she 
would do so, stole soft back again to her own chamber. 

thus several days passed, during which emily remain in her own room, 
maddelina attend her only at her repast, whose gentle countenance 
and manners soothe her more than any circumstance she had known for 
many months. of her pleasant embowered chamber she now became fond, and 
began to experience in it those feelings of security, which we 
naturally attach to home. in this interval also, her mind, have been 
undisturbed by any new circumstance of disgust, or alarm, recover its 
tone sufficient to permit her the enjoyment of her books, among which 
she found some unfinished sketch of landscapes, several blank sheet 
of paper, with her drawing instruments, and she was thus enable to 
amuse herself with select some of the lovely features of the 
prospect, that her window commanded, and combine them in scenes, to 
which her tasteful fancy gave a last grace. in these little sketch 
she generally placed interesting groups, characteristic of the scenery 
they animated, and often contrived to tell, with perspicuity, some 
simple and affecting story, when, as a tear fell over the picture 
griefs, which her imagination drew, she would forget, for a moment, her 
real sufferings. thus innocent she beguile the heavy hour of 
misfortune, and, with meek patience, await the event of futurity. 

a beautiful evening, that had succeed to a sultry day, at length 
induce emily to walk, though she knew that bertrand must attend her, 
and, with maddelina for her companion, she left the cottage, follow 
by bertrand, who allow her to choose her own way. the hour was cool 
and silent, and she could not look upon the country around her without 
delight. how lovely, too, appear the brilliant blue that coloured all 
the upper region of the air, and, thence fade downward, was lost in 
the saffron glow of the horizon! nor less so were the varied shades and 
warm colouring of the apennines, as the evening sun threw his slant 
ray athwart their broken surface. emily follow the course of the 
stream, under the shades, that overhung its grassy margin. on the 
opposite banks, the pasture were animate with herd of cattle of a 
beautiful cream-colour; and, beyond, were grove of lemon and orange, 
with fruit glowing on the branches, frequent almost as the leaves, 
which partly conceal it. she pursue her way towards the sea, which 
reflect the warm glow of sunset, while the cliffs, that rose over its 
edge, were tint with the last rays. the valley was terminate on the 
right by a lofty promontory, whose summit, impending over the waves, 
was crown with a ruin tower, now serving for the purpose of a 
beacon, whose shatter battlements and the extend wings of some 
sea-fowl, that circle near it, were still illumine by the upward 
beam of the sun, though his disk was now sunk beneath the horizon; 
while the lower part of the ruin, the cliff on which it stood and the 
wave at its foot, were shade with the first tint of twilight. 

have reach this headland, emily gaze with solemn pleasure on the 
cliffs, that extend on either hand along the sequester shores, some 
crown with grove of pine, and other exhibit only barren 
precipice of greyish marble, except where the crag were tuft with 
myrtle and other aromatic shrubs. the sea slept in a perfect calm; its 
waves, die in murmur on the shores, flow with the gentlest 
undulation, while its clear surface reflect in soften beauty the 
vermeil tint of the west. emily, as she look upon the ocean, thought 
of france and of past times, and she wished, oh! how ardently, and 
vainly—wished! that its wave would bear her to her distant native 
home! 

“ah! that vessel,” said she, “that vessel, which glide along so 
stately, with its tall sail reflect in the water is, perhaps, bound 
for france! happy—happy bark!” she continue to gaze upon it, with warm 
emotion, till the grey of twilight obscure the distance, and veiled it 
from her view. the melancholy sound of the wave at her feet assist 
the tenderness, that occasion her tears, and this was the only sound, 
that broke upon the hour, till, have follow the winding of the 
beach, for some time, a chorus of voice pass her on the air. she 
pause a moment, wish to hear more, yet fear to be seen, and, for 
the first time, look back to bertrand, as her protector, who was 
following, at a short distance, in company with some other person. 
reassure by this circumstance, she advanced towards the sounds, which 
seem to arise from behind a high promontory, that project athwart 
the beach. there was now a sudden pause in the music, and then one 
female voice was heard to sing in a kind of chant. emily quicken her 
steps, and, winding round the rock, saw, within the sweeping bay, 
beyond, which was hung with wood from the border of the beach to the 
very summit of the cliffs, two group of peasants, one seat beneath 
the shades, and the other standing on the edge of the sea, round the 
girl, who was singing, and who held in her hand a chaplet of flowers, 
which she seem about to drop into the waves. 

emily, listen with surprise and attention, distinguished the 
following invocation deliver in the pure and elegant tongue of 
tuscany, and accompany by a few pastoral instruments. 

to a sea-nymph 

o nymph! who love to float on the green wave, 
when neptune sleep beneath the moonlight hour, 
lull’d by the music’s melancholy pow’r, 
o nymph, arise from out thy pearly cave! 

for hesper beam amid the twilight shade, 
and soon shall cynthia tremble o’er the tide, 
gleam on these cliffs, that bound the ocean’s pride, 
and lonely silence all the air pervade. 

then, let thy tender voice at distance swell, 
and steal along this solitary shore, 
sink on the breeze, till dying—heard no more— 
thou wak’st the sudden magic of thy shell. 

while the long coast in echo sweet replies, 
thy soothe strain the pensive heart beguile, 
and bid the vision of the future smile, 
o nymph! from out thy pearly cave—arise! 

(chorus)—_arise!_ 
(semi-chorus)—_arise!_ 


the last words being repeated by the surrounding group, the garland of 
flower was thrown into the waves, and the chorus, sink gradual 
into a chant, die away in silence. 

“what can this mean, maddelina?” said emily, awakening from the 
pleasing trance, into which the music had lull her. “this is the eve 
of a festival, signora,” reply maddelina; “and the peasant then 
amuse themselves with all kind of sports.” 

“but they talk of a sea-nymph,” said emily: “how came these good 
people to think of a sea-nymph?” 

“o, signora,” rejoin maddelina, mistake the reason of emily’s 
surprise, “nobody _believes_ in such things, but our old song tell of 
them, and, when we are at our sports, we sometimes sing to them, and 
throw garland into the sea.” 

emily had been early taught to venerate florence as the seat of 
literature and of the fine arts; but, that its taste for classic story 
should descend to the peasant of the country, occasion her both 
surprise and admiration. the arcadian air of the girl next attract 
her attention. their dress was a very short full petticoat of light 
green, with a boddice of white silk; the sleeve loose, and tie up at 
the shoulder with ribbon and bunch of flowers. their hair, fall 
in ringlet on their necks, was also ornament with flowers, and with 
a small straw hat, which, set rather backward and on one side of the 
head, gave an expression of gaiety and smart to the whole figure. 
when the song had concluded, several of these girl approach emily, 
and, inviting her to sit down among them, offer her, and maddelina, 
whom they knew, grape and figs. 

emily accept their courtesy, much pleased with the gentle and 
grace of their manners, which appear to be perfectly natural to them; 
and when bertrand, soon after, approached, and was hasty drawing her 
away, a peasant, holding up a flask, invite him to drink; a 
temptation, which bertrand was seldom very valiant in resisting. 

“let the young lady join in the dance, my friend,” said the peasant, 
“while we empty this flask. they are go to begin directly. strike 
up! my lads, strike up your tambourine and merry flutes!” 

they sound gaily; and the younger peasant form themselves into a 
circle, which emily would readily have joined, had her spirits been in 
unison with their mirth. maddelina, however, trip it lightly, and 
emily, as she look on the happy group, lost the sense of her 
misfortune in that of a benevolent pleasure. but the pensive 
melancholy of her mind returned, as she sat rather apart from the 
company, listen to the mellow music, which the breeze soften as it 
bore it away, and watch the moon, steal its tremulous light over 
the wave and on the woody summit of the cliffs, that wound along 
these tuscan shores. 

meanwhile, bertrand was so well pleased with his first flask, that he 
very willing commence the attack on a second, and it was late before 
emily, not without some apprehension, return to the cottage. 

after this evening, she frequent walk with maddelina, but was never 
unattended by bertrand; and her mind became by degree as tranquil as 
the circumstances of her situation would permit. the quiet, in which 
she was suffer to live, encourage her to hope, that she was not sent 
hither with an evil design; and, had it not appear probable, that 
valancourt was at this time an inhabitant of udolpho, she would have 
wish to remain at the cottage, till an opportunity should offer of 
return to her native country. but, concerning montoni’s motive for 
send her into tuscany, she was more than ever perplexed, nor could 
she believe that any consideration for her safety had influence him on 
this occasion. 

she had been some time at the cottage, before she recollected, that, in 
the hurry of leave udolpho, she had forgotten the papers committed to 
her by her late aunt, relative to the languedoc estates; but, though 
this remembrance occasion her much uneasiness, she had some hope, 
that, in the obscure place, where they were deposited, they would 
escape the detection of montoni. 



chapter viii 

my tongue hath but a heavy tale to say. 
i play the torturer, by small and small, 
to lengthen out the worst that must be spoken. 
richard ii 


we now return, for a moment, to venice, where count morano was 
suffering under an accumulation of misfortunes. soon after his arrival 
in that city, he had been arrest by order of the senate, and, without 
knowing of what he was suspected, was convey to a place of 
confinement, whither the most strenuous enquiry of his friends had 
been unable to trace him. who the enemy was, that had occasion him 
this calamity, he had not been able to guess, unless, indeed, it was 
montoni, on whom his suspicion rested, and not only with much apparent 
probability, but with justice. 

in the affair of the poison cup, montoni had suspect morano; but, 
being unable to obtain the degree of proof, which was necessary to 
convict him of a guilty intention, he had recourse to means of other 
revenge, than he could hope to obtain by prosecution. he employ a 
person, in whom he believe he might confide, to drop a letter of 
accusation into the _denunzie secrete_, or lions’ mouths, which are 
fixed in a gallery of the doge’s palace, as receptacle for anonymous 
information, concerning persons, who may be disaffected towards the 
state. as, on these occasions, the accuse is not confront with the 
accused, a man may false impeach his enemy, and accomplish an unjust 
revenge, without fear of punishment, or detection. that montoni should 
have recourse to these diabolical means of ruin a person, whom he 
suspect of have attempt his life, is not in the least surprising. 
in the letter, which he had employ as the instrument of his revenge, 
he accused morano of designs against the state, which he attempt to 
prove, with all the plausible simplicity of which he was master; and 
the senate, with whom a suspicion was, at that time, almost equal to a 
proof, arrest the count, in consequence of this accusation; and, 
without even hint to him his crime, threw him into one of those 
secret prisons, which were the terror of the venetians, and in which 
person often languished, and sometimes died, without being discover 
by their friends. 

morano had incur the personal resentment of many member of the 
state; his habit of life had render him obnoxious to some; and his 
ambition, and the bold rivalship, which he discovered, on several 
public occasions,—to others; and it was not to be expected, that mercy 
would soften the rigour of a law, which was to be dispense from the 
hand of his enemies. 

montoni, meantime, was beset by danger of another kind. his castle was 
besiege by troops, who seem willing to dare everything, and to 
suffer patient any hardship in pursuit of victory. the strength of 
the fortress, however, withstood their attack, and this, with the 
vigorous defence of the garrison and the scarcity of provision on these 
wild mountains, soon compel the assailant to raise the siege. 

when udolpho was once more left to the quiet possession of montoni, he 
dispatch ugo into tuscany for emily, whom he had sent from 
consideration of her personal safety, to a place of greater security, 
than a castle, which was, at that time, liable to be overrun by his 
enemies. tranquill being once more restore to udolpho, he was 
impatient to secure her again under his roof, and had commission ugo 
to assist bertrand in guard her back to the castle. thus compel 
to return, emily bade the kind maddelina farewell, with regret, and, 
after about a fortnight’s stay in tuscany, where she had experienced an 
interval of quiet, which was absolutely necessary to sustain her 
long-harassed spirits, began once more to ascend the apennines, from 
whose heights she gave a long and sorrowful look to the beautiful 
country, that extend at their feet, and to the distant mediterranean, 
whose wave she had so often wish would bear her back to france. the 
distress she felt, on her return towards the place of her former 
sufferings, was, however, soften by a conjecture, that valancourt was 
there, and she found some degree of comfort in the thought of being 
near him, notwithstanding the consideration, that he was probably a 
prisoner. 

it was noon when she had left the cottage, and the evening was closed, 
long before she came within the neighbourhood of udolpho. there was a 
moon, but it shone only at intervals, for the night was cloudy, and, 
light by the torch, which ugo carried, the traveller pace silent 
along, emily muse on her situation, and bertrand and ugo anticipate 
the comfort of a flask of wine and a good fire, for they had perceive 
for some time the difference between the warm climate of the lowland 
of tuscany and the nipping air of these upper regions. emily was, at 
length, rouse from her reverie by the far-off sound of the castle 
clock, to which she listen not without some degree of awe, as it 
roll away on the breeze. another and another note succeeded, and die 
in sullen murmur among the mountains:—to her mournful imagination it 
seem a knell measure out some fateful period for her. 

“aye, there is the old clock,” said bertrand, “there he is still; the 
cannon have not silence him!” 

“no,” answer ugo, “he crow as loud as the best of them in the midst 
of it all. there he was roaring out in the hottest fire i have seen 
this many a day! i said that some of them would have a hit at the old 
fellow, but he escaped, and the tower too.” 

the road winding round the base of a mountain, they now came within 
view of the castle, which was shown in the perspective of the valley by 
a gleam of moonshine, and then vanish in shade; while even a 
transient view of it had awaken the poignancy of emily’s feelings. 
its massy and gloomy wall gave her terrible idea of imprison and 
suffering: yet, as she advanced, some degree of hope mingle with her 
terror; for, though this was certainly the residence of montoni, it was 
possibly, also, that of valancourt, and she could not approach a place, 
where he might be, without experience somewhat of the joy of hope. 

they continue to wind along the valley, and, soon after, she saw again 
the old wall and moonlit towers, rising over the woods: the strong 
ray enable her, also, to perceive the ravages, which the siege had 
made,—with the broken walls, and shatter battlements, for they were 
now at the foot of the steep, on which udolpho stood. massy fragment 
had roll down among the woods, through which the traveller now began 
to ascend, and there mingle with the loose earth, and pieces of rock 
they had brought with them. the woods, too, had suffer much from the 
battery above, for here the enemy had endeavour to screen 
themselves from the fire of the ramparts. many noble tree were 
level with the ground, and others, to a wide extent, were entire 
strip of their upper branches. “we had better dismount,” said ugo, 
“and lead the mule up the hill, or we shall get into some of the 
holes, which the balls have left. here are plenty of them. give me the 
torch,” continue ugo, after they had dismounted, “and take care you 
don’t stumble over anything, that lie in your way, for the ground is 
not yet clear of the enemy.” 

“how!” exclaim emily, “are any of the enemy here, then?” 

“nay, i don’t know for that, now,” he replied, “but when i came away i 
saw one or two of them lie under the trees.” 

as they proceeded, the torch threw a gloomy light upon the ground, and 
far among the recess of the woods, and emily fear to look forward, 
lest some object of horror should meet her eye. the path was often 
strewn with broken head of arrows, and with shatter remains of 
armour, such as at that period was mingle with the lighter dress of 
the soldiers. “bring the light hither,” said bertrand, “i have stumble 
over something, that rattle loud enough.” ugo holding up the torch, 
they perceive a steel breastplate on the ground, which bertrand 
raised, and they saw, that it was pierce through, and that the lining 
was entire cover with blood; but upon emily’s earnest entreaty 
that they would proceed, bertrand, utter some joke upon the 
unfortunate person, to whom it had belonged, threw it hard upon the 
ground, and they pass on. 

at every step she took, emily fear to see some vestige of death. 
coming soon after to an opening in the woods, bertrand stop to 
survey the ground, which was encumber with massy trunks and branch 
of the trees, that had so lately adorn it, and seem to have been a 
spot particularly fatal to the besiegers; for it was evident from the 
destruction of the trees, that here the hottest fire of the garrison 
had been directed. as ugo held again forth the torch, steel glitter 
between the fallen trees; the ground beneath was cover with broken 
arms, and with the torn vestment of soldiers, whose mangle form 
emily almost expect to see; and she again entreat her companion to 
proceed, who were, however, too intent in their examination, to regard 
her, and she turn her eyes from this desolate scene to the castle 
above, where she observe lights gliding along the ramparts. presently, 
the castle clock struck twelve, and then a trumpet sounded, of which 
emily enquire the occasion. 

“o! they are only change watch,” reply ugo. “i do not remember this 
trumpet,” said emily, “it is a new custom.” “it is only an old one 
revived, lady; we always use it in time of war. we have sound it, at 
midnight, ever since the place was besieged.” 

“hark!” said emily, as the trumpet sound again; and, in the next 
moment, she heard a faint clash of arms, and then the watchword pass 
along the terrace above, and was answer from a distant part of the 
castle; after which all was again still. she complain of cold, and 
beg to go on. “presently, lady,” said bertrand, turning over some 
broken arms with the pike he usually carried. “what have we here?” 

“hark!” cry emily, “what noise was that?” 

“what noise was it?” said ugo, start up and listening. 

“hush!” repeated emily. “it surely came from the rampart above:” and, 
on look up, they perceive a light moving along the walls, while, in 
the next instant, the breeze swelling, the voice sound loud than 
before. 

“who go yonder?” cry a sentinel of the castle. “speak or it will be 
worse for you.” bertrand utter a shout of joy. “hah! my brave 
comrade, is it you?” said he, and he blew a shrill whistle, which 
signal was answer by another from the soldier on watch; and the 
party, then passing forward, soon after emerge from the wood upon the 
broken road, that led immediately to the castle gates, and emily saw, 
with renew terror, the whole of that stupendous structure. “alas!” 
said she to herself, “i am go again into my prison!” 

“here has been warm work, by st. marco!” cry bertrand, wave a torch 
over the ground; “the balls have torn up the earth here with a 
vengeance.” 

“aye,” reply ugo, “they were fire from that redoubt, yonder, and 
rare execution they did. the enemy made a furious attack upon the great 
gates; but they might have guess they could never carry it there; 
for, besides the cannon from the walls, our archers, on the two round 
towers, shower down upon them at such a rate, that, by holy peter! 
there was no standing it. i never saw a better sight in my life; i 
laughed, till my side aked, to see how the knave scampered. bertrand, 
my good fellow, thou shouldst have been among them; i warrant thou 
wouldst have won the race!” 

“hah! you are at your old trick again,” said bertrand in a surly tone. 
“it is well for thee thou art so near the castle; thou knowest i have 
kill my man before now.” ugo reply only by a laugh, and then gave 
some further account of the siege, to which as emily listened, she was 
struck by the strong contrast of the present scene with that which had 
so lately been act here. 

the mingle uproar of cannon, drums, and trumpets, the groan of the 
conquered, and the shout of the conquer were now sunk into a 
silence so profound, that it seem as if death had triumph alike 
over the vanquish and the victor. the shatter condition of one of 
the tower of the great gate by no means confirmed the _valiant_ 
account just given by ugo of the scamper party, who, it was evident, 
had not only made a stand, but had done much mischief before they took 
to flight; for this tower appeared, as far as emily could judge by the 
dim moonlight that fell upon it, to be laid open, and the battlements 
were nearly demolished. while she gazed, a light glimmer through one 
of the lower loop-holes, and disappeared; but, in the next moment, she 
perceive through the broken wall, a soldier, with a lamp, ascend 
the narrow staircase, that wound within the tower, and, remember 
that it was the same she had pass up, on the night, when barnardine 
had delude her with a promise of seeing madame montoni, fancy gave her 
somewhat of the terror she had then suffered. she was now very near the 
gates, over which the soldier have open the door of the 
portal-chamber, the lamp he carry gave her a dusky view of that 
terrible apartment, and she almost sunk under the recollect horrors 
of the moment, when she had drawn aside the curtain, and discover the 
object it was meant to conceal. 

“perhaps,” said she to herself, “it is now use for a similar purpose; 
perhaps, that soldier goes, at this dead hour, to watch over the corpse 
of his friend!” the little remains of her fortitude now gave way to the 
united force of remember and anticipate horrors, for the melancholy 
fate of madame montoni appear to foretell her own. she considered, 
that, though the languedoc estates, if she relinquish them, would 
satisfy montoni’s avarice, they might not appease his vengeance, which 
was seldom pacify but by a terrible sacrifice; and she even thought, 
that, were she to resign them, the fear of justice might urge him 
either to detain her a prisoner, or to take away her life. 

they were now arrive at the gates, where bertrand, observing the light 
glimmer through a small case of the portal-chamber, call aloud; 
and the soldier, look out, demand who was there. “here, i have 
brought you a prisoner,” said ugo, “open the gate, and let us in.” 

“tell me first who it is, that demand entrance,” reply the soldier. 
“what! my old comrade,” cry ugo, “don’t you know me? not know ugo? i 
have brought home a prisoner here, bound hand and foot—a fellow, who 
has been drink tuscany wine, while we here have been fighting.” 

“you will not rest till you meet with your match,” said bertrand 
sullenly. “hah! my comrade, is it you?” said the soldier—“i’ll be with 
you directly.” 

emily presently heard his steps descend the stairs within, and then 
the heavy chain fall, and the bolt undraw of a small postern door, 
which he open to admit the party. he held the lamp low, to show the 
step of the gate, and she found herself once more beneath the gloomy 
arch, and heard the door close, that seem to shut her from the world 
for ever. in the next moment, she was in the first court of the castle, 
where she survey the spacious and solitary area, with a kind of calm 
despair; while the dead hour of the night, the gothic gloom of the 
surrounding buildings, and the hollow and imperfect echoes, which they 
returned, as ugo and the soldier converse together, assist to 
increase the melancholy foreboding of her heart. passing on to the 
second court, a distant sound broke feeble on the silence, and 
gradual swelling louder, as they advanced, emily distinguished voice 
of revelry and laughter, but they were to her far other than sound of 
joy. “why, you have got some tuscany wine among you, _here_,” said 
bertrand, “if one may judge by the uproar that is go forward. ugo 
has taken a large share of that than of fighting, i’ll be sworn. who 
is carouse at this late hour?” 

“his _excellenza_ and the signors,” reply the soldier: “it is a sign 
you are a stranger at the castle, or you would not need to ask the 
question. they are brave spirits, that do without sleep—they generally 
pass the night in good cheer; would that we, who keep the watch, had a 
little of it! it is cold work, pace the rampart so many hour of the 
night, if one has no good liquor to warm one’s heart.” 

“courage, my lad, courage ought to warm your heart,” said ugo. 
“courage!” reply the soldier sharply, with a menace air, which ugo 
perceiving, prevent his saying more, by return to the subject of 
the carousal. “this is a new custom,” said he; “when i left the castle, 
the signor use to sit up counselling.” 

“aye, and for that matter, carouse too,” reply the soldier, “but, 
since the siege, they have done nothing but make merry: and if i was 
they, i would settle account with myself, for all my hard fighting, 
the same way.” 

they had now cross the second court, and reach the hall door, when 
the soldier, bidding them good night, hasten back to his post; and, 
while they wait for admittance, emily considered how she might avoid 
seeing montoni, and retire unnoticed to her former apartment, for she 
shrunk from the thought of encounter either him, or any of his 
party, at this hour. the uproar within the castle was now so loud, 
that, though ugo knock repeatedly at the hall door, he was not heard 
by any of the servants, a circumstance, which increase emily’s alarm, 
while it allow her time to deliberate on the means of retiring 
unobserved; for, though she might, perhaps, pass up the great staircase 
unseen, it was impossible she could find the way to her chamber, 
without a light, the difficulty of procure which, and the danger of 
wandering about the castle, without one, immediately struck her. 
bertrand had only a torch, and she knew, that the servant never 
brought a taper to the door, for the hall was sufficient light by 
the large tripod lamp, which hung in the vaulted roof; and, while she 
should wait till annette could bring a taper, montoni, or some of his 
companions, might discover her. 

the door was now open by carlo; and emily, have request him to 
send annette immediately with a light to the great gallery, where she 
determined to await her, pass on with hasty steps towards the 
staircase; while bertrand and ugo, with the torch, follow old carlo 
to the servants’ hall, impatient for supper and the warm blaze of a 
wood fire. emily, light only by the feeble rays, which the lamp above 
threw between the arch of this extensive hall, endeavour to find 
her way to the staircase, now hid in obscurity; while the shout of 
merriment, that burst from a remote apartment, served, by heighten 
her terror, to increase her perplexity, and she expected, every 
instant, to see the door of that room open, and montoni and his 
companion issue forth. having, at length, reach the staircase, and 
found her way to the top, she seat herself on the last stair, to 
await the arrival of annette; for the profound dark of the gallery 
deter her from proceeding farther, and, while she listen for her 
footstep, she heard only distant sound of revelry, which rose in 
sullen echo from among the arcade below. once she thought she heard 
a low sound from the dark gallery behind her; and, turning her eyes, 
fancy she saw something luminous move in it; and, since she could 
not, at this moment, subdue the weakness that cause her fears, she 
quit her seat, and crept soft down a few stairs lower. 

annette not yet appearing, emily now concluded, that she was gone to 
bed, and that nobody chose to call her up; and the prospect, that 
present itself, of passing the night in darkness, in this place, or 
in some other equally forlorn (for she knew it would be impracticable 
to find her way through the intricacy of the gallery to her 
chamber), drew tear of mingle terror and despondent from her eyes. 

while thus she sat, she fancy she heard again an odd sound from the 
gallery, and she listened, scarcely daring to breathe, but the 
increase voice below overcame every other sound. soon after, she 
heard montoni and his companion burst into the hall, who spoke, as if 
they were much intoxicated, and seem to be advance towards the 
staircase. she now remembered, that they must come this way to their 
chambers, and, forget all the terror of the gallery, hurried 
towards it with an intention of secrete herself in some of the 
passages, that open beyond, and of endeavouring, when the signor 
were retired, to find her way to her own room, or to that of annette, 
which was in a remote part of the castle. 

with extend arms, she crept along the gallery, still hearing the 
voice of person below, who seem to stop in conversation at the foot 
of the staircase, and then pause for a moment to listen, half fearful 
of go further into the dark of the gallery, where she still 
imagined, from the noise she had heard, that some person was lurking, 
“they are already informed of my arrival,” said she, “and montoni is 
coming himself to seek me! in the present state of his mind, his 
purpose must be desperate.” then, recollect the scene, that had 
pass in the corridor, on the night preceding her departure from the 
castle, “o valancourt!” said she, “i must then resign you for ever. to 
brave any long the injustice of montoni, would not be fortitude, but 
rashness.” still the voice below did not draw nearer, but they became 
louder, and she distinguished those of verezzi and bertolini above the 
rest, while the few words she caught made her listen more anxious for 
others. the conversation seem to concern herself; and, have 
venture to step a few pace near to the staircase, she discovered, 
that they were dispute about her, each seeming to claim some former 
promise of montoni, who appeared, at first, inclined to appease and to 
persuade them to return to their wine, but afterwards to be weary of 
the dispute, and, saying that he left them to settle it as they could, 
was return with the rest of the party to the apartment he had just 
quitted. verezzi then stop him. “where is she? signor,” said he, in 
a voice of impatience: “tell us where she is.” “i have already told you 
that i do not know,” reply montoni, who seem to be somewhat 
overcome with wine; “but she is most probably gone to her apartment.” 
verezzi and bertolini now desist from their enquiries, and sprang to 
the staircase together, while emily, who, during this discourse, had 
tremble so excessively, that she had with difficulty support 
herself, seem inspired with new strength, the moment she heard the 
sound of their steps, and ran along the gallery, dark as it was, with 
the fleet of a fawn. but, long before she reach its extremity, 
the light, which verezzi carried, flash upon the walls; both 
appeared, and, instantly perceive emily, pursue her. at this moment, 
bertolini, whose steps, though swift, were not steady, and whose 
impatience overcame what little caution he had hitherto used, stumbled, 
and fell at his length. the lamp fell with him, and was presently 
expire on the floor; but verezzi, regardless of saving it, seize the 
advantage this accident gave him over his rival, and follow emily, to 
whom, however, the light had shown one of the passage that branch 
from the gallery, and she instantly turn into it. verezzi could just 
discern the way she had taken, and this he pursued; but the sound of 
her steps soon sunk in distance, while he, less acquaint with the 
passage, was oblige to proceed through the dark, with caution, lest he 
should fall down a flight of steps, such as in this extensive old 
castle frequent terminate an avenue. this passage at length brought 
emily to the corridor, into which her own chamber opened, and, not 
hearing any footstep, she pause to take breath, and consider what was 
the safest design to be adopted. she had follow this passage, merely 
because it was the first that appeared, and now that she had reach 
the end of it, was as perplexed as before. whither to go, or how 
further to find her way in the dark, she knew not; she was aware only 
that she must not seek her apartment, for there she would certainly be 
sought, and her danger increase every instant, while she remain near 
it. her spirits and her breath, however, were so much exhausted, that 
she was compel to rest, for a few minutes, at the end of the 
passage, and still she heard no steps approaching. as thus she stood, 
light glimmer under an opposite door of the gallery, and, from its 
situation, she knew, that it was the door of that mysterious chamber, 
where she had made a discovery so shocking, that she never remember 
it but with the utmost horror. that there should be light in this 
chamber, and at this hour, excited her strong surprise, and she felt a 
momentary terror concerning it, which did not permit her to look again, 
for her spirits were now in such a state of weakness, that she almost 
expect to see the door slow open, and some horrible object appear 
at it. still she listen for a step along the passage, and look up 
it, where, not a ray of light appearing, she concluded, that verezzi 
had gone back for the lamp; and, believe that he would shortly be 
there, she again considered which way she should go, or rather which 
way she could find in the dark. 

a faint ray still glimmer under the opposite door, but so great, and, 
perhaps, so just was her horror of that chamber, that she would not 
again have tempt its secrets, though she had been certain of 
obtain the light so important to her safety. she was still breathing 
with difficulty, and rest at the end of the passage, when she heard 
a rustling sound, and then a low voice, so very near her, that it 
seem close to her ear; but she had presence of mind to check her 
emotions, and to remain quite still; in the next moment, she perceive 
it to be the voice of verezzi, who did not appear to know, that she was 
there, but to have spoken to himself. “the air is fresher here,” said 
he: “this should be the corridor.” perhaps, he was one of those heroes, 
whose courage can defy an enemy better than darkness, and he try to 
rally his spirits with the sound of his own voice. however this might 
be, he turn to the right, and proceeded, with the same steal 
steps, towards emily’s apartment, apparently forgetting, that, in 
darkness, she could easily elude his search, even in her chamber; and, 
like an intoxicate person, he follow pertinacious the one idea, 
that had possessed his imagination. 

the moment she heard his steps steal away, she left her station and 
move soft to the other end of the corridor, determined to trust 
again to chance, and to quit it by the first avenue she could find; 
but, before she could effect this, light broke upon the wall of the 
gallery, and, look back, she saw verezzi crossing it towards her 
chamber. she now glide into a passage, that open on the left, 
without, as she thought, being perceived; but, in the next instant, 
another light, glimmer at the further end of this passage, threw her 
into new terror. while she stop and hesitate which way to go, the 
pause allow her to perceive, that it was annette, who advanced, and 
she hurried to meet her: but her imprudence again alarm emily, on 
perceive whom, she burst into a scream of joy, and it was some 
minutes, before she could be prevail with to be silent, or to release 
her mistress from the ardent clasp, in which she held her. when, at 
length, emily made annette comprehend her danger, they hurried towards 
annette’s room, which was in a distant part of the castle. no 
apprehensions, however, could yet silence the latter. “oh dear 
ma’amselle,” said she, as they pass along, “what a terrify time 
have i had of it! oh! i thought i should have die a hundred times! i 
never thought i should live to see you again! and i never was so glad 
to see anybody in my whole life, as i am to see you now.” “hark!” cry 
emily, “we are pursued; that was the echo of steps!” “no, ma’amselle,” 
said annette, “it was only the echo of a door shutting; sound runs 
along these vaulted passage so, that one is continual deceive by 
it; if one do but speak, or cough, it make a noise as loud as a 
cannon.” “then there is the greater necessity for us to be silent,” 
said emily: “pr’ythee say no more, till we reach your chamber.” here, 
at length, they arrived, without interruption, and, annette have 
fasten the door, emily sat down on her little bed, to recover breath 
and composure. to her enquiry, whether valancourt was among the 
prisoner in the castle, annette replied, that she had not been able to 
hear, but that she knew there were several person confined. she then 
proceeded, in her tedious way, to give an account of the siege, or 
rather a detail of her terror and various sufferings, during the 
attack. “but,” add she, “when i heard the shout of victory from the 
ramparts, i thought we were all taken, and gave myself up for lost, 
instead of which, _we_ had driven the enemy away. i went then to the 
north gallery, and saw a great many of them scamper away among the 
mountains; but the rampart wall were all in ruins, as one may say, and 
there was a dismal sight to see down among the wood below, where the 
poor fellow were lie in heaps, but were carry off presently by 
their comrades. while the siege was go on, the signor was here, and 
there, and everywhere, at the same time, as ludovico told me, for he 
would not let me see anything hardly, and lock me up, as he has often 
done before, in a room in the middle of the castle, and use to bring 
me food, and come and talk with me as often as he could; and i must 
say, if it had not been for ludovico, i should have die outright.” 

“well, annette,” said emily, “and how have affair gone on, since the 
siege?” 

“o! sad hurly-burly doings, ma’amselle,” reply annette; “the signor 
have done nothing but sit and drink and game, ever since. they sit up, 
all night, and play among themselves, for all those riches and fine 
things, they brought in, some time since, when they use to go out 
a-robbing, or as good, for days together; and then they have dreadful 
quarrel about who loses, and who wins. that fierce signor verezzi is 
always losing, as they tell me, and signor orsino win from him, and 
this make him very wroth, and they have had several hard set-to’s 
about it. then, all those fine ladies are at the castle still; and i 
declare i am frighted, whenever i meet any of them in the passages—” 

“surely, annette,” said emily starting, “i heard a noise: listen.” 
after a long pause, “no, ma’amselle,” said annette, “it was only the 
wind in the gallery; i often hear it, when it shakes the old doors, at 
the other end. but won’t you go to bed, ma’amselle? you surely will not 
sit up starving, all night.” emily now laid herself down on the 
mattress, and desire annette to leave the lamp burning on the hearth; 
have done which, the latter placed herself beside emily, who, 
however, was not suffer to sleep, for she again thought she heard a 
noise from the passage; and annette was again try to convince her, 
that it was only the wind, when footstep were distinct heard near 
the door. annette was now start from the bed, but emily prevail 
with her to remain there, and listen with her in a state of terrible 
expectation. the steps still loiter at the door, when presently an 
attempt was made on the lock, and, in the next instant, a voice called. 
“for heaven’s sake, annette, do not answer,” said emily softly, “remain 
quite still; but i fear we must extinguish the lamp, or its glare will 
betray us.” “holy virgin!” exclaim annette, forget her 
discretion, “i would not be in dark now for the whole world.” while 
she spoke, the voice became loud than before, and repeated annette’s 
name; “blessed virgin!” cry she suddenly, “it is only ludovico.” she 
rose to open the door, but emily prevent her, till they should be 
more certain, that it was he alone; with whom annette, at length, 
talk for some time, and learned, that he was come to enquire after 
herself, whom he had let out of her room to go to emily, and that he 
was now return to lock her in again. emily, fearful of being 
overheard, if they converse any long through the door, consent 
that it should be opened, and a young man appeared, whose open 
countenance confirmed the favourable opinion of him, which his care of 
annette had already prompt her to form. she entreat his protection, 
should verezzi make this requisite; and ludovico offer to pass the 
night in an old chamber, adjoining, that open from the gallery, and, 
on the first alarm, to come to their defence. 

emily was much soothe by this proposal; and ludovico, have light 
his lamp, went to his station, while she, once more, endeavour to 
repose on her mattress. but a variety of interests pressed upon her 
attention, and prevent sleep. she thought much on what annette had 
told her of the dissolute manners of montoni and his associates, and 
more of his present conduct towards herself, and of the danger, from 
which she had just escaped. from the view of her present situation she 
shrunk, as from a new picture of terror. she saw herself in a castle, 
inhabit by vice and violence, seat beyond the reach of law or 
justice, and in the power of a man, whose perseverance was equal to 
every occasion, and in whom passions, of which revenge was not the 
weakest, entire supply the place of principles. she was compelled, 
once more, to acknowledge, that it would be folly, and not fortitude, 
any long to dare his power; and, resign all hope of future 
happiness with valancourt, she determined, that, on the following 
morning, she would compromise with montoni, and give up her estates, on 
condition, that he would permit her immediate return to france. such 
consideration kept her waking for many hours; but, the night passed, 
without further alarm from verezzi. 

on the next morning, emily had a long conversation with ludovico, in 
which she heard circumstances concerning the castle, and received hint 
of the designs of montoni, that considerably increase her alarms. on 
express her surprise, that ludovico, who seem to be so sensible of 
the evil of his situation, should continue in it, he informed her, 
that it was not his intention to do so, and she then venture to ask 
him, if he would assist her to escape from the castle. ludovico assured 
her of his readiness to attempt this, but strong represent the 
difficulty of the enterprise, and the certain destruction which must 
ensue, should montoni overtake them, before they had pass the 
mountains; he, however, promise to be watchful of every circumstance, 
that might contribute to the success of the attempt, and to think upon 
some plan of departure. 

emily now confide to him the name of valancourt, and beg he would 
enquire for such a person among the prisoner in the castle; for the 
faint hope, which this conversation awakened, made her now recede from 
her resolution of an immediate compromise with montoni. she determined, 
if possible, to delay this, till she heard further from ludovico, and, 
if his designs were found to be impracticable, to resign the estate at 
once. her thought were on this subject, when montoni, who was now 
recover from the intoxicate of the preceding night, sent for her, 
and she immediately obey the summons. he was alone. “i find,” said 
he, “that you were not in your chamber, last night; where were you?” 
emily related to him some circumstances of her alarm, and entreat his 
protection from a repetition of them. “you know the terms of my 
protection,” said he; “if you really value this, you will secure it.” 
his open declaration, that he would only conditional protect her, 
while she remain a prisoner in the castle, show emily the necessity 
of an immediate compliance with his terms; but she first demanded, 
whether he would permit her immediately to depart, if she gave up her 
claim to the contest estates. in a very solemn manner he then assured 
her, that he would, and immediately laid before her a paper, which was 
to transfer the right of those estate to himself. 

she was, for a considerable time, unable to sign it, and her heart was 
torn with contend interests, for she was about to resign the 
happiness of all her future years—the hope, which had sustain her in 
so many hour of adversity. 

after hearing from montoni a recapitulation of the conditions of her 
compliance, and a remonstrance, that his time was valuable, she put her 
hand to the paper; when she had done which, she fell back in her chair, 
but soon recovered, and desired, that he would give orders for her 
departure, and that he would allow annette to accompany her. montoni 
smiled. “it was necessary to deceive you,” said he,—“there was no other 
way of making you act reasonably; you shall go, but it must not be at 
present. i must first secure these estate by possession: when that is 
done, you may return to france if you will.” 

the deliberate villany, with which he violate the solemn engagement he 
had just enter into, shock emily as much, as the certainty, that 
she had made a fruitless sacrifice, and must still remain his prisoner. 
she had no words to express what she felt, and knew, that it would have 
been useless, if she had. as she look piteous at montoni, he turn 
away, and at the same time desire she would withdraw to her apartment; 
but, unable to leave the room, she sat down in a chair near the door, 
and sigh heavily. she had neither words nor tears. 

“why will you indulge this childish grief?” said he. “endeavour to 
strengthen your mind, to bear patient what cannot now be avoided; you 
have no real evil to lament; be patient, and you will be sent back to 
france. at present retire to your apartment.” 

“i dare not go, sir,” said she, “where i shall be liable to the 
intrusion of signor verezzi.” “have i not promise to protect you?” 
said montoni. “you have promised, sir,”—replied emily, after some 
hesitation. “and is not my promise sufficient?” add he sternly. “you 
will recollect your former promise, signor,” said emily, trembling, 
“and may determine for me, whether i ought to rely upon this.” “will 
you provoke me to declare to you, that i will not protect you then?” 
said montoni, in a tone of haughty displeasure. “if that will satisfy 
you, i will do it immediately. withdraw to your chamber, before i 
retract my promise; you have nothing to fear there.” emily left the 
room, and move slow into the hall, where the fear of meeting 
verezzi, or bertolini, made her quicken her steps, though she could 
scarcely support herself; and soon after she reach once more her own 
apartment. have look fearful round her, to examine if any person 
was there, and have search every part of it, she fasten the door, 
and sat down by one of the casements. here, while she look out for 
some hope to support her faint spirits, which had been so long 
harass and oppressed, that, if she had not now struggle much against 
misfortune, they would have left her, perhaps, for ever, she 
endeavour to believe, that montoni did really intend to permit her 
return to france as soon as he had secure her property, and that he 
would, in the mean time, protect her from insult; but her chief hope 
rest with ludovico, who, she doubt not, would be zealous in her 
cause, though he seem almost to despair of success in it. one 
circumstance, however, she had to rejoice in. her prudence, or rather 
her fears, had save her from mention the name of valancourt to 
montoni, which she was several times on the point of doing, before she 
sign the paper, and of stipulate for his release, if he should be 
really a prisoner in the castle. had she done this, montoni’s jealous 
fear would now probably have loaded valancourt with new severities, 
and have suggest the advantage of holding him a captive for life. 

thus pass the melancholy day, as she had before pass many in this 
same chamber. when night drew on, she would have withdrawn herself to 
annette’s bed, had not a particular interest inclined her to remain in 
this chamber, in spite of her fears; for, when the castle should be 
still, and the customary hour arrived, she determined to watch for the 
music, which she had formerly heard. though its sound might not enable 
her positively to determine, whether valancourt was there, they would 
perhaps strengthen her opinion that he was, and impart the comfort, so 
necessary to her present support. but, on the other hand, if all should 
be silent! she hardly dare to suffer her thought to glance that way, 
but waited, with impatient expectation, the approach hour. 

the night was stormy; the battlements of the castle appear to rock in 
the wind, and, at intervals, long groan seem to pass on the air, 
such as those, which often deceive the melancholy mind, in tempests, 
and amidst scene of desolation. emily heard, as formerly, the 
sentinel pass along the terrace to their posts, and, look out from 
her casement, observed, that the watch was doubled; a precaution, which 
appear necessary enough, when she threw her eyes on the walls, and 
saw their shatter condition. the well-known sound of the soldiers’ 
march, and of their distant voices, which pass her in the wind, and 
were lost again, recall to her memory the melancholy sensation she 
had suffered, when she formerly heard the same sounds; and occasion 
almost involuntary comparison between her present, and her late 
situation. but this was no subject for congratulations, and she wise 
checked the course of her thoughts, while, as the hour was not yet 
come, in which she had been accustomed to hear the music, she closed 
the casement, and endeavour to await it in patience. the door of the 
staircase she try to secure, as usual, with some of the furniture of 
the room; but this expedient her fear now represent to her to be 
very inadequate to the power and perseverance of verezzi; and she often 
look at a large and heavy chest, that stood in the chamber, with 
wish that she and annette had strength enough to move it. while she 
blame the long stay of this girl, who was still with ludovico and some 
other of the servants, she trim her wood fire, to make the room 
appear less desolate, and sat down beside it with a book, which her 
eyes perused, while her thought wander to valancourt, and her own 
misfortunes. as she sat thus, she thought, in a pause of the wind, she 
distinguished music, and went to the case to listen, but the loud 
swell of the gust overcame every other sound. when the wind sunk again, 
she heard distinctly, in the deep pause that succeeded, the sweet 
strings of a lute; but again the rising tempest bore away the notes, 
and again was succeed by a solemn pause. emily, tremble with hope 
and fear, open her case to listen, and to try whether her own 
voice could be heard by the musician; for to endure any long this 
state of torture suspense concerning valancourt, seem to be utterly 
impossible. there was a kind of breathless still in the chambers, 
that permit her to distinguish from below the tender note of the 
very lute she had formerly heard, and with it, a plaintive voice, made 
sweet by the low rustling sound, that now began to creep along the 
wood-tops, till it was lost in the rising wind. their tall head then 
began to wave, while, through a forest of pine, on the left, the wind, 
groan heavily, roll onward over the wood below, bend them 
almost to their roots; and, as the long-resounding gale swept away, 
other woods, on the right, seem to answer the “loud lament;” then, 
others, further still, soften it into a murmur, that die into 
silence. emily listened, with mingle awe and expectation, hope and 
fear; and again the melting sweet of the lute was heard, and the 
same solemn-breathing voice. convinced that these came from an 
apartment underneath, she lean far out of her window, that she might 
discover whether any light was there; but the case below, as well 
as those above, were sunk so deep in the thick wall of the castle, 
that she could not see them, or even the faint ray, that probably 
glimmer through their bars. she then venture to call; but the wind 
bore her voice to the other end of the terrace, and then the music was 
heard as before, in the pause of the gust. suddenly, she thought she 
heard a noise in her chamber, and she drew herself within the casement; 
but, in a moment after, distinguish annette’s voice at the door, she 
conclude it was her she had heard before, and she let her in. “move 
softly, annette, to the casement,” said she, “and listen with me; the 
music is returned.” they were silent till, the measure changing, 
annette exclaimed, “holy virgin! i know that song well; it is a france 
song, one of the favourite song of my dear country.” this was the 
ballad emily had heard on a former night, though not the one she had 
first listen to from the fishing-house in gascony. “o! it is a 
frenchman, that sings,” said annette: “it must be monsieur valancourt.” 
“hark! annette, do not speak so loud,” said emily, “we may be 
overheard.” “what! by the chevalier?” said annette. “no,” reply emily 
mournfully, “but by somebody, who may report us to the signor. what 
reason have you to think it is monsieur valancourt, who sings? but 
hark! now the voice swell louder! do you recollect those tones? i fear 
to trust my own judgment.” “i never happen to hear the chevalier 
sing, mademoiselle,” reply annette, who, as emily was disappointed to 
perceive, had no strong reason for conclude this to be valancourt, 
than that the musician must be a frenchman. soon after, she heard the 
song of the fishing-house, and distinguished her own name, which was 
repeated so distinctly, that annette had heard it also. she trembled, 
sunk into a chair by the window, and annette call aloud, “monsieur 
valancourt! monsieur valancourt!” while emily endeavour to check her, 
but she repeated the call more loud than before, and the lute and the 
voice sudden stopped. emily listened, for some time, in a state of 
intolerable suspense; but, no answer being returned, “it do not 
signify, mademoiselle,” said annette; “it is the chevalier, and i will 
speak to him.” “no, annette,” said emily, “i think i will speak myself; 
if it is he, he will know my voice, and speak again.” “who is it,” said 
she, “that sing at this late hour?” 

a long silence ensued, and, have repeated the question, she perceive 
some faint accents, mingle in the blast, that swept by; but the 
sound were so distant, and pass so suddenly, that she could scarcely 
hear them, much less distinguish the words they uttered, or recognise 
the voice. after another pause, emily call again; and again they 
heard a voice, but as faint as before; and they perceived, that there 
were other circumstances, besides the strength, and direction of the 
wind, to content with; for the great depth, at which the case were 
fixed in the castle walls, contributed, still more than the distance, 
to prevent articulated sound from being understood, though general 
one were easily heard. emily, however, venture to believe, from the 
circumstance of her voice alone have been answered, that the stranger 
was valancourt, as well as that he knew her, and she gave herself up to 
speechless joy. annette, however, was not speechless. she renew her 
calls, but received no answer; and emily, fearing, that a further 
attempt, which certainly was, as present, highly dangerous, might 
expose them to the guard of the castle, while it could not perhaps 
terminate her suspense, insist on annette’s drop the enquiry for 
this night; though she determined herself to question ludovico, on the 
subject, in the morning, more urgent than she had yet done. she was 
now enable to say, that the stranger, whom she had formerly heard, was 
still in the castle, and to direct ludovico to that part of it, in 
which he was confined. 

emily, attend by annette, continue at the casement, for some time, 
but all remain still; they heard neither lute nor voice again, and 
emily was now as much oppress by anxious joy, as she lately was by a 
sense of her misfortunes. with hasty steps she pace the room, now half 
calling on valancourt’s name, then sudden stopping, and now go to 
the case and listening, where, however, she heard nothing but the 
solemn wave of the woods. sometimes her impatience to speak to 
ludovico prompt her to send annette to call him; but a sense of the 
impropriety of this at midnight restrained her. annette, meanwhile, as 
impatient as her mistress, went as often to the case to listen, and 
return almost as much disappointed. she, at length, mention signor 
verezzi, and her fear, lest he should enter the chamber by the 
staircase, door. “but the night is now almost past, mademoiselle,” said 
she, recollect herself; “there is the morning light, beginning to 
peep over those mountain yonder in the east.” 

emily had forgotten, till this moment, that such a person exist as 
verezzi, and all the danger that had appear to threaten her; but the 
mention of his name renew her alarm, and she remember the old 
chest, that she had wish to place against the door, which she now, 
with annette, attempt to move, but it was so heavy, that they could 
not lift it from the floor. “what is in this great old chest, 
mademoiselle,” said annette, “that make it so weighty?” emily have 
replied, “that she found it in the chamber, when she first came to the 
castle, and had never examine it.”—“then i will, ma’amselle,” said 
annette, and she try to lift the lid; but this was held by a lock, 
for which she had no key, and which, indeed, appeared, from its 
peculiar construction, to open with a spring. the morning now glimmer 
through the casements, and the wind had sunk into a calm. emily look 
out upon the dusky woods, and on the twilight mountains, just steal 
in the eye, and saw the whole scene, after the storm, lie in profound 
stillness, the wood motionless, and the cloud above, through which 
the dawn trembled, scarcely appear to move along the heavens. one 
soldier was pace the terrace beneath, with measured steps; and two, 
more distant, were sunk asleep on the walls, weary with the night’s 
watch. have inhaled, for a while, the pure spirit of the air, and of 
vegetation, which the late rains had call forth; and have listened, 
once more, for a note of music, she now closed the casement, and 
retired to rest. 



chapter ix 

thus on the chill lapponian’s dreary land, 
for many a long month lost in snow profound, 
when sol from cancer send the season bland, 
and in their northern cave the storm hath bound; 
from silent mountains, straight, with startle sound, 
torrent are hurl’d, green hill emerge, and lo, 
the tree with foliage, cliff with flower are crown’d; 
pure rill through vale of verdure warble go; 
and wonder, love, and joy, the peasant’s heart o’erflow. 
beattie 


several of her succeed days pass in suspense, for ludovico could 
only learn from the soldiers, that there was a prisoner in the 
apartment, describe to him by emily, and that he was a frenchman, whom 
they had taken in one of their skirmishes, with a party of his 
countrymen. during this interval, emily escape the persecution of 
bertolini, and verezzi, by confine herself to her apartment; except 
that sometimes, in an evening, she venture to walk in the adjoin 
corridor. montoni appear to respect his last promise, though he had 
prophane his first; for to his protection only could she attribute her 
present repose; and in this she was now so secure, that she did not 
wish to leave the castle, till she could obtain some certainty 
concerning valancourt; for which she waited, indeed, without any 
sacrifice of her own comfort, since no circumstance had occur to 
make her escape probable. 

on the fourth day, ludovico informed her, that he had hope of being 
admitted to the presence of the prisoner; it being the turn of a 
soldier, with whom he had been for some time familiar, to attend him on 
the following night. he was not deceive in his hope; for, under 
pretence of carry in a pitcher of water, he enter the prison, 
though, his prudence have prevent him from telling the sentinel the 
real motive of his visit, he was oblige to make his conference with 
the prisoner a very short one. 

emily await the result in her own apartment, ludovico have promise 
to accompany annette to the corridor, in the evening; where, after 
several hour impatient counted, he arrived. emily, have then 
utter the name of valancourt, could articulate no more, but hesitate 
in tremble expectation. “the chevalier would not entrust me with his 
name, signora,” reply ludovico; “but, when i just mention yours, he 
seem overwhelm with joy, though he was not so much surprise as i 
expected.” “does he then remember me?” she exclaimed. 

“o! it is mons. valancourt,” said annette, and look impatient at 
ludovico, who understood her look, and reply to emily: “yes, lady, 
the chevalier does, indeed, remember you, and, i am sure, has a very 
great regard for you, and i made bold to say you had for him. he then 
enquire how you came to know he was in the castle, and whether you 
ordered me to speak to him. the first question i could not answer, but 
the second i did; and then he went off into his ecstasy again. i was 
afraid his joy would have betray him to the sentinel at the door.” 

“but how do he look, ludovico?” interrupt emily: “is he not 
melancholy and ill with this long confinement?”—“why, as to melancholy, 
i saw no symptom of that, lady, while i was with him, for he seem in 
the finest spirits i ever saw anybody in, in all my life. his 
countenance was all joy, and, if one may judge from that, he was very 
well; but i did not ask him.” “did he send me no message?” said emily. 
“o yes, signora, and something besides,” reply ludovico, who search 
his pockets. “surely, i have not lost it,” add he. “the chevalier 
said, he would have written, madam, if he had had pen and ink, and was 
go to have sent a very long message, when the sentinel enter the 
room, but not before he had give me this.” ludovico then drew forth a 
miniature from his bosom, which emily received with a tremble hand, 
and perceive to be a portrait of herself—the very picture, which her 
mother had lost so strange in the fishing-house at la vallée. 

tear of mingle joy and tender flow to her eyes, while ludovico 
proceeded—“‘tell your lady,’ said the chevalier, as he gave me the 
picture, ‘that this has been my companion, and only solace in all my 
misfortunes. tell her, that i have worn it next my heart, and that i 
sent it her as the pledge of an affection, which can never die; that i 
would not part with it, but to her, for the wealth of worlds, and that 
i now part with it, only in the hope of soon receiving it from her 
hands. tell her—’ just then, signora, the sentinel came in, and the 
chevalier said no more; but he had before ask me to contrive an 
interview for him with you; and when i told him, how little hope i had 
of prevailing with the guard to assist me, he said, that was not, 
perhaps, of so much consequence as i imagined, and bade me contrive to 
bring back your answer, and he would inform me of more than he chose to 
do then. so this, i think, lady, is the whole of what passed.” 

“how, ludovico, shall i reward you for your zeal?” said emily: “but, 
indeed, i do not now possess the means. when can you see the chevalier 
again?” “that is uncertain, signora,” reply he. “it depend upon who 
stand guard next: there are not more than one or two among them, from 
whom i would dare to ask admittance to the prison-chamber.” 

“i need not bid you remember, ludovico,” resume emily, “how very much 
interested i am in your seeing the chevalier soon; and, when you do so, 
tell him, that i have received the picture, and, with the sentiment he 
wished. tell him i have suffer much, and still suffer—” she paused. 
“but shall i tell him you will see him, lady?” said ludovico. “most 
certainly i will,” reply emily. “but when, signora, and where?” “that 
must depend upon circumstances,” return emily. “the place, and the 
hour, must be regulate by his opportunities.” 

“as to the place, mademoiselle,” said annette, “there is no other place 
in the castle, besides this corridor, where _we_ can see him in safety, 
you know; and, as for the hour,—it must be when all the signor are 
asleep, if that ever happens!” “you may mention these circumstances to 
the chevalier, ludovico,” said she, check the flippancy of annette, 
“and leave them to his judgment and opportunity. tell him, my heart is 
unchanged. but, above all, let him see you again as soon as possible; 
and, ludovico, i think it is needless to tell you i shall very 
anxious look for you.” have then wish her good night, ludovico 
descended the staircase, and emily retired to rest, but not to sleep, 
for joy now render her as wakeful, as she had ever been from grief. 
montoni and his castle had all vanish from her mind, like the 
frightful vision of a necromancer, and she wandered, once more, in 
fairy scene of unfade happiness: 

as when, beneath the beam 
of summer moons, the distant wood among, 
or by some flood, all silver’d with the gleam, 
the soft embody fay thro’ airy portals stream. 


a week elapsed, before ludovico again visit the prison; for the 
sentinels, during that period, were men, in whom he could not confide, 
and he fear to awaken curiosity, by ask to see their prisoner. in 
this interval, he communicate to emily terrific report of what was 
passing in the castle; of riots, quarrels, and of carousal more 
alarm than either; while from some circumstances, which he 
mentioned, she not only doubted, whether montoni meant ever to release 
her, but greatly feared, that he had designs, concerning her,—such as 
she had formerly dreaded. her name was frequent mention in the 
conversations, which bertolini and verezzi held together, and, at those 
times, they were frequent in contention. montoni had lost large sum 
to verezzi, so that there was a dreadful possibility of his designing 
her to be a substitute for the debt; but, as she was ignorant, that he 
had formerly encourage the hope of bertolini also, concerning 
herself, after the latter had done him some signal service, she knew 
not how to account for these contention between bertolini and verezzi. 
the cause of them, however, appear to be of little consequence, for 
she thought she saw destruction approach in many forms, and her 
entreaty to ludovico to contrive an escape and to see the prisoner 
again, were more urgent than ever. 

at length, he informed her, that he had again visit the chevalier, 
who had direct him to confide in the guard of the prison, from whom 
he had already received some instance of kindness, and who had 
promise to permit his go into the castle for half an hour, on the 
ensue night, when montoni and his companion should be engaged at 
their carousals. “this was kind, to be sure,” add ludovico: “but 
sebastian know he runs no risk in letting the chevalier out, for, if 
he can get beyond the bar and iron door of the castle, he must be 
cunning indeed. but the chevalier desire me, signora, to go to you 
immediately, and to beg you would allow him to visit you, this night, 
if it was only for a moment, for that he could no long live under the 
same roof, without seeing you; the hour, he said, he could not mention, 
for it must depend on circumstances (just as you said, signora); and 
the place he desire you would appoint, as knowing which was best for 
your own safety.” 

emily was now so much agitate by the near prospect of meeting 
valancourt, that it was some time, before she could give any answer to 
ludovico, or consider of the place of meeting; when she did, she saw 
none, that promise so much security, as the corridor, near her own 
apartment, which she was checked from leaving, by the apprehension of 
meeting any of montoni’s guests, on their way to their rooms; and she 
dismiss the scruples, which delicacy opposed, now that a serious 
danger was to be avoid by encounter them. it was settled, 
therefore, that the chevalier should meet her in the corridor, at that 
hour of the night, which ludovico, who was to be upon the watch, should 
judge safest: and emily, as may be imagined, pass this interval in a 
tumult of hope and joy, anxiety and impatience. never, since her 
residence in the castle, had she watched, with so much pleasure, the 
sun set behind the mountains, and twilight shade, and dark veil the 
scene, as on this evening. she count the note of the great clock, 
and listen to the steps of the sentinels, as they change the watch, 
only to rejoice, that another hour was gone. “o, valancourt!” said she, 
“after all i have suffered; after our long, long separation, when i 
thought i should never—never see you more—we are still to meet again! 
o! i have endure grief, and anxiety, and terror, and let me, then, not 
sink beneath this joy!” these were moments, when it was impossible for 
her to feel emotion of regret, or melancholy, for any ordinary 
interests;—even the reflection, that she had resigned the estates, 
which would have been a provision for herself and valancourt for life, 
threw only a light and transient shade upon her spirits. the idea of 
valancourt, and that she should see him so soon, alone occupy her 
heart. 

at length the clock struck twelve; she open the door to listen, if 
any noise was in the castle, and heard only distant shout of riot and 
laughter, echo feeble along the gallery. she guessed, that the signor 
and his guest were at the banquet. “they are now engaged for the 
night,” said she; “and valancourt will soon be here.” have soft 
closed the door, she pace the room with impatient steps, and often 
went to the case to listen for the lute; but all was silent, and, 
her agitation every moment increasing, she was at length unable to 
support herself, and sat down by the window. annette, whom she 
detained, was, in the meantime, as loquacious as usual; but emily heard 
scarcely anything she said, and have at length risen to the casement, 
she distinguished the chord of the lute, struck with an expressive 
hand, and then the voice, she had formerly listen to, accompany it. 

now rising love they fann’d, now pleasing dole 
they breath’d in tender muse through the heart; 
and now a graver, sacred strain they stole, 
as when seraphic hand a hymn impart! 


emily wept in doubtful joy and tenderness; and, when the strain ceased, 
she considered it as a signal, that valancourt was about to leave the 
prison. soon after, she heard steps in the corridor;—they were the 
light, quick steps of hope; she could scarcely support herself, as they 
approached, but opening the door of the apartment, she advanced to meet 
valancourt, and, in the next moment, sunk in the arms of a stranger. 
his voice—his countenance instantly convinced her, and she faint 
away. 

on reviving, she found herself support by the stranger, who was 
watch over her recovery, with a countenance of ineffable tender 
and anxiety. she had no spirits for reply, or enquiry; she ask no 
questions, but burst into tears, and disengaged herself from his arms; 
when the expression of his countenance change to surprise and 
disappointment, and he turn to ludovico, for an explanation; annette 
soon gave the information, which ludovico could not. “o, sir!” said 
she, in a voice, interrupt with sobs; “o, sir! you are not the other 
chevalier. we expect monsieur valancourt, but you are not he! o 
ludovico! how could you deceive us so? my poor lady will never recover 
it—never!” the stranger, who now appear much agitated, attempt to 
speak, but his words faltered; and then striking his hand against his 
forehead, as if in sudden despair, he walk abrupt to the other end 
of the corridor. 

suddenly, annette dry her tears, and spoke to ludovico. “but, 
perhaps,” said she, “after all, the other chevalier is not this: 
perhaps the chevalier valancourt is still below.” emily raise her 
head. “no,” reply ludovico, “monsieur valancourt never was below, if 
this gentleman is not he.” “if you, sir,” said ludovico, address the 
stranger, “would but have had the goodness to trust me with your name, 
this mistake had been avoided.” “most true,” reply the stranger, 
speak in broken italian, “but it was of the utmost consequence to 
me, that my name should be conceal from montoni. madam,” add he 
then, address emily in french, “will you permit me to apologise for 
the pain i have occasion you, and to explain to you alone my name, 
and the circumstance, which has led me into this error? i am of 
france;—i am your countryman;—we are met in a foreign land.” emily 
try to compose her spirits; yet she hesitate to grant his request. 
at length, desiring, that ludovico would wait on the staircase, and 
detain annette, she told the stranger, that her woman understood 
very little italian, and beg he would communicate what he wish to 
say, in that language.—having withdrawn to a distant part of the 
corridor, he said, with a long-drawn sigh, “you, madam, are no stranger 
to me, though i am so unhappy as to be unknown to you.—my name is du 
pont; i am of france, of gascony, your native province, and have long 
admired,—and, why should i affect to disguise it?—have long love you.” 
he paused, but, in the next moment, proceeded. “my family, madam, is 
probably not unknown to you, for we live within a few mile of la 
vallée, and i have, sometimes, had the happiness of meeting you, on 
visit in the neighbourhood. i will not offend you by repeating how 
much you interested me; how much i love to wander in the scene you 
frequented; how often i visit your favourite fishing-house, and 
lament the circumstance, which, at that time, forbade me to reveal my 
passion. i will not explain how i surrender to temptation, and became 
possessed of a treasure, which was to me inestimable; a treasure, which 
i committed to your messenger, a few days ago, with expectations very 
different from my present ones. i will say nothing of these 
circumstances, for i know they will avail me little; let me only 
supplicate from you forgiveness, and the picture, which i so unwari 
returned. your generous will pardon the theft, and restore the prize. 
my crime has been my punishment; for the portrait i stole has 
contribute to nourish a passion, which must still be my torment.” 

emily now interrupt him. “i think, sir, i may leave it to your 
integrity to determine, whether, after what has just appeared, 
concerning mons. valancourt, i ought to return the picture. i think you 
will acknowledge, that this would not be generosity; and you will allow 
me to add, that it would be do myself an injustice. i must consider 
myself honour by your good opinion, but”—and she hesitated,—“the 
mistake of this evening make it unnecessary for me to say more.” 

“it does, madam,—alas! it does!” said the stranger, who, after a long 
pause, proceeded.—“but you will allow me to show my disinterestedness, 
though not my love, and will accept the service i offer. yet, alas! 
what service can i offer? i am myself a prisoner, a sufferer, like 
you. but, dear as liberty is to me, i would not seek it through half 
the hazard i would encounter to deliver you from this recess of vice. 
accept the offer service of a friend; do not refuse me the reward of 
having, at least, attempt to deserve your thanks.” 

“you deserve them already, sir,” said emily; “the wish deserve my 
warmest thanks. but you will excuse me for remind you of the danger 
you incur by prolong this interview. it will be a great consolation 
to me to remember, whether your friendly attempt to release me succeed 
or not, that i have a countryman, who would so generous protect 
me.”—monsieur du pont took her hand, which she but feeble attempt to 
withdraw, and pressed it respectful to his lips. “allow me to breathe 
another fervent sigh for your happiness,” said he, “and to applaud 
myself for an affection, which i cannot conquer.” as he said this, 
emily heard a noise from her apartment, and, turning round, saw the 
door from the staircase open, and a man rush into her chamber. “i will 
teach you to conquer it,” cry he, as he advanced into the corridor, 
and drew a stiletto, which he aim at du pont, who was unarmed, but 
who, step back, avoid the blow, and then sprung upon verezzi, 
from whom he wrench the stiletto. while they struggle in each 
other’s grasp, emily, follow by annette, ran further into the 
corridor, calling on ludovico, who was, however, gone from the 
staircase, and, as she advanced, terrify and uncertain what to do, a 
distant noise, that seem to arise from the hall, remind her of the 
danger she was incurring; and, send annette forward in search of 
ludovico, she return to the spot where du pont and verezzi were still 
struggle for victory. it was her own cause which was to be decided 
with that of the former, whose conduct, independent of this 
circumstance, would, however, have interested her in his success, even 
had she not dislike and dread verezzi. she threw herself in a chair, 
and supplicate them to desist from further violence, till, at length, 
du pont forced verezzi to the floor, where he lay stun by the 
violence of his fall; and she then entreat du pont to escape from the 
room, before montoni, or his party, should appear; but he still refuse 
to leave her unprotected; and, while emily, now more terrify for him, 
than for herself, enforce the entreaty, they heard steps ascend the 
private staircase. 

“o you are lost!” cry she, “these are montoni’s people.” du pont made 
no reply, but support emily, while, with a steady, though eager, 
countenance, he await their appearance, and, in the next moment, 
ludovico, alone, mount the landing-place. throw a hasty glance 
round the chamber, “follow me,” said he, “as you value your lives; we 
have not an instant to lose!” 

emily enquire what had occurred, and whither they were to go? 

“i cannot stay to tell you now, signora,” reply ludovico: “fly! fly!” 

she immediately follow him, accompany by mons. du pont, down the 
staircase, and along a vaulted passage, when sudden she recollect 
annette, and enquire for her. “she await us further on, signora,” 
said ludovico, almost breathless with haste; “the gate were open, a 
moment since, to a party just come in from the mountains: they will be 
shut, i fear, before we can reach them! through this door, signora,” 
add ludovico, holding down the lamp, “take care, here are two steps.” 

emily followed, tremble still more, than before she had understood, 
that her escape from the castle, depend upon the present moment; 
while du pont support her, and endeavoured, as they pass along, to 
cheer her spirits. 

“speak low, signor,” said ludovico, “these passage send echo all 
round the castle.” 

“take care of the light,” cry emily, “you go so fast, that the air 
will extinguish it.” 

ludovico now open another door, where they found annette, and the 
party then descended a short flight of steps into a passage, which, 
ludovico said, led round the inner court of the castle, and open into 
the outer one. as they advanced, confuse and tumultuous sounds, that 
seem to come from the inner court, alarm emily. “nay, signora,” 
said ludovico, “our only hope is in that tumult; while the signor’s 
people are busy about the men, who are just arrived, we may, perhaps, 
pass unnoticed through the gates. but hush!” he added, as they 
approach the small door, that open into the outer court, “if you 
will remain here a moment, i will go to see whether the gate are open, 
and anybody is in the way. pray extinguish the light, signor, if you 
hear me talking,” continue ludovico, deliver the lamp to du pont, 
“and remain quite still.” 

saying this, he step out upon the court, and they closed the door, 
listen anxious to his depart steps. no voice, however, was 
heard in the court, which he was crossing, though a confusion of many 
voice yet issue from the inner one. “we shall soon be beyond the 
walls,” said du pont soft to emily, “support yourself a little 
longer, madam, and all will be well.” 

but soon they heard ludovico speak loud, and the voice also of some 
other person, and du pont immediately extinguish the lamp. “ah! it is 
too late!” exclaim emily, “what is to become of us?” they listen 
again, and then perceived, that ludovico was talk with a sentinel, 
whose voice were heard also by emily’s favourite dog, that had 
follow her from the chamber, and now bark loudly. “this dog will 
betray us!” said du pont, “i will hold him.” “i fear he has already 
betray us!” reply emily. du pont, however, caught him up, and, 
again listen to what was go on without, they heard ludovico say, 
“i’ll watch the gate the while.” 

“stay a minute,” reply the sentinel, “and you need not have the 
trouble, for the horse will be sent round to the outer stables, then 
the gate will be shut, and i can leave my post.” “i don’t mind the 
trouble, comrade,” said ludovico, “you will do such another good turn 
for me, some time. go—go, and fetch the wine; the rogues, that are just 
come in, will drink it all else.” 

the soldier hesitated, and then call aloud to the people in the 
second court, to know why they did not send out the horses, that the 
gate might be shut; but they were too much engaged, to attend to him, 
even if they had heard his voice. 

“aye—aye,” said ludovico, “they know better than that; they are share 
it all among them; if you wait till the horse come out, you must wait 
till the wine is drunk. i have had my share already, but, since you do 
not care about yours, i see no reason why i should not have that too.” 

“hold, hold, not so fast,” cry the sentinel, “do watch then, for a 
moment: i’ll be with you presently.” 

“don’t hurry yourself,” said ludovico, coolly, “i have kept guard 
before now. but you may leave me your trombone,* that, if the castle 
should be attacked, you know, i may be able to defend the pass, like a 
hero.” 

(*note: a kind of blunderbuss. [a. r.]) 


“there, my good fellow,” return the soldier, “there, take it—it has 
seen service, though it could do little in defend the castle. i’ll 
tell you a good story, though, about this same trombone.” 

“you’ll tell it better when you have had the wine,” said ludovico. 
“there! they are coming out from the court already.” 

“i’ll have the wine, though,” said the sentinel, running off. “i won’t 
keep you a minute.” 

“take your time, i am in no haste,” reply ludovico, who was already 
hurry across the court, when the soldier came back. “whither so 
fast, friend—whither so fast?” said the latter. “what! is this the way 
you keep watch! i must stand to my post myself, i see.” 

“aye, well,” reply ludovico, “you have save me the trouble of 
following you further, for i want to tell you, if you have a mind to 
drink the tuscany wine, you must go to sebastian, he is dealing it out; 
the other that federico has, is not worth having. but you are not 
likely to have any, i see, for they are all coming out.” 

“by st. peter! so they are,” said the soldier, and again ran off, while 
ludovico, once more at liberty, hasten to the door of the passage, 
where emily was sink under the anxiety this long discourse had 
occasioned; but, on his telling them the court was clear, they follow 
him to the gates, without wait another instant, yet not before he 
had seize two horses, that had stray from the second court, and were 
pick a scanty meal among the grass, which grew between the pavement 
of the first. 

they passed, without interruption, the dreadful gates, and took the 
road that led down among the woods, emily, monsieur du pont and annette 
on foot, and ludovico, who was mount on one horse, leading the other. 
have reach them, they stopped, while emily and annette were placed 
on horseback with their two protectors, when, ludovico leading the way, 
they set off as fast as the broken road, and the feeble light, which a 
rising moon threw among the foliage, would permit. 

emily was so much astonish by this sudden departure, that she 
scarcely dare to believe herself awake; and she yet much doubt 
whether this adventure would terminate in escape,—a doubt, which had 
too much probability to justify it; for, before they quit the woods, 
they heard shout in the wind, and, on emerge from them, saw lights 
moving quick near the castle above. du pont whip his horse, and 
with some difficulty compel him to go faster. 

“ah! poor beast,” said ludovico, “he is weary enough;—he has been out 
all day; but, signor, we must fly for it, now; for yonder are lights 
coming this way.” 

have given his own horse a lash, they now both set off on a full 
gallop; and, when they again look back, the lights were so distant as 
scarcely to be discerned, and the voice were sunk into silence. the 
traveller then abate their pace, and, consulting whither they should 
direct their course, it was determined they should descend into 
tuscany, and endeavour to reach the mediterranean, where they could 
readily embark for france. thither du pont meant to attend emily, if he 
should learn, that the regiment he had accompany into italy, was 
return to his native country. 

they were now in the road, which emily had travelled with ugo and 
bertrand; but ludovico, who was the only one of the party, acquaint 
with the pass of these mountains, said, that, a little further on, a 
by-road, branch from this, would lead them down into tuscany with 
very little difficulty; and that, at a few league distance, was a 
small town, where necessaries could be procure for their journey. 

“but, i hope,” add he, “we shall meet with no straggle party of 
banditti; some of them are abroad, i know. however, i have got a good 
trombone, which will be of some service, if we should encounter any of 
those brave spirits. you have no arms, signor?” “yes,” reply du pont, 
“i have the villain’s stilletto, who would have stab me—but let us 
rejoice in our escape from udolpho, nor torment ourselves with look 
out for dangers, that may never arrive.” 

the moon was now risen high over the woods, that hung upon the side of 
the narrow glen, through which they wandered, and afford them light 
sufficient to distinguish their way, and to avoid the loose and broken 
stones, that frequent cross it. they now travelled leisurely, and 
in profound silence; for they had scarcely yet recover from the 
astonishment, into which this sudden escape had thrown them.—emily’s 
mind, especially, was sunk, after the various emotion it had suffered, 
into a kind of muse stillness, which the repose beauty of the 
surrounding scene and the creep murmur of the night-breeze among the 
foliage above contribute to prolong. she thought of valancourt and of 
france, with hope, and she would have thought of them with joy, had not 
the first event of this evening harass her spirits too much, to 
permit her now to feel so lively a sensation. meanwhile, emily was 
alone the object of du pont’s melancholy consideration; yet, with the 
despondent he suffered, as he muse on his recent disappointment, was 
mingle a sweet pleasure, occasion by her presence, though they did 
not now exchange a single word. annette thought of this wonderful 
escape, of the bustle in which montoni and his people must be, now that 
their flight was discovered; of her native country, whither she hope 
she was returning, and of her marriage with ludovico, to which there no 
long appear any impediment, for poverty she did not consider such. 
ludovico, on his part, congratulate himself, on have rescue his 
annette and signora emily from the danger, that had surround them; on 
his own liberation from people, whose manners he had long detested; on 
the freedom he had given to monsieur du pont; on his prospect of 
happiness with the object of his affections, and not a little on the 
address, with which he had deceive the sentinel, and conduct the 
whole of this affair. 

thus variously engaged in thought, the traveller pass on silently, 
for above an hour, a question only being, now and then, ask by du 
pont, concerning the road, or a remark utter by annette, respecting 
objects, seen imperfect in the twilight. at length, lights were 
perceive twinkling on the side of a mountain, and ludovico had no 
doubt, that they proceed from the town he had mentioned, while his 
companions, satisfy by this assurance, sunk again into silence. 
annette was the first who interrupt this. “holy peter!” said she, 
“what shall we do for money on our journey? for i know neither i, nor 
my lady, have a single sequin; the signor took care of that!” 

this remark produce a serious enquiry, which end in as serious an 
embarrassment, for du pont had been rifle of nearly all his money, 
when he was taken prisoner; the remainder he had given to the sentinel, 
who had enable him occasional to leave his prison-chamber; and 
ludovico, who had for some time found a difficulty, in procure any 
part of the wages due to him, had now scarcely cash sufficient to 
procure necessary refreshment at the first town, in which they should 
arrive. 

their poverty was the more distressing, since it would detain them 
among the mountains, where, even in a town, they could scarcely 
consider themselves safe from montoni. the travellers, however, had 
only to proceed and dare the future; and they continue their way 
through lonely wild and dusky valleys, where the overhang foliage 
now admitted, and then exclude the moonlight; wild so desolate, that 
they appeared, on the first glance, as if no human being had ever trod 
them before. even the road, in which the party were, did but slightly 
contradict this error, for the high grass and other luxuriant 
vegetation, with which it was overgrown, told how very seldom the foot 
of a traveller had pass it. 

at length, from a distance, was heard the faint tinkle of a 
sheep-bell; and, soon after, the bleat of flocks, and the party then 
knew, that they were near some human habitation, for the light, which 
ludovico had fancy to proceed from a town, had long been conceal by 
intervene mountains. cheer by this hope, they quicken their pace 
along the narrow pass they were winding, and it open upon one of 
those pastoral valley of the apennines, which might be paint for a 
scene of arcadia, and whose beauty and simplicity are finely contrast 
by the grandeur of the snowtopp mountain above. 

the morning light, now glimmer in the horizon, show faintly, at a 
little distance, upon the brow of a hill, which seem to peep from 
“under the opening eye-lids of the morn,” the town they were in search 
of, and which they soon after reached. it was not without some 
difficulty, that they there found a house, which could afford shelter 
for themselves and their horses; and emily desire they might not rest 
long than was necessary for refreshment. her appearance excited some 
surprise, for she was without a hat, have had time only to throw on 
her veil before she left the castle, a circumstance, that compel her 
to regret again the want of money, without which it was impossible to 
procure this necessary article of dress. 

ludovico, on examine his purse, found it even insufficient to supply 
present refreshment, and du pont, at length, venture to inform the 
landlord, whose countenance was simple and honest, of their exact 
situation, and requested, that he would assist them to pursue their 
journey; a purpose, which he promise to comply with, as far as he was 
able, when he learned that they were prisoner escape from montoni, 
whom he had too much reason to hate. but, though he consent to lend 
them fresh horse to carry them to the next town, he was too poor 
himself to trust them with money, and they were again lament their 
poverty, when ludovico, who had been with his tired horse to the 
hovel, which serve for a stable, enter the room, half frantic with 
joy, in which his auditor soon participated. on remove the saddle 
from one of the horses, he had found beneath it a small bag, 
containing, no doubt, the booty of one of the _condottieri_, who had 
return from a plunder excursion, just before ludovico left the 
castle, and whose horse have stray from the inner court, while his 
master was engaged in drinking, had brought away the treasure, which 
the ruffian had considered the reward of his exploit. 

on count over this, du pont found, that it would be more than 
sufficient to carry them all to france, where he now determined to 
accompany emily, whether he should obtain intelligence of his regiment, 
or not; for, though he had as much confidence in the integrity of 
ludovico, as his small knowledge of him allowed, he could not endure 
the thought of commit her to his care for the voyage; nor, perhaps, 
had he resolution enough to deny himself the dangerous pleasure, which 
he might derive from her presence. 

he now consult them, concerning the sea-port, to which they should 
direct their way, and ludovico, better informed of the geography of the 
country, said, that leghorn was the nearest port of consequence, which 
du pont knew also to be the most likely of any in italy to assist their 
plan, since from thence vessel of all nation were continual 
departing. thither, therefore, it was determined, that they should 
proceed. 

emily, have purchase a little straw hat, such as was worn by the 
peasant girl of tuscany, and some other little necessary equipment 
for the journey, and the travellers, have exchange their tired 
horse for other better able to carry them, recommence their joyous 
way, as the sun was rising over the mountains, and, after travel 
through this romantic country, for several hours, began to descend into 
the vale of arno. and here emily beheld all the charm of sylvan and 
pastoral landscape united, adorn with the elegant villa of the 
florentine nobles, and diversify with the various riches of 
cultivation. how vivid the shrub that embowered the slopes, with the 
woods, that stretch amphitheatre along the mountains! and, above 
all, how elegant the outline of these wave apennines, now soften 
from the wildness, which their interior regions exhibited! at a 
distance, in the east, emily discover florence, with its tower 
rising on the brilliant horizon, and its luxuriant plain, spread to 
the feet of the apennines, speckle with garden and magnificent 
villas, or coloured with grove of orange and lemon, with vines, corn, 
and plantation of olive and mulberry; while, to the west, the vale 
open to the waters of the mediterranean, so distant, that they were 
known only by a bluish line, that appear upon the horizon, and by the 
light marine vapour, which just stain the æther above. 

with a full heart, emily hail the waves, that were to bear her back 
to her native country, the remembrance of which, however, brought with 
it a pang; for she had there no home to receive, no parent to welcome 
her, but was going, like a forlorn pilgrim, to weep over the sad spot, 
where he, who _was_ her father, lay interred. nor were her spirits 
cheered, when she considered how long it would probably be before she 
should see valancourt, who might be station with his regiment in a 
distant part of france, and that, when they did meet, it would be only 
to lament the successful villany of montoni; yet, still she would have 
felt inexpressible delight at the thought of being once more in the 
same country with valancourt, had it even been certain, that she could 
not see him. 

the intense heat, for it was now noon, oblige the traveller to look 
out for a shady recess, where they might rest, for a few hours, and the 
neighbouring thickets, abound with wild grapes, raspberries, and 
figs, promise them grateful refreshment. soon after, they turn from 
the road into a grove, whose thick foliage entire exclude the 
sunbeams, and where a spring, gushing from the rock, gave cool to 
the air; and, have alight and turn the horse to graze, annette 
and ludovico ran to gather fruit from the surrounding thickets, of 
which they soon return with an abundance. the travellers, seat 
under the shade of a pine and cypress grove and on turf, enrich with 
such a profusion of fragrant flowers, as emily had scarcely ever seen, 
even among the pyrenees, took their simple repast, and viewed, with new 
delight, beneath the dark umbrage of gigantic pines, the glowing 
landscape stretch to the sea. 

emily and du pont gradual became thoughtful and silent; but annette 
was all joy and loquacity, and ludovico was gay, without forget the 
respectful distance, which was due to his companions. the repast being 
over, du pont recommend emily to endeavour to sleep, during these 
sultry hours, and, desire the servant would do the same, said he 
would watch the while; but ludovico wish to spare him this trouble; 
and emily and annette, weary with travelling, try to repose, while 
he stood guard with his trombone. 

when emily, refresh by slumber, awoke, she found the sentinel asleep 
on his post and du pont awake, but lost in melancholy thought. as the 
sun was yet too high to allow them to continue their journey, and as it 
was necessary, that ludovico, after the toils and trouble he had 
suffered, should finish his sleep, emily took this opportunity of 
enquiring by what accident du pont became montoni’s prisoner, and he, 
pleased with the interest this enquiry express and with the excuse it 
gave him for talk to her of himself, immediately answer her 
curiosity. 

“i came into italy, madam,” said du pont, “in the service of my 
country. in an adventure among the mountain our party, engaging with 
the band of montoni, was routed, and i, with a few of my comrades, was 
taken prisoner. when they told me, whose captive i was, the name of 
montoni struck me, for i remembered, that madame cheron, your aunt, had 
married an italy of that name, and that you had accompany them into 
italy. it was not, however, till some time after, that i became 
convinced this was the same montoni, or learned that you, madam, was 
under the same roof with myself. i will not pain you by describe what 
were my emotion upon this discovery, which i owe to a sentinel, whom 
i had so far won to my interest, that he grant me many indulgences, 
one of which was very important to me, and somewhat dangerous to 
himself; but he persist in refuse to convey any letter, or notice 
of my situation to you, for he just dread a discovery and the 
consequent vengeance of montoni. he however enable me to see you more 
than once. you are surprised, madam, and i will explain myself. my 
health and spirits suffer extremely from want of air and exercise, 
and, at length, i gain so far upon the pity, or the avarice of the 
man, that he gave me the means of walking on the terrace.” 

emily now listened, with very anxious attention, to the narrative of du 
pont, who proceeded: 

“in grant this indulgence, he knew, that he had nothing to apprehend 
from a chance of my escape from a castle, which was vigilant 
guarded, and the nearest terrace of which rose over a perpendicular 
rock; he show me also,” continue du pont, “a door conceal in the 
cedar wainscot of the apartment where i was confined, which he 
instruct me how to open; and which, leading into a passage, form 
within the thickness of the wall, that extend far along the castle, 
finally open in an obscure corner of the eastern rampart. i have 
since been informed, that there are many passage of the same kind 
conceal within the prodigious wall of that edifice, and which were, 
undoubtedly, contrived for the purpose of facilitate escape in time 
of war. through this avenue, at the dead of night, i often stole to the 
terrace, where i walk with the utmost caution, lest my steps should 
betray me to the sentinel on duty in distant parts; for this end of 
it, being guarded by high buildings, was not watch by soldiers. in 
one of these midnight wanderings, i saw light in a case that 
overlook the rampart, and which, i observed, was immediately over my 
prison-chamber. it occur to me, that you might be in that apartment, 
and, with the hope of seeing you, i placed myself opposite to the 
window.” 

emily, remember the figure that had formerly appear on the 
terrace, and which had occasion her so much anxiety, exclaimed, “it 
was you then, monsieur du pont, who occasion me much foolish terror; 
my spirits were, at that time, so much weaken by long suffering, that 
they took alarm at every hint.” du pont, after lamenting, that he had 
occasion her any apprehension, added, “as i rest on the wall, 
opposite to your casement, the consideration of your melancholy 
situation and of my own call from me involuntary sound of 
lamentation, which drew you, i fancy, to the casement; i saw there a 
person, whom i believe to be you. o! i will say nothing of my emotion 
at that moment; i wish to speak, but prudence restrained me, till the 
distant foot-step of a sentinel compel me sudden to quit my 
station. 

“it was some time, before i had another opportunity of walking, for i 
could only leave my prison, when it happen to be the turn of one man 
to guard me; meanwhile i became convinced from some circumstances 
related by him, that your apartment was over mine, and, when again i 
venture forth, i return to your casement, where again i saw you, but 
without daring to speak. i wave my hand, and you sudden disappeared; 
then it was, that i forgot my prudence, and yield to lamentation; 
again you appeared—you spoke—i heard the well-known accent of your 
voice! and, at that moment, my discretion would have forsaken me again, 
had i not heard also the approach steps of a soldier, when i 
instantly quit the place, though not before the man had seen me. he 
follow down the terrace and gain so fast upon me, that i was 
compel to make use of a stratagem, ridiculous enough, to save 
myself. i had heard of the superstition of many of these men, and i 
utter a strange noise, with a hope, that my pursuer would mistake it 
for something supernatural, and desist from pursuit. lucky for myself 
i succeeded; the man, it seems, was subject to fits, and the terror he 
suffer threw him into one, by which accident i secure my retreat. a 
sense of the danger i had escaped, and the increase watchfulness, 
which my appearance had occasion among the sentinels, deter me 
ever after from walking on the terrace; but, in the still of night, 
i frequent beguile myself with an old lute, procure for me by a 
soldier, which i sometimes accompany with my voice, and sometimes, i 
will acknowledge, with a hope of making myself heard by you; but it was 
only a few evenings ago, that this hope was answered. i then thought i 
heard a voice in the wind, calling me; yet, even then i fear to 
reply, lest the sentinel at the prison door should hear me. was i 
right, madam, in this conjecture—was it you who spoke?” 

“yes,” said emily, with an involuntary sigh, “you were right indeed.” 

du pont, observing the painful emotions, which this question revived, 
now change the subject. “in one of my excursion through the passage, 
which i have mentioned, i overheard a singular conversation,” said he. 

“in the passage!” said emily, with surprise. 

“i heard it in the passage,” said du pont, “but it proceed from an 
apartment, adjoin the wall, within which the passage wound, and the 
shell of the wall was there so thin, and was also somewhat decayed, 
that i could distinct hear every word, spoken on the other side. it 
happen that montoni and his companion were assemble in the room, 
and montoni began to relate the extraordinary history of the lady, his 
predecessor, in the castle. he did, indeed, mention some very 
surprising circumstances, and whether they were strict true, his 
conscience must decide; i fear it will determine against him. but you, 
madam, have doubtless heard the report, which he designs should 
circulate, on the subject of that lady’s mysterious fate.” 

“i have, sir,” reply emily, “and i perceive, that you doubt it.” 

“i doubt it before the period i am speak of,” rejoin du 
pont;—“but some circumstances, mention by montoni, greatly 
contribute to my suspicions. the account i then heard, almost 
convinced me, that he was a murderer. i tremble for you;—the more so 
that i had heard the guest mention your name in a manner, that 
threaten your repose; and, knowing, that the most impious men are 
often the most superstitious, i determined to try whether i could not 
awaken their consciences, and awe them from the commission of the crime 
i dreaded. i listen close to montoni, and, in the most striking 
passage of his story, i join my voice, and repeated his last words, 
in a disguise and hollow tone.” 

“but were you not afraid of being discovered?” said emily. 

“i was not,” reply du pont; “for i knew, that, if montoni had been 
acquaint with the secret of this passage, he would not have confine 
me in the apartment, to which it led. i knew also, from better 
authority, that he was ignorant of it. the party, for some time, 
appear inattentive to my voice; but, at length, were so much alarmed, 
that they quit the apartment; and, have heard montoni order his 
servant to search it, i return to my prison, which was very distant 
from this part of the passage.” “i remember perfectly to have heard of 
the conversation you mention,” said emily; “it spread a general alarm 
among montoni’s people, and i will own i was weak enough to partake of 
it.” 

monsieur du pont and emily thus continue to converse of montoni, and 
then of france, and of the plan of their voyage; when emily told him, 
that it was her intention to retire to a convent in languedoc, where 
she had been formerly treat with much kindness, and from thence to 
write to her relation monsieur quesnel, and inform him of her conduct. 
there, she design to wait, till la vallée should again be her own, 
whither she hope her income would some time permit her to return; for 
du pont now taught her to expect, that the estate, of which montoni had 
attempt to defraud her, was not irrecoverable lost, and he again 
congratulate her on her escape from montoni, who, he had not a doubt, 
meant to have detain her for life. the possibility of recover her 
aunt’s estate for valancourt and herself light up a joy in emily’s 
heart, such as she had not known for many months; but she endeavour 
to conceal this from monsieur du pont, lest it should lead him to a 
painful remembrance of his rival. 

they continue to converse, till the sun was decline in the west, 
when du pont awoke ludovico, and they set forward on their journey. 
gradual descend the lower slope of the valley, they reach the 
arno, and wound along its pastoral margin, for many miles, delight 
with the scenery around them, and with the remembrances, which its 
classic wave revived. at a distance, they heard the gay song of the 
peasant among the vineyards, and observe the setting sun tint the 
wave with yellow lustre, and twilight draw a dusky purple over the 
mountains, which, at length, deepen into night. then the _lucciola_, 
the fire-fly of tuscany, was seen to flash its sudden sparks among the 
foliage, while the _cicala_, with its shrill note, became more 
clamorous than even during the noon-day heat, loving best the hour when 
the english beetle, with less offensive sound, 

wind 
his small but sullen horn, 
as oft he rise ’midst the twilight path, 
against the pilgrim borne in heedless hum. 
collins 


the traveller cross the arno by moonlight, at a ferry, and, learning 
that pisa was distant only a few mile down the river, they wish to 
have proceed thither in a boat, but, as none could be procured, they 
set out on their weary horse for that city. as they approach it, 
the vale expand into a plain, variegated with vineyards, corn, olive 
and mulberry groves; but it was late, before they reach its gates, 
where emily was surprise to hear the busy sound of footstep and the 
tone of musical instruments, as well as to see the lively groups, that 
fill the streets, and she almost fancy herself again at venice; but 
here was no moonlight sea—no gay gondolas, dashing the waves,—no 
_palladian_ palaces, to throw enchantment over the fancy and lead it 
into the wild of fairy story. the arno roll through the town, but no 
music tremble from balcony over its waters; it gave only the busy 
voice of sailor on board vessel just arrive from the mediterranean; 
the melancholy heave of the anchor, and the shrill boatswain’s 
whistle;—sounds, which, since that period, have there sunk almost into 
silence. they then serve to remind du pont, that it was probable he 
might hear of a vessel, sailing soon to france from this port, and thus 
be spare the trouble of go to leghorn. as soon as emily had reach 
the inn, he went therefore to the quay, to make his enquiries; but, 
after all the endeavour of himself and ludovico, they could hear of no 
bark, destined immediately for france, and the traveller return to 
their resting-place. here also, du pont endeavour to learn where his 
regiment then lay, but could acquire no information concerning it. the 
traveller retired early to rest, after the fatigues of this day; and, 
on the following, rose early, and, without pause to view the 
celebrated antiquity of the place, or the wonders of its hanging 
tower, pursue their journey in the cooler hours, through a charming 
country, rich with wine, and corn and oil. the apennines, no long 
awful, or even grand, here soften into the beauty of sylvan and 
pastoral landscape; and emily, as she descended them, look down 
delight on leghorn, and its spacious bay, fill with vessels, and 
crown with these beautiful hills. 

she was no less surprise and amused, on enter this town, to find it 
crowded with person in the dress of all nations; a scene, which 
remind her of a venetian masquerade, such as she had witness at the 
time of the carnival; but here was bustle without gaiety, and noise 
instead of music, while elegance was to be look for only in the 
wave outline of the surrounding hills. 

monsieur du pont, immediately on their arrival, went down to the quay, 
where he heard of several france vessels, and of one, that was to sail, 
in a few days, for marseilles, from whence another vessel could be 
procured, without difficulty, to take them across the gulf of lyon 
towards narbonne, on the coast not many league from which city he 
understood the convent was seated, to which emily wish to retire. he, 
therefore, immediately engaged with the captain to take them to 
marseilles, and emily was delight to hear, that her passage to france 
was secured. her mind was now relieved from the terror of pursuit, and 
the pleasing hope of soon seeing her native country—that country which 
held valancourt, restore to her spirits a degree of cheerfulness, such 
as she had scarcely known, since the death of her father. at leghorn 
also, du pont heard of his regiment, and that it had embark for 
france; a circumstance, which gave him great satisfaction, for he could 
now accompany emily thither, without reproach to his conscience, or 
apprehension of displeasure from his commander. during these days, he 
scrupulous forbore to distress her by a mention of his passion, and 
she was compel to esteem and pity, though she could not love him. he 
endeavour to amuse her by showing the environs of the town, and they 
often walk together on the sea-shore, and on the busy quays, where 
emily was frequent interested by the arrival and departure of 
vessels, participate in the joy of meeting friends, and, sometimes, 
shed a sympathetic tear to the sorrow of those, that were 
separating. it was after have witness a scene of the latter kind, 
that she arrange the following stanzas: 

the mariner 

soft came the breath of spring; smooth flow’d the tide; 
and blue the heaven in its mirror smil’d; 
the white sail trembled, swell’d, expand wide, 
the busy sailor at the anchor toil’d. 

with anxious friends, that shed the parting tear, 
the deck was throng’d—how swift the moments fly! 
the vessel heaves, the farewell sign appear; 
mute is each tongue, and eloquent each eye! 

the last dread moment comes!—the sailor youth 
hide the big drop, then smile amid his pain, 
sooth his sad bride, and vow eternal truth, 
“farewell, my love—we shall—shall meet again!” 

long on the stern, with wave hand, he stood; 
the crowded shore sinks, lessening, from his view, 
as gradual glide the bark along the flood; 
his bride is seen no more—“adieu!—adieu!” 

the breeze of eve moan low, her smile is o’er, 
dim steal her twilight down the crimson’d west, 
he climb the top-most mast, to seek once more 
the far-seen coast, where all his wish rest. 

he view its dark line on the distant sky, 
and fancy leads him to his little home, 
he see his weeping love, he hear her sigh, 
he sooth her griefs, and tell of joy to come. 

eve yield to night, the breeze to wintry gales, 
in one vast shade the sea and shore repose; 
he turn his ache eyes,—his spirit fails, 
the chill tear falls;—sad to the deck he goes! 

the storm of midnight swells, the sail are furl’d, 
deep sound the lead, but find no friendly shore, 
fast o’er the wave the wretched bark is hurl’d, 
“o ellen, ellen! we must meet no more!” 

lightnings, that show the vast and foamy deep, 
the rend thunders, as they onward roll, 
the loud, loud winds, that o’er the billow sweep— 
shake the firm nerve, appall the bravest soul! 

ah! what avail the seamen’s toil care! 
the strain cordage bursts, the mast is riv’n; 
the sound of terror groan along the air, 
then sink afar;—the bark on rocks is driv’n! 

fierce o’er the wreck the whelm waters pass’d, 
the helpless crew sunk in the roaring main! 
henry’s faint accent tremble in the blast— 
“farewell, my love!—we ne’er shall meet again!” 

oft, at the calm and silent evening hour, 
when summer-breezes linger on the wave, 
a melancholy voice is heard to pour 
its lonely sweet o’er poor henry’s grave! 

and oft, at midnight, airy strain are heard 
around the grove, where ellen’s form is laid; 
nor is the dirge by village-maidens fear’d, 
for lovers’ spirits guard the holy shade! 




chapter x 

oh! the joy 
of young idea paint on the mind 
in the warm glowing colours fancy spread 
on object not yet known, when all is new, 
and all is lovely! 
sacred drama 


we now return to languedoc and to the mention of count de villefort, 
the nobleman, who succeed to an estate of the marquis de villeroi 
situated near the monastery of st. claire. it may be recollected, that 
this château was uninhabited, when st. aubert and his daughter were in 
the neighbourhood, and that the former was much affected on discover 
himself to be so near château-le-blanc, a place, concerning which the 
good old la voisin afterwards drop some hints, that had alarm 
emily’s curiosity. 

it was in the year 1584, the beginning of that, in which st. aubert 
died, that francis beauveau, count de villefort, came into possession 
of the mansion and extensive domain call château-le-blanc, situated 
in the province of languedoc, on the shore of the mediterranean. this 
estate, which, during some centuries, had belong to his family, now 
descended to him, on the decease of his relative, the marquis de 
villeroi, who had been latterly a man of reserved manners and austere 
character; circumstances, which, together with the duty of his 
profession, that often call him into the field, had prevent any 
degree of intimacy with his cousin, the count de villefort. for many 
years, they had known little of each other, and the count received the 
first intelligence of his death, which happen in a distant part of 
france, together with the instruments, that gave him possession of the 
domain château-le-blanc; but it was not till the following year, that 
he determined to visit that estate, when he design to pass the autumn 
there. the scene of château-le-blanc often came to his remembrance, 
heighten by the touches, which a warm imagination give to the 
recollection of early pleasures; for, many years before, in the 
life-time of the marchioness, and at that age when the mind is 
particularly sensible to impression of gaiety and delight, he had once 
visit this spot, and, though he had pass a long intervene period 
amidst the vexation and tumult of public affairs, which too 
frequent corrode the heart, and vitiate the taste, the shades of 
languedoc and the grandeur of its distant scenery had never been 
remember by him with indifference. 

during many years, the château had been abandoned by the late marquis, 
and, being inhabit only by an old steward and his wife, had been 
suffer to fall much into decay. to superintend the repairs, that 
would be requisite to make it a comfortable residence, had been a 
principal motive with the count for passing the autumnal month in 
languedoc; and neither the remonstrances, nor the tear of the 
countess, for, on urgent occasions, she could weep, were powerful 
enough to overcome his determination. she prepared, therefore, to obey 
the command, which she could not conquer, and to resign the gay 
assembly of paris,—where her beauty was generally unrivalled and won 
the applause, to which her wit had but feeble claim—for the twilight 
canopy of woods, the lonely grandeur of mountain and the solemnity of 
gothic hall and of long, long galleries, which echo only the 
solitary step of a domestic, or the measured clink, that ascend from 
the great clock—the ancient monitor of the hall below. from these 
melancholy expectations she endeavour to relieve her spirits by 
recollect all that she had ever heard, concerning the joyous vintage 
of the plain of languedoc; but there, alas! no airy form would bound 
to the gay melody of parisian dances, and a view of the rustic 
festivity of peasant could afford little pleasure to a heart, in 
which even the feelings of ordinary benevolence had long since decay 
under the corruption of luxury. 

the count had a son and a daughter, the children of a former marriage, 
who, he designed, should accompany him to the south of france; henri, 
who was in his twentieth year, was in the france service; and blanche, 
who was not yet eighteen, had been hitherto confine to the convent, 
where she had been placed immediately on her father’s second marriage. 
the present countess, who had neither sufficient ability, nor 
inclination, to superintend the education of her daughter-in-law, had 
advise this step, and the dread of superior beauty had since urge her 
to employ every art, that might prevail on the count to prolong the 
period of blanche’s seclusion; it was, therefore, with extreme 
mortification, that she now understood he would no long submit on 
this subject, yet it afford her some consolation to consider, that, 
though the lady blanche would emerge from her convent, the shades of 
the country would, for some time, veil her beauty from the public eye. 

on the morning, which commence the journey, the postillion stop at 
the convent, by the count’s order, to take up blanche, whose heart beat 
with delight, at the prospect of novelty and freedom now before her. as 
the time of her departure drew nigh, her impatience had increased, and 
the last night, during which she count every note of every hour, had 
appear the most tedious of any she had ever known. the morning light, 
at length, dawned; the matin-bell rang; she heard the nun descend 
from their chambers, and she start from a sleepless pillow to welcome 
the day, which was to emancipate her from the severity of a cloister, 
and introduce her to a world, where pleasure was ever smiling, and 
goodness ever blessed—where, in short, nothing but pleasure and 
goodness reigned! when the bell of the great gate rang, and the sound 
was follow by that of carriage wheels, she ran, with a palpitate 
heart, to her lattice, and, perceive her father’s carriage in the 
court below, danced, with airy steps, along the gallery, where she was 
met by a nun with a summons from the abbess. in the next moment, she 
was in the parlour, and in the presence of the countess who now 
appear to her as an angel, that was to lead her into happiness. but 
the emotion of the countess, on behold her, were not in unison with 
those of blanche, who had never appear so lovely as at this moment, 
when her countenance, animate by the lightning smile of joy, glow 
with the beauty of happy innocence. 

after converse for a few minutes with the abbess, the countess rose 
to go. this was the moment, which blanche had anticipate with such 
eager expectation, the summit from which she look down upon the 
fairy-land of happiness, and survey all its enchantment; was it a 
moment, then, for tear of regret? yet it was so. she turned, with an 
alter and dejected countenance, to her young companions, who were 
come to bid her farewell, and wept! even my lady abbess, so stately and 
so solemn, she salute with a degree of sorrow, which, an hour before, 
she would have believe it impossible to feel, and which may be 
account for by considering how reluctantly we all part, even with 
unplease objects, when the separation is conscious for ever. again, 
she kiss the poor nun and then follow the countess from that spot 
with tears, which she expect to leave only with smiles. 

but the presence of her father and the variety of objects, on the road, 
soon engaged her attention, and dissipated the shade, which tender 
regret had thrown upon her spirits. inattentive to a conversation, 
which was passing between the countess and a mademoiselle bearn, her 
friend, blanche sat, lost in pleasing reverie, as she watch the 
cloud floating silent along the blue expanse, now veil the sun 
and stretch their shadow along the distant scene, and then 
disclose all his brightness. the journey continue to give blanche 
inexpressible delight, for new scene of nature were every instant 
opening to her view, and her fancy became store with gay and beautiful 
imagery. 

it was on the evening of the seventh day, that the traveller came 
within view of château-le-blanc, the romantic beauty of whose situation 
strong impress the imagination of blanche, who observed, with 
sublime astonishment, the pyrenean mountains, which had been seen only 
at a distance during the day, now rising within a few leagues, with 
their wild cliff and immense precipices, which the evening clouds, 
floating round them, now disclosed, and again veiled. the setting rays, 
that tinge their snowy summit with a roseate hue, touched their lower 
points with various colouring, while the bluish tint, that pervade 
their shadowy recesses, gave the strength of contrast to the splendour 
of light. the plain of languedoc, blush with the purple vine and 
diversify with grove of mulberry, almond and olives, spread far to 
the north and the east; to the south, appear the mediterranean, clear 
as crystal, and blue as the heaven it reflected, bearing on its bosom 
vessels, whose white sail caught the sunbeams, and gave animation to 
the scene. on a high promontory, wash by the waters of the 
mediterranean, stood her father’s mansion, almost secluded from the eye 
by wood of intermingle pine, oak and chesnut, which crown the 
eminence, and slope towards the plains, on one side; while, on the 
other, they extend to a considerable distance along the sea-shores. 

as blanche drew nearer, the gothic features of this ancient mansion 
successive appeared—first an embattled turret, rising above the 
trees—then the broken arch of an immense gateway, retiring beyond them; 
and she almost fancy herself approach a castle, such as is often 
celebrated in early story, where the knight look out from the 
battlements on some champion below, who, clothe in black armour, 
comes, with his companions, to rescue the fair lady of his love from 
the oppression of his rival; a sort of legends, to which she had once 
or twice obtain access in the library of her convent, that, like many 
others, belong to the monks, was store with these relique of 
romantic fiction. 

the carriage stop at a gate, which led into the domain of the 
château, but which was now fastened; and the great bell, that had 
formerly serve to announce the arrival of strangers, have long since 
fallen from its station, a servant climb over a ruin part of the 
adjoin wall, to give notice to those within of the arrival of their 
lord. 

as blanche lean from the coach window, she resigned herself to the 
sweet and gentle emotions, which the hour and the scenery awakened. the 
sun had now left the earth, and twilight began to darken the mountains; 
while the distant waters, reflect the blush that still glow in the 
west, appear like a line of light, skirt the horizon. the low 
murmur of waves, break on the shore, came in the breeze, and, now 
and then, the melancholy dashing of oar was feeble heard from a 
distance. she was suffer to indulge her pensive mood, for the 
thought of the rest of the party were silent engaged upon the 
subject of their several interests. meanwhile, the countess, 
reflecting, with regret, upon the gay party she had left at paris, 
surveyed, with disgust, what she thought the gloomy wood and solitary 
wild of the scene; and, shrink from the prospect of being shut 
up in an old castle, was prepared to meet every object with 
displeasure. the feelings of henri were somewhat similar to those of 
the countess; he gave a mournful sigh to the delight of the capital, 
and to the remembrance of a lady, who, he believed, had engaged his 
affections, and who had certainly fascinate his imagination; but the 
surrounding country, and the mode of life, on which he was entering, 
had, for him, at least, the charm of novelty, and his regret was 
soften by the gay expectations of youth. the gate being at length 
unbarred, the carriage move slow on, under spread chesnuts, that 
almost exclude the remains of day, following what had been formerly a 
road, but which now, overgrown with luxuriant vegetation, could be 
trace only by the boundary, form by trees, on either side, and which 
wound for near half a mile among the woods, before it reach the 
château. this was the very avenue that st. aubert and emily had 
formerly entered, on their first arrival in the neighbourhood, with the 
hope of finding a house, that would receive them, for the night, and 
had so abrupt quitted, on perceive the wild of the place, and a 
figure, which the postillion had fancy was a robber. 

“what a dismal place is this!” exclaim the countess, as the carriage 
penetrate the deep recess of the woods. “surely, my lord, you do 
not mean to pass all the autumn in this barbarous spot! one ought to 
bring hither a cup of the waters of lethe, that the remembrance of 
pleasant scene may not heighten, at least, the natural dreary of 
these.” 

“i shall be govern by circumstances, madam,” said the count, “this 
barbarous spot was inhabit by my ancestors.” 

the carriage now stop at the château, where, at the door of the 
great hall, appear the old steward and the parisian servants, who had 
been sent to prepare the château, wait to receive their lord. lady 
blanche now perceived, that the edifice was not built entire in the 
gothic style, but that it had addition of a more modern date; the 
large and gloomy hall, however, into which she now entered, was 
entire gothic, and sumptuous tapestry, which it was now too dark to 
distinguish, hung upon the walls, and depicture scene from some of 
the ancient provençal romances. a vast gothic window, embroider with 
_clematis_ and eglantine, that ascend to the south, led the eye, now 
that the case were thrown open, through this verdant shade, over a 
slope lawn, to the tops of dark woods, that hung upon the brow of the 
promontory. beyond, appear the waters of the mediterranean, 
stretch far to the south, and to the east, where they were lost in 
the horizon; while, to the north-east, they were bound by the 
luxuriant shore of languedoc and provence, enrich with wood, and gay 
with vine and slope pastures; and, to the south-west, by the 
majestic pyrenees, now fade from the eye, beneath the gradual gloom. 

blanche, as she cross the hall, stop a moment to observe this 
lovely prospect, which the evening twilight obscured, yet did not 
conceal. but she was quick awaken from the complacent delight, 
which this scene had diffuse upon her mind, by the countess, who, 
discontented with every object around, and impatient for refreshment 
and repose, hasten forward to a large parlour, whose cedar wainscot, 
narrow, pointed casements, and dark ceiling of carve cypress wood, 
gave it an aspect of peculiar gloom, which the dingy green velvet of 
the chair and couches, fringe with tarnish gold, had once been 
design to enliven. 

while the countess enquire for refreshment, the count, attend by his 
son, went to look over some part of the château, and lady blanche 
reluctantly remain to witness the discontent and ill-humour of her 
step-mother. 

“how long have you live in this desolate place?” said her ladyship, to 
the old housekeeper, who came to pay her duty. 

“above twenty years, your ladyship, on the next feast of st. jerome.” 

“how happen it, that you have live here so long, and almost alone, 
too? i understood, that the château had been shut up for some years?” 

“yes, madam, it was for many years after my late lord, the count, went 
to the wars; but it is above twenty years, since i and my husband came 
into his service. the place is so large, and has of late been so 
lonely, that we were lost in it, and, after some time, we went to live 
in a cottage at the end of the woods, near some of the tenants, and 
came to look after the château, every now and then. when my lord 
return to france from the wars, he took a dislike to the place, and 
never came to live here again, and so he was satisfy with our 
remain at the cottage. alas—alas! how the château is change from 
what it once was! what delight my late lady use to take in it! i well 
remember when she came here a bride, and how fine it was. now, it has 
been neglect so long, and is gone into such decay! i shall never see 
those days again!” 

the countess appear to be somewhat offend by the thoughtless 
simplicity, with which the old woman regret former times, dorothée 
added—“but the château will now be inhabited, and cheerful again; not 
all the world could tempt me to live in it alone.” 

“well, the experiment will not be made, i believe,” said the countess, 
displease that her own silence had been unable to awe the loquac of 
this rustic old housekeeper, now spare from further attendance by the 
entrance of the count, who said he had been view part of the 
château, and found, that it would require considerable repair and some 
alterations, before it would be perfectly comfortable, as a place of 
residence. “i am sorry to hear it, my lord,” reply the countess. “and 
why sorry, madam?” “because the place will ill repay your trouble; and 
were it even a paradise, it would be insufferable at such a distance 
from paris.” 

the count made no reply, but walk abrupt to a window. “there are 
windows, my lord, but they neither admit entertainment, nor light; they 
show only a scene of savage nature.” 

“i am at a loss, madam,” said the count, “to conjecture what you mean 
by savage nature. do those plains, or those woods, or that fine expanse 
of water, deserve the name?” 

“those mountain certainly do, my lord,” rejoin the countess, 
point to the pyrenees, “and this château, though not a work of rude 
nature, is, to my taste, at least, one of savage art.” the count 
coloured highly. “this place, madam, was the work of my ancestors,” 
said he, “and you must allow me to say, that your present conversation 
discover neither good taste, nor good manners.” blanche, now shock 
at an altercation, which appear to be increase to a serious 
disagreement, rose to leave the room, when her mother’s woman enter 
it; and the countess, immediately desire to be shown to her own 
apartment, withdrew, attend by mademoiselle bearn. 

lady blanche, it being not yet dark, took this opportunity of explore 
new scenes, and, leave the parlour, she pass from the hall into a 
wide gallery, whose wall were decorate by marble pilasters, which 
support an arch roof, compose of a rich mosaic work. through a 
distant window, that seem to terminate the gallery, were seen the 
purple cloud of evening and a landscape, whose features, thin veiled 
in twilight, no long appear distinctly, but, blend into one grand 
mass, stretch to the horizon, coloured only with a tint of solemn 
grey. 

the gallery terminate in a saloon, to which the window she had seen 
through an open door, belonged; but the increase dusk permit her 
only an imperfect view of this apartment, which seem to be 
magnificent and of modern architecture; though it had been either 
suffer to fall into decay, or had never been properly finished. the 
windows, which were numerous and large, descended low, and afford a 
very extensive, and what blanche’s fancy represent to be, a very 
lovely prospect; and she stood for some time, survey the grey 
obscurity and depicture imaginary wood and mountains, valley and 
rivers, on this scene of night; her solemn sensation rather assisted, 
than interrupted, by the distant bark of a watch-dog, and by the 
breeze, as it tremble upon the light foliage of the shrubs. now and 
then, appear for a moment, among the woods, a cottage light; and, at 
length, was heard, afar off, the evening bell of a convent, die on 
the air. when she withdrew her thought from these subject of fanciful 
delight, the gloom and silence of the saloon somewhat awed her; and, 
have sought the door of the gallery, and pursued, for a considerable 
time, a dark passage, she came to a hall, but one total different 
from that she had formerly seen. by the twilight, admitted through an 
open portico, she could just distinguish this apartment to be of very 
light and airy architecture, and that it was paved with white marble, 
pillar of which support the roof, that rose into arch built in the 
moorish style. while blanche stood on the steps of this portico, the 
moon rose over the sea, and gradual disclosed, in partial light, the 
beauty of the eminence, on which she stood, whence a lawn, now rude 
and overgrown with high grass, slope to the woods, that, almost 
surrounding the château, extend in a grand sweep down the southern 
side of the promontory to the very margin of the ocean. beyond the 
woods, on the north-side, appear a long tract of the plain of 
languedoc; and, to the east, the landscape she had before dim seen, 
with the tower of a monastery, illumine by the moon, rising over dark 
groves. 

the soft and shadowy tint, that overspread the scene, the waves, 
undulate in the moonlight, and their low and measured murmur on the 
beach, were circumstances, that united to elevate the unaccustomed mind 
of blanche to enthusiasm. 

“and have i live in this glorious world so long,” said she, “and never 
till now beheld such a prospect—never experienced these delights! every 
peasant girl, on my father’s domain, has view from her infancy the 
face of nature; has ranged, at liberty, her romantic wilds, while i 
have been shut in a cloister from the view of these beautiful 
appearances, which were design to enchant all eyes, and awaken all 
hearts. how can the poor nun and friar feel the full fervour of 
devotion, if they never see the sun rise, or set? never, till this 
evening, did i know what true devotion is; for, never before did i see 
the sun sink below the vast earth! tomorrow, for the first time in my 
life, i will see it rise. o, who would live in paris, to look upon 
black wall and dirty streets, when, in the country, they might gaze on 
the blue heavens, and all the green earth!” 

this enthusiast soliloquy was interrupt by a rustling noise in the 
hall; and, while the lonely of the place made her sensible to fear, 
she thought she perceive something moving between the pillars. for a 
moment, she continue silent observing it, till, ashamed of her 
ridiculous apprehensions, she recollect courage enough to demand who 
was there. “o my young lady, is it you?” said the old housekeeper, who 
was come to shut the windows, “i am glad it is you.” the manner, in 
which she spoke this, with a faint breath, rather surprise blanche, 
who said, “you seem frightened, dorothée, what is the matter?” 

“no, not frightened, ma’amselle,” reply dorothée, hesitate and 
try to appear composed, “but i am old, and—a little matter startle 
me.” the lady blanche smile at the distinction. “i am glad, that my 
lord the count is come to live at the château, ma’amselle,” continue 
dorothée, “for it has been many a year deserted, and dreary enough; 
now, the place will look a little as it use to do, when my poor lady 
was alive.” blanche enquire how long it was, since the marchioness 
died? “alas! my lady,” reply dorothée, “so long—that i have cease to 
count the years! the place, to my mind, has mourn ever since, and i 
am sure my lord’s vassal have! but you have lost yourself, 
ma’amselle,—shall i show you to the other side of the château?” 

blanche enquire how long this part of the edifice had been built. 
“soon after my lord’s marriage, ma’am,” reply dorothée. “the place 
was large enough without this addition, for many rooms of the old 
building were even then never made use of, and my lord had a princely 
household too; but he thought the ancient mansion gloomy, and gloomy 
enough it is!” lady blanche now desire to be shown to the inhabit 
part of the château; and, as the passage were entire dark, dorothée 
conduct her along the edge of the lawn to the opposite side of the 
edifice, where, a door opening into the great hall, she was met by 
mademoiselle bearn. “where have you been so long?” said she, “i had 
begun to think some wonderful adventure had befallen you, and that the 
giant of this enchant castle, or the ghost, which, no doubt, haunt 
it, had convey you through a trap-door into some subterranean vault, 
whence you were never to return.” 

“no,” reply blanche, laughingly, “you seem to love adventure so 
well, that i leave them for you to achieve.” 

“well, i am willing to achieve them, provided i am allow to describe 
them.” 

“my dear mademoiselle bearn,” said henri, as he met her at the door of 
the parlour, “no ghost of these days would be so savage as to impose 
silence on you. our ghost are more civilize than to condemn a lady to 
a purgatory severe even, than their own, be it what it may.” 

mademoiselle bearn reply only by a laugh; and, the count now enter 
the room, supper was served, during which he spoke little, frequent 
appear to be abstracted from the company, and more than once 
remarked, that the place was greatly altered, since he had last seen 
it. “many years have intervene since that period,” said he; “and, 
though the grand features of the scenery admit of no change, they 
impress me with sensation very different from those i formerly 
experienced.” 

“did these scenes, sir,” said blanche, “ever appear more lovely, than 
they do now? to me this seem hardly possible.” the count, regarding 
her with a melancholy smile, said, “they once were as delightful to me, 
as they are now to you; the landscape is not changed, but time has 
change me; from my mind the illusion, which gave spirit to the 
colouring of nature, is fade fast! if you live, my dear blanche, to 
revisit this spot, at the distance of many years, you will, perhaps, 
remember and understand the feelings of your father.” 

lady blanche, affected by these words, remain silent; she look 
forward to the period, which the count anticipated, and considering, 
that he, who now spoke, would then probably be no more, her eyes, bent 
to the ground, were file with tears. she gave her hand to her father, 
who, smile affectionately, rose from his chair, and went to a window 
to conceal his emotion. 

the fatigues of the day made the party separate at an early hour, when 
blanche retired through a long oak gallery to her chamber, whose 
spacious and lofty walls, high antiquated casements, and, what was the 
effect of these, its gloomy air, did not reconcile her to its remote 
situation, in this ancient building. the furniture, also, was of 
ancient date; the bed was of blue damask, trim with tarnish gold 
lace, and its lofty tester rose in the form of a canopy, whence the 
curtains descended, like those of such tent as are sometimes 
represent in old pictures, and, indeed, much resemble those, 
exhibit on the fade tapestry, with which the chamber was hung. to 
blanche, every object here was matter of curiosity; and, taking the 
light from her woman to examine the tapestry, she perceived, that it 
represent scene from the war of troy, though the almost colourless 
worsted now mock the glowing action they once had painted. she 
laugh at the ludicrous absurd she observed, till, recollecting, 
that the hands, which had wove it, were, like the poet, whose thought 
of fire they had attempt to express, long since moulder into dust, 
a train of melancholy idea pass over her mind, and she almost wept. 

have given her woman a strict injunction to awaken her, before 
sunrise, she dismiss her; and then, to dissipate the gloom, which 
reflection had cast upon her spirits, open one of the high casements, 
and was again cheer by the face of living nature. the shadowy earth, 
the air, and ocean—all was still. along the deep serene of the heavens, 
a few light cloud float slowly, through whose skirt the stars now 
seem to tremble, and now to emerge with pure splendour. blanche’s 
thought arose involuntary to the great author of the sublime object 
she contemplated, and she breathe a prayer of fine devotion, than any 
she had ever utter beneath the vaulted roof of a cloister. at this 
casement, she remain till the gloom of midnight were stretch over 
the prospect. she then retired to her pillow, and, “with gay vision of 
tomorrow,” to those sweet slumbers, which health and happy innocence 
only know. 

tomorrow, to fresh wood and pasture new. 




chapter xi 

what transport to retrace our early plays, 
our easy bliss, when each thing joy supply 
the woods, the mountain and the warble maze 
of the wild brooks! 
thomson 


blanche’s slumber continued, till long after the hour, which she had 
so impatient anticipated, for her woman, fatigue with travelling, 
did not call her, till breakfast was nearly ready. her disappointment, 
however, was instantly forgotten, when, on opening the casement, she 
saw, on one hand, the wide sea sparkle in the morning rays, with its 
steal sail and glancing oars; and, on the other, the fresh woods, 
the plain far-stretching and the blue mountains, all glowing with the 
splendour of day. 

as she inspired the pure breeze, health spread a deep blush upon her 
countenance, and pleasure dance in her eyes. 

“who could first invent convents!” said she, “and who could first 
persuade people to go into them? and to make religion a pretence, too, 
where all that should inspire it, is so careful shut out! god is best 
pleased with the homage of a grateful heart, and, when we view his 
glories, we feel most grateful. i never felt so much devotion, during 
the many dull years i was in the convent, as i have done in the few 
hours, that i have been here, where i need only look on all around 
me—to adore god in my inmost heart!” 

saying this, she left the window, bound along the gallery, and, in 
the next moment, was in the breakfast room, where the count was already 
seated. the cheerful of a bright sunshine had disperse the 
melancholy gloom of his reflections, a pleasant smile was on his 
countenance, and he spoke in an enliven voice to blanche, whose 
heart echo back the tones. henri and, soon after, the countess with 
mademoiselle bearn appeared, and the whole party seem to acknowledge 
the influence of the scene; even the countess was so much reanimate as 
to receive the civility of her husband with complacency, and but once 
forgot her good-humour, which was when she ask whether they had any 
neighbours, who were likely to make _this barbarous spot _ more 
tolerable, and whether the count believe it possible for her to exist 
here, without some amusement? 

soon after breakfast the party dispersed; the count, order his 
steward to attend him in the library, went to survey the condition of 
his premises, and to visit some of his tenants; henri hasten with 
alacrity to the shore to examine a boat, that was to bear them on a 
little voyage in the evening and to superintend the adjust of a 
silk awning; while the countess, attend by mademoiselle bearn, 
retired to an apartment on the modern side of the château, which was 
fitted up with airy elegance; and, as the window open upon 
balconies, that front the sea, she was there save from a view of the 
_horrid_ pyrenees. here, while she recline on a sofa, and, casting her 
languid eyes over the ocean, which appear beyond the wood-tops, 
indulge in the luxury of _ennui_, her companion read aloud a 
sentimental novel, on some fashionable system of philosophy, for the 
countess was herself somewhat of a _philosopher_, especially as to 
_infidelity_, and among a certain circle her opinion were wait for 
with impatience, and received as doctrines. 

the lady blanche, meanwhile, hasten to indulge, amidst the wild 
wood-walks around the château, her new enthusiasm, where, as she 
wander under the shades, her gay spirits gradual yield to pensive 
complacency. now, she move with solemn steps, beneath the gloom of 
thick interwoven branches, where the fresh dew still hung upon every 
flower, that peep from among the grass; and now trip sportive 
along the path, on which the sunbeam dart and the checquere foliage 
trembled—where the tender greens of the beech, the acacia and the 
mountain-ash, mingle with the solemn tint of the cedar, the pine and 
cypress, exhibit as fine a contrast of colouring, as the majestic oak 
and oriental plane did of form, to the feathery lightness of the cork 
tree and the wave grace of the poplar. 

have reach a rustic seat, within a deep recess of the woods, she 
rest awhile, and, as her eyes caught, through a distant opening, a 
glimpse of the blue waters of the mediterranean, with the white sail, 
gliding on its bosom, or of the broad mountain, glowing beneath the 
mid-day sun, her mind experienced somewhat of that exquisite delight, 
which awaken the fancy, and leads to poetry. the hum of bee alone 
broke the still around her, as, with other insect of various hues, 
they sport gaily in the shade, or sip sweets from the fresh 
flowers: and, while blanche watch a butter-fly, flit from bud to 
bud, she indulge herself in imagine the pleasure of its short day, 
till she had compose the following stanzas. 

the butter-fly to his love 

what bowery dell, with fragrant breath, 
court thee to stay thy airy flight; 
nor seek again the purple heath, 
so oft the scene of gay delight? 

long i’ve watch’d i’ the lily’s bell, 
whose white stole the morning’s beam; 
no flutter sound thy coming tell, 
no wave wings, at distance, gleam. 

but fountain fresh, nor breathing grove, 
nor sunny mead, nor blossom’d tree, 
so sweet as lily’s cell shall prove,— 
the bower of constant love and me. 

when april bud begin to blow, 
the prim-rose, and the hare-bell blue, 
that on the verdant moss bank grow, 
with violet cups, that weep in dew; 

when wanton gale breathe through the shade, 
and shake the blooms, and steal their sweets, 
and swell the song of ev’ry glade, 
i range the forest’s green retreats: 

there, through the tangle wood-walks play, 
where no rude urchin pace near, 
where spare peep the sultry day, 
and light dew freshen all the air. 

high on a sunbeam oft i sport 
o’er bower and fountain, vale and hill; 
oft ev’ry blush flow’ret court, 
that hang its head o’er winding rill. 

but these i’ll leave to be thy guide, 
and show thee, where the jasmine spread 
her snowy leaf, where may-flow’rs hide, 
and rose-buds rear their peep heads. 

with me the mountain’s summit scale, 
and taste the wild-thyme’s hony bloom, 
whose fragrance, floating on the gale, 
oft leads me to the cedar’s gloom. 

yet, yet, no sound come in the breeze! 
what shade thus dare to tempt thy stay? 
once, me alone thou wish’d to please, 
and with me only thou wouldst stray. 

but, while thy long delay i mourn, 
and chide the sweet shades for their guile, 
thou may’st be true, and they forlorn, 
and fairy favours court thy smile. 

the tiny queen of fairy-land, 
who know thy speed, hath sent thee far, 
to bring, or ere the night-watch stand, 
rich essence for her shadowy car: 

perchance her acorn-cups to fill 
with nectar from the indian rose, 
or gather, near some haunt rill, 
may-dews, that lull to sleep love’s woes: 

or, o’er the mountains, bade thee fly, 
to tell her fairy love to speed, 
when ev’ning steal upon the sky, 
to dance along the twilight mead. 

but now i see thee sailing low, 
gay as the brightest flow’rs of spring, 
thy coat of blue and jet i know, 
and well thy gold and purple wing. 

borne on the gale, thou com’st to me; 
o! welcome, welcome to my home! 
in lily’s cell we’ll live in glee, 
together o’er the mountain roam! 


when lady blanche return to the château, instead of go to the 
apartment of the countess, she amuse herself with wandering over that 
part of the edifice, which she had not yet examined, of which the most 
ancient first attract her curiosity; for, though what she had seen of 
the modern was gay and elegant, there was something in the former more 
interesting to her imagination. have pass up the great staircase, 
and through the oak gallery, she enter upon a long suite of chambers, 
whose wall were either hung with tapestry, or wainscot with cedar, 
the furniture of which look almost as ancient as the rooms 
themselves; the spacious fire-places, where no mark of social cheer 
remained, present an image of cold desolation; and the whole suite 
had so much the air of neglect and desertion, that it seemed, as if the 
venerable persons, whose portrait hung upon the walls, had been the 
last to inhabit them. 

on leave these rooms, she found herself in another gallery, one end 
of which was terminate by a back staircase, and the other by a door, 
that seem to communicate with the north-side of the château, but 
which being fastened, she descended the staircase, and, opening a door 
in the wall, a few steps down, found herself in a small square room, 
that form part of the west turret of the castle. three window 
present each a separate and beautiful prospect; that to the north, 
overlook languedoc; another to the west, the hill ascend towards 
the pyrenees, whose awful summit crown the landscape; and a third, 
front the south, gave the mediterranean, and a part of the wild 
shore of rousillon, to the eye. 

have left the turret, and descended the narrow staircase, she found 
herself in a dusky passage, where she wandered, unable to find her way, 
till impatience yield to apprehension, and she call for assistance. 
presently steps approached, and light glimmer through a door at the 
other extremity of the passage, which was open with caution by some 
person, who did not venture beyond it, and whom blanche observe in 
silence, till the door was closing, when she call aloud, and, 
hasten towards it, perceive the old housekeeper. “dear ma’amselle! 
is it you?” said dorothée, “how could you find your way hither?” had 
blanche been less occupy by her own fears, she would probably have 
observe the strong expression of terror and surprise on dorothée’s 
countenance, who now led her through a long succession of passage and 
rooms, that look as if they had been uninhabited for a century, till 
they reach that appropriate to the housekeeper, where dorothée 
entreat she would sit down and take refreshment. blanche accept the 
sweet meats, offer to her, mention her discovery of the pleasant 
turret, and her wish to appropriate it to her own use. whether 
dorothée’s taste was not so sensible to the beauty of landscape as 
her young lady’s, or that the constant view of lovely scenery had 
deaden it, she forbore to praise the subject of blanche’s enthusiasm, 
which, however, her silence did not repress. to lady blanche’s enquiry 
of whither the door she had found fasten at the end of the gallery 
led, she replied, that it open to a suite of rooms, which had not 
been entered, during many years, “for,” add she, “my late lady die 
in one of them, and i could never find in my heart to go into them 
since.” 

blanche, though she wish to see these chambers, forbore, on observing 
that dorothée’s eyes were fill with tears, to ask her to unlock them, 
and, soon after, went to dress for dinner, at which the whole party met 
in good spirits and good humour, except the countess, whose vacant 
mind, overcome by the languor of idleness, would neither suffer her to 
be happy herself, nor to contribute to the happiness of others. 
mademoiselle bearn, attempt to be witty, direct her badinage 
against henri, who answered, because he could not well avoid it, rather 
than from any inclination to notice her, whose lively sometimes 
amused, but whose conceit and insensibility often disgust him. 

the cheerfulness, with which blanche rejoin the party, vanished, on 
her reach the margin of the sea; she gaze with apprehension upon 
the immense expanse of waters, which, at a distance, she had beheld 
only with delight and astonishment, and it was by a strong effort, that 
she so far overcame her fear as to follow her father into the boat. 

as she silent survey the vast horizon, bend round the distant 
verge of the ocean, an emotion of sublimest rapture struggle to 
overcome a sense of personal danger. a light breeze play on the 
water, and on the silk awning of the boat, and wave the foliage of the 
recede woods, that crown the cliffs, for many miles, and which the 
count survey with the pride of conscious property, as well as with 
the eye of taste. 

at some distance, among these woods, stood a pavilion, which had once 
been the scene of social gaiety, and which its situation still made one 
of romantic beauty. thither, the count had ordered coffee and other 
refreshment to be carried, and thither the sailor now steer their 
course, following the winding of the shore round many a woody 
promontory and circle bay; while the pensive tone of horn and other 
wind instruments, play by the attendant in a distant boat, echo 
among the rocks, and die along the waves. blanche had now subdued her 
fears; a delightful tranquill stole over her mind, and held her in 
silence; and she was too happy even to remember the convent, or her 
former sorrows, as subject of comparison with her present felicity. 

the countess felt less unhappy than she had done, since the moment of 
her leave paris; for her mind was now under some degree of restraint; 
she fear to indulge its wayward humours, and even wish to recover 
the count’s good opinion. on his family, and on the surrounding scene, 
he look with temper pleasure and benevolent satisfaction, while his 
son exhibit the gay spirits of youth, anticipate new delights, and 
regretless of those, that were passed. 

after near an hour’s rowing, the party landed, and ascend a little 
path, overgrown with vegetation. at a little distance from the point of 
the eminence, within the shadowy recess of the woods, appear the 
pavilion, which blanche perceived, as she caught a glimpse of its 
portico between the trees, to be built of variegated marble. as she 
follow the countess, she often turn her eyes with rapture towards 
the ocean, seen beneath the dark foliage, far below, and from thence 
upon the deep woods, whose silence and impenetrable gloom awaken 
emotion more solemn, but scarcely less delightful. 

the pavilion had been prepared, as far as was possible, on a very short 
notice, for the reception of its visitors; but the fade colours of its 
paint wall and ceiling, and the decay drapery of its once 
magnificent furniture, declared how long it had been neglected, and 
abandoned to the empire of the change seasons. while the party 
partook of a collation of fruit and coffee, the horns, placed in a 
distant part of the woods, where an echo sweeten and prolonged their 
melancholy tones, broke soft on the still of the scene. this spot 
seem to attract even the admiration of the countess, or, perhaps, it 
was merely the pleasure of plan furniture and decorations, that 
made her dwell so long on the necessity of repair and adorn it; 
while the count, never happy than when he saw her mind engaged by 
natural and simple objects, acquiesce in all her designs, concerning 
the pavilion. the painting on the wall and cove ceiling were to be 
renewed, the canopy and sofa were to be of light green damask; 
marble statue of wood-nymphs, bearing on their head basket of living 
flowers, were to adorn the recess between the windows, which, 
descend to the ground, were to admit to every part of the room, and 
it was of octagon form, the various landscape. one window open upon 
a romantic glade, where the eye rove among the woody recesses, and the 
scene was bound only by a lengthen pomp of groves; from another, 
the wood recede disclose the distant summit of the pyrenees; a 
third front an avenue, beyond which the grey tower of 
château-le-blanc, and a picturesque part of its ruin were seen 
partially among the foliage; while a fourth gave, between the trees, a 
glimpse of the green pasture and villages, that diversify the bank of 
the aude. the mediterranean, with the bold cliffs, that overlook its 
shores, were the grand object of a fifth window, and the other gave, 
in different points of view, the wild scenery of the woods. 

after wandering, for some time, in these, the party return to the 
shore and embarked; and, the beauty of the evening tempt them to 
extend their excursion, they proceed further up the bay. a dead calm 
had succeed the light breeze, that waft them hither, and the men 
took to their oars. around, the waters were spread into one vast 
expanse of polish mirror, reflect the grey cliff and feathery 
woods, that over-hung its surface, the glow of the western horizon and 
the dark clouds, that came slow from the east. blanche love to see 
the dip oar imprint the water, and to watch the spread circle 
they left, which gave a tremulous motion to the reflect landscape, 
without destroy the harmony of its features. 

above the dark of the woods, her eye now caught a cluster of high 
towers, touched with the splendour of the setting rays; and, soon 
after, the horn being then silent, she heard the faint swell of choral 
voice from a distance. 

“what voice are those, upon the air?” said the count, look round, 
and listening; but the strain had ceased. “it seem to be a 
vesper-hymn, which i have often heard in my convent,” said blanche. 

“we are near the monastery, then,” observe the count; and, the boat 
soon after double a lofty head-land, the monastery of st. claire 
appeared, seat near the margin of the sea, where the cliffs, sudden 
sinking, form a low shore within a small bay, almost encircle with 
woods, among which partial features of the edifice were seen;—the great 
gate and gothic window of the hall, the cloister and the side of a 
chapel more remote; while a venerable arch, which had once led to a 
part of the fabric, now demolished, stood a majestic ruin detached from 
the main building, beyond which appear a grand perspective of the 
woods. on the grey walls, the moss had fastened, and, round the pointed 
window of the chapel, the ivy and the briony hung in many a fantastic 
wreath. 

all without was silent and forsaken; but, while blanche gaze with 
admiration on this venerable pile, whose effect was heighten by the 
strong lights and shadow thrown athwart it by a cloudy sunset, a sound 
of many voices, slow chanting, arose from within. the count bade his 
men rest on their oars. the monk were singing the hymn of vespers, and 
some female voice mingle with the strain, which rose by soft degrees, 
till the high organ and the choral sound swell into full and solemn 
harmony. the strain, soon after, drop into sudden silence, and was 
renew in a low and still more solemn key, till, at length, the holy 
chorus die away, and was heard no more.—blanche sighed, tear tremble 
in her eyes, and her thought seem waft with the sound to heaven. 
while a rapt still prevail in the boat, a train of friars, and 
then of nuns, veiled in white, issue from the cloisters, and passed, 
under the shade of the woods, to the main body of the edifice. 

the countess was the first of her party to awaken from this pause of 
silence. 

“these dismal hymn and friar make one quite melancholy,” said she; 
“twilight is coming on; pray let us return, or it will be dark before 
we get home.” 

the count, look up, now perceived, that the twilight of evening was 
anticipate by an approach storm. in the east a tempest was 
collecting; a heavy gloom came on, oppose and contrast the glowing 
splendour of the setting sun. the clamorous sea-fowl skim in fleet 
circle upon the surface of the sea, dip their light pinion in the 
wave, as they flee away in search of shelter. the boatmen pull hard 
at their oars; but the thunder, that now mutter at a distance, and 
the heavy drops, that began to dimple the water, made the count 
determine to put back to the monastery for shelter, and the course of 
the boat was immediately changed. as the cloud approach the west, 
their lurid dark change to a deep ruddy glow, which, by 
reflection, seem to fire the tops of the wood and the shatter 
tower of the monastery. 

the appearance of the heaven alarm the countess and mademoiselle 
bearn, whose expression of apprehension distress the count, and 
perplexed his men; while blanche continue silent, now agitate with 
fear, and now with admiration, as she view the grandeur of the 
clouds, and their effect on the scenery, and listen to the long, long 
peal of thunder, that roll through the air. 

the boat have reach the lawn before the monastery, the count sent a 
servant to announce his arrival, and to entreat shelter of the 
superior, who, soon after, appear at the great gate, attend by 
several monks, while the servant return with a message, expressive at 
once of hospitality and pride, but of pride disguise in submission. 
the party immediately disembarked, and, have hasty cross the 
lawn—for the shower was now heavy—were received at the gate by the 
superior, who, as they entered, stretch forth his hand and gave his 
blessing; and they pass into the great hall, where the lady abbess 
waited, attend by several nuns, clothed, like herself, in black, and 
veiled in white. the veil of the abbess was, however, thrown half back, 
and discover a countenance, whose chaste dignity was sweeten by the 
smile of welcome, with which she address the countess, whom she led, 
with blanche and mademoiselle bearn, into the convent parlour, while 
the count and henri were conduct by the superior to the refectory. 

the countess, fatigue and discontented, received the polite of the 
abbess with careless haughtiness, and had follow her, with indolent 
steps, to the parlour, over which the paint case and wainscot of 
larch-wood threw, at all times, a melancholy shade, and where the gloom 
of evening now lour almost to darkness. 

while the lady abbess ordered refreshment, and converse with the 
countess, blanche withdrew to a window, the lower pane of which, being 
without painting, allow her to observe the progress of the storm over 
the mediterranean, whose dark waves, that had so lately slept, now came 
bold swelling, in long succession, to the shore, where they burst in 
white foam, and threw up a high spray over the rocks. a red sulphureous 
tint overspread the long line of clouds, that hung above the western 
horizon, beneath whose dark skirt the sun look out, illumine the 
distant shore of languedoc, as well as the tuft summit of the 
near woods, and shed a partial gleam on the western waves. the rest 
of the scene was in deep gloom, except where a sunbeam, dart between 
the clouds, glance on the white wings of the sea-fowl, that circle 
high among them, or touched the swelling sail of a vessel, which was 
seen labour in the storm. blanche, for some time, anxious watch 
the progress of the bark, as it threw the wave in foam around it, and, 
as the lightning flashed, look to the opening heavens, with many a 
sigh for the fate of the poor mariners. 

the sun, at length, set, and the heavy clouds, which had long impended, 
drop over the splendour of his course; the vessel, however, was yet 
dim seen, and blanche continue to observe it, till the quick 
succession of flashes, lighting up the gloom of the whole horizon, 
warn her to retire from the window, and she join the abbess, who, 
have exhaust all her topic of conversation with the countess, had 
now leisure to notice her. 

but their discourse was interrupt by tremendous peal of thunder; and 
the bell of the monastery soon after ring out, summon the 
inhabitant to prayer. as blanche pass the window, she gave another 
look to the ocean, where, by the momentary flash, that illumine the 
vast body of the waters, she distinguished the vessel she had observe 
before, amidst a sea of foam, break the billows, the mast now bowing 
to the waves, and then rising high in air. 

she sigh fervent as she gazed, and then follow the lady abbess 
and the countess to the chapel. meanwhile, some of the count’s 
servants, have gone by land to the château for carriages, return 
soon after vespers had concluded, when, the storm being somewhat 
abated, the count and his family return home. blanche was surprise 
to discover how much the winding of the shore had deceive her, 
concerning the distance of the château from the monastery, whose vesper 
bell she had heard, on the preceding evening, from the window of the 
west saloon, and whose tower she would also have seen from thence, had 
not twilight veiled them. 

on their arrival at the château, the countess, affecting more fatigue, 
than she really felt, withdrew to her apartment, and the count, with 
his daughter and henri, went to the supper-room, where they had not 
been long, when they heard, in a pause of the gust, a fire of guns, 
which the count understanding to be signal of distress from some 
vessel in the storm, went to a window, that open towards the 
mediterranean, to observe further; but the sea was now involved in 
utter darkness, and the loud howling of the tempest had again overcome 
every other sound. blanche, remember the bark, which she had before 
seen, now join her father, with tremble anxiety. in a few moments, 
the report of gun was again borne along the wind, and as sudden 
waft away; a tremendous burst of thunder followed, and, in the flash, 
that had precede it, and which seem to quiver over the whole surface 
of the waters, a vessel was discovered, toss amidst the white foam 
of the wave at some distance from the shore. impenetrable dark 
again involved the scene, but soon a second flash show the bark, with 
one sail unfurled, driving towards the coast. blanche hung upon her 
father’s arm, with looks full of the agony of united terror and pity, 
which were unnecessary to awaken the heart of the count, who gaze upon 
the sea with a piteous expression, and, perceiving, that no boat could 
live in the storm, forbore to send one; but he gave orders to his 
people to carry torch out upon the cliffs, hope they might prove a 
kind of beacon to the vessel, or, at least, warn the crew of the rocks 
they were approaching. while henri went out to direct on what part of 
the cliff the lights should appear, blanche remain with her father, 
at the window, catching, every now and then, as the lightning flashed, 
a glimpse of the vessel; and she soon saw, with revive hope, the 
torch flaming on the black of night, and, as they wave over the 
cliffs, casting a red gleam on the gasp billows. when the fire of 
gun was repeated, the torch were toss high in the air, as if 
answer the signal, and the fire was then redoubled; but, though 
the wind bore the sound away, she fancied, as the lightning glanced, 
that the vessel was much near the shore. 

the count’s servant were now seen, running to and fro, on the rocks; 
some venture almost to the point of the crags, and bend over, held 
out their torch fasten to long poles; while others, whose steps 
could be trace only by the course of the lights, descended the steep 
and dangerous path, that wound to the margin of the sea, and, with loud 
halloos, hail the mariners, whose shrill whistle, and then feeble 
voices, were heard, at intervals, mingle with the storm. sudden 
shout from the people on the rocks increase the anxiety of blanche to 
an almost intolerable degree: but her suspense, concerning the fate of 
the mariners, was soon over, when henri, running breathless into the 
room, told that the vessel was anchor in the bay below, but in so 
shatter a condition, that it was fear she would part before the 
crew could disembark. the count immediately gave orders for his own 
boat to assist in bring them to shore, and that such of these 
unfortunate stranger as could not be accommodate in the adjacent 
hamlet should be entertain at the château. among the latter, were 
emily st. aubert, monsieur du pont, ludovico and annette, who, have 
embark at leghorn and reach marseilles, were from thence crossing 
the gulf of lyons, when this storm overtook them. they were received by 
the count with his usual benignity, who, though emily wish to have 
proceed immediately to the monastery of st. claire, would not allow 
her to leave the château, that night; and, indeed, the terror and 
fatigue she had suffer would scarcely have permit her to go 
farther. 

in monsieur du pont the count discover an old acquaintance, and much 
joy and congratulate pass between them, after which emily was 
introduce by name to the count’s family, whose hospitable benevolence 
dissipated the little embarrassment, which her situation had occasion 
her, and the party were soon seat at the supper-table. the unaffected 
kindness of blanche and the lively joy she express on the escape of 
the strangers, for whom her pity had been so much interested, gradual 
revive emily’s languid spirits; and du pont, relieved from his terror 
for her and for himself, felt the full contrast, between his late 
situation on a dark and tremendous ocean, and his present one, in a 
cheerful mansion, where he was surround with plenty, elegance and 
smile of welcome. 

annette, meanwhile, in the servants’ hall, was telling of all the 
danger she had encountered, and congratulate herself so heartily 
upon her own and ludovico’s escape, and on her present comforts, that 
she often made all that part of the château ring with merriment and 
laughter. ludovico’s spirits were as gay as her own, but he had 
discretion enough to restrain them, and try to check hers, though in 
vain, till her laughter, at length, ascend to _my lady’s_ chamber, 
who sent to enquire what occasion so much uproar in the château, and 
to command silence. 

emily withdrew early to seek the repose she so much required, but her 
pillow was long a sleepless one. on this her return to her native 
country, many interesting remembrance were awakened; all the event 
and suffering she had experienced, since she quit it, came in long 
succession to her fancy, and were chase only by the image of 
valancourt, with whom to believe herself once more in the same land, 
after they had been so long, and so distantly separated, gave her 
emotion of indescribable joy, but which afterwards yield to anxiety 
and apprehension, when she considered the long period, that had 
elapsed, since any letter had pass between them, and how much might 
have happen in this interval to affect her future peace. but the 
thought that valancourt might be now no more, or, if living, might have 
forgotten her, was so very terrible to her heart, that she would 
scarcely suffer herself to pause upon the possibility. she determined 
to inform him, on the following day, of her arrival in france, which it 
was scarcely possible he could know but by a letter from herself, and, 
after soothe her spirits with the hope of soon hearing, that he was 
well, and unchanged in his affections, she, at length, sunk to repose. 



chapter xii 

oft woo’d the gleam of cynthia, silver-bright, 
in cloister dim, far from the haunt of folly, 
with freedom by my side, and soft-ey’d melancholy. 
gray 


the lady blanche was so much interested for emily, that, upon hearing 
she was go to reside in the neighbouring convent, she request the 
count would invite her to lengthen her stay at the château. “and you 
know, my dear sir,” add blanche, “how delight i shall be with such 
a companion; for, at present, i have no friend to walk, or to read 
with, since mademoiselle bearn is my mamma’s friend only.” 

the count smile at the youthful simplicity, with which his daughter 
yield to first impressions; and, though he chose to warn her of their 
danger, he silent applaud the benevolence, that could thus readily 
expand in confidence to a stranger. he had observe emily, with 
attention, on the preceding evening, and was as much pleased with her, 
as it was possible he could be with any person, on so short an 
acquaintance. the mention, made of her by mons. du pont, had also given 
him a favourable impression of emily; but, extremely cautious as to 
those, whom he introduce to the intimacy of his daughter, he 
determined, on hearing that the former was no stranger at the convent 
of st. claire, to visit the abbess, and, if her account correspond 
with his wish, to invite emily to pass some time at the château. on 
this subject, he was influence by a consideration of the lady 
blanche’s welfare, still more than by either a wish to oblige her, or 
to befriend the orphan emily, for whom, however, he felt considerably 
interested. 

on the following morning, emily was too much fatigue to appear; but 
mons. du pont was at the breakfast-table, when the count enter the 
room, who pressed him, as his former acquaintance, and the son of a 
very old friend, to prolong his stay at the château; an invitation, 
which du pont willing accepted, since it would allow him to be near 
emily; and, though he was not conscious of encourage a hope, that she 
would ever return his affection, he had not fortitude enough to 
attempt, at present, to overcome it. 

emily, when she was somewhat recovered, wander with her new friend 
over the grounds belong to the château, as much delight with the 
surrounding views, as blanche, in the benevolence of her heart, had 
wished; from thence she perceived, beyond the woods, the tower of the 
monastery, and remarked, that it was to this convent she design to 
go. 

“ah!” said blanche with surprise, “i am but just release from a 
convent, and would you go into one? if you could know what pleasure i 
feel in wandering here, at liberty,—and in seeing the sky and the 
fields, and the wood all round me, i think you would not.” emily, 
smile at the warmth, with which the lady blanche spoke, observed, 
that she did not mean to confine herself to a convent for life. 

“no, you may not intend it now,” said blanche; “but you do not know to 
what the nun may persuade you to consent: i know how kind they will 
appear, and how happy, for i have seen too much of their art.” 

when they return to the château, lady blanche conduct emily to her 
favourite turret, and from thence they ramble through the ancient 
chambers, which blanche had visit before. emily was amuse by 
observing the structure of these apartments, and the fashion of their 
old but still magnificent furniture, and by compare them with those 
of the castle of udolpho, which were yet more antique and grotesque. 
she was also interested by dorothée the housekeeper, who attend them, 
whose appearance was almost as antique as the object around her, and 
who seem no less interested by emily, on whom she frequent gaze 
with so much deep attention, as scarcely to hear what was said to her. 

while emily look from one of the casements, she perceived, with 
surprise, some objects, that were familiar to her memory;—the field 
and woods, with the gleam brook, which she had pass with la 
voisin, one evening, soon after the death of monsieur st. aubert, in 
her way from the monastery to her cottage; and she now knew this to be 
the château, which he had then avoided, and concerning which he had 
drop some remarkable hints. 

shock by this discovery, yet scarcely knowing why, she muse for some 
time in silence, and remember the emotion, which her father had 
betray on finding himself so near this mansion, and some other 
circumstances of his conduct, that now greatly interested her. the 
music, too, which she had formerly heard, and, respecting which la 
voisin had given such an odd account, occur to her, and, desirous of 
knowing more concerning it, she ask dorothée whether it return at 
midnight, as usual, and whether the musician had yet been discovered. 

“yes, ma’amselle,” reply dorothée, “that music is still heard, but 
the musician has never been found out, nor ever will, i believe; though 
there are some people, who can guess.” 

“indeed!” said emily, “then why do they not pursue the enquiry?” 

“ah, young lady! enquiry enough has been made—but who can pursue a 
spirit?” 

emily smiled, and, remember how lately she had suffer herself to 
be led away by superstition, determined now to resist its contagion; 
yet, in spite of her efforts, she felt awe mingle with her curiosity, 
on this subject; and blanche, who had hitherto listen in silence, now 
enquire what this music was, and how long it had been heard. 

“ever since the death of my lady, madam,” reply dorothée. 

“why, the place is not haunted, surely?” said blanche, between jesting 
and seriousness. 

“i have heard that music almost ever since my dear lady died,” 
continue dorothée, “and never before then. but that is nothing to some 
things i could tell of.” 

“do, pray, tell them, then,” said lady blanche, now more in earnest 
than in jest. “i am much interested, for i have heard sister henriette, 
and sister sophie, in the convent, tell of such strange appearances, 
which they themselves had witnessed!” 

“you never heard, my lady, i suppose, what made us leave the château, 
and go and live in a cottage,” said dorothée. “never!” reply blanche 
with impatience. 

“nor the reason, that my lord, the marquis”—dorothée checked herself, 
hesitated, and then endeavour to change the topic; but the curiosity 
of blanche was too much awaken to suffer the subject thus easily to 
escape her, and she pressed the old housekeeper to proceed with her 
account, upon whom, however, no entreaty could prevail; and it was 
evident, that she was alarm for the imprudence, into which she had 
already betray herself. 

“i perceive,” said emily, smiling, “that all old mansions are haunted; 
i am lately come from a place of wonders; but unluckily, since i left 
it, i have heard almost all of them explained.” 

blanche was silent; dorothée look grave, and sighed; and emily felt 
herself still inclined to believe more of the wonderful, than she chose 
to acknowledge. just then, she remember the spectacle she had 
witness in a chamber of udolpho, and, by an odd kind of coincidence, 
the alarm words, that had accidental met her eye in the ms. 
papers, which she had destroyed, in obedience to the command of her 
father; and she shudder at the meaning they seem to impart, almost 
as much as at the horrible appearance, disclose by the black veil. 

the lady blanche, meanwhile, unable to prevail with dorothée to explain 
the subject of her late hints, had desired, on reach the door, that 
terminate the gallery, and which she found fasten on the preceding 
day, to see the suite of rooms beyond. “dear young lady,” said the 
housekeeper, “i have told you my reason for not opening them; i have 
never seen them, since my dear lady died; and it would go hard with me 
to see them now. pray, madam, do not ask me again.” 

“certainly i will not,” reply blanche, “if that is really your 
objection.” 

“alas! it is,” said the old woman: “we all love her well, and i shall 
always grieve for her. time runs round! it is now many years, since she 
died; but i remember everything, that happen then, as if it was but 
yesterday. many things, that have pass of late years, are gone quite 
from my memory, while those so long ago, i can see as if in a glass.” 
she paused, but afterwards, as they walk up the gallery, add to 
emily, “this young lady sometimes bring the late marchioness to my 
mind; i can remember, when she look just as blooming, and very like 
her, when she smiles. poor lady! how gay she was, when she first came 
to the château!” 

“and was she not gay, afterwards?” said blanche. 

dorothée shook her head; and emily observe her, with eyes strong 
expressive of the interest she now felt. “let us sit down in this 
window,” said the lady blanche, on reach the opposite end of the 
gallery: “and pray, dorothée, if it is not painful to you, tell us 
something more about the marchioness. i should like to look into the 
glass you spoke of just now, and see a few of the circumstances, which 
you say often pass over it.” 

“no, my lady,” reply dorothée; “if you knew as much as i do, you 
would not, for you would find there a dismal train of them; i often 
wish i could shut them out, but they will rise to my mind. i see my 
dear lady on her death-bed,—her very look,—and remember all she said—it 
was a terrible scene!” 

“why was it so terrible?” said emily with emotion. 

“ah, dear young lady! is not death always terrible?” reply dorothée. 

to some further enquiry of blanche dorothée was silent; and emily, 
observing the tear in her eyes, forbore to urge the subject, and 
endeavour to withdraw the attention of her young friend to some 
object in the gardens, where the count, with the countess and monsieur 
du pont, appearing, they went down to join them. 

when he perceive emily, he advanced to meet her, and present her to 
the countess, in a manner so benign, that it recall most powerful 
to her mind the idea of her late father, and she felt more gratitude to 
him, than embarrassment towards the countess, who, however, received 
her with one of those fascinating smiles, which her caprice sometimes 
allow her to assume, and which was now the result of a conversation 
the count had held with her, concerning emily. whatever this might be, 
or whatever had pass in his conversation with the lady abbess, whom 
he had just visited, esteem and kindness were strong apparent in his 
manner, when he address emily, who experienced that sweet emotion, 
which arise from the consciousness of possess the approbation of 
the good; for to the count’s worth she had been inclined to yield her 
confidence almost from the first moment, in which she had seen him. 

before she could finish her acknowledgment for the hospitality she had 
received, and mention of her design of go immediately to the 
convent, she was interrupt by an invitation to lengthen her stay at 
the château, which was pressed by the count and the countess, with an 
appearance of such friendly sincerity, that, though she much wish to 
see her old friends at the monastery, and to sigh, once more, over her 
father’s grave, she consent to remain a few days at the château. 

to the abbess, however, she immediately wrote, mention her arrival 
in languedoc and her wish to be received into the convent, as a 
boarder; she also sent letters to monsieur quesnel and to valancourt, 
whom she merely informed of her arrival in france; and, as she knew not 
where the latter might be stationed, she direct her letter to his 
brother’s seat in gascony. 

in the evening, lady blanche and mons. du pont walk with emily to the 
cottage of la voisin, which she had now a melancholy pleasure in 
approaching, for time had soften her grief for the loss of st. 
aubert, though it could not annihilate it, and she felt a soothe 
sad in indulge the recollections, which this scene recalled. la 
voisin was still living, and seem to enjoy, as much as formerly, the 
tranquil evening of a blameless life. he was sitting at the door of his 
cottage, watch some of his grandchildren, play on the grass 
before him, and, now and then, with a laugh, or a commendation, 
encourage their sports. he immediately recollect emily, whom he was 
much pleased to see, and she was as rejoice to hear, that he had not 
lost one of his family, since her departure. 

“yes, ma’amselle,” said the old man, “we all live merry together 
still, thank god! and i believe there is not a happy family to be 
found in languedoc, than ours.” 

emily did not trust herself in the chamber, where st. aubert died; and, 
after half an hour’s conversation with la voisin and his family, she 
left the cottage. 

during these the first days of her stay at château-le-blanc, she was 
often affected, by observing the deep, but silent melancholy, which, at 
times, stole over du pont; and emily, pity the self-delusion, which 
disarm him of the will to depart, determined to withdraw herself as 
soon as the respect she owe the count and countess de villefort would 
permit. the dejection of his friend soon alarm the anxiety of the 
count, to whom du pont, at length, confide the secret of his hopeless 
affection, which, however, the former could only commiserate, though he 
secret determined to befriend his suit, if an opportunity of do so 
should ever occur. considering the dangerous situation of du pont, he 
but feeble oppose his intention of leave château-le-blanc, on the 
following day, but drew from him a promise of a long visit, when he 
could return with safety to his peace. emily herself, though she could 
not encourage his affection, esteem him both for the many virtue he 
possessed, and for the service she had received from him; and it was 
not without tender emotion of gratitude and pity, that she now saw him 
depart for his family seat in gascony; while he took leave of her with 
a countenance so expressive of love and grief, as to interest the count 
more warm in his cause than before. 

in a few days, emily also left the château, but not before the count 
and countess had received her promise to repeat her visit very soon; 
and she was welcome by the abbess, with the same maternal kindness she 
had formerly experienced, and by the nuns, with much expression of 
regard. the well-known scene of the convent occasion her many 
melancholy recollections, but with these were mingle others, that 
inspired gratitude for have escape the various dangers, that had 
pursue her, since she quit it, and for the good, which she yet 
possessed; and, though she once more wept over her father’s grave, with 
tear of tender affection, her grief was soften from its former 
acuteness. 

some time after her return to the monastery, she received a letter from 
her uncle, mons. quesnel, in answer to information that she had arrive 
in france, and to her enquiries, concerning such of her affair as he 
had undertaken to conduct during her absence, especially as to the 
period for which la vallée had been let, whither it was her wish to 
return, if it should appear, that her income would permit her to do so. 
the reply of mons. quesnel was cold and formal, as she expected, 
express neither concern for the evil she suffered, nor pleasure, 
that she was now remove from them; nor did he allow the opportunity to 
pass, of reproving her for her rejection of count morano, whom he 
affected still to believe a man of honour and fortune; nor of 
vehement declaim against montoni, to whom he had always, till now, 
felt himself to be inferior. on emily’s pecuniary concerns, he was not 
very explicit; he informed her, however, that the term, for which la 
vallée had been engaged, was nearly expired; but, without inviting her 
to his own house, added, that her circumstances would by no means allow 
her to reside there, and earnest advise her to remain, for the 
present, in the convent of st. claire. 

to her enquiry respecting poor old theresa, her late father’s 
servant, he gave no answer. in the postscript to his letter, monsieur 
quesnel mention m. motteville, in whose hand the late st. aubert had 
placed the chief of his personal property, as being likely to arrange 
his affair nearly to the satisfaction of his creditors, and that emily 
would recover much more of her fortune, than she had formerly reason to 
expect. the letter also inclose to emily an order upon a merchant at 
narbonne, for a small sum of money. 

the tranquill of the monastery, and the liberty she was suffer to 
enjoy, in wandering among the wood and shore of this delightful 
province, gradual restore her spirits to their natural tone, except 
that anxiety would sometimes intrude, concerning valancourt, as the 
time approached, when it was possible that she might receive an answer 
to her letter. 



chapter xiii 

as when a wave, that from a cloud impends, 
and, swell’d with tempests, on the ship descends, 
white are the deck with foam; the wind aloud, 
howl o’er the masts, and sing through ev’ry shroud: 
pale, trembling, tir’d, the sailor freeze with fears, 
and instant death on ev’ry wave appears. 
pope’s home 


the lady blanche, meanwhile, who was left much alone, became impatient 
for the company of her new friend, whom she wish to observe share 
in the delight she received from the beautiful scenery around. she had 
now no person, to whom she could express her admiration and communicate 
her pleasures, no eye, that sparkle to her smile, or countenance, that 
reflect her happiness; and she became spiritless and pensive. the 
count, observing her dissatisfaction, readily yield to her 
entreaties, and remind emily of her promise visit; but the silence 
of valancourt, which was now prolonged far beyond the period, when a 
letter might have arrive from estuvière, oppress emily with severe 
anxiety, and, rendering her averse to society, she would willing have 
defer her acceptance of this invitation, till her spirits should be 
relieved. the count and his family, however, pressed to see her; and, 
as the circumstances, that prompt her wish for solitude, could not be 
explained, there was an appearance of caprice in her refusal, which she 
could not persevere in, without offend the friends, whose esteem she 
valued. at length, therefore, she return upon a second visit to 
château-le-blanc. here the friendly manner of count de villefort 
encourage emily to mention to him her situation, respecting the 
estate of her late aunt, and to consult him on the means of recover 
them. he had little doubt, that the law would decide in her favour, 
and, advise her to apply to it, offer first to write to an advocate 
at avignon, on whose opinion he thought he could rely. his kindness was 
grateful accept by emily, who, soothe by the courtesy she daily 
experienced, would have been once more happy, could she have been 
assured of valancourt’s welfare and unaltered affection. she had now 
been above a week at the château, without receiving intelligence of 
him, and, though she knew, that, if he was absent from his brother’s 
residence, it was scarcely probable her letter had yet reach him, she 
could not forbear to admit doubt and fears, that destroy her peace. 
again she would consider of all, that might have happen in the long 
period, since her first seclusion at udolpho, and her mind was 
sometimes so overwhelm with an apprehension, that valancourt was no 
more, or that he live no long for her, that the company even of 
blanche became intolerable oppressive, and she would sit alone in her 
apartment for hour together, when the engagement of the family 
allow her to do so, without incivility. 

in one of these solitary hours, she unlock a little box, which 
contained some letters of valancourt, with some drawing she had 
sketched, during her stay in tuscany, the latter of which were no 
long interesting to her; but, in the letters, she now, with 
melancholy indulgence, meant to retrace the tenderness, that had so 
often soothe her, and render her, for a moment, insensible of the 
distance, which separate her from the writer. but their effect was now 
changed; the affection they express appeal so forcibly to her 
heart, when she considered that it had, perhaps, yield to the powers 
of time and absence, and even the view of the hand-writing recall so 
many painful recollections, that she found herself unable to go through 
the first she had opened, and sat musing, with her cheek rest on her 
arm, and tear steal from her eyes, when old dorothée enter the 
room to inform her, that dinner would be ready, an hour before the 
usual time. emily start on perceive her, and hasty put up the 
papers, but not before dorothée had observe both her agitation and her 
tears. 

“ah, ma’amselle!” said she, “you, who are so young,—have you reason for 
sorrow?” 

emily try to smile, but was unable to speak. 

“alas! dear young lady, when you come to my age, you will not weep at 
trifles; and surely you have nothing serious, to grieve you.” 

“no, dorothée, nothing of any consequence,” reply emily. dorothée, 
now stoop to pick up something, that had drop from among the 
papers, sudden exclaimed, “holy mary! what is it i see?” and then, 
trembling, sat down in a chair, that stood by the table. 

“what is it you do see?” said emily, alarm by her manner, and look 
round the room. 

“it is herself,” said dorothée, “her very self! just as she look a 
little before she died!” 

emily, still more alarmed, began now to fear, that dorothée was seize 
with sudden frenzy, but entreat her to explain herself. 

“that picture!” said she, “where did you find it, lady? it is my 
blessed mistress herself!” 

she laid on the table the miniature, which emily had long ago found 
among the papers her father had enjoin her to destroy, and over which 
she had once seen him shed such tender and affecting tears; and, 
recollect all the various circumstances of his conduct, that had 
long perplexed her, her emotion increase to an excess, which deprived 
her of all power to ask the question she tremble to have answered, 
and she could only enquire, whether dorothée was certain the picture 
resemble the late marchioness. 

“o, ma’amselle!” said she, “how came it to strike me so, the instant i 
saw it, if it was not my lady’s likeness? ah!” add she, taking up the 
miniature, “these are her own blue eyes—looking so sweet and so mild; 
and there is her very look, such as i have often seen it, when she had 
sat thinking for a long while, and then, the tear would often steal 
down her cheeks—but she never would complain! it was that look so meek, 
as it were, and resigned, that use to break my heart and make me love 
her so!” 

“dorothée!” said emily solemnly, “i am interested in the cause of that 
grief, more so, perhaps, than you may imagine; and i entreat, that you 
will no long refuse to indulge my curiosity;—it is not a common one.” 

as emily said this, she remember the papers, with which the picture 
had been found, and had scarcely a doubt, that they had concerned the 
marchioness de villeroi; but with this supposition came a scruple, 
whether she ought to enquire further on a subject, which might prove to 
be the same, that her father had so careful endeavour to conceal. 
her curiosity, concerning the marchioness, powerful as it was, it is 
probable she would now have resisted, as she had formerly done, on 
unwari observing the few terrible words in the papers, which had 
never since been erase from her memory, had she been certain that the 
history of that lady was the subject of those papers, or, that such 
simple particulars only as it was probable dorothée could relate were 
included in her father’s command. what was known to her could be no 
secret to many other persons; and, since it appear very unlikely, 
that st. aubert should attempt to conceal what emily might learn by 
ordinary means, she at length concluded, that, if the papers had 
related to the story of the marchioness, it was not those circumstances 
of it, which dorothée could disclose, that he had thought sufficient 
important to wish to have concealed. she, therefore, no long 
hesitate to make the enquiries, that might lead to the gratification 
of her curiosity. 

“ah, ma’amselle!” said dorothée, “it is a sad story, and cannot be told 
now: but what am i saying? i never will tell it. many years have 
passed, since it happened; and i never love to talk of the marchioness 
to anybody, but my husband. he live in the family, at that time, as 
well as myself, and he knew many particulars from me, which nobody else 
did; for i was about the person of my lady in her last illness, and saw 
and heard as much, or more than my lord himself. sweet saint! how 
patient she was! when she died, i thought i could have die with her!” 

“dorothée,” said emily, interrupt her, “what you shall tell, you may 
depend upon it, shall never be disclose by me. i have, i repeat it, 
particular reason for wish to be informed on this subject, and am 
willing to bind myself, in the most solemn manner, never to mention 
what you shall wish me to conceal.” 

dorothée seem surprise at the earnest of emily’s manner, and, 
after regarding her for some moments, in silence, said, “young lady! 
that look of yours plead for you—it is so like my dear mistress’s, 
that i can almost fancy i see her before me; if you were her daughter, 
you could not remind me of her more. but dinner will be ready—had you 
not better go down?” 

“you will first promise to grant my request,” said emily. 

“and ought not you first to tell me, ma’amselle, how this picture fell 
into your hands, and the reason you say you have for curiosity about 
my lady?” 

“why, no, dorothée,” reply emily, recollect herself, “i have also 
particular reason for observing silence, on these subjects, at least, 
till i know further; and, remember, i do not promise ever to speak upon 
them; therefore, do not let me induce you to satisfy my curiosity, from 
an expectation, that i shall gratify yours. what i may judge proper to 
conceal, do not concern myself alone, or i should have less scruple 
in revealing it: let a confidence in my honour alone persuade you to 
disclose what i request.” 

“well, lady!” reply dorothée, after a long pause, during which her 
eyes were fixed upon emily, “you seem so much interested,—and this 
picture and that face of yours make me think you have some reason to be 
so,—that i will trust you—and tell some things, that i never told 
before to anybody, but my husband, though there are people, who have 
suspect as much. i will tell you the particulars of my lady’s death, 
too, and some of my own suspicions; but you must first promise me by 
all the saints—” 

emily, interrupt her, solemn promise never to reveal what should 
be confide to her, without dorothée’s consent. 

“but there is the horn, ma’amselle, sound for dinner,” said 
dorothée; “i must be gone.” 

“when shall i see you again?” enquire emily. 

dorothée mused, and then replied, “why, madam, it may make people 
curious, if it is known i am so much in your apartment, and that i 
should be sorry for; so i will come when i am least likely to be 
observed. i have little leisure in the day, and i shall have a good 
deal to say; so, if you please, ma’am, i will come, when the family are 
all in bed.” 

“that will suit me very well,” reply emily: “remember, then, 
tonight—” 

“aye, that is well remembered,” said dorothée, “i fear i cannot come 
tonight, madam, for there will be the dance of the vintage, and it will 
be late, before the servant go to rest; for, when they once set in to 
dance, they will keep it up, in the cool of the air, till morning; at 
least, it use to be so in my time.” 

“ah! is it the dance of the vintage?” said emily, with a deep sigh, 
remembering, that it was on the evening of this festival, in the 
preceding year, that st. aubert and herself had arrive in the 
neighbourhood of château-le-blanc. she pause a moment, overcome by the 
sudden recollection, and then, recover herself, added—“but this 
dance is in the open woods; you, therefore, will not be wanted, and can 
easily come to me.” 

dorothée replied, that she had been accustomed to be present at the 
dance of the vintage, and she did not wish to be absent now; “but if i 
can get away, madam, i will,” said she. 

emily then hasten to the dining-room, where the count conduct 
himself with the courtesy, which is inseparable from true dignity, and 
of which the countess frequent practised little, though her manner to 
emily was an exception to her usual habit. but, if she retain few of 
the ornamental virtues, she cherish other qualities, which she seem 
to consider invaluable. she had dismiss the grace of modesty, but 
then she knew perfectly well how to manage the stare of assurance; her 
manners had little of the temper sweetness, which is necessary to 
render the female character interesting, but she could occasional 
throw into them an affectation of spirits, which seem to triumph over 
every person, who approach her. in the country, however, she 
generally affected an elegant languor, that persuade her almost to 
faint, when her favourite read to her a story of fictitious sorrow; but 
her countenance suffer no change, when living object of distress 
solicit her charity, and her heart beat with no transport to the 
thought of give them instant relief;—she was a stranger to the 
highest luxury, of which, perhaps, the human mind can be sensible, for 
her benevolence had never yet call smile upon the face of misery. 

in the evening, the count, with all his family, except the countess and 
mademoiselle bearn, went to the wood to witness the festivity of the 
peasants. the scene was in a glade, where the trees, opening, form a 
circle round the turf they highly overshadowed; between their branches, 
vines, loaded with ripe clusters, were hung in gay festoons; and, 
beneath, were tables, with fruit, wine, cheese and other rural 
fare,—and seat for the count and his family. at a little distance, 
were bench for the elder peasants, few of whom, however, could 
forbear to join the jocund dance, which began soon after sunset, when 
several of sixty trip it with almost as much glee and airy 
lightness, as those of sixteen. 

the musicians, who sat careless on the grass, at the foot of a tree, 
seem inspired by the sound of their own instruments, which were 
chiefly flute and a kind of long guitar. behind, stood a boy, 
flourish a tamborine, and dance a solo, except that, as he 
sometimes gaily toss the instrument, he trip among the other 
dancers, when his antic gesture call forth a broad laugh, and 
heighten the rustic spirit of the scene. 

the count was highly delight with the happiness he witnessed, to 
which his bounty had largely contributed, and the lady blanche join 
the dance with a young gentleman of her father’s party. du pont 
request emily’s hand, but her spirits were too much depressed, to 
permit her to engage in the present festivity, which call to her 
remembrance that of the preceding year, when st. aubert was living, and 
of the melancholy scenes, which had immediately follow it. 

overcome by these recollections, she, at length, left the spot, and 
walk slow into the woods, where the soften music, floating at a 
distance, soothe her melancholy mind. the moon threw a mellow light 
among the foliage; the air was balmy and cool, and emily, lost in 
thought, stroll on, without observing whither, till she perceive the 
sound sink afar off, and an awful still round her, except that, 
sometimes, the nightingale beguile the silence with 

liquid notes, that close the eye of day. 


at length, she found herself near the avenue, which, on the night of 
her father’s arrival, michael had attempt to pass in search of a 
house, which was still nearly as wild and desolate as it had then 
appeared; for the count had been so much engaged in direct other 
improvements, that he had neglect to give orders, concerning this 
extensive approach, and the road was yet broken, and the tree 
overload with their own luxuriance. 

as she stood survey it, and remember the emotions, which she had 
formerly suffer there, she sudden recollect the figure, that had 
been seen steal among the trees, and which had return no answer to 
michael’s repeated calls; and she experienced somewhat of the fear, 
that had then assail her, for it did not appear improbable, that 
these deep wood were occasional the haunt of banditti. she, 
therefore, turn back, and was hasty pursue her way to the 
dancers, when she heard steps approach from the avenue; and, being 
still beyond the call of the peasant on the green, for she could 
neither hear their voices, nor their music, she quicken her pace; but 
the person following gain fast upon her, and, at length, 
distinguish the voice of henri, she walk leisurely, till he came 
up. he express some surprise at meeting her so far from the company; 
and, on her saying, that the pleasant moonlight had beguile her to 
walk farther than she intended, an exclamation burst from the lip of 
his companion, and she thought she heard valancourt speak! it was, 
indeed, he! and the meeting was such as may be imagined, between 
person so affectionate, and so long separate as they had been. 

in the joy of these moments, emily forgot all her past sufferings, and 
valancourt seem to have forgotten, that any person but emily existed; 
while henri was a silent and astonish spectator of the scene. 

valancourt ask a thousand questions, concerning herself and montoni, 
which there was now no time to answer; but she learned, that her letter 
had been forward to him, at paris, which he had previous quitted, 
and was return to gascony, whither the letter also returned, which, 
at length, informed him of emily’s arrival, and on the receipt of which 
he had immediately set out for languedoc. on reach the monastery, 
whence she had dated her letter, he found, to his extreme 
disappointment, that the gate were already closed for the night; and 
believing, that he should not see emily, till the morrow, he was 
return to his little inn, with the intention of writing to her, when 
he was overtaken by henri, with whom he had been intimate at paris, and 
was led to her, whom he was secret lament that he should not see, 
till the following day. 

emily, with valancourt and henri, now return to the green, where the 
latter present valancourt to the count, who, she fancied, received 
him with less than his usual benignity, though it appeared, that they 
were not stranger to each other. he was invited, however, to partake 
of the diversion of the evening; and, when he had paid his respects to 
the count, and while the dance continue their festivity, he seat 
himself by emily, and conversed, without restraint. the lights, which 
were hung among the trees, under which they sat, allow her a more 
perfect view of the countenance she had so frequent in absence 
endeavour to recollect, and she perceived, with some regret, that it 
was not the same as when last she saw it. there was all its wonted 
intelligence and fire; but it had lost much of the simplicity, and 
somewhat of the open benevolence, that use to characterise it. still, 
however, it was an interesting countenance; but emily thought she 
perceived, at intervals, anxiety contract, and melancholy fix the 
features of valancourt; sometimes, too, he fell into a momentary 
musing, and then appear anxious to dissipate thought; while, at 
others, as he fixed his eyes on emily, a kind of sudden distraction 
seem to cross his mind. in her he perceive the same goodness and 
beautiful simplicity, that had charm him, on their first 
acquaintance. the bloom of her countenance was somewhat faded, but all 
its sweet remained, and it was render more interesting, than 
ever, by the faint expression of melancholy, that sometimes mingle 
with her smile. 

at his request, she related the most important circumstances, that had 
occur to her, since she left france, and emotion of pity and 
indignation alternate prevail in his mind, when he heard how much 
she had suffer from the villany of montoni. more than once, when she 
was speak of his conduct, of which the guilt was rather softened, 
than exaggerated, by her representation, he start from his seat, and 
walk away, apparently overcome as much by self-accusation as by 
resentment. her suffering alone were mention in the few words, which 
he could address to her, and he listen not to the account, which she 
was careful to give as distinct as possible, of the present loss of 
madame montoni’s estates, and of the little reason there was to expect 
their restoration. at length, valancourt remain lost in thought, and 
then some secret cause seem to overcome him with anguish. again he 
abrupt left her. when he returned, she perceive that he had been 
weeping, and tender begged, that he would compose himself. “my 
suffering are all pass now,” said she, “for i have escape from the 
tyranny of montoni, and i see you well—let me also see you happy.” 

valancourt was more agitate than before. “i am unworthy of you, 
emily,” said he, “i am unworthy of you;”—words, by his manner of 
utter which emily was then more shock than by their import. she 
fixed on him a mournful and enquiring eye. “do not look thus on me,” 
said he, turning away and pressing her hand; “i cannot bear those 
looks.” 

“i would ask,” said emily, in a gentle, but agitate voice, “the 
meaning of your words; but i perceive, that the question would distress 
you now. let us talk on other subjects. tomorrow, perhaps, you may be 
more composed. observe those moonlight woods, and the towers, which 
appear obscure in the perspective. you use to be a great admirer of 
landscape, and i have heard you say, that the faculty of derive 
consolation, under misfortune, from the sublime prospects, which 
neither oppression, nor poverty withhold from us, was the peculiar 
blessing of the innocent.” valancourt was deep affected. “yes,” 
reply he, “i had once a taste for innocent and elegant delights—i had 
once an uncorrupted heart.” then, check himself, he added, “do you 
remember our journey together in the pyrenees?” 

“can i forget it?” said emily.—“would that i could!” he replied;—“that 
was the happiest period of my life. i then loved, with enthusiasm, 
whatever was truly great, or good.” it was some time before emily could 
repress her tears, and try to command her emotions. “if you wish to 
forget that journey,” said she, “it must certainly be my wish to forget 
it also.” she paused, and then added, “you make me very uneasy; but 
this is not the time for further enquiry;—yet, how can i bear to 
believe, even for a moment, that you are less worthy of my esteem than 
formerly? i have still sufficient confidence in your candour, to 
believe, that, when i shall ask for an explanation, you will give it 
me.”—“yes,” said valancourt, “yes, emily: i have not yet lost my 
candour: if i had, i could better have disguise my emotions, on 
learning what were your sufferings—your virtues, while i—i—but i will 
say no more. i did not mean to have said even so much—i have been 
surprise into the self-accusation. tell me, emily, that you will not 
forget that journey—will not wish to forget it, and i will be calm. i 
would not lose the remembrance of it for the whole earth.” 

“how contradictory is this!” said emily;—“but we may be overheard. my 
recollection of it shall depend upon yours; i will endeavour to forget, 
or to recollect it, as you may do. let us join the count.”—“tell me 
first,” said valancourt, “that you forgive the uneasy i have 
occasion you, this evening, and that you will still love me.”—“i 
sincerely forgive you,” reply emily. “you best know whether i shall 
continue to love you, for you know whether you deserve my esteem. at 
present, i will believe that you do. it is unnecessary to say,” add 
she, observing his dejection, “how much pain it would give me to 
believe otherwise.—the young lady, who approaches, is the count’s 
daughter.” 

valancourt and emily now join the lady blanche; and the party, soon 
after, sat down with the count, his son, and the chevalier du pont, at 
a banquet, spread under a gay awning, beneath the trees. at the table 
also were seat several of the most venerable of the count’s tenants, 
and it was a festive repast to all but valancourt and emily. when the 
count retired to the château, he did not invite valancourt to accompany 
him, who, therefore, took leave of emily, and retired to his solitary 
inn for the night: meanwhile, she soon withdrew to her own apartment, 
where she mused, with deep anxiety and concern, on his behaviour, and 
on the count’s reception of him. her attention was thus so wholly 
engaged, that she forgot dorothée and her appointment, till morning was 
far advanced, when, knowing that the good old woman would not come, she 
retired, for a few hours, to repose. 

on the following day, when the count had accidental join emily in 
one of the walks, they talk of the festival of the preceding evening, 
and this led him to a mention of valancourt. “that is a young man of 
talents,” said he; “you were formerly acquaint with him, i perceive.” 
emily said, that she was. “he was introduce to me, at paris,” said the 
count, “and i was much pleased with him, on our first acquaintance.” he 
paused, and emily trembled, between the desire of hearing more and the 
fear of showing the count, that she felt an interest on the subject. 
“may i ask,” said he, at length, “how long you have known monsieur 
valancourt?”—“will you allow me to ask your reason for the question, 
sir?” said she; “and i will answer it immediately.”—“certainly,” said 
the count, “that is but just. i will tell you my reason. i cannot but 
perceive, that monsieur valancourt admire you; in that, however, there 
is nothing extraordinary; every person, who see you, must do the same. 
i am above use common-place compliments; i speak with sincerity. what 
i fear, is, that he is a favoured admirer.”—“why do you fear it, sir?” 
said emily, endeavour to conceal her emotion.—“because,” reply the 
count, “i think him not worthy of your favour.” emily, greatly 
agitated, entreat further explanation. “i will give it,” said he, “if 
you will believe, that nothing but a strong interest in your welfare 
could induce me to hazard that assertion.”—“i must believe so, sir,” 
reply emily. 

“but let us rest under these trees,” said the count, observing the 
pale of her countenance; “here is a seat—you are fatigued.” they 
sat down, and the count proceeded. “many young ladies, circumstance as 
you are, would think my conduct, on this occasion, and on so short an 
acquaintance, impertinent, instead of friendly; from what i have 
observe of your temper and understanding, i do not fear such a return 
from you. our acquaintance has been short, but long enough to make me 
esteem you, and feel a lively interest in your happiness. you deserve 
to be very happy, and i trust that you will be so.” emily sigh 
softly, and bowed her thanks. the count pause again. “i am 
unpleasant circumstanced,” said he; “but an opportunity of rendering 
you important service shall overcome inferior considerations. will you 
inform me of the manner of your first acquaintance with the chevalier 
valancourt, if the subject is not too painful?” 

emily brief related the accident of their meeting in the presence of 
her father, and then so earnest entreat the count not to hesitate 
in declare what he knew, that he perceive the violent emotion, 
against which she was contending, and, regarding her with a look of 
tender compassion, considered how he might communicate his information 
with least pain to his anxious auditor. 

“the chevalier and my son,” said he, “were introduce to each other, at 
the table of a brother officer, at whose house i also met him, and 
invite him to my own, whenever he should be disengaged. i did not then 
know, that he had form an acquaintance with a set of men, a disgrace 
to their species, who live by plunder and pass their lives in continual 
debauchery. i knew several of the chevalier’s family, resident at 
paris, and considered them as sufficient pledge for his introduction 
to my own. but you are ill; i will leave the subject.”—“no, sir,” said 
emily, “i beg you will proceed: i am only distressed.”—“_only!_” said 
the count, with emphasis; “however, i will proceed. i soon learned, 
that these, his associates, had drawn him into a course of dissipation, 
from which he appear to have neither the power, nor the inclination, 
to extricate himself. he lost large sum at the gaming-table; he became 
infatuated with play; and was ruined. i spoke tender of this to his 
friends, who assured me, that they had remonstrate with him, till they 
were weary. i afterwards learned, that, in consideration of his talent 
for play, which were generally successful, when unopposed by the trick 
of villany,—that in consideration of these, the party had initiate him 
into the secret of their trade, and allot him a share of their 
profits.” “impossible!” said emily suddenly; “but—pardon me, sir, i 
scarcely know what i say; allow for the distress of my mind. i must, 
indeed, i must believe, that you have not been truly informed. the 
chevalier had, doubtless, enemies, who misrepresent him.”—“i should 
be most happy to believe so,” reply the count, “but i cannot. nothing 
short of conviction, and a regard for your happiness, could have urge 
me to repeat these unpleasant reports.” 

emily was silent. she recollect valancourt’s sayings, on the 
preceding evening, which discover the pang of self-reproach, and 
seem to confirm all that the count had related. yet she had not 
fortitude enough to dare conviction. her heart was overwhelm with 
anguish at the mere suspicion of his guilt, and she could not endure a 
belief of it. after a silence, the count said, “i perceive, and can 
allow for, your want of conviction. it is necessary i should give some 
proof of what i have asserted; but this i cannot do, without subject 
one, who is very dear to me, to danger.”—“what is the danger you 
apprehend, sir?” said emily; “if i can prevent it, you may safe 
confide in my honour.”—“on your honour i am certain i can rely,” said 
the count; “but can i trust your fortitude? do you think you can resist 
the solicit of a favoured admirer, when he pleads, in affliction, 
for the name of one, who has rob him of a blessing?”—“i shall not be 
expose to such a temptation, sir,” said emily, with modest pride, “for 
i cannot favour one, whom i must no long esteem. i, however, readily 
give my word.” tears, in the mean time, contradict her first 
assertion; and she felt, that time and effort only could eradicate an 
affection, which had been form on virtuous esteem, and cherish by 
habit and difficulty. 

“i will trust you then,” said the count, “for conviction is necessary 
to your peace, and cannot, i perceive, be obtained, without this 
confidence. my son has too often been an eye-witness of the chevalier’s 
ill conduct; he was very near being drawn in by it; he was, indeed, 
drawn in to the commission of many follies, but i rescue him from 
guilt and destruction. judge then, mademoiselle st. aubert, whether a 
father, who had nearly lost his only son by the example of the 
chevalier, has not, from conviction, reason to warn those, whom he 
esteems, against trust their happiness in such hands. i have myself 
seen the chevalier engaged in deep play with men, whom i almost 
shudder to look upon. if you still doubt, i will refer you to my 
son.” 

“i must not doubt what you have yourself witnessed,” reply emily, 
sink with grief, “or what you assert. but the chevalier has, 
perhaps, been drawn only into a transient folly, which he may never 
repeat. if you had known the just of his former principles, you 
would allow for my present incredulity.” 

“alas!” observe the count, “it is difficult to believe that, which 
will make us wretched. but i will not sooth you by flatter and false 
hopes. we all know how fascinating the vice of game is, and how 
difficult it is, also, to conquer habits; the chevalier might, perhaps, 
reform for a while, but he would soon relapse into dissipation—for i 
fear, not only the bonds of habit would be powerful, but that his 
morals are corrupted. and—why should i conceal from you, that play is 
not his only vice? he appear to have a taste for every vicious 
pleasure.” 

the count hesitate and paused; while emily endeavour to support 
herself, as, with increase perturbation, she expect what he might 
further say. a long pause of silence ensued, during which he was 
visibly agitated; at length, he said, “it would be a cruel delicacy, 
that could prevail with me to be silent—and i will inform you, that the 
chevalier’s extravagance has brought him twice into the prison of 
paris, from whence he was last extricated, as i was told upon 
authority, which i cannot doubt, by a well-known parisian countess, 
with whom he continue to reside, when i left paris.” 

he pause again; and, look at emily, perceive her countenance 
change, and that she was fall from the seat; he caught her, but she 
had fainted, and he call loud for assistance. they were, however, 
beyond the hearing of his servant at the château, and he fear to 
leave her while he went thither for assistance, yet knew not how 
otherwise to obtain it; till a fountain at no great distance caught his 
eye, and he endeavour to support emily against the tree, under which 
she had been sitting, while he went thither for water. but again he was 
perplexed, for he had nothing near him, in which water could be 
brought; but while, with increase anxiety, he watch her, he thought 
he perceive in her countenance symptom of return life. 

it was long, however, before she revived, and then she found herself 
supported—not by the count, but by valancourt, who was observing her 
with looks of earnest apprehension, and who now spoke to her in a tone, 
tremulous with his anxiety. at the sound of his well-known voice, she 
raise her eyes, but presently closed them, and a faint again came 
over her. 

the count, with a look somewhat stern, wave him to withdraw; but he 
only sigh heavily, and call on the name of emily, as he again held 
the water, that had been brought, to her lips. on the count’s repeating 
his action, and accompany it with words, valancourt answer him 
with a look of deep resentment, and refuse to leave the place, till 
she should revive, or to resign her for a moment to the care of any 
person. in the next instant, his conscience seem to inform him of 
what had been the subject of the count’s conversation with emily, and 
indignation flash in his eyes; but it was quick repressed, and 
succeed by an expression of serious anguish, that induce the count 
to regard him with more pity than resentment, and the view of which so 
much affected emily, when she again revived, that she yield to the 
weakness of tears. but she soon restrained them, and, exert her 
resolution to appear recovered, she rose, thank the count and henri, 
with whom valancourt had enter the garden, for their care, and move 
towards the château, without notice valancourt, who, heart-struck by 
her manner, exclaim in a low voice—“good god! how have i deserve 
this?—what has been said, to occasion this change?” 

emily, without replying, but with increase emotion, quicken her 
steps. “what has thus disorder you, emily?” said he, as he still 
walk by her side: “give me a few moments’ conversation, i entreat 
you;—i am very miserable!” 

though this was spoken in a low voice, it was overheard by the count, 
who immediately replied, that mademoiselle st. aubert was then too much 
indisposed, to attend to any conversation, but that he would venture to 
promise she would see monsieur valancourt on the morrow, if she was 
better. 

valancourt’s cheek was crimsoned: he look haughty at the count, and 
then at emily, with successive expression of surprise, grief and 
supplication, which she could neither misunderstand, nor resist, and 
she said languidly—“i shall be better tomorrow, and if you wish to 
accept the count’s permission, i will see you then.” 

“see me!” exclaim valancourt, as he threw a glance of mingle pride 
and resentment upon the count; and then, seeming to recollect himself, 
he added—“but i will come, madam; i will accept the count’s 
_permission_.” 

when they reach the door of the château, he linger a moment, for 
his resentment was now fled; and then, with a look so expressive of 
tender and grief, that emily’s heart was not proof against it, he 
bade her good morning, and, bowing slightly to the count, disappeared. 

emily withdrew to her own apartment, under such oppression of heart as 
she had seldom known, when she endeavour to recollect all that the 
count had told, to examine the probability of the circumstances he 
himself believed, and to consider of her future conduct towards 
valancourt. but, when she attempt to think, her mind refuse control, 
and she could only feel that she was miserable. one moment, she sunk 
under the conviction, that valancourt was no long the same, whom she 
had so tender loved, the idea of whom had hitherto support her 
under affliction, and cheer her with the hope of happy days,—but a 
fallen, a worthless character, whom she must teach herself to 
despise—if she could not forget. then, unable to endure this terrible 
supposition, she reject it, and disdain to believe him capable of 
conduct, such as the count had described, to whom she believe he had 
been misrepresent by some artful enemy; and there were moments, when 
she even venture to doubt the integrity of the count himself, and to 
suspect, that he was influence by some selfish motive, to break her 
connection with valancourt. but this was the error of an instant, only; 
the count’s character, which she had heard spoken of by du pont and 
many other persons, and had herself observed, enable her to judge, and 
forbade the supposition; had her confidence, indeed, been less, there 
appear to be no temptation to betray him into conduct so treacherous, 
and so cruel. nor did reflection suffer her to preserve the hope, that 
valancourt had been mis-represented to the count, who had said, that he 
spoke chiefly from his own observation, and from his son’s experience. 
she must part from valancourt, therefore, for ever—for what of either 
happiness or tranquill could she expect with a man, whose taste 
were degenerate into low inclinations, and to whom vice was become 
habitual? whom she must no long esteem, though the remembrance of 
what he once was, and the long habit of loving him, would render it 
very difficult for her to despise him. “o valancourt!” she would 
exclaim, “having been separate so long—do we meet, only to be 
miserable—only to part for ever?” 

amidst all the tumult of her mind, she remember pertinacious the 
seeming candour and simplicity of his conduct, on the preceding night; 
and, had she dare to trust her own heart, it would have led her to 
hope much from this. still she could not resolve to dismiss him for 
ever, without obtain further proof of his ill conduct; yet she saw 
no probability of procure it, if, indeed, proof more positive was 
possible. something, however, it was necessary to decide upon, and she 
almost determined to be guide in her opinion solely by the manner, 
with which valancourt should receive her hint concerning his late 
conduct. 

thus pass the hour till dinner-time, when emily, struggle against 
the pressure of her grief, dry her tears, and join the family at 
table, where the count preserve towards her the most delicate 
attention; but the countess and mademoiselle bearn, have looked, for 
a moment, with surprise, on her dejected countenance, began, as usual, 
to talk of trifles, while the eyes of lady blanche ask much of her 
friend, who could only reply by a mournful smile. 

emily withdrew as soon after dinner as possible, and was follow by 
the lady blanche, whose anxious enquiries, however, she found herself 
quite unequal to answer, and whom she entreat to spare her on the 
subject of her distress. to converse on any topic, was now, indeed, so 
extremely painful to her, that she soon gave up the attempt, and 
blanche left her, with pity of the sorrow, which she perceive she had 
no power to assuage. 

emily secret determined to go to her convent in a day or two; for 
company, especially that of the countess and mademoiselle bearn, was 
intolerable to her, in the present state of her spirits; and, in the 
retirement of the convent, as well as the kindness of the abbess, she 
hope to recover the command of her mind, and to teach it resignation 
to the event, which, she too plainly perceived, was approaching. 

to have lost valancourt by death, or to have seen him married to a 
rival, would, she thought, have given her less anguish, than a 
conviction of his unworthiness, which must terminate in misery to 
himself, and which rob her even of the solitary image her heart so 
long had cherished. these painful reflection were interrupted, for a 
moment, by a note from valancourt, written in evident distraction of 
mind, entreating, that she would permit him to see her on the 
approach evening, instead of the following morning; a request, which 
occasion her so much agitation, that she was unable to answer it. she 
wish to see him, and to terminate her present state of suspense, yet 
shrunk from the interview, and, incapable of decide for herself, she, 
at length, sent to beg a few moments’ conversation with the count in 
his library, where she deliver to him the note, and request his 
advice. after reading it, he said, that, if she believe herself well 
enough to support the interview, his opinion was, that, for the relief 
of both parties, it ought to take place, that evening. 

“his affection for you is, undoubtedly, a very sincere one,” add the 
count; “and he appear so much distressed, and you, my amiable friend, 
are so ill at ease—that the soon the affair is decided, the better.” 

emily replied, therefore, to valancourt, that she would see him, and 
then exert herself in endeavour to attain fortitude and composure, 
to bear her through the approach scene—a scene so afflicting the 
reverse of any, to which she had look forward! 



volume 4 



chapter i 

is all the council that we two have shared, 
the hour that we have spent, 
when we have chid the hasty-footed time 
for parting us—oh! and is all forgot? 

and will you rend our ancient love asunder? 
midsummer night’s dream 


in the evening, when emily was at length informed, that count de 
villefort request to see her, she guess that valancourt was below, 
and, endeavour to assume composure and to recollect all her spirits, 
she rose and left the apartment; but on reach the door of the 
library, where she imagine him to be, her emotion return with such 
energy, that, fear to trust herself in the room, she return into 
the hall, where she continue for a considerable time, unable to 
command her agitate spirits. 

when she could recall them, she found in the library valancourt, seat 
with the count, who both rose on her entrance; but she did not dare to 
look at valancourt, and the count, have led her to a chair, 
immediately withdrew. 

emily remain with her eyes fixed on the floor, under such oppression 
of heart, that she could not speak, and with difficulty breathed; while 
valancourt threw himself into a chair beside her, and, sigh heavily, 
continue silent, when, had she raise her eyes, she would have 
perceive the violent emotions, with which he was agitated. 

at length, in a tremulous voice, he said, “i have solicit to see you 
this evening, that i might, at least, be spare the further torture of 
suspense, which your alter manner had occasion me, and which the 
hint i have just received from the count have in part explained. i 
perceive i have enemies, emily, who envy me my late happiness, and 
who have been busy in searching out the means to destroy it: i 
perceive, too, that time and absence have weaken the affection you 
once felt for me, and that you can now easily be taught to forget me.” 

his last words faltered, and emily, less able to speak than before, 
continue silent. 

“o what a meeting is this!” exclaim valancourt, start from his 
seat, and pace the room with hurried steps, “what a meeting is this, 
after our long—long separation!” again he sat down, and, after the 
struggle of a moment, he add in a firm but despairing tone, “this is 
too much—i cannot bear it! emily, will you not speak to me?” 

he cover his face with his hand, as if to conceal his emotion, and 
took emily’s, which she did not withdraw. her tear could no long be 
restrained; and, when he raise his eyes and perceive that she was 
weeping, all his tender returned, and a gleam of hope appear to 
cross his mind, for he exclaimed, “o! you do pity me, then, you do love 
me! yes, you are still my own emily—let me believe those tears, that 
tell me so!” 

emily now made an effort to recover her firmness, and, hasty dry 
them, “yes,” said she, “i do pity you—i weep for you—but, ought i to 
think of you with affection? you may remember, that yester-evening i 
said, i had still sufficient confidence in your candour to believe, 
that, when i should request an explanation of your words, you would 
give it. this explanation is now unnecessary, i understand them too 
well; but prove, at least, that your candour is deserving of the 
confidence i give it, when i ask you, whether you are conscious of 
being the same estimable valancourt—whom i once loved.” 

“once loved!” cry he,—“the same—the same!” he pause in extreme 
emotion, and then added, in a voice at once solemn, and dejected,—“no—i 
am not the same!—i am lost—i am no long worthy of you!” 

he again conceal his face. emily was too much affected by this honest 
confession to reply immediately, and, while she struggle to overcome 
the pleadings of her heart, and to act with the decisive firmness, 
which was necessary for her future peace, she perceive all the danger 
of trust long to her resolution, in the presence of valancourt, and 
was anxious to conclude an interview, that torture them both; yet, 
when she considered, that this was probably their last meeting, her 
fortitude sunk at once, and she experienced only emotion of tender 
and of despondency. 

valancourt, meanwhile, lost in emotion of remorse and grief, which he 
had neither the power, nor the will to express, sat insensible almost 
of the presence of emily, his features still concealed, and his breast 
agitate by convulsive sighs. 

“spare me the necessity,” said emily, recollect her fortitude, 
“spare me the necessity of mention those circumstances of your 
conduct, which oblige me to break our connection for ever.—we must 
part, i now see you for the last time.” 

“impossible!” cry valancourt, rouse from his deep silence, “you 
cannot mean what you say!—you cannot mean to throw me from you for 
ever!” 

“we must part,” repeated emily, with emphasis,—“and that for ever! your 
own conduct has made this necessary.” 

“this is the count’s determination,” said he haughtily, “not yours, and 
i shall enquire by what authority he interfere between us.” he now 
rose, and walk about the room in great emotion. 

“let me save you from this error,” said emily, not less agitated—“it is 
my determination, and, if you reflect a moment on your late conduct, 
you will perceive, that my future peace require it.” 

“your future peace requires, that we should part—part for ever!” said 
valancourt, “how little did i ever expect to hear you say so!” 

“and how little did i expect, that it would be necessary for me to say 
so!” rejoin emily, while her voice soften into tenderness, and her 
tear flow again.—“that you—you, valancourt, would ever fall from my 
esteem!” 

he was silent a moment, as if overwhelm by the consciousness of no 
long deserving this esteem, as well as the certainty of have lost 
it, and then, with impassioned grief, lament the criminal of his 
late conduct and the misery to which it had reduce him, till, overcome 
by a recollection of the past and a conviction of the future, he burst 
into tears, and utter only deep and broken sighs. 

the remorse he had expressed, and the distress he suffer could not be 
witness by emily with indifference, and, had she not call to her 
recollection all the circumstances, of which count de villefort had 
informed her, and all he had said of the danger of confiding in 
repentance, form under the influence of passion, she might perhaps 
have trust to the assurance of her heart, and have forgotten his 
misconduct in the tenderness, which that repentance excited. 

valancourt, return to the chair beside her, at length, said, in a 
calm voice, “’tis true, i am fallen—fallen from my own esteem! but 
could you, emily, so soon, so sudden resign, if you had not before 
cease to love me, or, if your conduct was not govern by the designs, 
i will say, the selfish designs of another person! would you not 
otherwise be willing to hope for my reformation—and could you bear, by 
estrange me from you, to abandon me to misery—to myself!”—emily wept 
aloud.—“no, emily—no—you would not do this, if you still love me. you 
would find your own happiness in saving mine.” 

“there are too many probability against that hope,” said emily, “to 
justify me in trust the comfort of my whole life to it. may i not 
also ask, whether you could wish me to do this, if you really love 
me?” 

“really love you!” exclaim valancourt—“is it possible you can doubt 
my love! yet it is reasonable, that you should do so, since you see, 
that i am less ready to suffer the horror of parting with you, than 
that of involve you in my ruin. yes, emily—i am ruined—irreparably 
ruined—i am involved in debts, which i can never discharge!” 
valancourt’s look, which was wild, as he spoke this, soon settled into 
an expression of gloomy despair; and emily, while she was compel to 
admire his sincerity, saw, with unutterable anguish, new reason for 
fear in the sudden of his feelings and the extent of the misery, in 
which they might involve him. after some minutes, she seem to contend 
against her grief and to struggle for fortitude to conclude the 
interview. “i will not prolong these moments,” said she, “by a 
conversation, which can answer no good purpose. valancourt, farewell!” 

“you are not going?” said he, wildly interrupt her—“you will not 
leave me thus—you will not abandon me even before my mind has suggest 
any possibility of compromise between the last indulgence of my despair 
and the endurance of my loss!” emily was terrify by the stern of 
his look, and said, in a soothe voice, “you have yourself 
acknowledged, that it is necessary we should part;—if you wish, that i 
should believe you love me, you will repeat the 
acknowledgment.”—“never—never,” cry he—“i was distracted when i made 
it. o! emily—this is too much;—though you are not deceive as to my 
faults, you must be delude into this exasperation against them. the 
count is the barrier between us; but he shall not long remain so.” 

“you are, indeed, distracted,” said emily, “the count is not your 
enemy; on the contrary, he is my friend, and that might, in some 
degree, induce you to consider him as yours.”—“your friend!” said 
valancourt, hastily, “how long has he been your friend, that he can so 
easily make you forget your lover? was it he, who recommend to your 
favour the monsieur du pont, who, you say, accompany you from italy, 
and who, i say, has stolen your affections? but i have no right to 
question you;—you are your own mistress. du pont, perhaps, may not long 
triumph over my fallen fortunes!” emily, more frightened than before by 
the frantic looks of valancourt, said, in a tone scarcely audible, “for 
heaven’s sake be reasonable—be composed. monsieur du pont is not your 
rival, nor is the count his advocate. you have no rival; nor, except 
yourself, an enemy. my heart is wrung with anguish, which must increase 
while your frantic behaviour show me, more than ever, that you are no 
long the valancourt i have been accustomed to love.” 

he made no reply, but sat with his arms rest on the table and his 
face conceal by his hands; while emily stood, silent and trembling, 
wretched for herself and dread to leave him in this state of mind. 

“o excess of misery!” he sudden exclaimed, “that i can never lament 
my sufferings, without accuse myself, nor remember you, without 
recollect the folly and the vice, by which i have lost you! why was 
i forced to paris, and why did i yield to allurements, which were to 
make me despicable for ever! o! why cannot i look back, without 
interruption, to those days of innocence and peace, the days of our 
early love!”—the recollection seem to melt his heart, and the frenzy 
of despair yield to tears. after a long pause, turning towards her 
and taking her hand, he said, in a soften voice, “emily, can you bear 
that we should part—can you resolve to give up a heart, that love you 
like mine—a heart, which, though it has erred—widely erred, is not 
irretrievable from error, as, you well know, it never can be 
retrieve from love?” emily made no reply, but with her tears. “can 
you,” continue he, “can you forget all our former days of happiness 
and confidence—when i had not a thought, that i might wish to conceal 
from you—when i had no taste—no pleasures, in which you did not 
participate?” 

“o do not lead me to the remembrance of those days,” said emily, 
“unless you can teach me to forget the present; i do not mean to 
reproach you; if i did, i should be spare these tears; but why will 
you render your present suffering more conspicuous, by contrast 
them with your former virtues?” 

“those virtues,” said valancourt, “might, perhaps, again be mine, if 
your affection, which nurture them, was unchanged;—but i fear, indeed, 
i see, that you can no long love me; else the happy hours, which we 
have pass together, would plead for me, and you could not look back 
upon them unmoved. yet, why should i torture myself with the 
remembrance—why do i linger here? am i not ruined—would it not be 
madness to involve you in my misfortunes, even if your heart was still 
my own? i will not distress you further. yet, before i go,” add he, 
in a solemn voice, “let me repeat, that, whatever may be my 
destiny—whatever i may be doom to suffer, i must always love you—most 
fondly love you! i am going, emily, i am go to leave you—to leave 
you, for ever!” as he spoke the last words, his voice trembled, and he 
threw himself again into the chair, from which he had risen. emily was 
utterly unable to leave the room, or to say farewell. all impression of 
his criminal conduct and almost of his folly was obliterate from her 
mind, and she was sensible only of pity and grief. 

“my fortitude is gone,” said valancourt at length; “i can no long 
even struggle to recall it. i cannot now leave you—i cannot bid you an 
eternal farewell; say, at least, that you will see me once again.” 
emily’s heart was somewhat relieved by the request, and she endeavour 
to believe, that she ought not to refuse it. yet she was embarrass by 
recollecting, that she was a visitor in the house of the count, who 
could not be pleased by the return of valancourt. other considerations, 
however, soon overcame this, and she grant his request, on the 
condition, that he would neither think of the count, as his enemy, nor 
du pont as his rival. he then left her, with a heart, so much lighten 
by this short respite, that he almost lost every former sense of 
misfortune. 

emily withdrew to her own room, that she might compose her spirits and 
remove the trace of her tears, which would encourage the censorious 
remark of the countess and her favourite, as well as excite the 
curiosity of the rest of the family. she found it, however, impossible 
to tranquillize her mind, from which she could not expel the 
remembrance of the late scene with valancourt, or the consciousness, 
that she was to see him again, on the morrow. this meeting now appear 
more terrible to her than the last, for the ingenuous confession he had 
made of his ill conduct and his embarrass circumstances, with the 
strength and tender of affection, which this confession discovered, 
had deep impress her, and, in spite of all she had heard and 
believe to his disadvantage, her esteem began to return. it frequent 
appear to her impossible, that he could have been guilty of the 
depravities, report of him, which, if not inconsistent with his 
warmth and impetuosity, were entire so with his candour and 
sensibility. whatever was the criminality, which had given rise to the 
reports, she could not now believe them to be wholly true, nor that his 
heart was finally closed against the charm of virtue. the deep 
consciousness, which he felt as well as express of his errors, seem 
to justify the opinion; and, as she understood not the instability of 
youthful dispositions, when oppose by habit, and that profession 
frequent deceive those, who make, as well as those, who hear them, 
she might have yield to the flatter persuasion of her own heart 
and the pleadings of valancourt, had she not been guide by the 
superior prudence of the count. he represent to her, in a clear 
light, the danger of her present situation, that of listen to 
promise of amendment, made under the influence of strong passion, and 
the slight hope, which could attach to a connection, whose chance of 
happiness rest upon the retrieval of ruin circumstances and the 
reform of corrupt habits. on these accounts, he lamented, that emily 
had consent to a second interview, for he saw how much it would shake 
her resolution and increase the difficulty of her conquest. 

her mind was now so entire occupy by near interests, that she 
forgot the old housekeeper and the promise history, which so lately 
had excited her curiosity, but which dorothée was probably not very 
anxious to disclose, for night came; the hour passed; and she did not 
appear in emily’s chamber. with the latter it was a sleepless and 
dismal night; the more she suffer her memory to dwell on the late 
scene with valancourt, the more her resolution declined, and she was 
oblige to recollect all the arguments, which the count had made use of 
to strengthen it, and all the precepts, which she had received from her 
deceased father, on the subject of self-command, to enable her to act, 
with prudence and dignity, on this the most severe occasion of her 
life. there were moments, when all her fortitude forsook her, and when, 
remember the confidence of former times, she thought it impossible, 
that she could renounce valancourt. his reformation then appear 
certain; the argument of count de villefort were forgotten; she 
readily believe all she wished, and was willing to encounter any evil, 
rather than that of an immediate separation. 

thus pass the night in ineffectual struggle between affection and 
reason, and she rose, in the morning, with a mind, weaken and 
irresolute, and a frame, tremble with illness. 



chapter ii 

come, weep with me;—past hope, past cure, past help! 
romeo and juliet 


valancourt, meanwhile, suffer the torture of remorse and despair. 
the sight of emily had renew all the ardour, with which he first 
love her, and which had suffer a temporary abate from absence 
and the passing scene of busy life. when, on the receipt of her 
letter, he set out for languedoc, he then knew, that his own folly had 
involved him in ruin, and it was no part of his design to conceal this 
from her. but he lament only the delay which his ill-conduct must 
give to their marriage, and did not foresee, that the information could 
induce her to break their connection for ever. while the prospect of 
this separation overwhelm his mind, before stung with self-reproach, 
he await their second interview, in a state little short of 
distraction, yet was still inclined to hope, that his pleadings might 
prevail upon her not to exact it. in the morning, he sent to know at 
what hour she would see him; and his note arrived, when she was with 
the count, who had sought an opportunity of again converse with her 
of valancourt; for he perceive the extreme distress of her mind, and 
feared, more than ever, that her fortitude would desert her. emily 
have dismiss the messenger, the count return to the subject of 
their late conversation, urge his fear of valancourt’s entreaties, 
and again point out to her the lengthen misery, that must ensue, 
if she should refuse to encounter some present uneasiness. his repeated 
argument could, indeed, alone have protect her from the affection 
she still felt for valancourt, and she resolve to be govern by them. 

the hour of interview, at length, arrived. emily went to it, at least, 
with composure of manner, but valancourt was so much agitated, that he 
could not speak, for several minutes, and his first words were 
alternate those of lamentation, entreaty, and self-reproach. 
afterward, he said, “emily, i have love you—i do love you, better than 
my life; but i am ruin by my own conduct. yet i would seek to 
entangle you in a connection, that must be miserable for you, rather 
than subject myself to the punishment, which is my due, the loss of 
you. i am a wretch, but i will be a villain no longer.—i will not 
endeavour to shake your resolution by the pleadings of a selfish 
passion. i resign you, emily, and will endeavour to find consolation in 
considering, that, though i am miserable, you, at least, may be happy. 
the merit of the sacrifice is, indeed, not my own, for i should never 
have attain strength of mind to surrender you, if your prudence had 
not demand it.” 

he pause a moment, while emily attempt to conceal the tears, which 
came to her eyes. she would have said, “you speak now, as you were wont 
to do,” but she checked herself.—“forgive me, emily,” said he, “all the 
suffering i have occasion you, and, sometimes, when you think of the 
wretched valancourt, remember, that his only consolation would be to 
believe, that you are no long unhappy by his folly.” the tear now 
fell fast upon her cheek, and he was relapse into the frenzy of 
despair, when emily endeavour to recall her fortitude and to 
terminate an interview, which only seem to increase the distress of 
both. perceive her tear and that she was rising to go, valancourt 
struggled, once more, to overcome his own feelings and to sooth hers. 
“the remembrance of this sorrow,” said he, “shall in future be my 
protection. o! never again will example, or temptation have power to 
seduce me to evil, exalted as i shall be by the recollection of your 
grief for me.” 

emily was somewhat comfort by this assurance. “we are now parting for 
ever,” said she; “but, if my happiness is dear to you, you will always 
remember, that nothing can contribute to it more, than to believe, that 
you have recover your own esteem.” valancourt took her hand;—his eyes 
were cover with tears, and the farewell he would have spoken was lost 
in sighs. after a few moments, emily said, with difficulty and emotion, 
“farewell, valancourt, may you be happy!” she repeated her “farewell,” 
and attempt to withdraw her hand, but he still held it and bath it 
with his tears. “why prolong these moments?” said emily, in a voice 
scarcely audible, “they are too painful to us both.” “this is too—too 
much,” exclaim valancourt, resign her hand and throw himself 
into a chair, where he cover his face with his hand and was 
overcome, for some moments, by convulsive sighs. after a long pause, 
during which emily wept in silence, and valancourt seem struggle 
with his grief, she again rose to take leave of him. then, endeavour 
to recover his composure, “i am again afflict you,” said he, “but 
let the anguish i suffer plead for me.” he then added, in a solemn 
voice, which frequent tremble with the agitation of his heart, 
“farewell, emily, you will always be the only object of my tenderness. 
sometimes you will think of the unhappy valancourt, and it will be with 
pity, though it may not be with esteem. o! what is the whole world to 
me, without you—without your esteem!” he checked himself—“i am fall 
again into the error i have just lamented. i must not intrude long 
upon your patience, or i shall relapse into despair.” 

he once more bade emily adieu, pressed her hand to his lips, look at 
her, for the last time, and hurried out of the room. 

emily remain in the chair, where he had left her, oppress with a 
pain at her heart, which scarcely permit her to breathe, and 
listen to his depart steps, sink faint and fainter, as he 
cross the hall. she was, at length, rouse by the voice of the 
countess in the garden, and, her attention being then awakened, the 
first object, which struck her sight, was the vacant chair, where 
valancourt had sat. the tears, which had been, for some time, repressed 
by the kind of astonishment, that follow his departure, now came to 
her relief, and she was, at length, sufficient compose to return to 
her own room. 



chapter iii 

this is no mortal business, nor no sound 
that the earth owes! 
shakespeare 


we now return to the mention of montoni, whose rage and disappointment 
were soon lost in near interests, than any, which the unhappy emily 
had awakened. his depredation have exceed their usual limits, and 
reach an extent, at which neither the timid of the then commercial 
senate of venice, nor their hope of his occasional assistance would 
permit them to connive, the same effort, it was resolved, should 
complete the suppression of his power and the correction of his 
outrages. while a corps of considerable strength was upon the point of 
receiving orders to march for udolpho, a young officer, prompt partly 
by resentment, for some injury, received from montoni, and partly by 
the hope of distinction, solicit an interview with the minister, who 
direct the enterprise. to him he represented, that the situation of 
udolpho render it too strong to be taken by open force, except after 
some tedious operations; that montoni had lately shown how capable he 
was of add to its strength all the advantages, which could be 
derive from the skill of a commander; that so considerable a body of 
troops, as that allot to the expedition, could not approach udolpho 
without his knowledge, and that it was not for the honour of the 
republic to have a large part of its regular force employed, for such a 
time as the siege of udolpho would require, upon the attack of a 
handful of banditti. the object of the expedition, he thought, might be 
accomplished much more safe and speedy by mingle contrivance with 
force. it was possible to meet montoni and his party, without their 
walls, and to attack them then; or, by approach the fortress, with 
the secrecy, consistent with the march of small body of troops, to 
take advantage either of the treachery, or negligence of some of his 
party, and to rush unexpected upon the whole even in the castle of 
udolpho. 

this advice was seriously attend to, and the officer, who gave it, 
received the command of the troops, demand for his purpose. his first 
effort were accordingly those of contrivance alone. in the 
neighbourhood of udolpho, he waited, till he had secure the assistance 
of several of the _condottieri_, of whom he found none, that he 
addressed, unwill to punish their imperious master and to secure 
their own pardon from the senate. he learned also the number of 
montoni’s troops, and that it had been much increased, since his late 
successes. the conclusion of his plan was soon effected. have 
return with his party, who received the watch-word and other 
assistance from their friends within, montoni and his officer were 
surprise by one division, who had been direct to their apartment, 
while the other maintain the slight combat, which precede the 
surrender of the whole garrison. among the persons, seize with 
montoni, was orsino, the assassin, who had join him on his first 
arrival at udolpho, and whose concealment had been made known to the 
senate by count morano, after the unsuccessful attempt of the latter to 
carry off emily. it was, indeed, partly for the purpose of capture 
this man, by whom one of the senate had been murdered, that the 
expedition was undertaken, and its success was so acceptable to them, 
that morano was instantly released, notwithstanding the politics 
suspicions, which montoni, by his secret accusation, had excited 
against him. the celerity and ease, with which this whole transaction 
was completed, prevent it from attract curiosity, or even from 
obtain a place in any of the publish record of that time; so that 
emily, who remain in languedoc, was ignorant of the defeat and signal 
humiliate of her late persecutor. 

her mind was now occupy with sufferings, which no effort of reason 
had yet been able to control. count de villefort, who sincerely 
attempt whatever benevolence could suggest for soften them, 
sometimes allow her the solitude she wish for, sometimes led her 
into friendly parties, and constant protect her, as much as 
possible, from the shrewd enquiry and critical conversation of the 
countess. he often invite her to make excursions, with him and his 
daughter, during which he converse entire on questions, suitable to 
her taste, without appear to consult it, and thus endeavour 
gradual to withdraw her from the subject of her grief, and to awake 
other interests in her mind. emily, to whom he appear as the 
enlightened friend and protector of her youth, soon felt for him the 
tender affection of a daughter, and her heart expand to her young 
friend blanche, as to a sister, whose kindness and simplicity 
compensate for the want of more brilliant qualities. it was long 
before she could sufficient abstract her mind from valancourt to 
listen to the story, promise by old dorothée, concerning which her 
curiosity had once been so deep interested; but dorothée, at length, 
remind her of it, and emily desired, that she would come, that night, 
to her chamber. 

still her thought were employ by considerations, which weaken her 
curiosity, and dorothée’s tap at the door, soon after twelve, surprise 
her almost as much as if it had not been appointed. “i am come, at 
last, lady,” said she; “i wonder what it is make my old limb shake 
so, tonight. i thought, once or twice, i should have dropped, as i was 
a-coming.” emily seat her in a chair, and desired, that she would 
compose her spirits, before she enter upon the subject, that had 
brought her thither. “alas,” said dorothée, “it is thinking of that, i 
believe, which has disturbed me so. in my way hither too, i pass the 
chamber, where my dear lady died, and everything was so still and 
gloomy about me, that i almost fancy i saw her, as she appear upon 
her death-bed.” 

emily now drew her chair near to dorothée, who went on. “it is about 
twenty years since my lady marchioness came a bride to the château. o! 
i well remember how she looked, when she came into the great hall, 
where we servant were all assemble to welcome her, and how happy my 
lord the marquis seemed. ah! who would have thought then!—but, as i was 
saying, ma’amselle, i thought the marchioness, with all her sweet 
looks, did not look happy at heart, and so i told my husband, and he 
said it was all fancy; so i said no more, but i made my remarks, for 
all that. my lady marchioness was then about your age, and, as i have 
often thought, very like you. well! my lord the marquis kept open 
house, for a long time, and gave such entertainment and there were 
such gay doings as have never been in the château since. i was younger, 
ma’amselle, then, than i am now, and was as gay at the best of them. i 
remember i dance with philip, the butler, in a pink gown, with yellow 
ribbons, and a coif, not such as they wear now, but plait high, with 
ribbon all about it. it was very becoming truly;—my lord, the marquis, 
notice me. ah! he was a good-natured gentleman then—who would have 
thought that he—” 

“but the marchioness, dorothée,” said emily, “you were telling me of 
her.” 

“o yes, my lady marchioness, i thought she did not seem happy at heart, 
and once, soon after the marriage, i caught her crying in her chamber; 
but, when she saw me, she dry her eyes, and pretended to smile. i did 
not dare then to ask what was the matter; but, the next time i saw her 
crying, i did, and she seem displeased;—so i said no more. i found 
out, some time after, how it was. her father, it seems, had command 
her to marry my lord, the marquis, for his money, and there was another 
nobleman, or else a chevalier, that she like better and that was very 
fond of her, and she fret for the loss of him, i fancy, but she 
never told me so. my lady always try to conceal her tear from the 
marquis, for i have often seen her, after she has been so sorrowful, 
look so calm and sweet, when he came into the room! but my lord, all of 
a sudden, grew gloomy and fretful, and very unkind sometimes to my 
lady. this afflict her very much, as i saw, for she never complained, 
and she use to try so sweet to oblige him and to bring him into a 
good humour, that my heart has often ache to see it. but he use to be 
stubborn, and give her harsh answers, and then, when she found it all 
in vain, she would go to her own room, and cry so! i use to hear her 
in the ante-room, poor dear lady! but i seldom venture to go to her. i 
used, sometimes, to think my lord was jealous. to be sure my lady was 
greatly admired, but she was too good to deserve suspicion. among the 
many chevaliers, that visit at the château, there was one, that i 
always thought seem just suit for my lady; he was so courteous, yet 
so spirited, and there was such a grace, as it were, in all he did, or 
said. i always observed, that, whenever he had been there, the marquis 
was more gloomy and my lady more thoughtful, and it came into my head, 
that this was the chevalier she ought to have married, but i never 
could learn for certain.” 

“what was the chevalier’s name, dorothée?” said emily. 

“why that i will not tell even to you, ma’amselle, for evil may come of 
it. i once heard from a person, who is since dead, that the marchioness 
was not in law the wife of the marquis, for that she had before been 
private married to the gentleman she was so much attach to, and was 
afterwards afraid to own it to her father, who was a very stern man; 
but this seem very unlikely, and i never gave much faith to it. as i 
was saying, the marquis was most out of humour, as i thought, when the 
chevalier i spoke of had been at the château, and, at last, his ill 
treatment of my lady made her quite miserable. he would see hardly any 
visitor at the castle, and made her live almost by herself. i was her 
constant attendant, and saw all she suffered, but still she never 
complained. 

“after matter had gone on thus, for near a year, my lady was taken 
ill, and i thought her long fret had made her so,—but, alas! i fear 
it was worse than that.” 

“worse! dorothée,” said emily, “can that be possible?” 

“i fear it was so, madam, there were strange appearances. but i will 
only tell what happened. my lord, the marquis—” 

“hush, dorothée, what sound were those?” said emily. 

dorothée change countenance, and, while they both listened, they 
heard, on the still of the night, music of uncommon sweetness. 

“i have surely heard that voice before!” said emily, at length. 

“i have often heard it, and at this same hour,” said dorothée, 
solemnly, “and, if spirits ever bring music—that is surely the music of 
one!” 

emily, as the sound drew nearer, knew them to be the same she had 
formerly heard at the time of her father’s death, and, whether it was 
the remembrance they now revive of that melancholy event, or that she 
was struck with superstitious awe, it is certain she was so much 
affected, that she had nearly fainted. 

“i think i once told you, madam,” said dorothée, “that i first heard 
this music, soon after my lady’s death! i well remember the night!”— 
“hark! it come again!” said emily, “let us open the window, and 
listen.” 

they did so; but, soon, the sound float gradual away into 
distance, and all was again still; they seem to have sunk among the 
woods, whose tuft tops were visible upon the clear horizon, while 
every other feature of the scene was involved in the night-shade, 
which, however, allow the eye an indistinct view of some object in 
the garden below. 

as emily lean on the window, gaze with a kind of thrill awe upon 
the obscurity beneath, and then upon the cloudless arch above, 
enlightened only by the stars, dorothée, in a low voice, resume her 
narrative. 

“i was saying, ma’amselle, that i well remember when first i heard that 
music. it was one night, soon after my lady’s death, that i had sat up 
later than usual, and i don’t know how it was, but i had been thinking 
a great deal about my poor mistress, and of the sad scene i had lately 
witnessed. the château was quite still, and i was in the chamber at a 
good distance from the rest of the servants, and this, with the 
mournful things i had been thinking of, i suppose, made me low 
spirited, for i felt very lonely and forlorn, as it were, and listen 
often, wish to hear a sound in the château, for you know, 
ma’amselle, when one can hear people moving, one do not so much mind, 
about one’s fears. but all the servant were gone to bed, and i sat, 
thinking and thinking, till i was almost afraid to look round the room, 
and my poor lady’s countenance often came to my mind, such as i had 
seen her when she was dying, and, once or twice, i almost thought i saw 
her before me,—when sudden i heard such sweet music! it seem just 
at my window, and i shall never forget what i felt. i had not power to 
move from my chair, but then, when i thought it was my dear lady’s 
voice, the tear came to my eyes. i had often heard her sing, in her 
life-time, and to be sure she had a very fine voice; it had made me cry 
to hear her, many a time, when she has sat in her oriel, of an evening, 
play upon her lute such sad songs, and singing so. o! it went to 
one’s heart! i have listen in the ante-chamber, for the hour 
together, and she would sometimes sit playing, with the window open, 
when it was summer time, till it was quite dark, and when i have gone 
in, to shut it, she has hardly seem to know what hour it was. but, as 
i said, madam,” continue dorothée, “when first i heard the music, that 
came just now, i thought it was my late lady’s, and i have often 
thought so again, when i have heard it, as i have done at intervals, 
ever since. sometimes, many month have gone by, but still it has 
returned.” 

“it is extraordinary,” observe emily, “that no person has yet 
discover the musician.” 

“aye, ma’amselle, if it had been anything earthly it would have been 
discover long ago, but who could have courage to follow a spirit, and 
if they had, what good could it do?—for spirits, _you know_, ma’am, can 
take any shape, or no shape, and they will be here, one minute, and, 
the next perhaps, in a quite different place!” 

“pray resume your story of the marchioness,” said emily, “and acquaint 
me with the manner of her death.” 

“i will, ma’am,” said dorothée, “but shall we leave the window?” 

“this cool air refresh me,” reply emily, “and i love to hear it 
creep along the woods, and to look upon this dusky landscape. you were 
speak of my lord, the marquis, when the music interrupt us.” 

“yes, madam, my lord, the marquis, became more and more gloomy; and my 
lady grew worse and worse, till, one night, she was taken very ill, 
indeed. i was call up, and, when i came to her bedside, i was shock 
to see her countenance—it was so changed! she look piteous up at 
me, and desire i would call the marquis again, for he was not yet 
come, and tell him she had something particular to say to him. at last, 
he came, and he did, to be sure, seem very sorry to see her, but he 
said very little. my lady told him she felt herself to be dying, and 
wish to speak with him alone, and then i left the room, but i shall 
never forget his look as i went.” 

“when i returned, i venture to remind my lord about send for a 
doctor, for i supposed he had forgot to do so, in his grief; but my 
lady said it was then too late; but my lord, so far from thinking so, 
seem to think light of her disorder—till she was seize with such 
terrible pains! o, i never shall forget her shriek! my lord then sent 
off a man and horse for the doctor, and walk about the room and all 
over the château in the greatest distress; and i staid by my dear lady, 
and did what i could to ease her sufferings. she had interval of ease, 
and in one of these she sent for my lord again; when he came, i was 
going, but she desire i would not leave her. o! i shall never forget 
what a scene passed—i can hardly bear to think of it now! my lord was 
almost distracted, for my lady behave with so much goodness, and took 
such pains to comfort him, that, if he ever had suffer a suspicion to 
enter his head, he must now have been convinced he was wrong. and to be 
sure he did seem to be overwhelm with the thought of his treatment of 
her, and this affected her so much, that she faint away. 

“we then got my lord out of the room; he went into his library, and 
threw himself on the floor, and there he staid, and would hear no 
reason, that was talk to him. when my lady recovered, she enquire 
for him, but, afterwards, said she could not bear to see his grief, and 
desire we would let her die quietly. she die in my arms, ma’amselle, 
and she went off as peaceful as a child, for all the violence of her 
disorder was passed.” 

dorothée pause and wept, and emily wept with her; for she was much 
affected by the goodness of the late marchioness, and by the meek 
patience with which she had suffered. 

“when the doctor came,” resume dorothée, “alas! he came too late; he 
appear greatly shock to see her, for soon after her death a 
frightful black spread all over her face. when he had sent the 
attendant out of the room, he ask me several odd question about the 
marchioness, particularly concerning the manner, in which she had been 
seized, and he often shook his head at my answers, and seem to mean 
more, than he chose to say. but i understood him too well. however, i 
kept my remark to myself, and only told them to my husband, who bade 
me hold my tongue. some of the other servants, however, suspect what 
i did, and strange report were whisper about the neighbourhood, but 
nobody dare to make any stir about them. when my lord heard that my 
lady was dead, he shut himself up, and would see nobody but the doctor, 
who use to be with him alone, sometimes for an hour together; and, 
after that, the doctor never talk with me again about my lady. when 
she was bury in the church of the convent, at a little distance 
yonder, if the moon was up you might see the tower here, ma’amselle, 
all my lord’s vassal follow the funeral, and there was not a dry eye 
among them, for she had done a deal of good among the poor. my lord, 
the marquis, i never saw anybody so melancholy as he was afterwards, 
and sometimes he would be in such fit of violence, that we almost 
thought he had lost his senses. he did not stay long at the château, 
but join his regiment, and, soon after, all the servants, except my 
husband and i, received notice to go, for my lord went to the wars. i 
never saw him after, for he would not return to the château, though it 
is such a fine place, and never finished those fine rooms he was 
building on the west side of it, and it has, in a manner, been shut up 
ever since, till my lord the count came here.” 

“the death of the marchioness appear extraordinary,” said emily, who 
was anxious to know more than she dare to ask. 

“yes, madam,” reply dorothée, “it was extraordinary; i have told you 
all i saw, and you may easily guess what i think, i cannot say more, 
because i would not spread reports, that might offend my lord the 
count.” 

“you are very right,” said emily;—“where did the marquis die?”—“in the 
north of france, i believe, ma’amselle,” reply dorothée. “i was very 
glad, when i heard my lord the count was coming, for this had been a 
sad desolate place, these many years, and we heard such strange noises, 
sometimes, after my lady’s death, that, as i told you before, my 
husband and i left it for a neighbouring cottage. and now, lady, i have 
told you all this sad history, and all my thoughts, and you have 
promised, you know, never to give the least hint about it.”—“i have,” 
said emily, “and i will be faithful to my promise, dorothée;—what you 
have told has interested me more than you can imagine. i only wish i 
could prevail upon you to tell the name of the chevalier, whom you 
thought so deserving of the marchioness.” 

dorothée, however, steady refuse to do this, and then return to 
the notice of emily’s likeness to the late marchioness. “there is 
another picture of her,” add she, “hanging in a room of the suite, 
which was shut up. it was drawn, as i have heard, before she was 
married, and is much more like you than the miniature.” when emily 
express a strong desire to see this, dorothée replied, that she did 
not like to open those rooms; but emily remind her, that the count 
had talk the other day of order them to be opened; of which 
dorothée seem to consider much, and then she owned, that she should 
feel less, if she went into them with emily first, than otherwise, and 
at length promise to show the picture. 

the night was too far advanced and emily was too much affected by the 
narrative of the scenes, which had pass in those apartments, to wish 
to visit them at this hour, but she request that dorothée would 
return on the following night, when they were not likely to be 
observed, and conduct her thither. besides her wish to examine the 
portrait, she felt a thrill curiosity to see the chamber, in which 
the marchioness had died, and which dorothée had said remained, with 
the bed and furniture, just as when the corpse was remove for 
interment. the solemn emotions, which the expectation of view such a 
scene had awakened, were in unison with the present tone of her mind, 
depressed by severe disappointment. cheerful object rather add to, 
than remove this depression; but, perhaps, she yield too much to her 
melancholy inclination, and imprudent lament the misfortune, which 
no virtue of her own could have taught her to avoid, though no effort 
of reason could make her look unmoved upon the self-degradation of him, 
whom she had once esteem and loved. 

dorothée promise to return, on the following night, with the key of 
the chambers, and then wish emily good repose, and departed. emily, 
however, continue at the window, muse upon the melancholy fate of 
the marchioness and listening, in awful expectation, for a return of 
the music. but the still of the night remain long unbroken, 
except by the murmur sound of the woods, as they wave in the 
breeze, and then by the distant bell of the convent, striking one. she 
now withdrew from the window, and, as she sat at her bedside, indulge 
melancholy reveries, which the lonely of the hour assisted, the 
still was sudden interrupt not by music, but by very uncommon 
sounds, that seem to come either from the room adjoin her own, or 
from one below. the terrible catastrophe that had been related to her, 
together with the mysterious circumstances said to have since occur 
in the château, had so much shock her spirits, that she now sunk for 
a moment under the weakness of superstition. the sounds, however, did 
not return, and she retired, to forget in sleep the disastrous story 
she had heard. 



chapter iv 

now it is the time of night, 
that, the grave all gape wide, 
every one let forth his sprite, 
in the church-way path to glide. 
shakespeare 


on the next night, about the same hour as before, dorothée came to 
emily’s chamber, with the key of that suite of rooms, which had been 
particularly appropriate to the late marchioness. these extend along 
the north side of the château, form part of the old building; and, 
as emily’s room was in the south, they had to pass over a great extent 
of the castle, and by the chambers of several of the family, whose 
observations dorothée was anxious to avoid, since it might excite 
enquiry, and raise reports, such as would displease the count. she, 
therefore, requested, that emily would wait half an hour, before they 
venture forth, that they might be certain all the servant were gone 
to bed. it was nearly one, before the château was perfectly still, or 
dorothée thought it prudent to leave the chamber. in this interval, her 
spirits seem to be greatly affected by the remembrance of past 
events, and by the prospect of enter again upon places, where these 
had occurred, and in which she had not been for so many years. emily 
too was affected, but her feelings had more of solemnity, and less of 
fear. from the silence, into which reflection and expectation had 
thrown them, they, at length, rouse themselves, and left the chamber. 
dorothée, at first, carry the lamp, but her hand tremble so much 
with infirmity and alarm, that emily took it from her, and offer her 
arm, to support her feeble steps. 

they had to descend the great staircase, and, after passing over a wide 
extent of the château, to ascend another, which led to the suite of 
rooms they were in quest of. they step cautious along the open 
corridor, that ran round the great hall, and into which the chambers of 
the count, countess, and the lady blanche, opened, and, from thence, 
descend the chief staircase, they cross the hall itself. 
proceeding through the servant hall, where the die ember of a wood 
fire still glimmer on the hearth, and the supper table was surround 
by chairs, that obstruct their passage, they came to the foot of the 
back staircase. old dorothée here paused, and look around; “let us 
listen,” said she, “if anything is stirring; ma’amselle, do you hear 
any voice?” “none,” said emily, “there certainly is no person up in the 
château, besides ourselves.”—“no, ma’amselle,” said dorothée, “but i 
have never been here at this hour before, and, after what i know, my 
fear are not wonderful.”—“what do you know?” said emily.—“o, 
ma’amselle, we have no time for talk now; let us go on. that door on 
the left is the one we must open.” 

they proceeded, and, have reach the top of the staircase, dorothée 
applied the key to the lock. “ah,” said she, as she endeavour to turn 
it, “so many years have pass since this was opened, that i fear it 
will not move.” emily was more successful, and they presently enter a 
spacious and ancient chamber. 

“alas!” exclaim dorothée, as she entered, “the last time i pass 
through this door—i follow my poor lady’s corpse!” 

emily, struck with the circumstance, and affected by the dusky and 
solemn air of the apartment, remain silent, and they pass on 
through a long suite of rooms, till they came to one more spacious than 
the rest, and rich in the remains of fade magnificence. 

“let us rest here awhile, madam,” said dorothée faintly, “we are go 
into the chamber, where my lady died! that door open into it. ah, 
ma’amselle! why did you persuade me to come?” 

emily drew one of the massy arm-chairs, with which the apartment was 
furnished, and beg dorothée would sit down, and try to compose her 
spirits. 

“how the sight of this place bring all that pass formerly to my 
mind!” said dorothée; “it seem as if it was but yesterday since all 
that sad affair happened!” 

“hark! what noise is that?” said emily. 

dorothée, half start from her chair, look round the apartment, and 
they listened—but, everything remain still, the old woman spoke 
again upon the subject of her sorrow. “this saloon, ma’amselle, was in 
my lady’s time the finest apartment in the château, and it was fitted 
up according to her own taste. all this grand furniture, but you can 
now hardly see what it is for the dust, and our light is none of the 
best—ah! how i have seen this room light up in my lady’s time!—all 
this grand furniture came from paris, and was made after the fashion of 
some in the louvre there, except those large glasses, and they came 
from some outlandish place, and that rich tapestry. how the colours are 
fade already!—since i saw it last!” 

“i understood, that was twenty years ago,” observe emily. 

“thereabout, madam,” said dorothée, “and well remembered, but all the 
time between then and now seem as nothing. that tapestry use to be 
greatly admire at, it tell the story out of some famous book, or 
other, but i have forgot the name.” 

emily now rose to examine the figures it exhibited, and discovered, by 
verse in the provençal tongue, wrought underneath each scene, that it 
exhibit story from some of the most celebrated ancient romances. 

dorothée’s spirits being now more composed, she rose, and unlock the 
door that led into the late marchioness’s apartment, and emily pass 
into a lofty chamber, hung round with dark arras, and so spacious, that 
the lamp she held up did not show its extent; while dorothée, when she 
entered, had drop into a chair, where, sigh deeply, she scarcely 
trust herself with the view of a scene so affecting to her. it was 
some time before emily perceived, through the dusk, the bed on which 
the marchioness was said to have died; when, advance to the upper end 
of the room, she discover the high canopy tester of dark green 
damask, with the curtains descend to the floor in the fashion of a 
tent, half drawn, and remain apparently, as they had been left 
twenty years before; and over the whole bedding was thrown a 
counterpane, or pall, of black velvet, that hung down to the floor. 
emily shuddered, as she held the lamp over it, and look within the 
dark curtains, where she almost expect to have seen a human face, 
and, sudden remember the horror she had suffer upon discover 
the die madame montoni in the turret-chamber of udolpho, her spirits 
fainted, and she was turning from the bed, when dorothée, who had now 
reach it, exclaimed, “holy virgin! methinks i see my lady stretch 
upon that pall—as when last i saw her!” 

emily, shock by this exclamation, look involuntary again within 
the curtains, but the black of the pall only appeared; while 
dorothée was compel to support herself upon the side of the bed, and 
presently tear brought her some relief. 

“ah!” said she, after she had wept awhile, “it was here i sat on that 
terrible night, and held my lady’s hand, and heard her last words, and 
saw all her sufferings—_here_ she die in my arms!” 

“do not indulge these painful recollections,” said emily, “let us go. 
show me the picture you mentioned, if it will not too much affect you.” 

“it hang in the oriel,” said dorothée rising, and go towards a 
small door near the bed’s head, which she opened, and emily follow 
with the light into the closet of the late marchioness. 

“alas! there she is, ma’amselle,” said dorothée, point to a portrait 
of a lady, “there is her very self! just as she look when she came 
first to the château. you see, madam, she was all blooming like you, 
then—and so soon to be cut off!” 

while dorothée spoke, emily was attentive examine the picture, 
which bore a strong resemblance to the miniature, though the expression 
of the countenance in each was somewhat different; but still she 
thought she perceive something of that pensive melancholy in the 
portrait, which so strong characterise the miniature. 

“pray, ma’amselle, stand beside the picture, that i may look at you 
together,” said dorothée, who, when the request was comply with, 
exclaim again at the resemblance. emily also, as she gaze upon it, 
thought that she had somewhere seen a person very like it, though she 
could not now recollect who this was. 

in this closet were many memorial of the departed marchioness; a robe 
and several articles of her dress were scattered upon the chairs, as if 
they had just been thrown off. on the floor were a pair of black satin 
slippers, and, on the dressing-table, a pair of glove and a long black 
veil, which, as emily took it up to examine, she perceive was drop 
to pieces with age. 

“ah!” said dorothée, observing the veil, “my lady’s hand laid it there; 
it has never been move since!” 

emily, shuddering, immediately laid it down again. “i well remember 
seeing her take it off,” continue dorothée, “it was on the night 
before her death, when she had return from a little walk i had 
persuade her to take in the gardens, and she seem refresh by it. i 
told her how much better she looked, and i remember what a languid 
smile she gave me; but, alas! she little thought, or i either, that she 
was to die that night.” 

dorothée wept again, and then, taking up the veil, threw it sudden 
over emily, who shudder to find it wrap round her, descend even 
to her feet, and, as she endeavour to throw it off, dorothée 
entreat that she would keep it on for one moment. “i thought,” add 
she, “how like you would look to my dear mistress in that veil;—may 
your life, ma’amselle, be a happy one than hers!” 

emily, have disengaged herself from the veil, laid it again on the 
dressing-table, and survey the closet, where every object, on which 
her eye fixed, seem to speak of the marchioness. in a large oriel 
window of paint glass, stood a table, with a silver crucifix, and a 
prayer-book open; and emily remember with emotion what dorothée had 
mention concerning her custom of play on her lute in this window, 
before she observe the lute itself, lie on a corner of the table, as 
if it had been careless placed there by the hand, that had so often 
awaken it. 

“this is a sad forlorn place!” said dorothée, “for, when my dear lady 
died, i had no heart to put it to rights, or the chamber either; and my 
lord never came into the rooms after, so they remain just as they did 
when my lady was remove for interment.” 

while dorothée spoke, emily was still look on the lute, which was a 
spain one, and remarkably large; and then, with a hesitate hand, 
she took it up, and pass her finger over the chords. they were out 
of tune, but utter a deep and full sound. dorothée start at their 
well-known tones, and, seeing the lute in emily’s hand, said, “this is 
the lute my lady marchioness love so! i remember when last she play 
upon it—it was on the night that she died. i came as usual to undress 
her, and, as i enter the bed-chamber, i heard the sound of music from 
the oriel, and perceive it was my lady’s, who was sitting there, i 
step soft to the door, which stood a little open, to listen; for 
the music—though it was mournful—was so sweet! there i saw her, with 
the lute in her hand, look upwards, and the tear fell upon her 
cheeks, while she sung a vesper hymn, so soft, and so solemn! and her 
voice trembled, as it were, and then she would stop for a moment, and 
wipe away her tears, and go on again, lower than before. o! i had often 
listen to my lady, but never heard anything so sweet as this; it made 
me cry, almost, to hear it. she had been at prayers, i fancy, for there 
was the book open on the table beside her—aye, and there it lie open 
still! pray, let us leave the oriel, ma’amselle,” add dorothée, “this 
is a heart-breaking place!” 

have return into the chamber, she desire to look once more upon 
the bed, when, as they came opposite to the open door, leading into the 
saloon, emily, in the partial gleam, which the lamp threw into it, 
thought she saw something glide along into the obscure part of the 
room. her spirits had been much affected by the surrounding scene, or 
it is probable this circumstance, whether real or imaginary, would not 
have affected her in the degree it did; but she endeavour to conceal 
her emotion from dorothée, who, however, observing her countenance 
change, enquire if she was ill. 

“let us go,” said emily, faintly, “the air of these rooms is 
unwholesome;” but, when she attempt to do so, considering that she 
must pass through the apartment where the phantom of her terror had 
appeared, this terror increased, and, too faint to support herself, she 
sat down on the side of the bed. 

dorothée, believe that she was only affected by a consideration of 
the melancholy catastrophe, which had happen on this spot, 
endeavour to cheer her; and then, as they sat together on the bed, 
she began to relate other particulars concerning it, and this without 
reflecting, that it might increase emily’s emotion, but because they 
were particularly interesting to herself. “a little before my lady’s 
death,” said she, “when the pains were gone off, she call me to her, 
and stretch out her hand to me, i sat down just there—where the 
curtain falls upon the bed. how well i remember her look at the 
time—death was in it!—i can almost fancy i see her now.—there she lay, 
ma’amselle—her face was upon the pillow there! this black counterpane 
was not upon the bed then; it was laid on, after her death, and she was 
laid out upon it.” 

emily turn to look within the dusky curtains, as if she could have 
seen the countenance of which dorothée spoke. the edge of the white 
pillow only appear above the black of the pall, but, as her eyes 
wander over the pall itself, she fancy she saw it move. without 
speaking, she caught dorothée’s arm, who, surprise by the action, and 
by the look of terror that accompany it, turn her eyes from emily 
to the bed, where, in the next moment she, too, saw the pall slow 
lifted, and fall again. 

emily attempt to go, but dorothée stood fixed and gaze upon the 
bed; and, at length, said—“it is only the wind, that wave it, 
ma’amselle; we have left all the door open: see how the air wave the 
lamp, too.—it is only the wind.” 

she had scarcely utter these words, when the pall was more violent 
agitate than before; but emily, somewhat ashamed of her terrors, 
step back to the bed, willing to be convinced that the wind only had 
occasion her alarm; when, as she gaze within the curtains, the pall 
move again, and, in the next moment, the apparition of a human 
countenance rose above it. 

scream with terror, they both fled, and got out of the chamber as 
fast as their tremble limb would bear them, leave open the door 
of all the rooms, through which they passed. when they reach the 
staircase, dorothée threw open a chamber door, where some of the female 
servant slept, and sunk breathless on the bed; while emily, deprived 
of all presence of mind, made only a feeble attempt to conceal the 
occasion of her terror from the astonish servants; and, though 
dorothée, when she could speak, endeavour to laugh at her own fright, 
and was join by emily, no remonstrance could prevail with the 
servants, who had quick taken the alarm, to pass even the remainder 
of the night in a room so near to these terrific chambers. 

dorothée have accompany emily to her own apartment, they then began 
to talk over, with some degree of coolness, the strange circumstance, 
that had just occurred; and emily would almost have doubt her own 
perceptions, had not those of dorothée attested their truth. have now 
mention what she had observe in the outer chamber, she ask the 
housekeeper, whether she was certain no door had been left unfastened, 
by which a person might secret have enter the apartments? dorothée 
replied, that she had constant kept the key of the several door in 
her own possession; that, when she had gone her rounds through the 
castle, as she frequent did, to examine if all was safe, she had 
try these door among the rest, and had always found them fastened. 
it was, therefore, impossible, she added, that any person could have 
got admittance into the apartments; and, if they could—it was very 
improbable they should have chosen to sleep in a place so cold and 
forlorn. 

emily observed, that their visit to these chambers had, perhaps, been 
watched, and that some person, for a frolic, had follow them into the 
rooms, with a design to frighten them, and, while they were in the 
oriel, had taken the opportunity of conceal himself in the bed. 

dorothée allowed, that this was possible, till she recollected, that, 
on enter the apartments, she had turn the key of the outer door, 
and this, which had been done to prevent their visit being notice by 
any of the family, who might happen to be up, must effectually have 
exclude every person, except themselves, from the chambers; and she 
now persist in affirming, that the ghastly countenance she had seen 
was nothing human, but some dreadful apparition. 

emily was very solemn affected. of whatever nature might be the 
appearance she had witnessed, whether human or supernatural, the fate 
of the deceased marchioness was a truth not to be doubted; and this 
unaccountable circumstance, occur in the very scene of her 
sufferings, affected emily’s imagination with a superstitious awe, to 
which, after have detect the fallacy at udolpho, she might not 
have yielded, had she been ignorant of the unhappy story, related by 
the housekeeper. her she now solemn conjure to conceal the 
occurrence of this night, and to make light of the terror she had 
already betrayed, that the count might not be distress by reports, 
which would certainly spread alarm and confusion among his family. 
“time,” she added, “may explain this mysterious affair; meanwhile let 
us watch the event in silence.” 

dorothée readily acquiesced; but she now recollect that she had left 
all the door of the north suite of rooms open, and, not have courage 
to return alone to lock even the outer one, emily, after some effort, 
so far conquer her own fears, that she offer to accompany her to 
the foot of the back staircase, and to wait there while dorothée 
ascended, whose resolution being reassure by this circumstance, she 
consent to go, and they left emily’s apartment together. 

no sound disturbed the stillness, as they pass along the hall and 
galleries; but, on reach the foot of the back staircase, dorothée’s 
resolution fail again; having, however, pause a moment to listen, 
and no sound being heard above, she ascended, leave emily below, and, 
scarcely suffering her eye to glance within the first chamber, she 
fasten the door, which shut up the whole suite of apartments, and 
return to emily. 

as they step along the passage, leading into the great hall, a sound 
of lamentation was heard, which seem to come from the hall itself, 
and they stop in new alarm to listen, when emily presently 
distinguished the voice of annette, whom she found crossing the hall, 
with another female servant, and so terrify by the report, which the 
other maid had spread, that, believe she could be safe only where 
her lady was, she was go for refuge to her apartment. emily’s 
endeavour to laugh, or to argue her out of these terrors, were equally 
vain, and, in compassion to her distress, she consent that she should 
remain in her room during the night. 



chapter v 

hail, mildly-pleasing solitude! 
companion of the wise and good! 

thine is the balmy breath of morn, 
just as the dew-bent rose is born. 

but chief when evening scene decay 
and the faint landscape swim away, 
thine is the doubtful, soft decline, 
and that best hour of muse thine. 
thomson 


emily’s injunction to annette to be silent on the subject of her 
terror were ineffectual, and the occurrence of the preceding night 
spread such alarm among the servants, who now all affirmed, that they 
had frequent heard unaccountable noise in the château, that a report 
soon reach the count of the north side of the castle being haunted. 
he treat this, at first, with ridicule, but, perceiving, that it was 
productive of serious evil, in the confusion it occasion among his 
household, he forbade any person to repeat it, on pain of punishment. 

the arrival of a party of his friends soon withdrew his thought 
entire from this subject, and his servant had now little leisure to 
brood over it, except, indeed, in the evenings after supper, when they 
all assemble in their hall, and related story of ghosts, till they 
fear to look round the room; started, if the echo of a close door 
murmur along the passage, and refuse to go singly to any part of the 
castle. 

on these occasion annette made a distinguished figure. when she told 
not only of all the wonders she had witnessed, but of all that she had 
imagined, in the castle of udolpho, with the story of the strange 
disappearance of signora laurentini, she made no trifling impression on 
the mind of her attentive auditors. her suspicions, concerning montoni, 
she would also have freely disclosed, had not ludovico, who was now in 
the service of the count, prudent checked her loquacity, whenever it 
pointed to that subject. 

among the visitor at the château was the baron de saint foix, an old 
friend of the count, and his son, the chevalier st. foix, a sensible 
and amiable young man, who, have in the preceding year seen the lady 
blanche, at paris, had become her declared admirer. the friendship, 
which the count had long entertain for his father, and the equality 
of their circumstances made him secret approve of the connection; 
but, thinking his daughter at this time too young to fix her choice for 
life, and wish to prove the sincerity and strength of the 
chevalier’s attachment, he then reject his suit, though without 
forbidding his future hope. this young man now came, with the baron, 
his father, to claim the reward of a steady affection, a claim, which 
the count admitted and which blanche did not reject. 

while these visitor were at the château, it became a scene of gaiety 
and splendour. the pavilion in the wood was fitted up and frequented, 
in the fine evenings, as a supper-room, when the hour usually conclude 
with a concert, at which the count and countess, who were scientific 
performers, and the chevalier henri and st. foix, with the lady 
blanche and emily, whose voice and fine taste compensate for the want 
of more skilful execution, usually assisted. several of the count’s 
servant perform on horn and other instruments, some of which, 
placed at a little distance among the woods, spoke, in sweet response, 
to the harmony, that proceed from the pavilion. 

at any other period, these party would have been delightful to emily; 
but her spirits were now oppress with a melancholy, which she 
perceive that no kind of what is call amusement had power to 
dissipate, and which the tender and, frequently, pathetic, melody of 
these concert sometimes increase to a very painful degree. 

she was particularly fond of walking in the woods, that hung on a 
promontory, overlook the sea. their luxuriant shade was soothe to 
her pensive mind, and, in the partial views, which they afford of the 
mediterranean, with its winding shore and passing sails, tranquil 
beauty was united with grandeur. the path were rude and frequent 
overgrown with vegetation, but their tasteful owner would suffer little 
to be done to them, and scarcely a single branch to be lop from the 
venerable trees. on an eminence, in one of the most sequester parts 
of these woods, was a rustic seat, form of the trunk of a decay 
oak, which had once been a noble tree, and of which many lofty branch 
still flourish united with beech and pine to over-canopy the spot. 
beneath their deep umbrage, the eye pass over the tops of other 
woods, to the mediterranean, and, to the left, through an opening, was 
seen a ruin watch-tower, standing on a point of rock, near the sea, 
and rising from among the tuft foliage. 

hither emily often came alone in the silence of evening, and, soothe 
by the scenery and by the faint murmur, that rose from the waves, would 
sit, till dark oblige her to return to the château. frequently, 
also, she visit the watch-tower, which command the entire prospect, 
and, when she lean against its broken walls, and thought of 
valancourt, she not once imagined, what was so true, that this tower 
had been almost as frequent his resort, as her own, since his 
estrangement from the neighbouring château. 

one evening, she linger here to a late hour. she had sat on the steps 
of the building, watching, in tranquil melancholy, the gradual effect 
of evening over the extensive prospect, till the grey waters of the 
mediterranean and the massy wood were almost the only features of the 
scene, that remain visible; when, as she gaze alternate on these, 
and on the mild blue of the heavens, where the first pale star of 
evening appeared, she personify the hour in the following lines:— 

song of the evening hour 

last of the hours, that track the fade day, 
i move along the realm of twilight air, 
and hear, remote, the choral song decay 
of sister-nymphs, who dance around his car. 

then, as i follow through the azure void, 
his partial splendour from my strain eye 
sink in the depth of space; my only guide 
his faint ray dawn on the farthest sky; 

save that sweet, lingering strain of gay hours, 
whose close my voice prolong in die notes, 
while mortal on the green earth own its pow’rs, 
as downward on the evening gale it floats. 

when fade along the west the sun’s last beam, 
as, weary, to the nether world he goes, 
and mountain-summits catch the purple gleam, 
and slumber ocean faint and faint glows, 

silent upon the globe’s broad shade i steal, 
and o’er its dry turf shed the cool dews, 
and ev’ry fever’d herb and flow’ret heal, 
and all their fragrance on the air diffuse. 

where’er i move, a tranquil pleasure reigns; 
o’er all the scene the dusky tint i send, 
that forest wild and mountains, stretch plain 
and people towns, in soft confusion blend. 

wide o’er the world i waft the fresh’ning wind, 
low breathing through the wood and twilight vale, 
in whisper soft, that woo the pensive mind 
of him, who love my lonely steps to hail. 

his tender oaten reed i watch to hear, 
steal its sweet o’er some plain rill, 
or soothe ocean’s wave, when storm are near, 
or swelling in the breeze from distant hill! 

i wake the fairy elves, who shun the light; 
when, from their blossom’d beds, they sly peep, 
and spy my pale star, leading on the night,— 
forth to their games and revelry they leap; 

send all the prison’d sweets abroad in air, 
that with them slumber’d in the flow’ret’s cell; 
then to the shore and moonlight brook repair, 
till the high lark their matin-carol swell. 

the wood-nymphs hail my airs and temper’d shade, 
with ditty soft and lightly sportive dance, 
on river margin of some bow’ry glade, 
and strew their fresh bud as my steps advance: 

but, swift i pass, and distant regions trace, 
for moonbeam silver all the eastern cloud, 
and day’s last crimson vestige fade apace; 
down the steep west i fly from midnight’s shroud. 


the moon was now rising out of the sea. she watch its gradual 
progress, the extend line of radiance it threw upon the waters, the 
sparkle oars, the sail faint silvered, and the wood-tops and the 
battlements of the watch-tower, at whose foot she was sitting, just 
tint with the rays. emily’s spirits were in harmony with this scene. 
as she sat meditating, sound stole by her on the air, which she 
immediately knew to be the music and the voice she had formerly heard 
at midnight, and the emotion of awe, which she felt, was not unmixed 
with terror, when she considered her remote and lonely situation. the 
sound drew nearer. she would have risen to leave the place, but they 
seem to come from the way she must have taken towards the château, 
and she await the event in tremble expectation. the sound 
continue to approach, for some time, and then ceased. emily sat 
listening, gaze and unable to move, when she saw a figure emerge from 
the shade of the wood and pass along the bank, at some little distance 
before her. it went swiftly, and her spirits were so overcome with awe, 
that, though she saw, she did not much observe it. 

have left the spot, with a resolution never again to visit it alone, 
at so late an hour, she began to approach the château, when she heard 
voice calling her from the part of the wood, which was nearest to it. 
they were the shout of the count’s servants, who were sent to search 
for her; and when she enter the supper-room, where he sat with henri 
and blanche, he gently reproach her with a look, which she blush to 
have deserved. 

this little occurrence deep impress her mind, and, when she 
withdrew to her own room, it recall so forcibly the circumstances she 
had witnessed, a few nights before, that she had scarcely courage to 
remain alone. she watch to a late hour, when, no sound have renew 
her fears, she, at length, sunk to repose. but this was of short 
continuance, for she was disturbed by a loud and unusual noise, that 
seem to come from the gallery, into which her chamber opened. groan 
were distinct heard, and, immediately after, a dead weight fell 
against the door, with a violence, that threaten to burst it open. 
she call loud to know who was there, but received no answer, 
though, at intervals, she still thought she heard something like a low 
moaning. fear deprived her of the power to move. soon after, she heard 
footstep in a remote part of the gallery, and, as they approached, she 
call more loud than before, till the steps pause at her door. she 
then distinguished the voice of several of the servants, who seem 
too much engaged by some circumstance without, to attend to her calls; 
but, annette soon after enter the room for water, emily understood, 
that one of the maid had fainted, whom she immediately desire them to 
bring into her room, where she assist to restore her. when this girl 
had recover her speech, she affirmed, that, as she was passing up the 
back staircase, in the way to her chamber, she had seen an apparition 
on the second landing-place; she held the lamp low, she said, that she 
might pick her way, several of the stairs being infirm and even 
decayed, and it was upon raise her eyes, that she saw this 
appearance. it stood for a moment in the corner of the landing-place, 
which she was approaching, and then, gliding up the stairs, vanish at 
the door of the apartment, that had been lately opened. she heard 
afterwards a hollow sound. 

“then the devil has got a key to that apartment,” said dorothée, “for 
it could be nobody but he; i lock the door myself!” 

the girl, spring down the stairs and passing up the great staircase, 
had run, with a faint scream, till she reach the gallery, where she 
fell, groaning, at emily’s door. 

gently chide her for the alarm she had occasioned, emily try to 
make her ashamed of her fears; but the girl persist in saying, that 
she had seen an apparition, till she went to her own room, whither she 
was accompany by all the servant present, except dorothée, who, at 
emily’s request, remain with her during the night. emily was 
perplexed, and dorothée was terrified, and mention many occurrence 
of former times, which had long since confirmed her superstitions; 
among these, according to her belief, she had once witness an 
appearance, like that just described, and on the very same spot, and it 
was the remembrance of it, that had made her pause, when she was go 
to ascend the stairs with emily, and which had increase her reluctance 
to open the north apartments. whatever might be emily’s opinions, she 
did not disclose them, but listen attentive to all that dorothée 
communicated, which occasion her much thought and perplexity. 

from this night the terror of the servant increase to such an excess, 
that several of them determined to leave the château, and request 
their discharge of the count, who, if he had any faith in the subject 
of their alarm, thought proper to dissemble it, and, anxious to avoid 
the inconvenience that threaten him, employ ridicule and then 
argument to convince them they had nothing to apprehend from 
supernatural agency. but fear had render their mind inaccessible to 
reason; and it was now, that ludovico prove at once his courage and 
his gratitude for the kindness he had received from the count, by 
offering to watch, during a night, in the suite of rooms, reputed to be 
haunted. he feared, he said, no spirits, and, if anything of human form 
appeared—he would prove that he dread that as little. 

the count pause upon the offer, while the servants, who heard it, 
look upon one another in doubt and amazement, and annette, terrify 
for the safety of ludovico, employ tear and entreaty to dissuade 
him from his purpose. 

“you are a bold fellow,” said the count, smiling, “think well of what 
you are go to encounter, before you finally determine upon it. 
however, if you persevere in your resolution, i will accept your offer, 
and your intrepid shall not go unrewarded.” 

“i desire no reward, your _excellenza_,” reply ludovico, “but your 
approbation. your _excellenza_ has been sufficient good to me 
already; but i wish to have arms, that i may be equal to my enemy, if 
he should appear.” 

“your sword cannot defend you against a ghost,” reply the count, 
throw a glance of irony upon the other servants, “neither can bars, 
nor bolts; for a spirit, you know, can glide through a keyhole as 
easily as through a door.” 

“give me a sword, my lord count,” said ludovico, “and i will lay all 
the spirits, that shall attack me, in the red sea.” 

“well,” said the count, “you shall have a sword, and good cheer, too; 
and your brave comrade here will, perhaps, have courage enough to 
remain another night in the château, since your bold will 
certainly, for this night, at least, confine all the malice of the 
spectre to yourself.” 

curiosity now struggle with fear in the mind of several of his fellow 
servants, and, at length, they resolve to await the event of 
ludovico’s rashness. 

emily was surprise and concerned, when she heard of his intention, and 
was frequent inclined to mention what she had witness in the north 
apartments to the count, for she could not entire divest herself of 
fear for ludovico’s safety, though her reason represent these to be 
absurd. the necessity, however, of conceal the secret, with which 
dorothée had entrust her, and which must have been mentioned, with 
the late occurrence, in excuse for her have so private visit the 
north apartments, kept her entire silent on the subject of her 
apprehension; and she try only to sooth annette, who held, that 
ludovico was certainly to be destroyed; and who was much less affected 
by emily’s consolatory efforts, than by the manner of old dorothée, who 
often, as she exclaim ludovico, sighed, and threw up her eyes to 
heaven. 



chapter vi 

ye gods of quiet, and of sleep profound! 
whose soft dominion o’er this castle sways, 
and all the widely-silent place round, 
forgive me, if my tremble pen display 
what never yet was sung in mortal lays. 
thomson 


the count gave orders for the north apartments to be open and 
prepared for the reception of ludovico; but dorothée, remember what 
she had lately witness there, fear to obey, and, not one of the 
other servant daring to venture thither, the rooms remain shut up 
till the time when ludovico was to retire thither for the night, an 
hour, for which the whole household wait with impatience. 

after supper, ludovico, by the order of the count, attend him in his 
closet, where they remain alone for near half an hour, and, on 
leave which, his lord deliver to him a sword. 

“it has seen service in mortal quarrels,” said the count, jocosely, 
“you will use it honourably, no doubt, in a spiritual one. tomorrow, 
let me hear that there is not one ghost remain in the château.” 

ludovico received it with a respectful bow. “you shall be obeyed, my 
lord,” said he; “i will engage, that no spectre shall disturb the peace 
of the château after this night.” 

they now return to the supper-room, where the count’s guest await 
to accompany him and ludovico to the door of the north apartments, and 
dorothée, being summon for the keys, deliver them to ludovico, who 
then led the way, follow by most of the inhabitant of the château. 
have reach the back staircase, several of the servant shrunk back, 
and refuse to go further, but the rest follow him to the top of the 
staircase, where a broad landing-place allow them to flock round him, 
while he applied the key to the door, during which they watch him 
with as much eager curiosity as if he had been perform some magical 
rite. 

ludovico, unaccustomed to the lock, could not turn it, and dorothée, 
who had linger far behind, was call forward, under whose hand the 
door open slowly, and, her eye glancing within the dusky chamber, she 
utter a sudden shriek, and retreated. at this signal of alarm, the 
greater part of the crowd hurried down the stairs, and the count, henri 
and ludovico were left alone to pursue the enquiry, who instantly 
rush into the apartment, ludovico with a drawn sword, which he had 
just time to draw from the scabbard, the count with the lamp in his 
hand, and henri carry a basket, contain provisions for the 
courageous adventurer. 

have look hasty round the first room, where nothing appear to 
justify alarm, they pass on to the second; and, here too all being 
quiet, they proceed to a third with a more temper step. the count 
had now leisure to smile at the discomposure, into which he had been 
surprised, and to ask ludovico in which room he design to pass the 
night. 

“there are several chambers beyond these, your _excellenza_,” said 
ludovico, point to a door, “and in one of them is a bed, they say. i 
will pass the night there, and when i am weary of watching, i can lie 
down.” 

“good;” said the count; “let us go on. you see these rooms show 
nothing, but damp wall and decay furniture. i have been so much 
engaged since i came to the château, that i have not look into them 
till now. remember, ludovico, to tell the housekeeper, tomorrow, to 
throw open these windows. the damask hangings are drop to pieces, i 
will have them taken down, and this antique furniture removed.” 

“dear sir!” said henri, “here is an arm-chair so massy with gilding, 
that it resemble one of the state chair at the louvre, more then 
anything else.” 

“yes,” said the count, stopping a moment to survey it, “there is a 
history belong to that chair, but i have not time to tell it.—let us 
pass on. this suite runs to a greater extent than i had imagined; it is 
many years since i was in them. but where is the bedroom you speak of, 
ludovico?—these are only ante-chambers to the great drawing-room. i 
remember them in their splendour!” 

“the bed, my lord,” reply ludovico, “they told me, was in a room that 
open beyond the saloon, and terminate the suite.” 

“o, here is the saloon,” said the count, as they enter the spacious 
apartment, in which emily and dorothée had rested. he here stood for a 
moment, survey the relique of fade grandeur, which it 
exhibited—the sumptuous tapestry—the long and low sopha of velvet, 
with frames heavy carve and gilded—the floor inlaid with small 
square of fine marble, and cover in the centre with a piece of very 
rich tapestry-work—the case of paint glass, and the large 
venetian mirrors, of a size and quality, such as at that period france 
could not make, which reflected, on every side, the spacious apartment. 
these had formerly also reflect a gay and brilliant scene, for this 
had been the state-room of the château, and here the marchioness had 
held the assemblies, that made part of the festivity of her nuptials. 
if the wand of a magician could have recall the vanish groups, many 
of them vanish even from the earth, that once had pass over these 
polish mirrors, what a varied and contrast picture would they have 
exhibit with the present! now, instead of a blaze of lights, and a 
splendid and busy crowd, they reflect only the ray of the one 
glimmer lamp, which the count held up, and which scarcely serve to 
show the three forlorn figures, that stood survey the room, and the 
spacious and dusky wall around them. 

“ah!” said the count to henri, awake from his deep reverie, “how the 
scene is change since last i saw it! i was a young man, then, and the 
marchioness was alive and in her bloom; many other person were here, 
too, who are now no more! there stood the orchestra; here we trip in 
many a sprightly maze—the wall echo to the dance! now, they resound 
only one feeble voice—and even that will, ere long, be heard no more! 
my son, remember, that i was once as young as yourself, and that you 
must pass away like those, who have precede you—like those, who, as 
they sung and dance in this once gay apartment, forgot, that years are 
made up of moments, and that every step they took carry them near 
to their graves. but such reflection are useless, i had almost said 
criminal, unless they teach us to prepare for eternity, since, 
otherwise, they cloud our present happiness, without guide us to a 
future one. but enough of this; let us go on.” 

ludovico now open the door of the bedroom, and the count, as he 
entered, was struck with the funereal appearance which the dark arras 
gave to it. he approach the bed with an emotion of solemnity, and, 
perceive it to be cover with the pall of black velvet, paused; 
“what can this mean?” said he, as he gaze upon it. 

“i have heard, my lord,” said ludovico, as he stood at the feet, 
look within the canopy curtains, “that the lady marchioness de 
villeroi die in this chamber, and remain here till she was remove 
to be buried; and this, perhaps, signor, may account for the pall.” 

the count made no reply, but stood for a few moments engaged in 
thought, and evidently much affected. then, turning to ludovico, he 
ask him with a serious air whether he thought his courage would 
support him through the night? “if you doubt this,” add the count, 
“do not be ashamed to own it; i will release you from your engagement, 
without expose you to the triumph of your fellow-servants.” 

ludovico paused; pride, and something very like fear, seem struggle 
in his breast; pride, however, was victorious;—he blushed, and his 
hesitation ceased. 

“no, my lord,” said he, “i will go through with what i have begun; and 
i am grateful for your consideration. on that hearth i will make a 
fire, and, with the good cheer in this basket, i doubt not i shall do 
well.” 

“be it so,” said the count; “but how will you beguile the tedious 
of the night, if you do not sleep?” 

“when i am weary, my lord,” reply ludovico, “i shall not fear to 
sleep; in the meanwhile, i have a book that will entertain me.” 

“well,” said the count, “i hope nothing will disturb you; but if you 
should be seriously alarm in the night, come to my apartment. i have 
too much confidence in your good sense and courage to believe you will 
be alarm on slight grounds; or suffer the gloom of this chamber, or 
its remote situation, to overcome you with ideal terrors. tomorrow, i 
shall have to thank you for an important service; these rooms shall 
then be thrown open, and my people will be convinced of their error. 
good night, ludovico; let me see you early in the morning, and remember 
what i lately said to you.” 

“i will, my lord; good night to your _excellenza_; let me attend you 
with the light.” 

he light the count and henri through the chambers to the outer door. 
on the landing-place stood a lamp, which one of the affrighte servant 
had left, and henri, as he took it up, again bade ludovico good night, 
who, have respectful return the wish, closed the door upon them, 
and fasten it. then, as he retired to the bed-chamber, he examine 
the rooms through which he passed, with more minute than he had 
done before, for he apprehend that some person might have conceal 
himself in them, for the purpose of frighten him. no one, however, 
but himself, was in these chambers, and leave open the door through 
which he passed, he came again to the great drawing-room, whose 
spacious and silent gloom somewhat awed him. for a moment he stood, 
look back through the long suite of rooms he had quitted, and as he 
turned, perceive a light and his own figure reflect in one of the 
large mirrors, he started. other object too were seen obscure on its 
dark surface, but he pause not to examine them, and return hasty 
into the bedroom, as he survey which, he observe the door of the 
oriel, and open it. all within was still. on look round, his eye 
was arrest by the portrait of the deceased marchioness, upon which he 
gaze for a considerable time with great attention and some surprise; 
and then, have examine the closet, he return into the bedroom, 
where he kindle a wood fire, the bright blaze of which revive his 
spirits, which had begun to yield to the gloom and silence of the 
place, for gust of wind alone broke at interval this silence. he now 
drew a small table and a chair near the fire, took a bottle of wine and 
some cold provision out of his basket, and regale himself. when he had 
finished his repast, he laid his sword upon the table, and, not feeling 
disposed to sleep, drew from his pocket the book he had spoken of.—it 
was a volume of old provençal tales. have stir the fire into a 
bright blaze, he began to read, and his attention was soon wholly 
occupy by the scene which the page disclosed. 

the count, meanwhile, had return to the supper-room, whither those of 
the party who had attend him to the north apartment had retreated, 
upon hearing dorothée’s scream, and who were now earnest in their 
enquiry concerning those chambers. the count rally his guest on 
their precipitate retreat, and on the superstitious inclination which 
had occasion it, and this led to the question, whether the spirit, 
after it has quit the body, is ever permit to revisit the earth; 
and if it is, whether it was possible for spirits to become visible to 
the sense. the baron was of opinion, that the first was probable, and 
the last was possible, and he endeavour to justify this opinion by 
respectable authorities, both ancient and modern, which he quoted. the 
count, however, was decidedly against him, and a long conversation 
ensued, in which the usual argument on these subject were on both 
side brought forward with skill, and discuss with candour, but 
without convert either party to the opinion of his opponent. the 
effect of their conversation on their auditor was various. though the 
count had much the superior of the baron in point of argument, he 
had considerably few adherents; for that love, so natural to the 
human mind, of whatever is able to distend its faculty with wonder 
and astonishment, attach the majority of the company to the side of 
the baron; and, though many of the count’s proposition were 
unanswerable, his opponent were inclined to believe this the 
consequence of their own want of knowledge on so abstracted a subject, 
rather than that argument did not exist which were forcible enough to 
conquer his. 

blanche was pale with attention, till the ridicule in her father’s 
glance call a blush upon her countenance, and she then endeavour to 
forget the superstitious tale she had been told in her convent. 
meanwhile, emily had been listen with deep attention to the 
discussion of what was to her a very interesting question, and, 
remember the appearance she had witness in the apartment of the 
late marchioness, she was frequent chill with awe. several times 
she was on the point of mention what she had seen, but the fear of 
give pain to the count, and the dread of his ridicule, restrained 
her; and, await in anxious expectation the event of ludovico’s 
intrepidity, she determined that her future silence should depend upon 
it. 

when the party had separate for the night, and the count retired to 
his dressing-room, the remembrance of the desolate scene he had lately 
witness in his own mansion deep affected him, but at length he was 
arouse from his reverie and his silence. “what music is that i hear?” 
said he sudden to his valet, “who play at this late hour?” 

the man made no reply, and the count continue to listen, and then 
added, “that is no common musician; he touch the instrument with a 
delicate hand; who is it, pierre?” 

“my lord!” said the man, hesitatingly. 

“who play that instrument?” repeated the count. 

“does not your lordship know, then?” said the valet. 

“what mean you?” said the count, somewhat sternly. 

“nothing, my lord, i meant nothing,” rejoin the man 
submissively—“only—that music—goes about the house at midnight often, 
and i thought your lordship might have heard it before.” 

“music go about the house at midnight! poor fellow!—does nobody dance 
to the music, too?” 

“it is not in the château, i believe, my lord; the sound come from the 
woods, they say, though they seem so near;—but then a spirit can do 
anything!” 

“ah, poor fellow!” said the count, “i perceive you are as silly as the 
rest of them; tomorrow you will be convinced of your ridiculous error. 
but hark!—what voice is that?” 

“o my lord! that is the voice we often hear with the music.” 

“often!” said the count, “how often, pray? it is a very fine one.” 

“why, my lord, i myself have not heard it more than two or three times, 
but there are those who have live here longer, that have heard it 
often enough.” 

“what a swell was that!” exclaim the count, as he still listened, 
“and now, what a die cadence! this is surely something more than 
mortal!” 

“that is what they say, my lord,” said the valet; “they say it is 
nothing mortal, that utter it; and if i might say my thoughts—” 

“peace!” said the count, and he listen till the strain die away. 

“this is strange!” said he, as he turn from the window, “close the 
casements, pierre.” 

pierre obeyed, and the count soon after dismiss him, but did not so 
soon lose the remembrance of the music, which long vibrate in his 
fancy in tone of melting sweetness, while surprise and perplexity 
engaged his thoughts. 

ludovico, meanwhile, in his remote chamber, heard, now and then, the 
faint echo of a close door, as the family retired to rest, and then 
the hall clock, at a great distance, strike twelve. “it is midnight,” 
said he, and he look suspicious round the spacious chamber. the 
fire on the hearth was now nearly expiring, for his attention have 
been engaged by the book before him, he had forgotten everything 
besides; but he soon add fresh wood, not because he was cold, though 
the night was stormy, but because he was cheerless; and, have again 
trim his lamp, he pour out a glass of wine, drew his chair near 
to the crackling blaze, try to be deaf to the wind, that howl 
mournful at the casements, endeavour to abstract his mind from the 
melancholy that was steal upon him, and again took up his book. it 
had been lent to him by dorothée, who had formerly picked it up in an 
obscure corner of the marquis’s library, and who, have open it and 
perceive some of the marvel it related, had careful preserve it 
for her own entertainment, its condition give her some excuse for 
detain it from its proper station. the damp corner into which it had 
fallen had cause the cover to be disfigure and mouldy, and the leaves 
to be so discolour with spots, that it was not without difficulty the 
letters could be traced. the fiction of the provençal writers, whether 
drawn from the arabia legends, brought by the saracen into spain, or 
recount the chivalry exploit perform by the crusaders, whom the 
troubador accompany to the east, were generally splendid and always 
marvellous, both in scenery and incident; and it is not wonderful, that 
dorothée and ludovico should be fascinate by inventions, which had 
captivate the careless imagination in every rank of society, in a 
former age. some of the tales, however, in the book now before 
ludovico, were of simple structure, and exhibit nothing of the 
magnificent machinery and heroic manners, which usually characterise 
the fable of the twelfth century, and of this description was the one 
he now happen to open, which, in its original style, was of great 
length, but which may be thus shortly related. the reader will perceive 
that it is strong tincture with the superstition of the times. 

the provenÇal tale 


“there lived, in the province of bretagne, a noble baron, famous for 
his magnificence and courtly hospitalities. his castle was grace with 
ladies of exquisite beauty, and throng with illustrious knights; for 
the honour he paid to feat of chivalry invite the brave of distant 
country to enter his lists, and his court was more splendid than 
those of many princes. eight minstrel were retain in his service, 
who use to sing to their harp romantic fictions, taken from the 
arabians, or adventure of chivalry, that befel knight during the 
crusades, or the martial deed of the baron, their lord;—while he, 
surround by his knight and ladies, banquet in the great hall of 
his castle, where the costly tapestry, that adorn the wall with 
picture exploit of his ancestors, the case of paint glass, 
enrich with armorial bearings, the gorgeous banners, that wave along 
the roof, the sumptuous canopies, the profusion of gold and silver that 
glitter on the sideboards, the numerous dishes, that cover the 
tables, the number and gay livery of the attendants, with the 
chivalry and splendid attire of the guests, united to form a scene of 
magnificence, such as we may not hope to see in these _degenerate 
days_. 

“of the baron, the following adventure is related. one night, have 
retired late from the banquet to his chamber, and dismiss his 
attendants, he was surprise by the appearance of a stranger of a noble 
air, but of a sorrowful and dejected countenance. believing, that this 
person had been secrete in the apartment, since it appear impossible 
he could have lately pass the ante-room, unobserved by the page in 
waiting, who would have prevent this intrusion on their lord, the 
baron, calling loud for his people, drew his sword, which he had not 
yet taken from his side, and stood upon his defence. the stranger 
slow advancing, told him, that there was nothing to fear; that he 
came with no hostile design, but to communicate to him a terrible 
secret, which it was necessary for him to know. 

“the baron, appease by the courteous manners of the stranger, after 
survey him, for some time, in silence, return his sword into the 
scabbard, and desire him to explain the means, by which he had 
obtain access to the chamber, and the purpose of this extraordinary 
visit. 

“without answer either of these enquiries, the stranger said, that 
he could not then explain himself, but that, if the baron would follow 
him to the edge of the forest, at a short distance from the castle 
walls, he would there convince him, that he had something of importance 
to disclose. 

“this proposal again alarm the baron, who could scarcely believe, 
that the stranger meant to draw him to so solitary a spot, at this hour 
of the night, without harbour a design against his life, and he 
refuse to go, observing, at the same time, that, if the stranger’s 
purpose was an honourable one, he would not persist in refuse to 
reveal the occasion of his visit, in the apartment where they were. 

“while he spoke this, he view the stranger still more attentive 
than before, but observe no change in his countenance, or any symptom, 
that might intimate a consciousness of evil design. he was habit like 
a knight, was of a tall and majestic stature, and of dignified and 
courteous manners. still, however, he refuse to communicate the 
subject of his errand in any place, but that he had mentioned, and, at 
the same time, gave hint concerning the secret he would disclose, that 
awaken a degree of solemn curiosity in the baron, which, at length, 
induce him to consent to follow the stranger on certain conditions. 

“‘sir knight,’ said he, ‘i will attend you to the forest, and will take 
with me only four of my people, who shall witness our conference.’ 

“to this, however, the knight objected. 

“‘what i would disclose,’ said he, with solemnity, ‘is to you alone. 
there are only three living persons, to whom the circumstance is known; 
it is of more consequence to you and your house, than i shall now 
explain. in future years, you will look back to this night with 
satisfaction or repentance, accordingly as you now determine. as you 
would hereafter prosper—follow me; i pledge you the honour of a knight, 
that no evil shall befall you;—if you are contented to dare 
futurity—remain in your chamber, and i will depart as i came.’ 

“‘sir knight,’ reply the baron, ‘how is it possible, that my future 
peace can depend upon my present determination?’ 

“‘that is not now to be told,’ said the stranger, ‘i have explain 
myself to the utmost. it is late; if you follow me it must be 
quickly;—you will do well to consider the alternative.’ 

“the baron mused, and, as he look upon the knight, he perceive his 
countenance assume a singular solemnity.” 

[here ludovico thought he heard a noise, and he threw a glance round 
the chamber, and then held up the lamp to assist his observation; but, 
not perceive anything to confirm his alarm, he took up the book again 
and pursue the story.] 

“the baron pace his apartment, for some time, in silence, impress by 
the last words of the stranger, whose extraordinary request he fear 
to grant, and feared, also, to refuse. at length, he said, ‘sir knight, 
you are utterly unknown to me; tell me yourself,—is it reasonable, that 
i should trust myself alone with a stranger, at this hour, in a 
solitary forest? tell me, at least, who you are, and who assist to 
secrete you in this chamber.’ 

“the knight frown at these latter words, and was a moment silent; 
then, with a countenance somewhat stern, he said, 

“‘i am an english knight; i am call sir bevy of lancaster,—and my 
deed are not unknown at the holy city, whence i was return to my 
native land, when i was benighted in the neighbouring forest.’ 

“‘your name is not unknown to fame,’ said the baron, ‘i have heard of 
it.’ (the knight look haughtily.) ‘but why, since my castle is known 
to entertain all true knights, did not your herald announce you? why 
did you not appear at the banquet, where your presence would have been 
welcomed, instead of hiding yourself in my castle, and steal to my 
chamber, at midnight?’ 

“the stranger frowned, and turn away in silence; but the baron 
repeated the questions. 

“‘i come not,’ said the knight, ‘to answer enquiries, but to reveal 
facts. if you would know more, follow me, and again i pledge the honour 
of a knight that you shall return in safety.—be quick in your 
determination—i must be gone.’ 

“after some further hesitation, the baron determined to follow the 
stranger, and to see the result of his extraordinary request; he, 
therefore, again drew forth his sword, and, taking up a lamp, bade the 
knight lead on. the latter obeyed, and, opening the door of the 
chamber, they pass into the ante-room, where the baron, surprise to 
find all his page asleep, stopped, and, with hasty violence, was go 
to reprimand them for their carelessness, when the knight wave his 
hand, and look so expressive upon the baron, that the latter 
restrained his resentment, and pass on. 

“the knight, have descended a staircase, open a secret door, which 
the baron had believe was known only to himself, and, proceeding 
through several narrow and winding passages, came, at length, to a 
small gate, that open beyond the wall of the castle. meanwhile, the 
baron follow in silence and amazement, on perceive that these 
secret passage were so well known to a stranger, and felt inclined to 
return from an adventure that appear to partake of treachery, as well 
as danger. then, considering that he was armed, and observing the 
courteous and noble air of his conductor, his courage returned, he 
blushed, that it had fail him for a moment, and he resolve to trace 
the mystery to its source. 

“he now found himself on the heathy platform, before the great gate of 
his castle, where, on look up, he perceive lights glimmer in the 
different case of the guests, who were retiring to sleep; and, 
while he shiver in the blast, and look on the dark and desolate 
scene around him, he thought of the comfort of his warm chamber, 
render cheerful by the blaze of wood, and felt, for a moment, the 
full contrast of his present situation.” 

[here ludovico pause a moment, and, look at his own fire, gave it a 
brighten stir.] 

“the wind was strong, and the baron watch his lamp with anxiety, 
expect every moment to see it extinguished; but, though the flame 
wavered, it did not expire, and he still follow the stranger, who 
often sigh as he went, but did not speak. 

“when they reach the border of the forest, the knight turned, and 
raise his head, as if he meant to address the baron, but then, close 
his lip in silence, he walk on. 

“as they enter beneath the dark and spread boughs, the baron, 
affected by the solemnity of the scene, hesitate whether to proceed, 
and demand how much further they were to go. the knight reply only 
by a gesture, and the baron, with hesitate steps and a suspicious 
eye, follow through an obscure and intricate path, till, have 
proceed a considerable way, he again demand whither they were 
going, and refuse to proceed unless he was informed. 

“as he said this, he look at his own sword, and at the knight 
alternately, who shook his head, and whose dejected countenance 
disarm the baron, for a moment, of suspicion. 

“‘a little further is the place, whither i would lead you,’ said the 
stranger; ‘no evil shall befall you—i have sworn it on the honour of a 
knight.’ 

“the baron, reassured, again follow in silence, and they soon arrive 
at a deep recess of the forest, where the dark and lofty chesnut 
entire exclude the sky, and which was so overgrown with underwood, 
that they proceed with difficulty. the knight sigh deep as he 
passed, and sometimes paused; and having, at length, reach a spot, 
where the tree crowded into a knot, he turned, and, with a terrific 
look, point to the ground, the baron saw there the body of a man, 
stretch at its length, and welter in blood; a ghastly wound was on 
the forehead, and death appear already to have contract the 
features. 

“the baron, on perceive the spectacle, start in horror, look at 
the knight for explanation, and was then go to raise the body and 
examine if there were yet any remains of life; but the stranger, wave 
his hand, fixed upon him a look so earnest and mournful, as not only 
much surprise him, but made him desist. 

“but, what were the baron’s emotions, when, on holding the lamp near 
the features of the corpse, he discover the exact resemblance of the 
stranger his conductor, to whom he now look up in astonishment and 
enquiry? as he gazed, he perceive the countenance of the knight 
change, and begin to fade, till his whole form gradual vanish from 
his astonish sense! while the baron stood, fixed to the spot, a voice 
was heard to utter these words:—” 

[ludovico started, and laid down the book, for he thought he heard a 
voice in the chamber, and he look toward the bed, where, however, he 
saw only the dark curtains and the pall. he listened, scarcely daring 
to draw his breath, but heard only the distant roaring of the sea in 
the storm, and the blast, that rush by the casements; when, 
concluding, that he had been deceive by its sighings, he took up his 
book to finish the story.] 

“while the baron stood, fixed to the spot, a voice was heard to utter 
these words:—* 

(*note: this repetition seem to be intentional. ludovico is pick up 
the thread.) 


“the body of sir bevy of lancaster, a noble knight of england, lie 
before you. he was, this night, waylaid and murdered, as he journey 
from the holy city towards his native land. respect the honour of 
knighthood and the law of humanity; inter the body in christian ground, 
and cause his murder to be punished. as ye observe, or neglect this, 
shall peace and happiness, or war and misery, light upon you and your 
house for ever!” 

“the baron, when he recover from the awe and astonishment, into which 
this adventure had thrown him, return to his castle, whither he 
cause the body of sir bevy to be removed; and, on the following day, 
it was interred, with the honours of knighthood, in the chapel of the 
castle, attend by all the noble knight and ladies, who grace the 
court of baron de brunne.” 



ludovico, have finished this story, laid aside the book, for he felt 
drowsy, and, after putt more wood on the fire and taking another 
glass of wine, he repose himself in the arm-chair on the hearth. in 
his dream he still beheld the chamber where he really was, and, once or 
twice, start from imperfect slumbers, imagine he saw a man’s face, 
look over the high back of his arm-chair. this idea had so strong 
impress him, that, when he raise his eyes, he almost expect to 
meet other eyes, fixed upon his own, and he quit his seat and look 
behind the chair, before he felt perfectly convinced, that no person 
was there. 

thus closed the hour. 



chapter vii 

enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber; 
thou hast no figures, nor no fantasies, 
which busy care draw in the brains of men; 
therefore thou sleep’st so sound. 
shakespeare 


the count, who had slept little during the night, rose early, and, 
anxious to speak with ludovico, went to the north apartment; but, the 
outer door have been fastened, on the preceding night, he was oblige 
to knock loud for admittance. neither the knocking, nor his voice was 
heard; but, considering the distance of this door from the bedroom, and 
that ludovico, weary with watching, had probably fallen into a deep 
sleep, the count was not surprise on receiving no answer, and, leave 
the door, he went down to walk in his grounds. 

it was a grey autumnal morning. the sun, rising over provence, gave 
only a feeble light, as his ray struggle through the vapours that 
ascend from the sea, and float heavy over the wood-tops, which 
were now varied with many a mellow tint of autumn. the storm was 
passed, but the wave were yet violent agitated, and their course was 
trace by long lines of foam, while not a breeze flutter in the sail 
of the vessels, near the shore, that were weigh anchor to depart. 
the still gloom of the hour was pleasing to the count, and he pursue 
his way through the woods, sunk in deep thought. 

emily also rose at an early hour, and took her customary walk along the 
brow of the promontory, that overhung the mediterranean. her mind was 
now not occupy with the occurrence of the château, and valancourt 
was the subject of her mournful thoughts; whom she had not yet taught 
herself to consider with indifference, though her judgment constant 
reproach her for the affection, that linger in her heart, after her 
esteem for him was departed. remembrance frequent gave her his 
parting look and the tone of his voice, when he had bade her a last 
farewell; and, some accidental association now recall these 
circumstances to her fancy, with peculiar energy, she shed bitter tear 
to the recollection. 

have reach the watch-tower, she seat herself on the broken steps, 
and, in melancholy dejection, watch the waves, half hid in vapour, as 
they came rolling towards the shore, and threw up their light spray 
round the rocks below. their hollow murmur and the obscure mists, 
that came in wreath up the cliffs, gave a solemnity to the scene, 
which was in harmony with the temper of her mind, and she sat, given up 
to the remembrance of past times, till this became too painful, and she 
abrupt quit the place. on passing the little gate of the 
watch-tower, she observe letters, engrave on the stone postern, which 
she pause to examine, and, though they appear to have been rudely 
cut with a pen-knife, the character were familiar to her; at length, 
recognise the hand-writing of valancourt, she read, with tremble 
anxiety the following lines, entitle 

shipwreck 

’til solemn midnight! on this lonely steep, 
beneath this watch-tow’r’s desolate wall, 
where mystic shape the wonder appall, 
i rest; and view below the desert deep, 
as through tempestuous cloud the moon’s cold light 
gleam on the wave. viewless, the wind of night 
with loud mysterious force the billow sweep, 
and sullen roar the surges, far below. 
in the still pause of the gust i hear 
the voice of spirits, rising sweet and slow, 
and oft among the cloud their form appear. 
but hark! what shriek of death come in the gale, 
and in the distant ray what glimmer sail 
bends to the storm?—now sink the note of fear! 
ah! wretched mariners!—no more shall day 
unclose his cheering eye to light ye on your way! 


from these lines it appeared, that valancourt had visit the tower; 
that he had probably been here on the preceding night, for it was such 
a one as they described, and that he had left the building very lately, 
since it had not long been light, and without light it was impossible 
these letters could have been cut. it was thus even probable, that he 
might be yet in the gardens. 

as these reflection pass rapid over the mind of emily, they call 
up a variety of contend emotions, that almost overcame her spirits; 
but her first impulse was to avoid him, and, immediately leave the 
tower, she returned, with hasty steps, towards the château. as she 
pass along, she remember the music she had lately heard near the 
tower, with the figure, which had appeared, and, in this moment of 
agitation, she was inclined to believe, that she had then heard and 
seen valancourt; but other recollection soon convinced her of her 
error. on turning into a thick part of the woods, she perceive a 
person, walking slow in the gloom at some little distance, and, her 
mind engaged by the idea of him, she start and paused, imagine this 
to be valancourt. the person advanced with quick steps, and, before 
she could recover recollection enough to avoid him, he spoke, and she 
then knew the voice of the count, who express some surprise, on 
finding her walking at so early an hour, and made a feeble effort to 
rally her on her love of solitude. but he soon perceive this to be 
more a subject of concern than of light laughter, and, change his 
manner, affectionate expostulate with emily, on thus indulge 
unavailing regret; who, though she acknowledge the just of all he 
said, could not restrain her tears, while she did so, and he presently 
quit the topic. express surprise at not have yet heard from his 
friend, the advocate at avignon, in answer to the question propose to 
him, respecting the estate of the late madame montoni, he, with 
friendly zeal, endeavour to cheer emily with hope of establish 
her claim to them; while she felt, that the estate could now 
contribute little to the happiness of a life, in which valancourt had 
no long an interest. 

when they return to the château, emily retired to her apartment, and 
count de villefort to the door of the north chambers. this was still 
fastened, but, being now determined to arouse ludovico, he renew his 
call more loud than before, after which a total silence ensued, and 
the count, finding all his effort to be heard ineffectual, at length 
began to fear, that some accident had befallen ludovico, whom terror of 
an imaginary being might have deprived of his senses. he, therefore, 
left the door with an intention of summon his servant to force it 
open, some of whom he now heard moving in the lower part of the 
château. 

to the count’s enquiries, whether they had seen or heard ludovico, they 
reply in affright, that not one of them had venture on the north 
side of the château, since the preceding night. 

“he sleep sound then,” said the count, “and is at such a distance 
from the outer door, which is fastened, that to gain admittance to the 
chambers it will be necessary to force it. bring an instrument, and 
follow me.” 

the servant stood mute and dejected, and it was not till nearly all 
the household were assembled, that the count’s orders were obeyed. in 
the mean time, dorothée was telling of a door, that open from a 
gallery, leading from the great staircase into the last ante-room of 
the saloon, and, this being much near to the bed-chamber, it appear 
probable, that ludovico might be easily awaken by an attempt to open 
it. thither, therefore, the count went, but his voice was as 
ineffectual at this door as it had prove at the remote one; and now, 
seriously interested for ludovico, he was himself go to strike upon 
the door with the instrument, when he observe its singular beauty, and 
withheld the blow. it appeared, on the first glance, to be of ebony, so 
dark and close was its grain and so high its polish; but it prove to 
be only of larch wood, of the growth of provence, then famous for its 
forest of larch. the beauty of its polish hue and of its delicate 
carving determined the count to spare this door, and he return to 
that leading from the back staircase, which being, at length, forced, 
he enter the first ante-room, follow by henri and a few of the most 
courageous of his servants, the rest await the event of the enquiry 
on the stairs and landing-place. 

all was silent in the chambers, through which the count passed, and, 
have reach the saloon, he call loud upon ludovico; after which, 
still receiving no answer, he threw open the door of the bedroom, and 
entered. 

the profound still within confirmed his apprehension for ludovico, 
for not even the breathing of a person in sleep were heard; and his 
uncertainty was not soon terminated, since the shutter being all 
closed, the chamber was too dark for any object to be distinguished in 
it. 

the count bade a servant open them, who, as he cross the room to do 
so, stumble over something, and fell to the floor, when his cry 
occasion such panic among the few of his fellows, who had venture 
thus far, that they instantly fled, and the count and henri were left 
to finish the adventure. 

henri then sprung across the room, and, opening a window-shutter, they 
perceived, that the man had fallen over a chair near the hearth, in 
which ludovico had been sitting;—for he sat there no longer, nor could 
anywhere be seen by the imperfect light, that was admitted into the 
apartment. the count, seriously alarmed, now open other shutters, 
that he might be enable to examine further, and, ludovico not yet 
appearing, he stood for a moment, suspend in astonishment and 
scarcely trust his senses, till, his eyes glancing on the bed, he 
advanced to examine whether he was there asleep. no person, however, 
was in it, and he proceed to the oriel, where everything remain as 
on the preceding night, but ludovico was nowhere to be found. 

the count now checked his amazement, considering that ludovico might 
have left the chambers, during the night, overcome by the terrors, 
which their lonely desolate and the recollect reports, concerning 
them, had inspired. yet, if this had been the fact, the man would 
naturally have sought society, and his fellow servant had all declared 
they had not seen him; the door of the outer room also had been found 
fastened, with the key on the inside; it was impossible, therefore, for 
him to have pass through that, and all the outer door of this suite 
were found, on examination, to be bolt and locked, with the key also 
within them. the count, being then compel to believe, that the lad 
had escape through the casements, next examine them, but such as 
open wide enough to admit the body of a man were found to be 
careful secure either by iron bars, or by shutters, and no vestige 
appear of any person have attempt to pass them; neither was it 
probable, that ludovico would have incur the risk of break his 
neck, by leap from a window, when he might have walk safe 
through a door. 

the count’s amaze did not admit of words; but he return once more 
to examine the bedroom, where was no appearance of disorder, except 
that occasion by the late overthrow of the chair, near which had 
stood a small table, and on this ludovico’s sword, his lamp, the book 
he had been reading, and the remnant of his flask of wine still 
remained. at the foot of the table, too, was the basket with some 
fragment of provision and wood. 

henri and the servant now utter their astonishment without reserve, 
and, though the count said little, there was a serious in his 
manner, that express much. it appeared, that ludovico must have 
quit these rooms by some conceal passage, for the count could not 
believe, that any supernatural means had occasion this event, yet, if 
there was any such passage, it seem inexplicable why he should 
retreat through it, and it was equally surprising, that not even the 
smallest vestige should appear, by which his progress could be traced. 
in the rooms everything remain as much in order as if he had just 
walk out by the common way. 

the count himself assist in lift the arras, with which the 
bed-chamber, saloon and one of the ante-rooms were hung, that he might 
discover if any door had been conceal behind it; but, after a 
laborious search, none was found, and he, at length, quit the 
apartments, have secure the door of the last ante-chamber, the key 
of which he took into his own possession. he then gave orders, that 
strict search should be made for ludovico not only in the château, but 
in the neighbourhood, and, retiring with henri to his closet, they 
remain there in conversation for a considerable time, and whatever 
was the subject of it, henri from this hour lost much of his vivacity, 
and his manners were particularly grave and reserved, whenever the 
topic, which now agitate the count’s family with wonder and alarm, was 
introduced. 

on the disappear of ludovico, baron st. foix seem strengthen in 
all his former opinion concerning the probability of apparitions, 
though it was difficult to discover what connection there could 
possibly be between the two subjects, or to account for this effect 
otherwise than by supposing, that the mystery attend ludovico, by 
exciting awe and curiosity, reduce the mind to a state of sensibility, 
which render it more liable to the influence of superstition in 
general. it is, however, certain, that from this period the baron and 
his adherent became more bigoted to their own system than before, 
while the terror of the count’s servant increase to an excess, that 
occasion many of them to quit the mansion immediately, and the rest 
remain only till other could be procure to supply their places. 

the most strenuous search after ludovico prove unsuccessful, and, 
after several days of indefatigable enquiry, poor annette gave herself 
up to despair, and the other inhabitant of the château to amazement. 

emily, whose mind had been deep affected by the disastrous fate of 
the late marchioness and with the mysterious connection, which she 
fancy had exist between her and st. aubert, was particularly 
impress by the late extraordinary event, and much concerned for the 
loss of ludovico, whose integrity and faithful service claim both 
her esteem and gratitude. she was now very desirous to return to the 
quiet retirement of her convent, but every hint of this was received 
with real sorrow by the lady blanche, and affectionate set aside by 
the count, for whom she felt much of the respectful love and admiration 
of a daughter, and to whom, by dorothée’s consent, she, at length, 
mention the appearance, which they had witness in the chamber of 
the deceased marchioness. at any other period, he would have smile at 
such a relation, and have believed, that its object had exist only in 
the distempered fancy of the relater; but he now attend to emily with 
seriousness, and, when she concluded, request of her a promise, that 
this occurrence should rest in silence. “whatever may be the cause and 
the import of these extraordinary occurrences,” add the count, “time 
only can explain them. i shall keep a wary eye upon all that pass in 
the château, and shall pursue every possible means of discover the 
fate of ludovico. meanwhile, we must be prudent and be silent. i will 
myself watch in the north chambers, but of this we will say nothing, 
till the night arrives, when i purpose do so.” 

the count then sent for dorothée, and require of her also a promise of 
silence, concerning what she had already, or might in future witness of 
an extraordinary nature; and this ancient servant now related to him 
the particulars of the marchioness de villeroi’s death, with some of 
which he appear to be already acquainted, while by other he was 
evidently surprise and agitated. after listen to this narrative, 
the count retired to his closet, where he remain alone for several 
hours; and, when he again appeared, the solemnity of his manner 
surprise and alarm emily, but she gave no utterance to her thoughts. 

on the week following the disappearance of ludovico, all the count’s 
guest took leave of him, except the baron, his son mons. st. foix, and 
emily; the latter of whom was soon after embarrass and distress by 
the arrival of another visitor, mons. du pont, which made her determine 
upon withdraw to her convent immediately. the delight, that appear 
in his countenance, when he met her, told that he brought back the same 
ardour of passion, which had formerly banish him from 
château-le-blanc. he was received with reserve by emily, and with 
pleasure by the count, who present him to her with a smile, that 
seem intended to plead his cause, and who did not hope the less for 
his friend, from the embarrassment she betrayed. 

but m. du pont, with true sympathy, seem to understand her manner, 
and his countenance quick lost its vivacity, and sunk into the 
languor of despondency. 

on the following day, however, he sought an opportunity of declare 
the purport of his visit, and renew his suit; a declaration, which 
was received with real concern by emily, who endeavour to lessen the 
pain she might inflict by a second rejection, with assurance of esteem 
and friendship; yet she left him in a state of mind, that claim and 
excited her tenderest compassion; and, being more sensible than ever of 
the impropriety of remain long at the château, she immediately 
sought the count, and communicate to him her intention of return to 
the convent. 

“my dear emily,” said he, “i observe with extreme concern, the illusion 
you are encouraging—an illusion common to young and sensible minds. 
your heart has received a severe shock; you believe you can never 
entire recover it, and you will encourage this belief, till the habit 
of indulge sorrow will subdue the strength of your mind, and 
discolour your future view with melancholy and regret. let me 
dissipate this illusion, and awaken you to a sense of your danger.” 

emily smile mournfully, “i know what you would say, my dear sir,” said 
she, “and am prepared to answer you. i feel, that my heart can never 
know a second affection; and that i must never hope even to recover its 
tranquillity—if i suffer myself to enter into a second engagement.” 

“i know, that you feel all this,” reply the count; “and i know, also, 
that time will overcome these feelings, unless you cherish them in 
solitude, and, pardon me, with romantic tenderness. then, indeed, time 
will only confirm habit. i am particularly empower to speak on this 
subject, and to sympathise in your sufferings,” add the count, with 
an air of solemnity, “for i have known what it is to love, and to 
lament the object of my love. yes,” continue he, while his eyes fill 
with tears, “i have suffered!—but those times have pass away—long 
passed! and i can now look back upon them without emotion.” 

“my dear sir,” said emily, timidly, “what mean those tears?—they speak, 
i fear, another language—they plead for me.” 

“they are weak tears, for they are useless ones,” reply the count, 
dry them, “i would have you superior to such weakness. these, 
however, are only faint trace of a grief, which, if it had not been 
oppose by long continue effort, might have led me to the verge of 
madness! judge, then, whether i have not cause to warn you of an 
indulgence, which may produce so terrible an effect, and which must 
certainly, if not opposed, overcloud the years, that otherwise might be 
happy. m. du pont is a sensible and amiable man, who has long been 
tender attach to you; his family and fortune are 
unexceptionable;—after what i have said, it is unnecessary to add, that 
i should rejoice in your felicity, and that i think m. du pont would 
promote it. do not weep, emily,” continue the count, taking her hand, 
“there _is_ happiness reserved for you.” 

he was silent a moment; and then added, in a firm voice, “i do not 
wish, that you should make a violent effort to overcome your feelings; 
all i, at present, ask, is, that you will check the thoughts, that 
would lead you to a remembrance of the past; that you will suffer your 
mind to be engaged by present objects; that you will allow yourself to 
believe it possible you may yet be happy; and that you will sometimes 
think with complacency of poor du pont, and not condemn him to the 
state of despondency, from which, my dear emily, i am endeavour to 
withdraw you.” 

“ah! my dear sir,” said emily, while her tear still fell, “do not 
suffer the benevolence of your wish to mislead mons. du pont with an 
expectation that i can ever accept his hand. if i understand my own 
heart, this never can be; your instruction i can obey in almost every 
other particular, than that of adopt a contrary belief.” 

“leave me to understand your heart,” reply the count, with a faint 
smile. “if you pay me the compliment to be guide by my advice in other 
instances, i will pardon your incredulity, respecting your future 
conduct towards mons. du pont. i will not even press you to remain 
long at the château than your own satisfaction will permit; but 
though i forbear to oppose your present retirement, i shall urge the 
claim of friendship for your future visits.” 

tear of gratitude mingle with those of tender regret, while emily 
thank the count for the many instance of friendship she had received 
from him; promise to be direct by his advice upon every subject but 
one, and assured him of the pleasure, with which she should, at some 
future period, accept the invitation of the countess and himself—if 
mons. du pont was not at the château. 

the count smile at this condition. “be it so,” said he, “meanwhile the 
convent is so near the château, that my daughter and i shall often 
visit you; and if, sometimes, we should dare to bring you another 
visitor—will you forgive us?” 

emily look distressed, and remain silent. 

“well,” rejoin the count, “i will pursue this subject no further, and 
must now entreat your forgiveness for have pressed it thus far. you 
will, however, do me the justice to believe, that i have been urge 
only by a sincere regard for your happiness, and that of my amiable 
friend mons. du pont.” 

emily, when she left the count, went to mention her intended departure 
to the countess, who oppose it with polite expression of regret; 
after which, she sent a note to acquaint the lady abbess, that she 
should return to the convent; and thither she withdrew on the evening 
of the following day. m. du pont, in extreme regret, saw her depart, 
while the count endeavour to cheer him with a hope, that emily would 
sometimes regard him with a more favourable eye. 

she was pleased to find herself once more in the tranquil retirement of 
the convent, where she experienced a renewal of all the maternal 
kindness of the abbess, and of the sisterly attention of the nuns. a 
report of the late extraordinary occurrence at the château had already 
reach them, and, after supper, on the evening of her arrival, it was 
the subject of conversation in the convent parlour, where she was 
request to mention some particulars of that unaccountable event. 
emily was guarded in her conversation on this subject, and brief 
related a few circumstances concerning ludovico, whose disappearance, 
her auditor almost unanimous agreed, had been effect by 
supernatural means. 

“a belief had so long prevailed,” said a nun, who was call sister 
frances, “that the château was haunted, that i was surprised, when i 
heard the count had the temerity to inhabit it. its former possessor, i 
fear, had some deed of conscience to atone for; let us hope, that the 
virtue of its present owner will preserve him from the punishment due 
to the error of the last, if, indeed, he was a criminal.” 

“of what crime, then, was he suspected?” said a mademoiselle feydeau, a 
boarder at the convent. 

“let us pray for his soul!” said a nun, who had till now sat in silent 
attention. “if he was criminal, his punishment in this world was 
sufficient.” 

there was a mixture of wild and solemnity in her manner of 
deliver this, which struck emily exceedingly; but mademoiselle 
repeated her question, without notice the solemn eager of the 
nun. 

“i dare not presume to say what was his crime,” reply sister frances; 
“but i have heard many report of an extraordinary nature, respecting 
the late marquis de villeroi, and among others, that, soon after the 
death of his lady, he quit château-le-blanc, and never afterwards 
return to it. i was not here at the time, so i can only mention it 
from report, and so many years have pass since the marchioness died, 
that few of our sisterhood, i believe, can do more.” 

“but i can,” said the nun, who had before spoke, and whom they call 
sister agnes. 

“you then,” said mademoiselle feydeau, “are possibly acquaint with 
circumstances, that enable you to judge, whether he was criminal or 
not, and what was the crime impute to him.” 

“i am,” reply the nun; “but who shall dare to scrutinize my 
thoughts—who shall dare to pluck out my opinion? god only is his judge, 
and to that judge he is gone!” 

emily look with surprise at sister frances, who return her a 
significant glance. 

“i only request your opinion,” said mademoiselle feydeau, mildly; “if 
the subject is displease to you, i will drop it.” 

“displeasing!”—said the nun, with emphasis.—“we are idle talkers; we do 
not weigh the meaning of the words we use; _displeasing_ is a poor 
word. i will go pray.” as she said this she rose from her seat, and 
with a profound sigh quit the room. 

“what can be the meaning of this?” said emily, when she was gone. 

“it is nothing extraordinary,” reply sister frances, “she is often 
thus; but she had no meaning in what she says. her intellect are at 
times deranged. did you never see her thus before?” 

“never,” said emily. “i have, indeed, sometimes, thought, that there 
was the melancholy of madness in her look, but never before perceive 
it in her speech. poor soul, i will pray for her!” 

“your prayer then, my daughter, will unite with ours,” observe the 
lady abbess, “she has need of them.” 

“dear lady,” said mademoiselle feydeau, address the abbess, “what is 
your opinion of the late marquis? the strange circumstances, that have 
occur at the château, have so much awaken my curiosity, that i 
shall be pardon the question. what was his impute crime, and what 
the punishment, to which sister agnes alluded?” 

“we must be cautious of advance our opinion,” said the abbess, with 
an air of reserve, mingle with solemnity, “we must be cautious of 
advance our opinion on so delicate a subject. i will not take upon me 
to pronounce, that the late marquis was criminal, or to say what was 
the crime of which he was suspected; but, concerning the punishment our 
daughter agnes hinted, i know of none he suffered. she probably allude 
to the severe one, which an exasperate conscience can inflict. beware, 
my children, of incur so terrible a punishment—it is the purgatory 
of this life! the late marchioness i knew well; she was a pattern to 
such as live in the world; nay, our sacred order need not have blush 
to copy her virtues! our holy convent received her mortal part; her 
heavenly spirit, i doubt not, ascend to its sanctuary!” 

as the abbess spoke this, the last bell of vespers struck up, and she 
rose. “let us go, my children,” said she, “and intercede for the 
wretched; let us go and confess our sins, and endeavour to purify our 
soul for the heaven, to which _she_ is gone!” 

emily was affected by the solemnity of this exhortation, and, 
remember her father, “the heaven, to which _he_, too, is gone!” said 
she, faintly, as she suppress her sighs, and follow the abbess and 
the nun to the chapel. 



chapter viii 

be thou a spirit of health, or goblin damn’d, 
bring with thee airs from heaven, or blast from hell, 
be thy intent wicked, or charitable, 

i will speak to thee. 
hamlet 


count de villefort, at length, received a letter from the advocate at 
avignon, encourage emily to assert her claim to the estate of the 
late madame montoni; and, about the same time, a messenger arrive from 
monsieur quesnel with intelligence, that made an appeal to the law on 
this subject unnecessary, since it appeared, that the only person, who 
could have oppose her claim, was now no more. a friend of monsieur 
quesnel, who reside at venice, had sent him an account of the death of 
montoni who had been brought to trial with orsino, as his supposed 
accomplice in the murder of the venetian nobleman. orsino was found 
guilty, condemn and execute upon the wheel, but, nothing being 
discover to criminate montoni, and his colleagues, on this charge, 
they were all released, except montoni, who, being considered by the 
senate as a very dangerous person, was, for other reasons, ordered 
again into confinement, where, it was said, he had die in a doubtful 
and mysterious manner, and not without suspicion of have been 
poisoned. the authority, from which m. quesnel had received this 
information, would not allow him to doubt its truth, and he told emily, 
that she had now only to lay claim to the estate of her late aunt, to 
secure them, and added, that he would himself assist in the necessary 
form of this business. the term, for which la vallée had been let 
being now also nearly expired, he acquaint her with the circumstance, 
and advise her to take the road thither, through thoulouse, where he 
promise to meet her, and where it would be proper for her to take 
possession of the estate of the late madame montoni; adding, that he 
would spare her any difficulties, that might occur on that occasion 
from the want of knowledge on the subject, and that he believe it 
would be necessary for her to be at thoulouse, in about three week 
from the present time. 

an increase of fortune seem to have awaken this sudden kindness in 
m. quesnel towards his niece, and it appeared, that he entertain more 
respect for the rich heiress, than he had ever felt compassion for the 
poor and unfriended orphan. 

the pleasure, with which she received this intelligence, was cloud 
when she considered, that he, for whose sake she had once regret the 
want of fortune, was no long worthy of share it with her; but, 
remember the friendly admonition of the count, she checked this 
melancholy reflection, and endeavour to feel only gratitude for the 
unexpected good, that now attend her; while it form no 
inconsiderable part of her satisfaction to know, that la vallée, her 
native home, which was endear to her by it’s have been the 
residence of her parents, would soon be restore to her possession. 
there she meant to fix her future residence, for, though it could not 
be compare with the château at thoulouse, either for extent, or 
magnificence, its pleasant scene and the tender remembrances, that 
haunt them, had claim upon her heart, which she was not inclined to 
sacrifice to ostentation. she wrote immediately to thank m. quesnel for 
the active interest he took in her concerns, and to say, that she would 
meet him at thoulouse at the appoint time. 

when count de villefort, with blanche, came to the convent to give 
emily the advice of the advocate, he was informed of the contents of m. 
quesnel’s letter, and gave her his sincere congratulations, on the 
occasion; but she observed, that, when the first expression of 
satisfaction had fade from his countenance, an unusual gravity 
succeeded, and she scarcely hesitate to enquire its cause. 

“it has no new occasion,” reply the count; “i am harass and 
perplexed by the confusion, into which my family is thrown by their 
foolish superstition. idle report are floating round me, which i can 
neither admit to be true, nor prove to be false; and i am, also, very 
anxious about the poor fellow, ludovico, concerning whom i have not 
been able to obtain information. every part of the château and every 
part of the neighbourhood, too, has, i believe, been searched, and i 
know not what further can be done, since i have already offer large 
rewards for the discovery of him. the key of the north apartment i 
have not suffer to be out of my possession, since he disappeared, and 
i mean to watch in those chambers, myself, this very night.” 

emily, seriously alarm for the count, united her entreaty with 
those of the lady blanche, to dissuade him from his purpose. 

“what should i fear?” said he. “i have no faith in supernatural 
combats, and for human opposition i shall be prepared; nay, i will even 
promise not to watch alone.” 

“but who, dear sir, will have courage enough to watch with you?” said 
emily. 

“my son,” reply the count. “if i am not carry off in the night,” 
add he, smiling, “you shall hear the result of my adventure, 
tomorrow.” 

the count and lady blanche, shortly afterwards, took leave of emily, 
and return to the château, where he informed henri of his intention, 
who, not without some secret reluctance, consent to be the partner of 
his watch; and, when the design was mention after supper, the 
countess was terrified, and the baron, and m. du pont join with her 
in entreating, that he would not tempt his fate, as ludovico had done. 
“we know not,” add the baron, “the nature, or the power of an evil 
spirit; and that such a spirit haunt those chambers can now, i think, 
scarcely be doubted. beware, my lord, how you provoke its vengeance, 
since it has already given us one terrible example of its malice. i 
allow it may be probable, that the spirits of the dead are permit to 
return to the earth only on occasion of high import; but the present 
import may be your destruction.” 

the count could not forbear smiling; “do you think then, baron,” said 
he, “that my destruction is of sufficient importance to draw back to 
earth the soul of the departed? alas! my good friend, there is no 
occasion for such means to accomplish the destruction of any 
individual. wherever the mystery rests, i trust i shall, this night, be 
able to detect it. you know i am not superstitious.” 

“i know that you are incredulous,” interrupt the baron. 

“well, call it what you will, i mean to say, that, though you know i am 
free from superstition—if anything supernatural has appeared, i doubt 
not it will appear to me, and if any strange event hang over my house, 
or if any extraordinary transaction has formerly been connected with 
it, i shall probably be made acquaint with it. at all event i will 
invite discovery; and, that i may be equal to a mortal attack, which in 
good truth, my friend, is what i most expect, i shall take care to be 
well armed.” 

the count took leave of his family, for the night, with an assume 
gaiety, which but ill conceal the anxiety, that depressed his 
spirits, and retired to the north apartments, accompany by his son 
and follow by the baron, m. du pont and some of the domestics, who 
all bade him good night at the outer door. in these chambers everything 
appear as when he had last been here; even in the bedroom no 
alteration was visible, where he light his own fire, for none of the 
domestic could be prevail upon to venture thither. after careful 
examine the chamber and the oriel, the count and henri drew their 
chair upon the hearth, set a bottle of wine and a lamp before them, 
laid their sword upon the table, and, stirring the wood into a blaze, 
began to converse on indifferent topics. but henri was often silent and 
abstracted, and sometimes threw a glance of mingle awe and curiosity 
round the gloomy apartment; while the count gradual cease to 
converse, and sat either lost in thought, or reading a volume of 
tacitus, which he had brought to beguile the tedious of the night. 



chapter ix 

give thy thought no tongue. 
shakespeare 


the baron st. foix, whom anxiety for his friend had kept awake, rose 
early to enquire the event of the night, when, as he pass the count’s 
closet, hearing steps within, he knock at the door, and it was open 
by his friend himself. rejoicing to see him in safety, and curious to 
learn the occurrence of the night, he had not immediately leisure to 
observe the unusual gravity, that overspread the features of the count, 
whose reserved answer first occasion him to notice it. the count, 
then smiling, endeavour to treat the subject of his curiosity with 
levity, but the baron was serious, and pursue his enquiry so 
closely, that the count, at length, resume his gravity, said, “well, 
my friend, press the subject no further, i entreat you; and let me 
request also, that you will hereafter be silent upon anything you may 
think extraordinary in my future conduct. i do not scruple to tell you, 
that i am unhappy, and that the watch of the last night has not 
assist me to discover ludovico; upon every occurrence of the night 
you must excuse my reserve.” 

“but where is henri?” said the baron, with surprise and disappointment 
at this denial. 

“he is well in his own apartment,” reply the count. “you will not 
question him on this topic, my friend, since you know my wish.” 

“certainly not,” said the baron, somewhat chagrined, “since it would be 
displease to you; but methinks, my friend, you might rely on my 
discretion, and drop this unusual reserve. however, you must allow me 
to suspect, that you have seen reason to become a convert to my system, 
and are no long the incredulous knight you lately appear to be.” 

“let us talk no more upon this subject,” said the count; “you may be 
assured, that no ordinary circumstance has impose this silence upon me 
towards a friend, whom i have call so for near thirty years; and my 
present reserve cannot make you question either my esteem, or the 
sincerity of my friendship.” 

“i will not doubt either,” said the baron, “though you must allow me to 
express my surprise, at this silence.” 

“to me i will allow it,” reply the count, “but i earnest entreat 
that you will forbear to notice it to my family, as well as everything 
remarkable you may observe in my conduct towards them.” 

the baron readily promise this, and, after converse for some time on 
general topics, they descended to the breakfast-room, where the count 
met his family with a cheerful countenance, and evade their enquiry 
by employ light ridicule, and assume an air of uncommon gaiety, 
while he assured them, that they need not apprehend any evil from the 
north chambers, since henri and himself had been permit to return 
from them in safety. 

henri, however, was less successful in disguise his feelings. from 
his countenance an expression of terror was not entire faded; he was 
often silent and thoughtful, and when he attempt to laugh at the 
eager enquiry of mademoiselle bearn, it was evidently only an 
attempt. 

in the evening, the count called, as he had promised, at the convent, 
and emily was surprise to perceive a mixture of playful ridicule and 
of reserve in his mention of the north apartment. of what had occur 
there, however, he said nothing, and, when she venture to remind him 
of his promise to tell her the result of his enquiries, and to ask if 
he had received any proof, that those chambers were haunted, his look 
became solemn, for a moment, then, seeming to recollect himself, he 
smiled, and said, “my dear emily, do not suffer my lady abbess to 
infect your good understanding with these fancies; she will teach you 
to expect a ghost in every dark room. but believe me,” add he, with a 
profound sigh, “the apparition of the dead come not on light, or 
sportive errands, to terrify, or to surprise the timid.” he paused, and 
fell into a momentary thoughtfulness, and then added, “we will say no 
more on this subject.” 

soon after, he took leave, and, when emily join some of the nuns, she 
was surprise to find them acquaint with a circumstance, which she 
had careful avoid to mention, and express their admiration of 
his intrepid in have dare to pass a night in the apartment, 
whence ludovico had disappeared; for she had not considered with what 
rapid a tale of wonder circulates. the nun had acquire their 
information from peasants, who brought fruit to the monastery, and 
whose whole attention had been fixed, since the disappearance of 
ludovico, on what was passing in the castle. 

emily listen in silence to the various opinion of the nuns, 
concerning the conduct of the count, most of whom condemn it as rash 
and presumptuous, affirming, that it was provoking the vengeance of an 
evil spirit, thus to intrude upon its haunts. 

sister frances contended, that the count had act with the bravery of 
a virtuous mind. he knew himself guiltless of aught, that should 
provoke a good spirit, and did not fear the spell of an evil one, 
since he could claim the protection of a higher power, of him, who can 
command the wicked, and will protect the innocent. 

“the guilty cannot claim that protection!” said sister agnes, “let the 
count look to his conduct, that he do not forfeit his claim! yet who is 
he, that shall dare to call himself innocent!—all earthly innocence is 
but comparative. yet still how wide asunder are the extreme of guilt, 
and to what a horrible depth may we fall! oh!—” 

the nun, as she concluded, utter a shudder sigh, that startle 
emily, who, look up, perceive the eyes of agnes fixed on hers, 
after which the sister rose, took her hand, gaze earnest upon her 
countenance, for some moments, in silence, and then said, 

“you are young—you are innocent! i mean you are yet innocent of any 
great crime!—but you have passion in your heart,—scorpions; they sleep 
now—beware how you awaken them!—they will sting you, even unto death!” 

emily, affected by these words and by the solemnity, with which they 
were delivered, could not suppress her tears. 

“ah! is it so?” exclaim agnes, her countenance soften from its 
sternness—“so young, and so unfortunate! we are sisters, then indeed. 
yet, there is no bond of kindness among the guilty,” she added, while 
her eyes resume their wild expression, “no gentleness,—no peace, no 
hope! i knew them all once—my eyes could weep—but now they burn, for 
now, my soul is fixed, and fearless!—i lament no more!” 

“rather let us repent, and pray,” said another nun. “we are taught to 
hope, that prayer and penitence will work our salvation. there is hope 
for all who repent!” 

“who repent and turn to the true faith,” observe sister frances. 

“for all but me!” reply agnes solemnly, who paused, and then abrupt 
added, “my head burns, i believe i am not well. o! could i strike from 
my memory all former scenes—the figures, that rise up, like furies, to 
torment me!—i see them, when i sleep, and, when i am awake, they are 
still before my eyes! i see them now—now!” 

she stood in a fixed attitude of horror, her strain eyes moving 
slow round the room, as if they follow something. one of the nun 
gently took her hand, to lead her from the parlour. agnes became calm, 
drew her other hand across her eyes, look again, and, sigh deeply, 
said, “they are gone—they are gone! i am feverish, i know not what i 
say. i am thus, sometimes, but it will go off again, i shall soon be 
better. was not that the vesper-bell?” 

“no,” reply frances, “the evening service is passed. let margaret 
lead you to your cell.” 

“you are right,” reply sister agnes, “i shall be better there. good 
night, my sisters, remember me in your orisons.” 

when they had withdrawn, frances, observing emily’s emotion, said, “do 
not be alarmed, our sister is often thus deranged, though i have not 
lately seen her so frantic; her usual mood is melancholy. this fit has 
been coming on, for several days; seclusion and the customary treatment 
will restore her.” 

“but how rational she conversed, at first!” observe emily, “her 
idea follow each other in perfect order.” 

“yes,” reply the nun, “this is nothing new; nay, i have sometimes 
known her argue not only with method, but with acuteness, and then, in 
a moment, start off into madness.” 

“her conscience seem afflicted,” said emily, “did you ever hear what 
circumstance reduce her to this deplorable condition?” 

“i have,” reply the nun, who said no more till emily repeated the 
question, when she add in a low voice, and look significant 
towards the other boarders, “i cannot tell you now, but, if you think 
it worth your while, come to my cell, tonight, when our sisterhood are 
at rest, and you shall hear more; but remember we rise to midnight 
prayers, and come either before, or after midnight.” 

emily promise to remember, and, the abbess soon after appearing, they 
spoke no more of the unhappy nun. 

the count meanwhile, on his return home, had found m. du pont in one of 
those fit of despondency, which his attachment to emily frequent 
occasion him, an attachment, that had subsist too long to be easily 
subdued, and which had already outlive the opposition of his friends. 
m. du pont had first seen emily in gascony, during the lifetime of his 
parent, who, on discover his son’s partiality for mademoiselle st. 
aubert, his inferior in point of fortune, forbade him to declare it to 
her family, or to think of her more. during the life of his father, he 
had observe the first command, but had found it impracticable to obey 
the second, and had, sometimes, soothe his passion by visiting her 
favourite haunts, among which was the fishing-house, where, once or 
twice, he address her in verse, conceal his name, in obedience to 
the promise he had given his father. there too he play the pathetic 
air, to which she had listen with such surprise and admiration; and 
there he found the miniature, that had since cherish a passion fatal 
to his repose. during his expedition into italy, his father died; but 
he received his liberty at a moment, when he was the least enable to 
profit by it, since the object, that render it most valuable, was no 
long within the reach of his vows. by what accident he discover 
emily, and assist to release her from a terrible imprisonment, has 
already appeared, and also the unavailing hope, with which he then 
encourage his love, and the fruitless efforts, that he had since made 
to overcome it. 

the count still endeavoured, with friendly zeal, to sooth him with a 
belief, that patience, perseverance and prudence would finally obtain 
for him happiness and emily: “time,” said he, “will wear away the 
melancholy impression, which disappointment has left on her mind, and 
she will be sensible of your merit. your service have already awaken 
her gratitude, and your suffering her pity; and trust me, my friend, 
in a heart so sensible as hers, gratitude and pity lead to love. when 
her imagination is rescue from its present delusion, she will readily 
accept the homage of a mind like yours.” 

du pont sighed, while he listen to these words; and, endeavour to 
hope what his friend believed, he willing yield to an invitation to 
prolong his visit at the château, which we now leave for the monastery 
of st. claire. 

when the nun had retired to rest, emily stole to her appointment with 
sister frances, whom she found in her cell, engaged in prayer, before a 
little table, where appear the image she was addressing, and, above, 
the dim lamp that gave light to the place. turning her eyes, as the 
door opened, she beckon to emily to come in, who, have done so, 
seat herself in silence beside the nun’s little mattress of straw, 
till her orison should conclude. the latter soon rose from her knees, 
and, taking down the lamp and place it on the table, emily perceive 
there a human skull and bones, lie beside an hour-glass; but the nun, 
without observing her emotion, sat down on the mattress by her, saying, 
“your curiosity, sister, has made you punctual, but you have nothing 
remarkable to hear in the history of poor agnes, of whom i avoid to 
speak in the presence of my lay-sisters, only because i would not 
publish her crime to them.” 

“i shall consider your confidence in me as a favour,” said emily, “and 
will not misuse it.” 

“sister agnes,” resume the nun, “is of a noble family, as the dignity 
of her air must already have informed you, but i will not dishonour 
their name so much as to reveal it. love was the occasion of her crime 
and of her madness. she was beloved by a gentleman of inferior fortune, 
and her father, as i have heard, bestow her on a nobleman, whom she 
disliked, an ill-governed passion prove her destruction.—every 
obligation of virtue and of duty was forgotten, and she prophane her 
marriage vows; but her guilt was soon detected, and she would have 
fallen a sacrifice to the vengeance of her husband, had not her father 
contrived to convey her from his power. by what means he did this, i 
never could learn; but he secrete her in this convent, where he 
afterwards prevail with her to take the veil, while a report was 
circulate in the world, that she was dead, and the father, to save his 
daughter, assist the rumour, and employ such means as induce her 
husband to believe she had become a victim to his jealousy. you look 
surprised,” add the nun, observing emily’s countenance; “i allow the 
story is uncommon, but not, i believe, without a parallel.” 

“pray proceed,” said emily, “i am interested.” 

“the story is already told,” resume the nun, “i have only to mention, 
that the long struggle, which agnes suffered, between love, remorse and 
a sense of the duty she had taken upon herself in becoming of our 
order, at length unsettled her reason. at first, she was frantic and 
melancholy by quick alternatives; then, she sunk into a deep and 
settled melancholy, which still, however, has, at times, been 
interrupt by fit of wildness, and, of late, these have again been 
frequent.” 

emily was affected by the history of the sister, some parts of whose 
story brought to her remembrance that of the marchioness de villeroi, 
who had also been compel by her father to forsake the object of her 
affections, for a nobleman of his choice; but, from what dorothée had 
related, there appear no reason to suppose, that she had escape the 
vengeance of a jealous husband, or to doubt for a moment the innocence 
of her conduct. but emily, while she sigh over the misery of the nun, 
could not forbear shed a few tear to the misfortune of the 
marchioness; and, when she return to the mention of sister agnes, she 
ask frances if she remember her in her youth, and whether she was 
then beautiful. 

“i was not here at the time, when she took the vows,” reply frances, 
“which is so long ago, that few of the present sisterhood, i believe, 
were witness of the ceremony; nay, ever our lady mother did not then 
preside over the convent: but i can remember, when sister agnes was a 
very beautiful woman. she retain that air of high rank, which always 
distinguished her, but her beauty, you must perceive, is fled; i can 
scarcely discover even a vestige of the loveliness, that once animate 
her features.” 

“it is strange,” said emily, “but there are moments, when her 
countenance has appear familiar to my memory! you will think me 
fanciful, and i think myself so, for i certainly never saw sister 
agnes, before i came to this convent, and i must, therefore, have seen 
some person, whom she strong resembles, though of this i have no 
recollection.” 

“you have been interested by the deep melancholy of her countenance,” 
said frances, “and its impression has probably delude your 
imagination; for i might as reasonably think i perceive a likeness 
between you and agnes, as you, that you have seen her anywhere but in 
this convent, since this has been her place of refuge, for nearly as 
many years as make your age.” 

“indeed!” said emily. 

“yes,” rejoin frances, “and why do that circumstance excite your 
surprise?” 

emily did not appear to notice this question, but remain thoughtful, 
for a few moments, and then said, “it was about that same period that 
the marchioness de villeroi expired.” 

“that is an odd remark,” said frances. 

emily, recall from her reverie, smiled, and gave the conversation 
another turn, but it soon came back to the subject of the unhappy nun, 
and emily remain in the cell of sister frances, till the midnight 
bell arouse her; when, apologise for have interrupt the sister’s 
repose, till this late hour, they quit the cell together. emily 
return to her chamber, and the nun, bearing a glimmer taper, went 
to her devotion in the chapel. 

several days followed, during which emily saw neither the count, nor 
any of his family; and, when, at length, he appeared, she remarked, 
with concern, that his air was unusually disturbed. 

“my spirits are harassed,” said he, in answer to her anxious enquiries, 
“and i mean to change my residence, for a little while, an experiment, 
which, i hope, will restore my mind to its usual tranquillity. my 
daughter and myself will accompany the baron st. foix to his château. 
it lie in a valley of the pyrenees, that open towards gascony, and i 
have been thinking, emily, that, when you set out for la vallée, we may 
go part of the way together; it would be a satisfaction to me to guard 
you towards your home.” 

she thank the count for his friendly consideration, and lamented, 
that the necessity for her go first to thoulouse would render this 
plan impracticable. “but, when you are at the baron’s residence,” she 
added, “you will be only a short journey from la vallée, and i think, 
sir, you will not leave the country without visiting me; it is 
unnecessary to say with what pleasure i should receive you and the lady 
blanche.” 

“i do not doubt it,” reply the count, “and i will not deny myself and 
blanche the pleasure of visiting you, if your affair should allow you 
to be at la vallée, about the time when we can meet you there.” 

when emily said that she should hope to see the countess also, she was 
not sorry to learn that this lady was going, accompany by 
mademoiselle bearn, to pay a visit, for a few weeks, to a family in 
lower languedoc. 

the count, after some further conversation on his intended journey and 
on the arrangement of emily’s, took leave; and many days did not 
succeed this visit, before a second letter from m. quesnel informed 
her, that he was then at thoulouse, that la vallée was at liberty, and 
that he wish her to set off for the former place, where he await 
her arrival, with all possible dispatch, since his own affair pressed 
him to return to gascony. emily did not hesitate to obey him, and, 
have taken an affecting leave of the count’s family, in which m. du 
pont was still included, and of her friends at the convent, she set out 
for thoulouse, attend by the unhappy annette, and guarded by a steady 
servant of the count. 



chapter x 

lull’d in the countless chambers of the brain, 
our thought are link’d by many a hidden chain: 
awake but one, and lo! what myriad rise! 
each stamp its image as the other flies! 
pleasure of memory 


emily pursue her journey, without any accident, along the plain of 
languedoc towards the north-west; and, on this her return to thoulouse, 
which she had last left with madame montoni, she thought much on the 
melancholy fate of her aunt, who, but for her own imprudence, might now 
have been living in happiness there! montoni, too, often rose to her 
fancy, such as she had seen him in his days of triumph, bold, spirited 
and commanding; such also as she had since beheld him in his days of 
vengeance; and now, only a few short month had passed—and he had no 
long the power, or the will to afflict;—he had become a clod of 
earth, and his life was vanish like a shadow! emily could have wept 
at his fate, had she not remember his crimes; for that of her 
unfortunate aunt she did weep, and all sense of her error was overcome 
by the recollection of her misfortunes. 

other thought and other emotion succeeded, as emily drew near the 
well-known scene of her early love, and considered, that valancourt 
was lost to her and to himself, for ever. at length, she came to the 
brow of the hill, whence, on her departure for italy, she had given a 
farewell look to this beloved landscape, amongst whose wood and field 
she had so often walk with valancourt, and where he was then to 
inhabit, when she would be far, far away! she saw, once more, that 
chain of the pyrenees, which overlook la vallée, rising, like faint 
clouds, on the horizon. “there, too, is gascony, extend at their 
feet!” said she, “o my father,—my mother! and there, too, is the 
garonne!” she added, dry the tears, that obscure her sight,—“and 
thoulouse, and my aunt’s mansion—and the grove in her garden!—o my 
friends! are ye all lost to me—must i never, never see ye more!” tear 
rush again to her eyes, and she continue to weep, till an abrupt 
turn in the road had nearly occasion the carriage to overset, when, 
look up, she perceive another part of the well-known scene around 
thoulouse, and all the reflection and anticipations, which she had 
suffered, at the moment, when she bade it last adieu, came with 
recollect force to her heart. she remember how anxious she had 
look forward to the futurity, which was to decide her happiness 
concerning valancourt, and what depress fear had assail her; the 
very words she had uttered, as she withdrew her last look from the 
prospect, came to her memory. “could i but be certain,” she had then 
said, “that i should ever return, and that valancourt would still live 
for me—i should go in peace!” 

now, that futurity, so anxious anticipated, was arrived, she was 
returned—but what a dreary blank appeared!—valancourt no long live 
for her! she had no long even the melancholy satisfaction of 
contemplate his image in her heart, for he was no long the same 
valancourt she had cherish there—the solace of many a mournful hour, 
the animate friend, that had enable her to bear up against the 
oppression of montoni—the distant hope, that had beam over her gloomy 
prospect! on perceive this beloved idea to be an illusion of her own 
creation, valancourt seem to be annihilated, and her soul sicken at 
the blank, that remained. his marriage with a rival, even his death, 
she thought she could have endure with more fortitude, than this 
discovery; for then, amidst all her grief, she could have look in 
secret upon the image of goodness, which her fancy had drawn of him, 
and comfort would have mingle with her suffering! 

dry her tears, she looked, once more, upon the landscape, which had 
excited them, and perceived, that she was passing the very bank, where 
she had taken leave of valancourt, on the morning of her departure from 
thoulouse, and she now saw him, through her return tears, such as he 
had appeared, when she look from the carriage to give him a last 
adieu—saw him leaning mournful against the high trees, and remember 
the fixed look of mingle tender and anguish, with which he had 
then regard her. this recollection was too much for her heart, and 
she sunk back in the carriage, nor once look up, till it stop at 
the gate of what was now her own mansion. 

these being opened, and by the servant, to whose care the château had 
been entrusted, the carriage drove into the court, where, alighting, 
she hasty pass through the great hall, now silent and solitary, to 
a large oak parlour, the common sitting room of the late madame 
montoni, where, instead of being received by m. quesnel, she found a 
letter from him, inform her that business of consequence had oblige 
him to leave thoulouse two days before. emily was, upon the whole, not 
sorry to be spare his presence, since his abrupt departure appear to 
indicate the same indifference, with which he had formerly regard 
her. this letter informed her, also, of the progress he had made in the 
settlement of her affairs, and conclude with directions, concerning 
the form of some business, which remain for her to transact. but m. 
quesnel’s unkind did not long occupy her thoughts, which return 
the remembrance of the person she had been accustomed to see in this 
mansion, and chiefly of the ill-guided and unfortunate madame montoni. 
in the room, where she now sat, she had breakfast with her on the 
morning of their departure for italy; and the view of it brought most 
forcibly to her recollection all she had herself suffered, at that 
time, and the many gay expectations, which her aunt had formed, 
respecting the journey before her. while emily’s mind was thus engaged, 
her eyes wander unconscious to a large window, that look upon the 
garden, and here new memorial of the past spoke to her heart, for she 
saw extend before her the very avenue, in which she had part with 
valancourt, on the eve of her journey; and all the anxiety, the tender 
interest he had shown, concerning her future happiness, his earnest 
remonstrance against her commit herself to the power of montoni, 
and the truth of his affection, came afresh to her memory. at this 
moment, it appear almost impossible, that valancourt could have 
become unworthy of her regard, and she doubt all that she had lately 
heard to his disadvantage, and even his own words, which had confirmed 
count de villefort’s report of him. overcome by the recollections, 
which the view of this avenue occasioned, she turn abrupt from the 
window, and sunk into a chair beside it, where she sat, given up to 
grief, till the entrance of annette, with coffee, arouse her. 

“dear madam, how melancholy this place looks now,” said annette, “to 
what it use to do! it is dismal coming home, when there is nobody to 
welcome one!” 

this was not the moment, in which emily could bear the remark; her 
tear fell again, and, as soon as she had taken the coffee, she retired 
to her apartment, where she endeavour to repose her fatigue spirits. 
but busy memory would still supply her with the vision of former 
times: she saw valancourt interesting and benevolent, as he had been 
wont to appear in the days of their early love, and, amidst the scenes, 
where she had believe that they should sometimes pass their years 
together!—but, at length, sleep closed these afflict scene from her 
view. 

on the following morning, serious occupation recover her from such 
melancholy reflections; for, being desirous of quit thoulouse, and 
of hasten on to la vallée, she made some enquiry into the 
condition of the estate, and immediately dispatch a part of the 
necessary business concerning it, according to the directions of mons. 
quesnel. it require a strong effort to abstract her thought from 
other interests sufficient to attend to this, but she was reward 
for her exertion by again experiencing, that employment is the surest 
antidote to sorrow. 

this day was devoted entire to business; and, among other concerns, 
she employ means to learn the situation of all her poor tenants, that 
she might relieve their wants, or confirm their comforts. 

in the evening, her spirits were so much strengthened, that she thought 
she could bear to visit the gardens, where she had so often walk with 
valancourt; and, knowing, that, if she delay to do so, their scene 
would only affect her the more, whenever they should be viewed, she 
took advantage of the present state of her mind, and enter them. 

passing hasty the gate leading from the court into the gardens, she 
hurried up the great avenue, scarcely permit her memory to dwell 
for a moment on the circumstance of her have here part with 
valancourt, and soon quit this for other walk less interesting to 
her heart. these brought her, at length, to the flight of steps, that 
led from the lower garden to the terrace, on seeing which, she became 
agitated, and hesitate whether to ascend, but, her resolution 
returning, she proceeded. 

“ah!” said emily, as she ascended, “these are the same high trees, that 
use to wave over the terrace, and these the same flowery thickets—the 
liburnum, the wild rose, and the cerinthe—which were wont to grow 
beneath them! ah! and there, too, on that bank, are the very plants, 
which valancourt so careful reared!—o, when last i saw them!”—she 
checked the thought, but could not restrain her tears, and, after 
walking slow on for a few moments, her agitation, upon the view of 
this well-known scene, increase so much, that she was oblige to stop, 
and lean upon the wall of the terrace. it was a mild, and beautiful 
evening. the sun was setting over the extensive landscape, to which his 
beams, slope from beneath a dark cloud, that overhung the west, gave 
rich and partial colouring, and touched the tuft summit of the 
groves, that rose from the garden below, with a yellow gleam. emily and 
valancourt had often admire together this scene, at the same hour; and 
it was exactly on this spot, that, on the night preceding her departure 
for italy, she had listen to his remonstrance against the journey, 
and to the pleadings of passionate affection. some observations, which 
she made on the landscape, brought this to her remembrance, and with it 
all the minute particulars of that conversation;—the alarm doubt he 
had express concerning montoni, doubts, which had since been fatally 
confirmed; the reason and entreaty he had employ to prevail with 
her to consent to an immediate marriage; the tender of his love, 
the paroxysm of this grief, and the conviction that he had repeatedly 
expressed, that they should never meet again in happiness! all these 
circumstances rose afresh to her mind, and awaken the various 
emotion she had then suffered. her tender for valancourt became as 
powerful as in the moments, when she thought, that she was parting with 
him and happiness together, and when the strength of her mind had 
enable her to triumph over present suffering, rather than to deserve 
the reproach of her conscience by engaging in a clandestine 
marriage.—“alas!” said emily, as these recollection came to her mind, 
“and what have i gain by the fortitude i then practised?—am i happy 
now?—he said, we should meet no more in happiness; but, o! he little 
thought his own misconduct would separate us, and lead to the very evil 
he then dreaded!” 

her reflection increase her anguish, while she was compel to 
acknowledge, that the fortitude she had formerly exerted, if it had not 
conduct her to happiness, had save her from irretrievable 
misfortune—from valancourt himself! but in these moments she could not 
congratulate herself on the prudence, that had save her; she could 
only lament, with bitterest anguish, the circumstances, which had 
conspire to betray valancourt into a course of life so different from 
that, which the virtues, the tastes, and the pursuit of his early 
years had promised; but she still love him too well to believe, that 
his heart was even now depraved, though his conduct had been criminal. 
an observation, which had fallen from m. st. aubert more than once, now 
occur to her. “this young man,” said he, speak of valancourt, 
“has never been at paris;” a remark, that had surprise her at the time 
it was uttered, but which she now understood, and she exclaim 
sorrowfully, “o valancourt! if such a friend as my father had been with 
you at paris—your noble, ingenuous nature would not have fallen!” 

the sun was now set, and, recall her thought from their melancholy 
subject, she continue her walk; for the pensive shade of twilight was 
pleasing to her, and the nightingale from the surrounding grove began 
to answer each other in the long-drawn, plaintive note, which always 
touched her heart; while all the fragrance of the flowery thickets, 
that bound the terrace, was awaken by the cool evening air, which 
float so lightly among their leaves, that they scarcely tremble as 
it passed. 

emily came, at length, to the steps of the pavilion, that terminate 
the terrace, and where her last interview with valancourt, before her 
departure from thoulouse, had so unexpected taken place. the door was 
now shut, and she trembled, while she hesitate whether to open it; but 
her wish to see again a place, which had been the chief scene of her 
former happiness, at length overcome her reluctance to encounter the 
painful regret it would renew, she entered. the room was obscure by a 
melancholy shade; but through the open lattices, darken by the 
hanging foliage of the vines, appear the dusky landscape, the garonne 
reflect the evening light, and the west still glowing. a chair was 
placed near one of the balconies, as if some person had been sitting 
there, but the other furniture of the pavilion remain exactly as 
usual, and emily thought it look as if it had not once been move 
since she set out for italy. the silent and desert air of the place 
add solemnity to her emotions, for she heard only the low whisper of 
the breeze, as it shook the leaves of the vines, and the very faint 
murmur of the garonne. 

she seat herself in a chair, near the lattice, and yield to the 
sad of her heart, while she recollect the circumstances of her 
parting interview with valancourt, on this spot. it was here too, that 
she had pass some of the happiest hour of her life with him, when 
her aunt favoured the connection, for here she had often sat and 
worked, while he conversed, or read; and she now well remember with 
what discriminating judgment, with what temper energy, he use to 
repeat some of the sublimest passage of their favourite authors; how 
often he would pause to admire with her their excellence, and with what 
tender delight he would listen to her remarks, and correct her taste. 

“and is it possible,” said emily, as these recollection returned—“is 
it possible, that a mind, so susceptible of whatever is grand and 
beautiful, could stoop to low pursuits, and be subdued by frivolous 
temptations?” 

she remember how often she had seen the sudden tear start in his eye, 
and had heard his voice tremble with emotion, while he related any 
great or benevolent action, or repeated a sentiment of the same 
character. “and such a mind,” said she, “such a heart, were to be 
sacrifice to the habit of a great city!” 

these recollection becoming too painful to be endured, she abrupt 
left the pavilion, and, anxious to escape from the memorial of her 
departed happiness, return towards the château. as she pass along 
the terrace, she perceive a person, walking, with a slow step, and a 
dejected air, under the trees, at some distance. the twilight, which 
was now deep, would not allow her to distinguish who it was, and she 
imagine it to be one of the servants, till, the sound of her steps 
seeming to reach him, he turn half round, and she thought she saw 
valancourt! 

whoever it was, he instantly struck among the thicket on the left, and 
disappeared, while emily, her eyes fixed on the place, whence he had 
vanished, and her frame tremble so excessively, that she could 
scarcely support herself, remained, for some moments, unable to quit 
the spot, and scarcely conscious of existence. with her recollection, 
her strength returned, and she hurried toward the house, where she did 
not venture to enquire who had been in the gardens, lest she should 
betray her emotion; and she sat down alone, endeavour to recollect 
the figure, air and features of the person she had just seen. her view 
of him, however, had been so transient, and the gloom had render it 
so imperfect, that she could remember nothing with exactness; yet the 
general appearance of his figure, and his abrupt departure, made her 
still believe, that this person was valancourt. sometimes, indeed, she 
thought, that her fancy, which had been occupy by the idea of him, 
had suggest his image to her uncertain sight: but this conjecture was 
fleeting. if it was himself whom she had seen, she wonder much, that 
he should be at thoulouse, and more, how he had gain admittance into 
the garden; but as often as her impatience prompt her to enquire 
whether any stranger had been admitted, she was restrained by an 
unwilling to betray her doubts; and the evening was pass in 
anxious conjecture, and in effort to dismiss the subject from her 
thoughts. but, these endeavour were ineffectual, and a thousand 
inconsistent emotion assail her, whenever she fancy that 
valancourt might be near her; now, she dread it to be true, and now 
she fear it to be false; and, while she constant try to persuade 
herself, that she wish the person, whom she had seen, might not be 
valancourt, her heart as constant contradict her reason. 

the following day was occupy by the visit of several neighbouring 
families, formerly intimate with madame montoni, who came to condole 
with emily on her death, to congratulate her upon the acquisition of 
these estates, and to enquire about montoni, and concerning the strange 
report they had heard of her own situation; all which was done with 
the utmost decorum, and the visitor departed with as much composure as 
they had arrived. 

emily was weary by these formalities, and disgust by the 
subservient manners of many persons, who had thought her scarcely 
worthy of common attention, while she was believe to be a dependant on 
madame montoni. 

“surely,” said she, “there is some magic in wealth, which can thus make 
person pay their court to it, when it do not even benefit 
themselves. how strange it is, that a fool or a knave, with riches, 
should be treat with more respect by the world, than a good man, or a 
wise man in poverty!” 

it was evening, before she was left alone, and she then wish to have 
refresh her spirits in the free air of her garden; but she fear to 
go thither, lest she should meet again the person, whom she had seen on 
the preceding night, and he should prove to be valancourt. the suspense 
and anxiety she suffered, on this subject, she found all her effort 
unable to control, and her secret wish to see valancourt once more, 
though unseen by him, powerful prompt her to go, but prudence and a 
delicate pride restrained her, and she determined to avoid the 
possibility of throw herself in his way, by forbearing to visit the 
gardens, for several days. 

when, after near a week, she again venture thither, she made annette 
her companion, and confine her walk to the lower grounds, but often 
start as the leaves rustle in the breeze, imagining, that some 
person was among the thickets; and, at the turn of every alley, she 
look forward with apprehensive expectation. she pursue her walk 
thoughtful and silently, for her agitation would not suffer her to 
converse with annette, to whom, however, thought and silence were so 
intolerable, that she did not scruple at length to talk to her 
mistress. 

“dear madam,” said she, “why do you start so? one would think you knew 
what has happened.” 

“what has happened?” said emily, in a falter voice, and try to 
command her emotion. 

“the night before last, you know, madam—” 

“i know nothing, annette,” reply her lady in a more hurried voice. 

“the night before last, madam, there was a robber in the garden.” 

“a robber!” said emily, in an eager, yet doubt tone. 

“i suppose he was a robber, madam. what else could he be?” 

“where did you see him, annette?” rejoin emily, look round her, 
and turning back towards the château. 

“it was not i that saw him, madam, it was jean the gardener. it was 
twelve o’clock at night, and, as he was coming across the court to go 
the back way into the house, what should he see—but somebody walking in 
the avenue, that front the garden gate! so, with that, jean guess 
how it was, and he went into the house for his gun.” 

“his gun!” exclaim emily. 

“yes, madam, his gun; and then he came out into the court to watch him. 
presently, he see him come slow down the avenue, and lean over the 
garden gate, and look up at the house for a long time; and i warrant he 
examine it well, and settled what window he should break in at.” 

“but the gun,” said emily—“the gun!” 

“yes, madam, all in good time. presently, jean says, the robber open 
the gate, and was coming into the court, and then he thought proper to 
ask him his business: so he call out again, and bade him say who he 
was, and what he wanted. but the man would do neither; but turn upon 
his heel, and pass into the garden again. jean knew then well enough 
how it was, and so he fire after him.” 

“fired!” exclaim emily. 

“yes, madam, fire off his gun; but, holy virgin! what make you look 
so pale, madam? the man was not killed,—i dare say; but if he was, his 
comrade carry him off: for, when jean went in the morning, to look 
for the body, it was gone, and nothing to be seen but a track of blood 
on the ground. jean follow it, that he might find out where the man 
got into the garden, but it was lost in the grass, and—” 

annette was interrupted: for emily’s spirits die away, and she would 
have fallen to the ground, if the girl had not caught her, and 
support her to a bench, close to them. 

when, after a long absence, her senses returned, emily desire to be 
led to her apartment; and, though she tremble with anxiety to enquire 
further on the subject of her alarm, she found herself too ill at 
present, to dare the intelligence which it was possible she might 
receive of valancourt. have dismiss annette, that she might weep 
and think at liberty, she endeavour to recollect the exact air of the 
person, whom she had seen on the terrace, and still her fancy gave her 
the figure of valancourt. she had, indeed, scarcely a doubt, that it 
was he whom she had seen, and at whom the garden had fired: for the 
manner of the latter person, as describe by annette, was not that of a 
robber; nor did it appear probable, that a robber would have come 
alone, to break into a house so spacious as this. 

when emily thought herself sufficient recovered, to listen to what 
jean might have to relate, she sent for him; but he could inform her of 
no circumstance, that might lead to a knowledge of the person, who had 
been shot, or of the consequence of the wound; and, after severe 
reprimand him, for have fire with bullets, and order diligent 
enquiry to be made in the neighbourhood for the discovery of the 
wound person, she dismiss him, and herself remain in the same 
state of terrible suspense. all the tender she had ever felt for 
valancourt, was recall by the sense of his danger; and the more she 
considered the subject, the more her conviction strengthened, that it 
was he, who had visit the gardens, for the purpose of soothe the 
misery of disappointed affection, amidst the scene of his former 
happiness. 

“dear madam,” said annette, when she returned, “i never saw you so 
affected before! i dare say the man is not killed.” 

emily shuddered, and lament bitter the rash of the garden in 
have fired. 

“i knew you would be angry enough about that, madam, or i should have 
told you before; and he knew so too; for, say he, ‘annette, say 
nothing about this to my lady. she lie on the other side of the house, 
so did not hear the gun, perhaps; but she would be angry with me, if 
she knew, seeing there is blood. but then,’ say he, ‘how is one to 
keep the garden clear, if one is afraid to fire at a robber, when one 
see him?’” 

“no more of this,” said emily, “pray leave me.” 

annette obeyed, and emily return to the agonizing considerations, 
that had assail her before, but which she, at length, endeavour to 
sooth by a new remark. if the stranger was valancourt, it was certain 
he had come alone, and it appeared, therefore, that he had been able to 
quit the gardens, without assistance; a circumstance which did not seem 
probable, had his wound been dangerous. with this consideration, she 
endeavour to support herself, during the enquiries, that were making 
by her servant in the neighbourhood; but day after day came, and still 
closed in uncertainty, concerning this affair: and emily, suffering in 
silence, at length, drooped, and sunk under the pressure of her 
anxiety. she was attack by a slow fever, and when she yield to the 
persuasion of annette to send for medical advice, the physician 
prescribed little beside air, gentle exercise and amusement: but how 
was this last to be obtained? she, however, endeavour to abstract her 
thought from the subject of her anxiety, by employ them in 
promote that happiness in others, which she had lost herself; and, 
when the evening was fine, she usually took an airing, including in her 
ride the cottage of some of her tenants, on whose condition she made 
such observations, as often enable her, unasked, to fulfil their 
wishes. 

her indisposition and the business she engaged in, relative to this 
estate, had already protract her stay at thoulouse, beyond the period 
she had formerly fixed for her departure to la vallée; and now she was 
unwill to leave the only place, where it seem possible, that 
certainty could be obtain on the subject of her distress. but the 
time was come, when her presence was necessary at la vallée, a letter 
from the lady blanche now inform her, that the count and herself, 
being then at the château of the baron st. foix, purpose to visit her 
at la vallée, on their way home, as soon as they should be informed of 
her arrival there. blanche added, that they made this visit, with the 
hope of induce her to return with them to château-le-blanc. 

emily, have reply to the letter of her friend, and said that she 
should be at la vallée in a few days, made hasty preparation for the 
journey; and, in thus leave thoulouse, endeavour to support herself 
with a belief, that, if any fatal accident had happen to valancourt, 
she must in this interval have heard of it. 

on the evening before her departure, she went to take leave of the 
terrace and the pavilion. the day had been sultry, but a light shower, 
that fell just before sunset, had cool the air, and given that soft 
verdure to the wood and pastures, which is so refreshing to the eye; 
while the rain drops, still tremble on the shrubs, glitter in the 
last yellow gleam, that light up the scene, and the air was fill 
with fragrance, exhale by the late shower, from herb and flower and 
from the earth itself. but the lovely prospect, which emily beheld from 
the terrace, was no long view by her with delight; she sigh 
deep as her eye wander over it, and her spirits were in a state of 
such dejection, that she could not think of her approach return to 
la vallée, without tears, and seem to mourn again the death of her 
father, as if it had been an event of yesterday. have reach the 
pavilion, she seat herself at the open lattice, and, while her eyes 
settled on the distant mountains, that overlook gascony, still 
gleam on the horizon, though the sun had now left the plain below, 
“alas!” said she, “i return to your long-lost scenes, but shall meet no 
more the parents, that were wont to render them delightful!—no more 
shall see the smile of welcome, or hear the well-known voice of 
fondness:—all will now be cold and silent in what was once my happy 
home.” 

tear stole down her cheek, as the remembrance of what that home had 
been, return to her; but, after indulge her sorrow for some time, 
she checked it, accuse herself of ingratitude in forget the 
friends, that she possessed, while she lament those that were 
departed; and she, at length, left the pavilion and the terrace, 
without have observe a shadow of valancourt or of any other person. 



chapter xi 

ah happy hills! ah pleasing shade! 
ah field belov’d in vain! 
where once my careless childhood stray’d, 
a stranger yet to pain! 
i feel the gales, that from ye blow, 
a momentary bliss bestow, 
as wave fresh their gladsome wing, 
my weary soul they seem to sooth. 
gray 


on the following morning, emily left thoulouse at an early hour, and 
reach la vallée about sunset. with the melancholy she experienced on 
the review of a place which had been the residence of her parents, and 
the scene of her earliest delight, was mingled, after the first shock 
had subsided, a tender and undescribable pleasure. for time had so far 
blunt the acute of her grief, that she now court every scene, 
that awaken the memory of her friends; in every room, where she had 
been accustomed to see them, they almost seem to live again; and she 
felt that la vallée was still her happiest home. one of the first 
apartments she visited, was that, which had been her father’s library, 
and here she seat herself in his arm-chair, and, while she 
contemplated, with temper resignation, the picture of past times, 
which her memory gave, the tear she shed could scarcely be call 
those of grief. 

soon after her arrival, she was surprise by a visit from the venerable 
m. barreaux, who came impatient to welcome the daughter of his late 
respect neighbour, to her long-deserted home. emily was comfort by 
the presence of an old friend, and they pass an interesting hour in 
converse of former times, and in relate some of the circumstances, 
that had occur to each, since they parted. 

the evening was so far advanced, when m. barreaux left emily, that she 
could not visit the garden that night; but, on the following morning, 
she trace its long-regretted scene with fond impatience; and, as she 
walk beneath the groves, which her father had planted, and where she 
had so often saunter in affectionate conversation with him, his 
countenance, his smile, even the accent of his voice, return with 
exact to her fancy, and her heart melt to the tender 
recollections. 

this, too, was his favourite season of the year, at which they had 
often together admire the rich and variegated tint of these wood and 
the magical effect of autumnal lights upon the mountains; and now, the 
view of these circumstances made memory eloquent. as she wander 
pensive on, she fancy the following address 

to autumn 

sweet autumn! how thy melancholy grace 
steal on my heart, as through these shades i wind! 
sooth’d by thy breathing sigh, i fondly trace 
each lonely image of the pensive mind! 
lov’d scenes, lov’d friends—long lost! around me rise, 
and wake the melting thought, the tender tear! 
that tear, that thought, which more than mirth i prize— 
sweet as the gradual tint, that paints thy year! 
thy farewell smile, with fond regret, i view, 
thy beam lights, soft gliding o’er the woods; 
thy distant landscape, touch’d with yellow hue 
while falls the lengthen’d gleam; thy winding floods, 
now veil’d in shade, save where the skiff’s white sail 
swell to the breeze, and catch thy stream ray. 
but now, e’en now!—the partial vision fails, 
and the wave smiles, as sweep the cloud away! 
emblem of life!—thus checquer’d is its plan, 
thus joy succeed to grief—thus smile the varied man! 


one of emily’s earliest enquiries, after her arrival at la vallée, was 
concerning theresa, her father’s old servant, whom it may be remember 
that m. quesnel had turn from the house when it was let, without any 
provision. understanding that she live in a cottage at no great 
distance, emily walk thither, and, on approaching, was pleased to 
see, that her habitation was pleasant situated on a green slope, 
sheltered by a tuft of oaks, and had an appearance of comfort and 
extreme neatness. she found the old woman within, pick vine-stalks, 
who, on perceive her young mistress, was nearly overcome with joy. 

“ah! my dear young lady!” said she, “i thought i should never see you 
again in this world, when i heard you were gone to that outlandish 
country. i have been hardly used, since you went; i little thought they 
would have turn me out of my old master’s family in my old age!” 

emily lament the circumstance, and then assured her, that she would 
make her latter days comfortable, and express satisfaction, on seeing 
her in so pleasant a habitation. 

theresa thank her with tears, adding, “yes, mademoiselle, it is a 
very comfortable home, thanks to the kind friend, who took me out of my 
distress, when you were too far off to help me, and placed me here! i 
little thought!—but no more of that—” 

“and who was this kind friend?” said emily: “whoever it was, i shall 
consider him as mine also.” 

“ah, mademoiselle! that friend forbade me to blazon the good deed—i 
must not say, who it was. but how you are alter since i saw you last! 
you look so pale now, and so thin, too; but then, there is my old 
master’s smile! yes, that will never leave you, any more than the 
goodness, that use to make him smile. alas-a-day! the poor lost a 
friend indeed, when he died!” 

emily was affected by this mention of her father, which theresa 
observing, change the subject. “i heard, mademoiselle,” said she, 
“that madame cheron married a foreign gentleman, after all, and took 
you abroad; how do she do?” 

emily now mention her death. “alas!” said theresa, “if she had not 
been my master’s sister, i should never have love her; she was always 
so cross. but how do that dear young gentleman do, m. valancourt? he 
was a handsome youth, and a good one; is he well, mademoiselle?” 

emily was much agitated. 

“a blessing on him!” continue theresa. “ah, my dear young lady, you 
need not look so shy; i know all about it. do you think i do not know, 
that he love you? why, when you were away, mademoiselle, he use to 
come to the château and walk about it, so disconsolate! he would go 
into every room in the lower part of the house, and, sometimes, he 
would sit himself down in a chair, with his arms across, and his eyes 
on the floor, and there he would sit, and think, and think, for the 
hour together. he use to be very fond of the south parlour, because i 
told him it use to be yours; and there he would stay, look at the 
pictures, which i said you drew, and play upon your lute, that hung 
up by the window, and reading in your books, till sunset, and then he 
must go back to his brother’s château. and then—” 

“it is enough, theresa,” said emily.—“how long have you live in this 
cottage—and how can i serve you? will you remain here, or return and 
live with me?” 

“nay, mademoiselle,” said theresa, “do not be so shy to your poor old 
servant. i am sure it is no disgrace to like such a good young 
gentleman.” 

a deep sigh escape from emily. 

“ah! how he did love to talk of you! i love him for that. nay, for 
that matter, he like to hear me talk, for he did not say much himself. 
but i soon found out what he came to the château about. then, he would 
go into the garden, and down to the terrace, and sit under that great 
tree there, for the day together, with one of your books in his hand; 
but he did not read much, i fancy; for one day i happen to go that 
way, and i heard somebody talking. who can be here? say i: i am sure i 
let nobody into the garden, but the chevalier. so i walk softly, to 
see who it could be; and behold! it was the chevalier himself, talk 
to himself about you. and he repeated your name, and sigh so! and 
said he had lost you for ever, for that you would never return for him. 
i thought he was out in his reckoning there, but i said nothing, and 
stole away.” 

“no more of this trifling,” said emily, awakening from her reverie: “it 
displease me.” 

“but, when m. quesnel let the château, i thought it would have broke 
the chevalier’s heart.” 

“theresa,” said emily seriously, “you must name the chevalier no more!” 

“not name him, mademoiselle!” cry theresa: “what times are come up 
now? why, i love the chevalier next to my old master and you, 
mademoiselle.” 

“perhaps your love was not well bestowed, then,” reply emily, try 
to conceal her tears; “but, however that might be, we shall meet no 
more.” 

“meet no more!—not well bestowed!” exclaim theresa. “what do i hear? 
no, mademoiselle, my love was well bestowed, for it was the chevalier 
valancourt, who gave me this cottage, and has support me in my old 
age, ever since m. quesnel turn me from my master’s house.” 

“the chevalier valancourt!” said emily, tremble extremely. 

“yes, mademoiselle, he himself, though he made me promise not to tell; 
but how could one help, when one heard him ill spoken of? ah! dear 
young lady, you may well weep, if you have behave unkindly to him, for 
a more tender heart than his never young gentleman had. he found me out 
in my distress, when you were too far off to help me; and m. quesnel 
refuse to do so, and bade me go to service again—alas! i was too old 
for that!—the chevalier found me, and bought me this cottage, and gave 
me money to furnish it, and bade me seek out another poor woman to live 
with me; and he ordered his brother’s steward to pay me, every quarter, 
that which has support me in comfort. think then, mademoiselle, 
whether i have not reason to speak well of the chevalier. and there are 
others, who could have afford it better than he: and i am afraid he 
has hurt himself by his generosity, for quarter day is gone by long 
since, and no money for me! but do not weep so, mademoiselle: you are 
not sorry surely to hear of the poor chevalier’s goodness?” 

“sorry!” said emily, and wept the more. “but how long is it since you 
have seen him?” 

“not this many a day, mademoiselle.” 

“when did you hear of him?” enquire emily, with increase emotion. 

“alas! never since he went away so sudden into languedoc; and he was 
but just come from paris then, or i should have seen him, i am sure. 
quarter day is gone by long since, and, as i said, no money for me; and 
i begin to fear some harm has happen to him: and if i was not so far 
from estuvière and so lame, i should have gone to enquire before this 
time; and i have nobody to send so far.” 

emily’s anxiety, as to the fate of valancourt, was now scarcely 
endurable, and, since propriety would not suffer her to send to the 
château of his brother, she request that theresa would immediately 
hire some person to go to his steward from herself, and, when he ask 
for the quarterage due to her, to make enquiry concerning valancourt. 
but she first made theresa promise never to mention her name in this 
affair, or ever with that of the chevalier valancourt; and her former 
faithful to m. st. aubert induce emily to confide in her 
assurances. theresa now joyful undertook to procure a person for this 
errand, and then emily, after give her a sum of money to supply her 
with present comforts, returned, with spirits heavy oppressed, to her 
home, lamenting, more than ever, that a heart, possessed of so much 
benevolence as valancourt’s, should have been contaminate by the vice 
of the world, but affected by the delicate affection, which his 
kindness to her old servant express for herself. 



chapter xii 

light thickens, and the crow 
make wing to the rooky wood: 
good things of day begin to droop, and drowse; 
while night’s black agent to their prey do rouse. 
macbeth 


meanwhile count de villefort and lady blanche had pass a pleasant 
fortnight at the château de st. foix, with the baron and baroness, 
during which they made frequent excursion among the mountains, and 
were delight with the romantic wild of pyrenean scenery. it was 
with regret, that the count bade adieu to his old friends, although 
with the hope of being soon united with them in one family; for it was 
settled that m. st. foix, who now attend them into gascony, should 
receive the hand of the lady blanche, upon their arrival at 
château-le-blanc. as the road, from the baron’s residence to la vallée, 
was over some of the wildest tract of the pyrenees, and where a 
carriage-wheel had never passed, the count hire mule for himself and 
his family, as well as a couple of stout guides, who were well armed, 
informed of all the pass of the mountains, and who boasted, too, that 
they were acquaint with every brake and dingle in the way, could tell 
the name of all the highest points of this chain of alps, knew every 
forest, that spread along their narrow valleys, the shallowest part of 
every torrent they must cross, and the exact distance of every 
goat-herd’s and hunter’s cabin they should have occasion to pass,—which 
last article of learning require no very capacious memory, for even 
such simple inhabitant were but thin scattered over these wilds. 

the count left the château de st. foix, early in the morning, with an 
intention of passing the night at a little inn upon the mountains, 
about half way to la vallée, of which his guide had informed him; and, 
though this was frequent chiefly by spain muleteers, on their route 
into france, and, of course, would afford only sorry accommodation, the 
count had no alternative, for it was the only place like an inn, on the 
road. 

after a day of admiration and fatigue, the traveller found themselves, 
about sunset, in a woody valley, overlooked, on every side, by abrupt 
heights. they had proceed for many leagues, without seeing a human 
habitation, and had only heard, now and then, at a distance, the 
melancholy tinkle of a sheep-bell; but now they caught the note of 
merry music, and presently saw, within a little green recess among the 
rocks, a group of mountaineers, tripping through a dance. the count, 
who could not look upon the happiness, any more than on the misery of 
others, with indifference, halt to enjoy this scene of simple 
pleasure. the group before him consist of france and spain 
peasants, the inhabitant of a neighbouring hamlet, some of whom were 
perform a sprightly dance, the women with castanets in their hands, 
to the sound of a lute and a tamborine, till, from the brisk melody of 
france, the music soften into a slow movement, to which two female 
peasant dance a spain pavan. 

the count, compare this with the scene of such gaiety as he had 
witness at paris, where false taste paint the features, and, while 
it vain try to supply the glow of nature, conceal the charm of 
animation—where affectation so often distort the air, and vice 
pervert the manners—sighed to think, that natural graces and innocent 
pleasure flourish in the wild of solitude, while they droop 
amidst the concourse of polish society. but the lengthen shadow 
remind the travellers, that they had no time to lose; and, leave 
this joyous group, they pursue their way towards the little inn, which 
was to shelter them from the night. 

the ray of the setting sun now threw a yellow gleam upon the forest 
of pine and chesnut, that swept down the lower region of the mountains, 
and gave resplendent tint to the snowy points above. but soon, even 
this light fade fast, and the scenery assume a more tremendous 
appearance, invest with the obscurity of twilight. where the torrent 
had been seen, it was now only heard; where the wild cliff had 
display every variety of form and attitude, a dark mass of mountain 
now alone appeared; and the vale, which far, far below had open its 
dreadful chasm, the eye could no long fathom. a melancholy gleam 
still linger on the summit of the highest alps, overlook the deep 
repose of evening, and seeming to make the still of the hour more 
awful. 

blanche view the scene in silence, and listen with enthusiasm to 
the murmur of the pines, that extend in dark lines along the 
mountains, and to the faint voice of the izard, among the rocks, that 
came at interval on the air. but her enthusiasm sunk into 
apprehension, when, as the shadow deepened, she look upon the 
doubtful precipice, that border the road, as well as on the various 
fantastic form of danger, that glimmer through the obscurity beyond 
it; and she ask her father, how far they were from the inn, and 
whether he did not consider the road to be dangerous at this late hour. 
the count repeated the first question to the guides, who return a 
doubtful answer, adding, that, when it was darker, it would be safest 
to rest, till the moon rose. “it is scarcely safe to proceed now,” said 
the count; but the guides, assure him that there was no danger, went 
on. blanche, revive by this assurance, again indulge a pensive 
pleasure, as she watch the progress of twilight gradual spread 
its tint over the wood and mountains, and steal from the eye every 
minute feature of the scene, till the grand outline of nature alone 
remained. then fell the silent dews, and every wild flower, and 
aromatic plant, that bloom among the cliffs, breathe forth its 
sweetness; then, too, when the mountain-bee had crept into its 
blossom bed, and the hum of every little insect, that had float 
gaily in the sunbeam, was hushed, the sound of many streams, not heard 
till now, murmur at a distance.—the bats alone, of all the animal 
inhabit this region, seem awake; and, while they flit across 
the silent path, which blanche was pursuing, she remember the 
following lines, which emily had given her: 

to the bat 

from haunt of man, from day’s obtrusive glare, 
thou shroud’st thee in the ruin’s ivy’d tow’r. 
or in some shadowy glen’s romantic bow’r, 
where wizard form their mystic charm prepare, 
where horror lurks, and ever-boding care! 
but, at the sweet and silent ev’ning hour, 
when clos’d in sleep is ev’ry languid flow’r, 
thou lov’st to sport upon the twilight air, 
mock the eye, that would thy course pursue, 
in many a wanton-round, elastic, gay, 
thou flit’st athwart the pensive wand’rer’s way, 
as his lone footstep print the mountain-dew. 
from indian isle thou com’st, with summer’s car, 
twilight thy love—thy guide her beam star! 


to a warm imagination, the dubious forms, that float, half veiled in 
darkness, afford a higher delight, than the most distinct scenery, that 
the sun can show. while the fancy thus wander over landscape partly 
of its own creation, a sweet complacency steal upon the mind, and 

refine it all to subtlest feeling, 
bid the tear of rapture roll. 


the distant note of a torrent, the weak tremble of the breeze among 
the woods, or the far-off sound of a human voice, now lost and heard 
again, are circumstances, which wonderful heighten the enthusiast 
tone of the mind. the young st. foix, who saw the presentation of a 
fervid fancy, and felt whatever enthusiasm could suggest, sometimes 
interrupt the silence, which the rest of the party seem by mutual 
consent to preserve, remark and point out to blanche the most 
striking effect of the hour upon the scenery; while blanche, whose 
apprehension were beguile by the conversation of her lover, yield 
to the taste so congenial to his, and they converse in a low 
restrained voice, the effect of the pensive tranquillity, which 
twilight and the scene inspired, rather than of any fear, that they 
should be heard. but, while the heart was thus soothe to tenderness, 
st. foix gradual mingled, with his admiration of the country, a 
mention of his affection; and he continue to speak, and blanche to 
listen, till the mountains, the woods, and the magical illusion of 
twilight, were remember no more. 

the shadow of evening soon shift to the gloom of night, which was 
somewhat anticipate by the vapours, that, gathering fast round the 
mountains, roll in dark wreath along their sides; and the guide 
propose to rest, till the moon should rise, adding, that they thought 
a storm was coming on. as they look round for a spot, that might 
afford some kind of shelter, an object was perceive obscure through 
the dusk, on a point of rock, a little way down the mountain, which 
they imagine to be a hunter’s or a shepherd’s cabin, and the party, 
with cautious steps, proceed towards it. their labour, however, was 
not rewarded, or their apprehension soothed; for, on reach the 
object of their search, they discover a monumental cross, which 
marked the spot to have been pollute by murder. 

the dark would not permit them to read the inscription; but the 
guide knew this to be a cross, raise to the memory of a count de 
beliard, who had been murder here by a horde of banditti, that had 
infest this part of the pyrenees, a few years before; and the 
uncommon size of the monument seem to justify the supposition, that 
it was erect for a person of some distinction. blanche shuddered, as 
she listen to some horrid particulars of the count’s fate, which one 
of the guide related in a low, restrained tone, as if the sound of his 
own voice frightened him; but, while they linger at the cross, 
attend to his narrative, a flash of lightning glance upon the 
rocks, thunder mutter at a distance, and the travellers, now alarmed, 
quit this scene of solitary horror, in search of shelter. 

have regain their former track, the guides, as they pass on, 
endeavour to interest the count by various story of robbery, and 
even of murder, which had been perpetrate in the very place they must 
unavoidable pass, with account of their own dauntless courage and 
wonderful escapes. the chief guide, or rather he, who was the most 
completely armed, drawing forth one of the four pistols, that were 
tuck into his belt, swore, that it had shot three robber within the 
year. he then brandish a clasp-knife of enormous length, and was 
go to recount the wonderful execution it had done, when st. foix, 
perceiving, that blanche was terrified, interrupt him. the count, 
meanwhile, secret laugh at the terrible history and extravagant 
boast of the man, resolve to humour him, and, telling blanche in a 
whisper, his design, began to recount some exploit of his own, which 
infinite exceed any related by the guide. 

to these surprising circumstances he so artful gave the colouring of 
truth, that the courage of the guide was visibly affected by them, who 
continue silent, long after the count had cease to speak. the 
loquac of the chief hero thus laid asleep, the vigilance of his eyes 
and ear seem more thorough awakened, for he listened, with much 
appearance of anxiety, to the deep thunder, which murmur at 
intervals, and often paused, as the breeze, that was now rising, rush 
among the pines. but, when he made a sudden halt before a tuft of cork 
trees, that project over the road, and drew forth a pistol, before he 
would venture to brave the banditti which might lurk behind it, the 
count could no long refrain from laughter. 

have now, however, arrive at a level spot, somewhat sheltered from 
the air, by overhang cliff and by a wood of larch, that rose over 
the precipice on the left, and the guide being yet ignorant how far 
they were from the inn, the traveller determined to rest, till the 
moon should rise, or the storm disperse. blanche, recall to a sense 
of the present moment, look on the surrounding gloom, with terror; 
but give her hand to st. foix, she alighted, and the whole party 
enter a kind of cave, if such it could be called, which was only a 
shallow cavity, form by the curve of impending rocks. a light being 
struck, a fire was kindled, whose blaze afford some degree of 
cheerfulness, and no small comfort, for, though the day had been hot, 
the night air of this mountainous region was chilling; a fire was 
partly necessary also to keep off the wolves, with which those wild 
were infested. 

provisions being spread upon a projection of the rock, the count and 
his family partook of a supper, which, in a scene less rude, would 
certainly have been thought less excellent. when the repast was 
finished, st. foix, impatient for the moon, saunter along the 
precipice, to a point, that front the east; but all was yet wrapt in 
gloom, and the silence of night was broken only by the murmur of 
woods, that wave far below, or by distant thunder, and, now and then, 
by the faint voice of the party he had quitted. he viewed, with 
emotion of awful sublimity, the long volumes of sulphureous clouds, 
that float along the upper and middle regions of the air, and the 
lightning that flash from them, sometimes silently, and, at others, 
follow by sullen peal of thunder, which the mountain feeble 
prolonged, while the whole horizon, and the abyss, on which he stood, 
were discover in the momentary light. upon the succeed darkness, 
the fire, which had been kindle in the cave, threw a partial gleam, 
illumine some points of the opposite rocks, and the summit of 
pine-woods, that hung beetling on the cliff below, while their 
recess seem to frown in deep shade. 

st. foix stop to observe the picture, which the party in the cave 
presented, where the elegant form of blanche was finely contrast by 
the majestic figure of the count, who was seat by her on a rude 
stone, and each was render more impressive by the grotesque habit 
and strong features of the guide and other attendants, who were in the 
back ground of the piece. the effect of the light, too, was 
interesting; on the surrounding figures it threw a strong, though pale 
gleam, and glitter on their bright arms; while upon the foliage of a 
gigantic larch, that impende its shade over the cliff above, appear 
a red, dusky tint, deepen almost imperceptible into the black of 
night. 

while st. foix contemplate the scene, the moon, broad and yellow, rose 
over the eastern summits, from among embattled clouds, and show dim 
the grandeur of the heavens, the mass of vapours, that roll half way 
down the precipice beneath, and the doubtful mountains. 

what dreadful pleasure! there to stand sublime, 
like shipwreck’d mariner on desert coast, 
and view th’enormous waste of vapour, tost 
in billow length’ning to th’horizon round! 
the minstrel 


from this romantic reverie he was awaken by the voice of the guides, 
repeating his name, which was reverbe from cliff to cliff, till a 
hundred tongue seem to call him; when he soon quiet the fear of 
the count and the lady blanche, by return to the cave. as the storm, 
however, seem approaching, they did not quit their place of shelter; 
and the count, seat between his daughter and st. foix, endeavour to 
divert the fear of the former, and converse on subjects, relate to 
the natural history of the scene, among which they wandered. he spoke 
of the mineral and fossile substances, found in the depths of these 
mountains,—the vein of marble and granite, with which they abounded, 
the strata of shells, discover near their summits, many thousand 
fathom above the level of the sea, and at a vast distance from its 
present shore;—of the tremendous chasm and cavern of the rocks, the 
grotesque form of the mountains, and the various phenomena, that seem 
to stamp upon the world the history of the deluge. from the natural 
history he descended to the mention of event and circumstances, 
connected with the civil story of the pyrenees; name some of the most 
remarkable fortresses, which france and spain had erect in the pass 
of these mountains; and gave a brief account of some celebrated siege 
and encounter in early times, when ambition first frightened solitude 
from these her deep recesses, made her mountains, which before had 
echo only to the torrent’s roar, tremble with the clang of arms, and, 
when man’s first footstep in her sacred haunt had left the print of 
blood! 

as blanche sat, attentive to the narrative, that render the scene 
doubly interesting, and resigned to solemn emotion, while she 
considered, that she was on the very ground, once pollute by these 
events, her reverie was sudden interrupt by a sound, that came in 
the wind.—it was the distant bark of a watch-dog. the traveller 
listen with eager hope, and, as the wind blew stronger, fancied, that 
the sound came from no great distance; and, the guide have little 
doubt, that it proceed from the inn they were in search of, the count 
determined to pursue his way. the moon now afford a stronger, though 
still an uncertain light, as she move among broken clouds; and the 
travellers, led by the sound, recommence their journey along the brow 
of the precipice, precede by a single torch, that now contend with 
the moonlight; for the guides, believe they should reach the inn soon 
after sunset, had neglect to provide more. in silent caution they 
follow the sound, which was heard but at intervals, and which, after 
some time entire ceased. the guide endeavoured, however, to point 
their course to the quarter, whence it had issued, but the deep roaring 
of a torrent soon seize their attention, and presently they came to a 
tremendous chasm of the mountain, which seem to forbid all further 
progress. blanche alight from her mule, as did the count and st. 
foix, while the guide traverse the edge in search of a bridge, which, 
however rude, might convey them to the opposite side, and they, at 
length, confessed, what the count had begun to suspect, that they had 
been, for some time, doubtful of their way, and were now certain only, 
that they had lost it. 

at a little distance, was discover a rude and dangerous passage, 
form by an enormous pine, which, thrown across the chasm, united the 
opposite precipices, and which had been fell probably by the hunter, 
to facilitate his chace of the izard, or the wolf. the whole party, the 
guide excepted, shudder at the prospect of crossing this alpine 
bridge, whose side afford no kind of defence, and from which to fall 
was to die. the guides, however, prepared to lead over the mules, while 
blanche stood tremble on the brink, and listen to the roar of the 
waters, which were seen descend from rocks above, overhung with 
lofty pines, and thence precipitate themselves into the deep abyss, 
where their white surge gleam faint in the moonlight. the poor 
animal proceed over this perilous bridge with instinctive caution, 
neither frightened by the noise of the cataract, nor deceive by the 
gloom, which the impending foliage threw athwart their way. it was now, 
that the solitary torch, which had been hitherto of little service, was 
found to be an inestimable treasure; and blanche, terrified, shrinking, 
but endeavour to recollect all her firm and presence of mind, 
precede by her lover and support by her father, follow the red 
gleam of the torch, in safety, to the opposite cliff. 

as they went on, the heights contracted, and form a narrow pass, at 
the bottom of which, the torrent they had just crossed, was heard to 
thunder. but they were again cheer by the bark of a dog, keeping 
watch, perhaps, over the flock of the mountains, to protect them from 
the nightly descent of the wolves. the sound was much near than 
before, and, while they rejoice in the hope of soon reach a place 
of repose, a light was seen to glimmer at a distance. it appear at a 
height considerably above the level of their path, and was lost and 
seen again, as if the wave branch of tree sometimes exclude and 
then admitted its rays. the guide hallooe with all their strength, 
but the sound of no human voice was heard in return, and, at length, as 
a more effectual means of making themselves known, they fire a pistol. 
but, while they listen in anxious expectation, the noise of the 
explosion was alone heard, echo among the rocks, and it gradual 
sunk into silence, which no friendly hint of man disturbed. the light, 
however, that had been seen before, now became plainer, and, soon 
after, voice were heard indistinct on the wind; but, upon the guide 
repeating the call, the voice sudden ceased, and the light 
disappeared. 

the lady blanche was now almost sink beneath the pressure of 
anxiety, fatigue and apprehension, and the united effort of the count 
and st. foix could scarcely support her spirits. as they continue to 
advance, an object was perceive on a point of rock above, which, the 
strong ray of the moon then fall on it, appear to be a 
watch-tower. the count, from its situation and some other 
circumstances, had little doubt, that it was such, and believing, that 
the light had proceed from thence, he endeavour to reanimate his 
daughter’s spirits by the near prospect of shelter and repose, which, 
however rude the accommodation, a ruin watch-tower might afford. 

“numerous watch-towers have been erect among the pyrenees,” said the 
count, anxious only to call blanche’s attention from the subject of her 
fears; “and the method, by which they give intelligence of the approach 
of the enemy, is, you know, by fires, kindle on the summit of these 
edifices. signal have thus, sometimes, been communicate from post to 
post, along a frontier line of several hundred mile in length. then, 
as occasion may require, the lurk army emerge from their 
fortress and the forests, and march forth, to defend, perhaps, the 
entrance of some grand pass, where, plant themselves on the heights, 
they assail their astonish enemies, who wind along the glen below, 
with fragment of the shatter cliff, and pour death and defeat upon 
them. the ancient forts, and watch-towers, overlook the grand pass 
of the pyrenees, are careful preserved; but some of those in inferior 
station have been suffer to fall into decay, and are now frequent 
convert into the more peaceful habitation of the hunter, or the 
shepherd, who, after a day of toil, retire hither, and, with his 
faithful dogs, forgets, near a cheerful blaze, the labour of the chace, 
or the anxiety of collect his wandering flocks, while he is 
sheltered from the nightly storm.” 

“but are they always thus peaceful inhabited?” said the lady blanche. 

“no,” reply the count, “they are sometimes the asylum of france and 
spain smugglers, who cross the mountain with contraband goods from 
their respective countries, and the latter are particularly numerous, 
against whom strong party of the king’s troops are sometimes sent. 
but the desperate resolution of these adventurers, who, knowing, that, 
if they are taken, they must expiate the breach of the law by the most 
cruel death, travel in large parties, well armed, often daunt the 
courage of the soldiers. the smugglers, who seek only safety, never 
engage, when they can possibly avoid it; the military, also, who know, 
that in these encounters, danger is certain, and glory almost 
unattainable, are equally reluctant to fight; an engagement, therefore, 
very seldom happens, but, when it does, it never conclude till after 
the most desperate and bloody conflict. you are inattentive, blanche,” 
add the count: “i have weary you with a dull subject; but see, 
yonder, in the moonlight, is the edifice we have been in search of, and 
we are fortunate to be so near it, before the storm bursts.” 

blanche, look up, perceived, that they were at the foot of the 
cliff, on whose summit the building stood, but no light now issue from 
it; the bark of the dog too had, for some time, ceased, and the 
guide began to doubt, whether this was really the object of their 
search. from the distance, at which they survey it, shown imperfect 
by a cloudy moon, it appear to be of more extent than a single 
watch-tower; but the difficulty was how to ascend the height, whose 
abrupt declivity seem to afford no kind of pathway. 

while the guide carry forward the torch to examine the cliff, the 
count, remain with blanche and st. foix at its foot, under the 
shadow of the woods, endeavour again to beguile the time by 
conversation, but again anxiety abstracted the mind of blanche; and he 
then consulted, apart with st. foix, whether it would be advisable, 
should a path be found, to venture to an edifice, which might possibly 
harbour banditti. they considered, that their own party was not small, 
and that several of them were well armed; and, after enumerate the 
dangers, to be incur by passing the night in the open wild, exposed, 
perhaps, to the effects of a thunder-storm, there remain not a doubt, 
that they ought to endeavour to obtain admittance to the edifice above, 
at any hazard respecting the inhabitant it might harbour; but the 
darkness, and the dead silence, that surround it, appear to 
contradict the probability of its being inhabit at all. 

a shout from the guide arouse their attention, after which, in a few 
minutes, one of the count’s servant return with intelligence, that a 
path was found, and they immediately hasten to join the guides, when 
they all ascend a little winding way cut in the rock among thicket 
of dwarf wood, and, after much toil and some danger, reach the 
summit, where several ruin towers, surround by a massy wall, rose 
to their view, partially illumine by the moonlight. the space around 
the building was silent, and apparently forsaken, but the count was 
cautious; “step softly,” said he, in a low voice, “while we reconnoitre 
the edifice.” 

have proceed silent along for some paces, they stop at a gate, 
whose portals were terrible even in ruins, and, after a moment’s 
hesitation, pass on to the court of entrance, but pause again at the 
head of a terrace, which, branch from it, ran along the brow of a 
precipice. over this, rose the main body of the edifice, which was now 
seen to be, not a watch-tower, but one of those ancient fortresses, 
that, from age and neglect, had fallen to decay. many parts of it, 
however, appear to be still entire; it was built of grey stone, in 
the heavy saxon-gothic style, with enormous round towers, buttress of 
proportion strength, and the arch of the large gate, which seem 
to open into the hall of the fabric, was round, as was that of a window 
above. the air of solemnity, which must so strong have characterise 
the pile even in the days of its early strength, was now considerably 
heighten by its shatter battlements and half-demolished walls, and 
by the huge masses of ruin, scattered in its wide area, now silent and 
grass grown. in this court of entrance stood the gigantic remains of an 
oak, that seem to have flourish and decay with the building, 
which it still appear frowning to protect by the few remain 
branches, leafless and moss-grown, that crown its trunk, and whose 
wide extent told how enormous the tree had been in a former age. this 
fortress was evidently once of great strength, and, from its situation 
on a point of rock, impending over a deep glen, had been of great power 
to annoy, as well as to resist; the count, therefore, as he stood 
survey it, was somewhat surprised, that it had been suffered, 
ancient as it was, to sink into ruins, and its present lonely and 
desert air excited in his breast emotion of melancholy awe. while he 
indulged, for a moment, these emotions, he thought he heard a sound of 
remote voice steal upon the stillness, from within the building, the 
front of which he again survey with scrutinize eyes, but yet no 
light was visible. he now determined to walk round the fort, to that 
remote part of it, whence he thought the voice had arisen, that he 
might examine whether any light could be discern there, before he 
venture to knock at the gate; for this purpose, he enter upon the 
terrace, where the remains of cannon were yet apparent in the thick 
walls, but he had not proceed many paces, when his steps were 
sudden arrest by the loud bark of a dog within, and which he 
fancy to be the same, whose voice had been the means of bring the 
traveller thither. it now appear certain, that the place was 
inhabited, and the count return to consult again with st. foix, 
whether he should try to obtain admittance, for its wild aspect had 
somewhat shaken his former resolution; but, after a second 
consultation, he submit to the considerations, which before 
determined him, and which were strengthen by the discovery of the 
dog, that guarded the fort, as well as by the still that pervade 
it. he, therefore, ordered one of his servant to knock at the gate, 
who was advance to obey him, when a light appear through the 
loop-hole of one of the towers, and the count call loudly, but, 
receiving no answer, he went up to the gate himself, and struck upon it 
with an iron-pointed pole, which had assist him to climb the steep. 
when the echo had ceased, that this blow had awakened, the renew 
barking,—and there were now more than one dog,—was the only sound, that 
was heard. the count step back, a few paces, to observe whether the 
light was in the tower, and, perceiving, that it was gone, he return 
to the portal, and had lift the pole to strike again, when again he 
fancy he heard the murmur of voice within, and pause to listen. he 
was confirmed in the supposition, but they were too remote, to be heard 
otherwise than in a murmur, and the count now let the pole fall heavy 
upon the gate; when almost immediately a profound silence followed. it 
was apparent, that the people within had heard the sound, and their 
caution in admit stranger gave him a favourable opinion of them. 
“they are either hunter or shepherds,” said he, “who, like ourselves, 
have probably sought shelter from the night within these walls, and are 
fearful of admit strangers, lest they should prove robbers. i will 
endeavour to remove their fears.” so saying, he call aloud, “we are 
friends, who ask shelter from the night.” in a few moments, steps were 
heard within, which approached, and a voice then enquired—“who calls?” 
“friends,” repeated the count; “open the gates, and you shall know 
more.”—strong bolt were now heard to be undrawn, and a man, armed with 
a hunting spear, appeared. “what is it you want at this hour?” said he. 
the count beckon his attendants, and then answered, that he wish to 
enquire the way to the nearest cabin. “are you so little acquaint 
with these mountains,” said the man, “as not to know, that there is 
none, within several leagues? i cannot show you the way; you must seek 
it—there’s a moon.” saying this, he was close the gate, and the count 
was turning away, half disappointed and half afraid, when another voice 
was heard from above, and, on look up, he saw a light, and a man’s 
face, at the grate of the portal. “stay, friend, you have lost your 
way?” said the voice. “you are hunters, i suppose, like ourselves: i 
will be with you presently.” the voice ceased, and the light 
disappeared. blanche had been alarm by the appearance of the man, who 
had open the gate, and she now entreat her father to quit the 
place; but the count had observe the hunter’s spear, which he carried; 
and the words from the tower encourage him to await the event. the 
gate was soon opened, and several men in hunters’ habits, who had heard 
above what had pass below, appeared, and, have listen some time 
to the count, told him he was welcome to rest there for the night. they 
then pressed him, with much courtesy, to enter, and to partake of such 
fare as they were about to sit down to. the count, who had observe 
them attentive while they spoke, was cautious, and somewhat 
suspicious; but he was also weary, fearful of the approach storm, 
and of encounter alpine heights in the obscurity of night; being 
likewise somewhat confident in the strength and number of his 
attendants, he, after some further consideration, determined to accept 
the invitation. with this resolution he call his servants, who, 
advance round the tower, behind which some of them had silent 
listen to this conference, follow their lord, the lady blanche, and 
st. foix into the fortress. the stranger led them on to a large and 
rude hall, partially seen by a fire that blaze at its extremity, round 
which four men, in the hunter’s dress, were seated, and on the hearth 
were several dogs stretch in sleep. in the middle of the hall stood a 
large table, and over the fire some part of an animal was boiling. as 
the count approached, the men arose, and the dogs, half raise 
themselves, look fierce at the strangers, but, on hearing their 
masters’ voices, kept their posture on the hearth. 

blanche look round this gloomy and spacious hall; then at the men, 
and to her father, who, smile cheerful at her, address himself to 
the hunters. “this is a hospitable hearth,” said he, “the blaze of a 
fire is revive after have wander so long in these dreary wilds. 
your dogs are tired; what success have you had?” “such as we usually 
have,” reply one of the men, who had been seat in the hall, “we 
kill our game with tolerable certainty.” “these are fellow hunters,” 
said one of the men who had brought the count hither, “that have lost 
their way, and i have told them there is room enough in the fort for us 
all.” “very true, very true,” reply his companion, “what luck have 
you had in the chace, brothers? we have kill two izards, and that, 
you will say, is pretty well.” “you mistake, friend,” said the count, 
“we are not hunters, but travellers; but, if you will admit us to 
hunters’ fare, we shall be well contented, and will repay your 
kindness.” “sit down then, brother,” said one of the men: “jacques, lay 
more fuel on the fire, the kid will soon be ready; bring a seat for the 
lady too. ma’amselle, will you taste our brandy? it is true barcelona, 
and as bright as ever flow from a keg.” blanche timid smiled, and 
was go to refuse, when her father prevent her, by taking, with a 
good humour air, the glass offer to his daughter; and mons. st. 
foix, who was seat next her, pressed her hand, and gave her an 
encourage look, but her attention was engaged by a man, who sat 
silent by the fire, observing st. foix, with a steady and earnest 
eye. 

“you lead a jolly life here,” said the count. “the life of a hunter is 
a pleasant and a healthy one; and the repose is sweet, which succeed 
to your labour.” 

“yes,” reply one of his hosts, “our life is pleasant enough. we live 
here only during the summer, and autumnal months; in winter, the place 
is dreary, and the swoln torrents, that descend from the heights, put a 
stop to the chace.” 

“’tis a life of liberty and enjoyment,” said the count: “i should like 
to pass a month in your way very well.” 

“we find employment for our gun too,” said a man who stood behind the 
count: “here are plenty of birds, of delicious flavour, that feed upon 
the wild thyme and herbs, that grow in the valleys. now i think of it, 
there is a brace of bird hung up in the stone gallery; go fetch them, 
jacques, we will have them dressed.” 

the count now made enquiry, concerning the method of pursue the chace 
among the rocks and precipice of these romantic regions, and was 
listen to a curious detail, when a horn was sound at the gate. 
blanche look timid at her father, who continue to converse on the 
subject of the chace, but whose countenance was somewhat expressive of 
anxiety, and who often turn his eyes towards that part of the hall 
nearest the gate. the horn sound again, and a loud halloo succeeded. 
“these are some of our companions, return from their day’s labour,” 
said a man, go lazy from his seat towards the gate; and in a few 
minutes, two men appeared, each with a gun over his shoulder, and 
pistol in his belt. “what cheer, my lads? what cheer?” said they, as 
they approached. “what luck?” return their companions: “have you 
brought home your supper? you shall have none else.” 

“hah! who the devil have you brought home?” said they in bad spanish, 
on perceive the count’s party, “are they from france, or spain?—where 
did you meet with them?” 

“they met with us, and a merry meeting too,” reply his companion 
aloud in good french. “this chevalier, and his party, had lost their 
way, and ask a night’s lodging in the fort.” the other made no 
reply, but threw down a kind of knapsack, and drew forth several brace 
of birds. the bag sound heavy as it fell to the ground, and the 
glitter of some bright metal within glance on the eye of the count, 
who now surveyed, with a more enquiring look, the man, that held the 
knapsack. he was a tall robust figure, of a hard countenance, and had 
short black hair, curling in his neck. instead of the hunter’s dress, 
he wore a fade military uniform; sandal were lace on his broad legs, 
and a kind of short trowser hung from his waist. on his head he wore a 
leathern cap, somewhat resemble in shape an ancient roman helmet; but 
the brow that scowl beneath it, would have characterise those of 
the barbarians, who conquer rome, rather than those of a roman 
soldier. the count, at length, turn away his eyes, and remain 
silent and thoughtful, till, again raise them, he perceive a figure 
standing in an obscure part of the hall, fixed in attentive gaze on st. 
foix, who was converse with blanche, and did not observe this; but 
the count, soon after, saw the same man look over the shoulder of 
the soldier as attentive at himself. he withdrew his eye, when that 
of the count met it, who felt mistrust gathering fast upon his mind, 
but fear to betray it in his countenance, and, force his features 
to assume a smile, address blanche on some indifferent subject. when 
he again look round, he perceived, that the soldier and his companion 
were gone. 

the man, who was call jacques, now return from the stone gallery. 
“a fire is light there,” said he, “and the bird are dressing; the 
table too is spread there, for that place is warm than this.” 

his companion approve of the removal, and invite their guest to 
follow to the gallery, of whom blanche appear distressed, and 
remain seated, and st. foix look at the count, who said, he 
prefer the comfortable blaze of the fire he was then near. the 
hunters, however, commend the warmth of the other apartment, and 
pressed his removal with such seeming courtesy, that the count, half 
doubting, and half fearful of betray his doubts, consent to go. 
the long and ruinous passages, through which they went, somewhat 
daunt him, but the thunder, which now burst in loud peal above, made 
it dangerous to quit this place of shelter, and he forbore to provoke 
his conductor by showing that he distrust them. the hunter led the 
way, with a lamp; the count and st. foix, who wish to please their 
host by some instance of familiarity, carry each a seat, and 
blanche followed, with falter steps. as she pass on, part of her 
dress caught on a nail in the wall, and, while she stopped, somewhat 
too scrupulously, to disengage it, the count, who was talk to st. 
foix, and neither of whom observe the circumstance, follow their 
conductor round an abrupt angle of the passage, and blanche was left 
behind in darkness. the thunder prevent them from hearing her call 
but, have disengaged her dress, she quick followed, as she thought, 
the way they had taken. a light, that glimmer at a distance, 
confirmed this belief, and she proceed towards an open door, whence 
it issued, conjecture the room beyond to be the stone gallery the men 
had spoken of. hearing voice as she advanced, she pause within a few 
pace of the chamber, that she might be certain whether she was right, 
and from thence, by the light of a lamp, that hung from the ceiling, 
observe four men, seat round a table, over which they lean in 
apparent consultation. in one of them she distinguished the features of 
him, whom she had observed, gaze at st. foix, with such deep 
attention; and who was now speak in an earnest, though restrained 
voice, till, one of his companion seeming to oppose him, they spoke 
together in a loud and harsh tone. blanche, alarm by perceive 
that neither her father, nor st. foix were there, and terrify at the 
fierce countenance and manners of these men, was turning hasty from 
the chamber, to pursue her search of the gallery, when she heard one of 
the men say: 

“let all dispute end here. who talks of danger? follow my advice, and 
there will be none—secure _them_, and the rest are an easy prey.” 
blanche, struck with these words, pause a moment, to hear more. “there 
is nothing to be got by the rest,” said one of his companions, “i am 
never for blood when i can help it—dispatch the two others, and our 
business is done; the rest may go.” 

“may they so?” exclaim the first ruffian, with a tremendous 
oath—“what! to tell how we have disposed of their masters, and to send 
the king’s troops to drag us to the wheel! you were always a choice 
adviser—i warrant we have not yet forgot st. thomas’s eve last year.” 

blanche’s heart now sunk with horror. her first impulse was to retreat 
from the door, but, when she would have gone, her tremble frame 
refuse to support her, and, have totter a few paces, to a more 
obscure part of the passage, she was compel to listen to the 
dreadful council of those, who, she was no long suffer to doubt, 
were banditti. in the next moment, she heard the following words, “why 
you would not murder the whole _gang?_” 

“i warrant our lives are as good as theirs,” reply his comrade. “if 
we don’t kill them, they will hang us: better they should die than we 
be hanged.” 

“better, better,” cry his comrades. 

“to commit murder, is a hopeful way of escape the gallows!” said the 
first ruffian—“many an honest fellow has run his head into the noose 
that way, though.” there was a pause of some moments, during which they 
appear to be considering. 

“confound those fellows,” exclaim one of the robber impatiently, 
“they ought to have been here by this time; they will come back 
presently with the old story, and no booty: if they were here, our 
business would be plain and easy. i see we shall not be able to do the 
business tonight, for our numbers are not equal to the enemy, and in 
the morning they will be for march off, and how can we detain them 
without force?” 

“i have been thinking of a scheme, that will do,” said one of his 
comrades: “if we can dispatch the two chevalier silently, it will be 
easy to master the rest.” 

“that’s a plausible scheme, in good faith,” said another with a smile 
of scorn—“if i can eat my way through the prison wall, i shall be at 
liberty!—how can we dispatch them _silently?_” 

“by poison,” reply his companions. 

“well said! that will do,” said the second ruffian, “that will give a 
lingering death too, and satisfy my revenge. these baron shall take 
care how they again tempt our vengeance.” 

“i knew the son, the moment i saw him,” said the man, whom blanche had 
observe gaze on st. foix, “though he do not know me; the father i 
had almost forgotten.” 

“well, you may say what you will,” said the third ruffian, “but i don’t 
believe he is the baron, and i am as likely to know as any of you, for 
i was one of them, that attack him, with our brave lads, that 
suffered.” 

“and was not i another?” said the first ruffian, “i tell you he is the 
baron; but what do it signify whether he is or not?—shall we let all 
this booty go out of our hands? it is not often we have such luck at 
this. while we run the chance of the wheel for smuggle a few pound 
of tobacco, to cheat the king’s manufactory, and of break our neck 
down the precipice in the chace of our food; and, now and then, rob a 
brother smuggler, or a straggle pilgrim, of what scarcely repay us 
the powder we fire at them, shall we let such a prize as this go? why 
they have enough about them to keep us for—” 

“i am not for that, i am not for that,” reply the third robber, “let 
us make the most of them: only, if this is the baron, i should like to 
have a flash the more at him, for the sake of our brave comrades, that 
he brought to the gallows.” 

“aye, aye, flash as much as you will,” rejoin the first man, “but i 
tell you the baron is a tall man.” 

“confound your quibbling,” said the second ruffian, “shall we let them 
go or not? if we stay here much longer, they will take the hint, and 
march off without our leave. let them be who they will, they are rich, 
or why all those servants? did you see the ring, he, you call the 
baron, had on his finger?—it was a diamond; but he has not got it on 
now: he saw me look at it, i warrant, and took it off.” 

“aye, and then there is the picture; did you see that? she has not 
taken that off,” observe the first ruffian, “it hang at her neck; if 
it had not sparkle so, i should not have found it out, for it was 
almost hid by her dress; those are diamond too, and a rare many of 
them there must be, to go round such a large picture.” 

“but how are we to manage this business?” said the second ruffian: “let 
us talk of that, there is no fear of there being booty enough, but how 
are we to secure it?” 

“aye, aye,” said his comrades, “let us talk of that, and remember no 
time is to be lost.” 

“i am still for poison,” observe the third, “but consider their 
number; why there are nine or ten of them, and armed too; when i saw so 
many at the gate, i was not for letting them in, you know, nor you 
either.” 

“i thought they might be some of our enemies,” reply the second, “i 
did not so much mind numbers.” 

“but you must mind them now,” rejoin his comrade, “or it will be 
worse for you. we are not more than six, and how can we master ten by 
open force? i tell you we must give some of them a dose, and the rest 
may then be managed.” 

“i’ll tell you a better way,” rejoin the other impatiently, “draw 
closer.” 

blanche, who had listen to this conversation, in an agony, which it 
would be impossible to describe, could no long distinguish what was 
said, for the ruffian now spoke in lower voices; but the hope, that 
she might save her friends from the plot, if she could find her way 
quick to them, sudden reanimate her spirits, and lent her strength 
enough to turn her steps in search of the gallery. terror, however, and 
dark conspire against her, and, have move a few yards, the 
feeble light, that issue from the chamber, no long even contend 
with the gloom, and, her foot stumble over a step that cross the 
passage, she fell to the ground. 

the noise startle the banditti, who became sudden silent, and then 
all rush to the passage, to examine whether any person was there, who 
might have overheard their councils. blanche saw them approaching, and 
perceive their fierce and eager looks: but, before she could raise 
herself, they discover and seize her, and, as they drag her 
towards the chamber they had quitted, her scream drew from them 
horrible threatenings. 

have reach the room, they began to consult what they should do with 
her. “let us first know what she had heard,” said the chief robber. 
“how long have you been in the passage, lady, and what brought you 
there?” 

“let us first secure that picture,” said one of his comrades, 
approach the tremble blanche. “fair lady, by your leave that 
picture is mine; come, surrender it, or i shall seize it.” 

blanche, entreat their mercy, immediately gave up the miniature, 
while another of the ruffian fierce interrogate her, concerning 
what she had overheard of their conversation, when, her confusion and 
terror too plainly telling what her tongue fear to confess, the 
ruffian look expressive upon one another, and two of them withdrew 
to a remote part of the room, as if to consult further. 

“these are diamonds, by st. peter!” exclaim the fellow, who had been 
examine the miniature, “and here is a very pretty picture too, 
“faith; as handsome a young chevalier, as you would wish to see by a 
summer’s sun. lady, this is your spouse, i warrant, for it is the 
spark, that was in your company just now.” 

blanche, sink with terror, conjure him to have pity on her, and, 
deliver him her purse, promise to say nothing of what had passed, 
if he would suffer her to return to her friends. 

he smile ironically, and was go to reply, when his attention was 
call off by a distant noise; and, while he listened, he grasp the 
arm of blanche more firmly, as if he fear she would escape from him, 
and she again shriek for help. 

the approach sound call the ruffian from the other part of the 
chamber. “we are betrayed,” said they; “but let us listen a moment, 
perhaps it is only our comrade come in from the mountains, and if so, 
our work is sure; listen!” 

a distant discharge of shot confirmed this supposition for a moment, 
but, in the next, the former sound drawing nearer, the clash of 
swords, mingle with the voice of loud contention and with heavy 
groans, were distinguished in the avenue leading to the chamber. while 
the ruffian prepared their arms, they heard themselves call by some 
of their comrade afar off, and then a shrill horn was sound without 
the fortress, a signal, it appeared, they too well understood; for 
three of them, leave the lady blanche to the care of the fourth, 
instantly rush from the chamber. 

while blanche, trembling, and nearly fainting, was supplicate for 
release, she heard amid the tumult, that approached, the voice of st. 
foix, and she had scarcely renew her shriek, when the door of the 
room was thrown open, and he appeared, much disfigure with blood, and 
pursue by several ruffians. blanche neither saw, nor heard any more; 
her head swam, her sight failed, and she became senseless in the arms 
of the robber, who had detain her. 

when she recovered, she perceived, by the gloomy light that tremble 
round her, that she was in the same chamber, but neither the count, st. 
foix, nor any other person appeared, and she continued, for some time, 
entire still, and nearly in a state of stupefaction. but, the 
dreadful image of the past returning, she endeavour to raise 
herself, that she might seek her friends, when a sullen groan, at a 
little distance, remind her of st. foix, and of the condition, in 
which she had seen him enter this room; then, start from the floor, 
by a sudden effort of horror, she advanced to the place whence the 
sound had proceeded, where a body was lie stretch upon the 
pavement, and where, by the glimmer light of a lamp, she discover 
the pale and disfigure countenance of st. foix. her horrors, at that 
moment, may be easily imagined. he was speechless; his eyes were half 
closed, and, on the hand, which she grasp in the agony of despair, 
cold damp had settled. while she vain repeated his name, and call 
for assistance, steps approached, and a person enter the chamber, 
who, she soon perceived, was not the count, her father; but, what was 
her astonishment, when, supplicate him to give his assistance to st. 
foix, she discover ludovico! he scarcely pause to recognise her, but 
immediately bound up the wound of the chevalier, and, perceiving, that 
he had faint probably from loss of blood, ran for water; but he had 
been absent only a few moments, when blanche heard other steps 
approaching, and, while she was almost frantic with apprehension of the 
ruffians, the light of a torch flash upon the walls, and then count 
de villefort appeared, with an affrighte countenance, and breathless 
with impatience, calling upon his daughter. at the sound of his voice, 
she rose, and ran to his arms, while he, letting fall the bloody sword 
he held, pressed her to his bosom in a transport of gratitude and joy, 
and then hasty enquire for st. foix, who now gave some sign of 
life. ludovico soon after return with water and brandy, the former 
was applied to his lips, and the latter to his temple and hands, and 
blanche, at length, saw him unclose his eyes, and then heard him 
enquire for her; but the joy she felt, on this occasion, was 
interrupt by new alarms, when ludovico said it would be necessary to 
remove mons. st. foix immediately, and added, “the banditti, that are 
out, my lord, were expect home, an hour ago, and they will certainly 
find us, if we delay. that shrill horn, they know, is never sound by 
their comrade but on most desperate occasions, and it echo among the 
mountain for many league round. i have known them brought home by its 
sound even from the pied de melicant. is anybody standing watch at the 
great gate, my lord?” 

“nobody,” reply the count; “the rest of my people are now scattered 
about, i scarcely know where. go, ludovico, collect them together, and 
look out yourself, and listen if you hear the feet of mules.” 

ludovico then hurried away, and the count consult as to the means of 
remove st. foix, who could not have borne the motion of a mule, even 
if his strength would have support him in the saddle. 

while the count was telling, that the banditti, whom they had found in 
the fort, were secure in the dungeon, blanche observe that he was 
himself wounded, and that his left arm was entire useless; but he 
smile at her anxiety, assure her the wound was trifling. 

the count’s servants, except two who kept watch at the gate, now 
appeared, and, soon after, ludovico. “i think i hear mule coming along 
the glen, my lord,” said he, “but the roaring of the torrent below will 
not let me be certain; however, i have brought what will serve the 
chevalier,” he added, showing a bear’s skin, fasten to a couple of 
long poles, which had been adapt for the purpose of bring home 
such of the banditti as happen to be wound in their encounters. 
ludovico spread it on the ground, and, place the skin of several 
goat upon it, made a kind of bed, into which the chevalier, who was 
however now much revived, was gently lifted; and, the pole being 
raise upon the shoulder of the guides, whose footing among these 
steep could best be depend upon, he was borne along with an easy 
motion. some of the count’s servant were also wounded—but not 
materially, and, their wound being bound up, they now follow to the 
great gate. as they pass along the hall, a loud tumult was heard at 
some distance, and blanche was terrified. “it is only those villain in 
the dungeon, my lady,” said ludovico. “they seem to be burst it 
open,” said the count. “no, my lord,” reply ludovico, “it has an iron 
door; we have nothing to fear from them; but let me go first, and look 
out from the rampart.” 

they quick follow him, and found their mule browse before the 
gates, where the party listen anxiously, but heard no sound, except 
that of the torrent below and of the early breeze, sigh among the 
branch of the old oak, that grew in the court; and they were now glad 
to perceive the first tint of dawn over the mountain-tops. when they 
had mount their mules, ludovico, undertaking to be their guide, led 
them by an easy path, than that by which they had formerly ascended, 
into the glen. “we must avoid that valley to the east, my lord,” said 
he, “or we may meet the banditti; they went out that way in the 
morning.” 

the travellers, soon after, quit this glen, and found themselves in 
a narrow valley that stretch towards the north-west. the morning 
light upon the mountain now strengthen fast, and gradual 
discover the green hillocks, that skirt the winding feet of the 
cliffs, tuft with cork tree, and ever-green oak. the thunder-clouds 
being dispersed, had left the sky perfectly serene, and blanche was 
revive by the fresh breeze, and by the view of verdure, which the late 
rain had brightened. soon after, the sun arose, when the dripping 
rocks, with the shrub that fringe their summits, and many a turfy 
slope below, sparkle in his rays. a wreath of mist was seen, floating 
along the extremity of the valley, but the gale bore it before the 
travellers, and the sunbeam gradual drew it up towards the summit of 
the mountains. they had proceed about a league, when, st. foix have 
complain of extreme faintness, they stop to give him refreshment, 
and, that the men, who bore him, might rest. ludovico had brought from 
the fort some flask of rich spain wine, which now prove a revive 
cordial not only to st. foix but to the whole party, though to him it 
gave only temporary relief, for it fed the fever, that burn in his 
veins, and he could neither disguise in his countenance the anguish he 
suffered, nor suppress the wish, that he was arrive at the inn, where 
they had design to pass the preceding night. 

while they thus repose themselves under the shade of the dark green 
pines, the count desire ludovico to explain shortly, by what means he 
had disappear from the north apartment, how he came into the hand of 
the banditti, and how he had contribute so essentially to serve him 
and his family, for to him he just attribute their present 
deliverance. ludovico was go to obey him, when sudden they heard 
the echo of a pistol-shot, from the way they had passed, and they rose 
in alarm, hasty to pursue their route. 



chapter xiii 

ah why did fate his steps decoy 
in stormy path to roam, 
remote from all congenial joy! 
beattie 


emily, meanwhile, was still suffering anxiety as to the fate of 
valancourt; but theresa, having, at length, found a person, whom she 
could entrust on her errand to the steward, informed her, that the 
messenger would return on the following day; and emily promise to be 
at the cottage, theresa being too lame to attend her. 

in the evening, therefore, emily set out alone for the cottage, with a 
melancholy foreboding, concerning valancourt, while, perhaps, the gloom 
of the hour might contribute to depress her spirits. it was a grey 
autumnal evening towards the close of the season; heavy mists partially 
obscure the mountains, and a chill breeze, that sigh among the 
beech woods, strew her path with some of their last yellow leaves. 
these, circle in the blast and foretell the death of the year, 
gave an image of desolate to her mind, and, in her fancy, seem to 
announce the death of valancourt. of this she had, indeed, more than 
once so strong a presentiment, that she was on the point of return 
home, feeling herself unequal to an encounter with the certainty she 
anticipated, but, contend with her emotions, she so far command 
them, as to be able to proceed. 

while she walk mournful on, gaze on the long volumes of vapour, 
that pour upon the sky, and watch the swallows, toss along the 
wind, now disappear among tempestuous clouds, and then emerging, for 
a moment, in circle upon the calm air, the affliction and 
vicissitudes of her late life seem portray in these fleeting 
images;—thus had she been toss upon the stormy sea of misfortune for 
the last year, with but short interval of peace, if peace that could 
be called, which was only the delay of evils. and now, when she had 
escape from so many dangers, was become independent of the will of 
those, who had oppress her, and found herself mistress of a large 
fortune, now, when she might reasonably have expect happiness, she 
perceive that she was as distant from it as ever. she would have 
accused herself of weakness and ingratitude in thus suffering a sense 
of the various blessing she possessed to be overcome by that of a 
single misfortune, had this misfortune affected herself alone; but, 
when she had wept for valancourt even as living, tear of compassion 
had mingle with those of regret, and while she lament a human being 
degrade to vice, and consequently to misery, reason and humanity 
claim these tears, and fortitude had not yet taught her to separate 
them from those of love; in the present moments, however, it was not 
the certainty of his guilt, but the apprehension of his death (of a 
death also, to which she herself, however innocently, appear to have 
been in some degree instrumental) that oppress her. this fear 
increased, as the means of certainty concerning it approached; and, 
when she came within view of theresa’s cottage, she was so much 
disordered, and her resolution fail her so entirely, that, unable to 
proceed, she rest on a bank, beside her path; where, as she sat, the 
wind that groan sullen among the lofty branch above, seem to 
her melancholy imagination to bear the sound of distant lamentation, 
and, in the pause of the gust, she still fancy she heard the feeble 
and far-off note of distress. attention convinced her, that this was 
no more than fancy; but the increase gloom, which seem the sudden 
close of day, soon warn her to depart, and, with falter steps, she 
again move toward the cottage. through the case appear the 
cheerful blaze of a wood fire, and theresa, who had observe emily 
approaching, was already at the door to receive her. 

“it is a cold evening, madam,” said she, “storms are coming on, and i 
thought you would like a fire. do take this chair by the hearth.” 

emily, thank her for this consideration, sat down, and then, look 
in her face, on which the wood fire threw a gleam, she was struck with 
its expression, and, unable to speak, sunk back in her chair with a 
countenance so full of woe, that theresa instantly comprehend the 
occasion of it, but she remain silent. “ah!” said emily, at length, 
“it is unnecessary for me to ask the result of your enquiry, your 
silence, and that look, sufficient explain it;—he is dead!” 

“alas! my dear young lady,” reply theresa, while tear fill her 
eyes, “this world is made up of trouble! the rich have their share as 
well as the poor! but we must all endeavour to bear what heaven 
pleases.” 

“he is dead, then!”—interrupted emily—“valancourt is dead!” 

“a-well-a-day! i fear he is,” reply theresa. 

“you fear!” said emily, “do you only fear?” 

“alas! yes, madam, i fear he is! neither the steward, nor any of the 
epourville family, have heard of him since he left languedoc, and the 
count is in great affliction about him, for he say he was always 
punctual in writing, but that now he has not received a line from him, 
since he left languedoc; he appoint to be at home, three week ago, 
but he has neither come, nor written, and they fear some accident has 
befallen him. alas! that ever i should live to cry for his death! i am 
old, and might have die without being missed, but he”—emily was faint, 
and ask for some water, and theresa, alarm by the voice, in which 
she spoke, hasten to her assistance, and, while she held the water to 
emily’s lips, continued, “my dear young mistress, do not take it so to 
heart; the chevalier may be alive and well, for all this; let us hope 
the best!” 

“o no! i cannot hope,” said emily, “i am acquaint with circumstances, 
that will not suffer me to hope. i am somewhat better now, and can hear 
what you have to say. tell me, i entreat, the particulars of what you 
know.” 

“stay, till you are a little better, mademoiselle, you look sadly!” 

“o no, theresa, tell me all, while i have the power to hear it,” said 
emily, “tell me all, i conjure you!” 

“well, madam, i will then; but the steward did not say much, for 
richard say he seem shy of talk about mons. valancourt, and what 
he gather was from gabriel, one of the servants, who said he had 
heard it from my lord’s gentleman.” 

“what did he hear?” said emily. 

“why, madam, richard has but a bad memory, and could not remember half 
of it, and, if i had not ask him a great many questions, i should 
have heard little indeed. but he say that gabriel said, that he and 
all the other servant were in great trouble about m. valancourt, for 
that he was such a kind young gentleman, they all love him, as well as 
if he had been their own brother—and now, to think what was become of 
him! for he use to be so courteous to them all, and, if any of them 
had been in fault, m. valancourt was the first to persuade my lord to 
forgive them. and then, if any poor family was in distress, m. 
valancourt was the first, too, to relieve them, though some folks, not 
a great way off, could have afford that much better than he. and 
then, said gabriel, he was so gentle to everybody, and, for all he had 
such a noble look with him, he never would command, and call about him, 
as some of your quality people do, and we never minded him the less for 
that. nay, say gabriel, for that matter, we minded him the more, and 
would all have run to obey him at a word, soon than if some folks had 
told us what to do at full length; aye, and were more afraid of 
displease him, too, than of them, that use rough words to us.” 

emily, who no long considered it to be dangerous to listen to praise, 
bestow on valancourt, did not attempt to interrupt theresa, but sat, 
attentive to her words, though almost overwhelm with grief. “my 
lord,” continue theresa, “frets about m. valancourt sadly, and the 
more, because, they say, he had been rather harsh against him lately. 
gabriel say he had it from my lord’s valet, that m. valancourt had 
_comported_ himself wildly at paris, and had spent a great deal of 
money, more a great deal than my lord liked, for he love money better 
than m. valancourt, who had been led astray sadly. nay, for that 
matter, m. valancourt had been put into prison at paris, and my lord, 
say gabriel, refuse to take him out, and said he deserve to suffer; 
and, when old gregoire, the butler, heard of this, he actually bought a 
walking-stick to take with him to paris, to visit his young master; but 
the next thing we hear is, that m. valancourt is coming home. o, it was 
a joyful day when he came; but he was sadly altered, and my lord look 
very cool upon him, and he was very sad, indeed. and, soon after, he 
went away again into languedoc, and, since that time, we have never 
seen him.” 

theresa paused, and emily, sigh deeply, remain with her eyes fixed 
upon the floor, without speaking. after a long pause, she enquire what 
further theresa had heard. “yet why should i ask?” she added; “what you 
have already told is too much. o valancourt! thou art gone—for ever 
gone! and i—i have murder thee!” these words, and the countenance of 
despair which accompany them, alarm theresa, who began to fear, 
that the shock of the intelligence emily had just received, had 
affected her senses. “my dear young lady, be composed,” said she, “and 
do not say such frightful words. you murder m. valancourt,—dear heart!” 
emily reply only by a heavy sigh. 

“dear lady, it break my heart to see you look so,” said theresa, “do 
not sit with your eyes upon the ground, and all so pale and melancholy; 
it frighten me to see you.” emily was still silent, and did not appear 
to hear anything that was said to her. “besides, mademoiselle,” 
continue theresa, “m. valancourt may be alive and merry yet, for what 
we know.” 

at the mention of his name, emily raise her eyes, and fixed them, in a 
wild gaze, upon theresa, as if she was endeavour to understand what 
had been said. “aye, my dear lady,” said theresa, mistake the meaning 
of this considerate air, “m. valancourt may be alive and merry yet.” 

on the repetition of these words, emily comprehend their import, but, 
instead of produce the effect intended, they seem only to heighten 
her distress. she rose hasty from her chair, pace the little room, 
with quick steps, and, often sigh deeply, clasp her hands, and 
shuddered. 

meanwhile, theresa, with simple, but honest affection, endeavour to 
comfort her; put more wood on the fire, stir it up into a bright 
blaze, swept the hearth, set the chair, which emily had left, in a 
warm situation, and then drew forth from a cupboard a flask of wine. 
“it is a stormy night, madam,” said she, “and blow cold—do come near 
the fire, and take a glass of this wine; it will comfort you, as it has 
done me, often and often, for it is not such wine as one get every 
day; it is rich languedoc, and the last of six flask that m. 
valancourt sent me, the night before he left gascony for paris. they 
have serve me, ever since, as cordials, and i never drink it, but i 
think of him, and what kind words he said to me when he gave them. 
‘theresa,’ say he, ‘you are not young now, and should have a glass of 
good wine, now and then. i will send you a few flasks, and, when you 
taste them, you will sometimes remember me your friend.’ yes—those were 
his very words—me your friend!” emily still pace the room, without 
seeming to hear what theresa said, who continue speaking. “and i have 
remember him, often enough, poor young gentleman!—for he gave me this 
roof for a shelter, and that, which has support me. ah! he is in 
heaven, with my blessed master, if ever saint was!” 

theresa’s voice faltered; she wept, and set down the flask, unable to 
pour out the wine. her grief seem to recall emily from her own, who 
went towards her, but then stopped, and, have gaze on her, for a 
moment, turn sudden away, as if overwhelm by the reflection, that 
it was valancourt, whom theresa lamented. 

while she yet pace the room, the still, soft note of an oboe, or 
flute, was heard mingle with the blast, the sweet of which 
affected emily’s spirits; she pause a moment in attention; the tender 
tones, as they swell along the wind, till they were lost again in the 
rude gust, came with a plaintiveness, that touched her heart, and she 
melt into tears. 

“aye,” said theresa, dry her eyes, “there is richard, our 
neighbour’s son, play on the oboe; it is sad enough, to hear such 
sweet music now.” emily continue to weep, without replying. “he often 
play of an evening,” add theresa, “and, sometimes, the young folks 
dance to the sound of his oboe. but, dear young lady! do not cry so; 
and pray take a glass of this wine,” continue she, pour some into a 
glass, and hand it to emily, who reluctantly took it. 

“taste it for m. valancourt’s sake,” said theresa, as emily lift the 
glass to her lips, “for he gave it me, you know, madam.” emily’s hand 
trembled, and she spilt the wine as she withdrew it from her lips. “for 
whose sake!—who gave the wine?” said she in a falter voice. “m. 
valancourt, dear lady. i knew you would be pleased with it. it is the 
last flask i have left.” 

emily set the wine upon the table, and burst into tears, while theresa, 
disappointed and alarmed, try to comfort her; but she only wave her 
hand, entreat she might be left alone, and wept the more. 

a knock at the cottage door prevent theresa from immediately obey 
her mistress, and she was go to open it, when emily, check her, 
request she would not admit any person; but, afterwards, 
recollecting, that she had ordered her servant to attend her home, she 
said it was only philippe, and endeavour to restrain her tears, while 
theresa open the door. 

a voice, that spoke without, drew emily’s attention. she listened, 
turn her eyes to the door, when a person now appeared, and 
immediately a bright gleam, that flash from the fire, 
discovered—valancourt! 

emily, on perceive him, start from her chair, trembled, and, 
sink into it again, became insensible to all around her. 

a scream from theresa now told, that she knew valancourt, whom her 
imperfect sight, and the dusky of the place had prevent her from 
immediately recollecting; but his attention was immediately call from 
her to the person, whom he saw, fall from a chair near the fire; 
and, hasten to her assistance,—he perceived, that he was support 
emily! the various emotions, that seize him upon thus unexpected 
meeting with her, from whom he had believe he had part for ever, and 
on behold her pale and lifeless in his arms—may, perhaps, be 
imagined, though they could neither be then expressed, nor now 
described, any more than emily’s sensations, when, at length, she 
unclosed her eyes, and, look up, again saw valancourt. the intense 
anxiety, with which he regard her, was instantly change to an 
expression of mingle joy and tenderness, as his eye met hers, and he 
perceived, that she was reviving. but he could only exclaim, “emily!” 
as he silent watch her recovery, while she avert her eye, and 
feeble attempt to withdraw her hand; but, in these the first moments, 
which succeed to the pang his supposed death had occasion her, she 
forgot every fault, which had formerly claim indignation, and 
behold valancourt such as he had appeared, when he won her early 
affection, she experienced emotion of only tender and joy. this, 
alas! was but the sunshine of a few short moments; recollection rose, 
like clouds, upon her mind, and, darken the illusion image, that 
possessed it, she again beheld valancourt, degraded—valancourt unworthy 
of the esteem and tender she had once bestow upon him; her 
spirits faltered, and, withdraw her hand, she turn from him to 
conceal her grief, while he, yet more embarrass and agitated, 
remain silent. 

a sense of what she owe to herself restrained her tears, and taught 
her soon to overcome, in some degree, the emotion of mingle joy and 
sorrow, that contend at her heart, as she rose, and, have thank 
him for the assistance he had given her, bade theresa good evening. as 
she was leave the cottage, valancourt, who seem sudden awaken 
as from a dream, entreated, in a voice, that plead powerful for 
compassion, a few moments attention. emily’s heart, perhaps, plead as 
powerfully, but she had resolution enough to resist both, together with 
the clamorous entreaty of theresa, that she would not venture home 
alone in the dark, and had already open the cottage door, when the 
pelt storm compel her to obey their requests. 

silent and embarrassed, she return to the fire, while valancourt, 
with increase agitation, pace the room, as if he wished, yet feared, 
to speak, and theresa express without restraint her joy and wonder 
upon seeing him. 

“dear heart! sir,” said she, “i never was so surprise and overjoyed in 
my life. we were in great tribulation before you came, for we thought 
you were dead, and were talking, and lament about you, just when you 
knock at the door. my young mistress there was crying, fit to break 
her heart—” 

emily look with much displeasure at theresa, but, before she could 
speak, valancourt, unable to repress the emotion, which theresa’s 
imprudent discovery occasioned, exclaimed, “o my emily! am i then still 
dear to you! did you, indeed, honour me with a thought—a tear? o 
heavens! you weep—you weep now!” 

“theresa, sir,” said emily, with a reserved air, and try to conquer 
her tears, “has reason to remember you with gratitude, and she was 
concerned, because she had not lately heard of you. allow me to thank 
you for the kindness you have shown her, and to say, that, since i am 
now upon the spot, she must not be further indebted to you.” 

“emily,” said valancourt, no long master of his emotions, “is it thus 
you meet him, whom once you meant to honour with your hand—thus you 
meet him, who has love you—suffered for you?—yet what do i say? pardon 
me, pardon me, mademoiselle st. aubert, i know not what i utter. i have 
no long any claim upon your remembrance—i have forfeit every 
pretension to your esteem, your love. yes! let me not forget, that i 
once possessed your affections, though to know that i have lost them, 
is my severest affliction. affliction—do i call it!—that is a term of 
mildness.” 

“dear heart!” said theresa, prevent emily from replying, “talk of 
once have her affections! why, my dear young lady love you now, 
better than she do anybody in the whole world, though she pretend to 
deny it.” 

“this is insupportable!” said emily; “theresa, you know not what you 
say. sir, if you respect my tranquillity, you will spare me from the 
continuance of this distress.” 

“i do respect your tranquill too much, voluntary to interrupt it,” 
reply valancourt, in whose bosom pride now contend with tenderness; 
“and will not be a voluntary intruder. i would have entreat a few 
moments attention—yet i know not for what purpose. you have cease to 
esteem me, and to recount to you my suffering will degrade me more, 
without exciting even your pity. yet i have been, o emily! i am indeed 
very wretched!” add valancourt, in a voice, that soften from 
solemnity into grief. 

“what! is my dear young master go out in all this rain!” said 
theresa. “no, he shall not stir a step. dear! dear! to see how 
gentlefolk can afford to throw away their happiness! now, if you were 
poor people, there would be none of this. to talk of unworthiness, and 
not care about one another, when i know there are not such a 
kind-hearted lady and gentleman in the whole province, nor any that 
love one another half so well, if the truth was spoken!” 

emily, in extreme vexation, now rose from her chair, “i must be gone,” 
said she, “the storm is over.” 

“stay, emily, stay, mademoiselle st. aubert!” said valancourt, 
summon all his resolution, “i will no long distress you by my 
presence. forgive me, that i did not soon obey you, and, if you can, 
sometimes, pity one, who, in lose you—has lost all hope of peace! may 
you be happy, emily, however wretched i remain, happy as my fondest 
wish would have you!” 

his voice falter with the last words, and his countenance changed, 
while, with a look of ineffable tender and grief, he gaze upon her 
for an instant, and then quit the cottage. 

“dear heart! dear heart!” cry theresa, following him to the door, 
“why, monsieur valancourt! how it rains! what a night is this to turn 
him out in! why it will give him his death; and it was but now you were 
crying, mademoiselle, because he was dead. well! young ladies do change 
their mind in a minute, as one may say!” 

emily made no reply, for she heard not what was said, while, lost in 
sorrow and thought, she remain in her chair by the fire, with her 
eyes fixed, and the image of valancourt still before them. 

“m. valancourt is sadly altered! madam,” said theresa; “he looks so 
thin to what he use to do, and so melancholy, and then he wear his 
arm in a sling.” 

emily raise her eyes at these words, for she had not observe this 
last circumstance, and she now did not doubt, that valancourt had 
received the shot of her garden at thoulouse; with this conviction 
her pity for him returning, she blame herself for have occasion 
him to leave the cottage, during the storm. 

soon after her servant arrive with the carriage, and emily, have 
censure theresa for her thoughtless conversation to valancourt, and 
strict charge her never to repeat any hint of the same kind to 
him, withdrew to her home, thoughtful and disconsolate. 

meanwhile, valancourt had return to a little inn of the village, 
whither he had arrive only a few moments before his visit to theresa’s 
cottage, on the way from thoulouse to the château of the count de 
duvarney, where he had not been since he bade adieu to emily at 
château-le-blanc, in the neighbourhood of which he had linger for a 
considerable time, unable to summon resolution enough to quit a place, 
that contained the object most dear to his heart. there were times, 
indeed, when grief and despair urge him to appear again before emily, 
and, regardless of his ruin circumstances, to renew his suit. pride, 
however, and the tender of his affection, which could not long 
endure the thought of involve her in his misfortunes, at length, so 
far triumph over passion, that he relinquish this desperate design, 
and quit château-le-blanc. but still his fancy wander among the 
scenes, which had witness his early love, and, on his way to gascony, 
he stop at thoulouse, where he remain when emily arrived, 
concealing, yet indulge his melancholy in the gardens, where he had 
formerly pass with her so many happy hours; often recurring, with 
vain regret, to the evening before her departure for italy, when she 
had so unexpected met him on the terrace, and endeavour to recall 
to his memory every word and look, which had then charm him, the 
argument he had employ to dissuade her from the journey, and the 
tender of their last farewell. in such melancholy recollection he 
had been indulging, when emily unexpected arrive to him on this very 
terrace, the evening after her arrival at thoulouse. his emotions, on 
thus seeing her, can scarcely be imagined; but he so far overcame the 
first prompt of love, that he forbore to discover himself, and 
abrupt quit the gardens. still, however, the vision he had seen 
haunt his mind; he became more wretched than before, and the only 
solace of his sorrow was to return in the silence of the night; to 
follow the path which he believe her steps had pressed, during the 
day; and, to watch round the habitation where she reposed. it was in 
one of these mournful wanderings, that he had received by the fire of 
the gardener, who mistook him for a robber, a wound in his arm, which 
had detain him at thoulouse till very lately, under the hand of a 
surgeon. there, regardless of himself and careless of his friends, 
whose late unkind had urge him to believe, that they were 
indifferent as to his fate, he remained, without inform them of his 
situation; and now, being sufficient recover to bear travelling, he 
had taken la vallée in his way to estuvière, the count’s residence, 
partly for the purpose of hearing of emily, and of being again near 
her, and partly for that of enquiring into the situation of poor old 
theresa, who, he had reason to suppose, had been deprived of her 
stipend, small as it was, and which enquiry had brought him to her 
cottage, when emily happen to be there. 

this unexpected interview, which had at once shown him the tender 
of her love and the strength of her resolution, renew all the 
acute of the despair, that had attend their former separation, 
and which no effort of reason could teach him, in these moments, to 
subdue. her image, her look, the tone of her voice, all dwelt on his 
fancy, as powerful as they had late appear to his senses, and 
banish from his heart every emotion, except those of love and 
despair. 

before the evening concluded, he return to theresa’s cottage, that he 
might hear her talk of emily, and be in the place, where she had so 
lately been. the joy, felt and express by that faithful servant, was 
quick change to sorrow, when she observed, at one moment, his wild 
and frenzied look, and, at another, the dark melancholy, that overhung 
him. 

after he had listened, and for a considerable time, to all she had to 
relate, concerning emily, he gave theresa nearly all the money he had 
about him, though she repeatedly refuse it, declaring, that her 
mistress had ample supply her wants; and then, drawing a ring of 
value from his finger, he deliver it her with a solemn charge to 
present it to emily, of whom he entreated, as a last favour, that she 
would preserve it for his sake, and sometimes, when she look upon it, 
remember the unhappy giver. 

theresa wept, as she received the ring, but it was more from sympathy, 
than from any presentiment of evil; and before she could reply, 
valancourt abrupt left the cottage. she follow him to the door, 
calling upon his name and entreat him to return; but she received no 
answer, and saw him no more. 



chapter xiv 

call up him, that left half told 
the story of cambuscan bold. 
milton 


on the following morning, as emily sat in the parlour adjoin the 
library, reflect on the scene of the preceding night, annette rush 
wildly into the room, and, without speaking, sunk breathless into a 
chair. it was some time before she could answer the anxious enquiry 
of emily, as to the occasion of her emotion, but, at length, she 
exclaimed, “i have seen his ghost, madam, i have seen his ghost!” 

“who do you mean?” said emily, with extreme impatience. 

“it came in from the hall, madam,” continue annette, “as i was 
crossing to the parlour.” 

“who are you speak of?” repeated emily, “who came in from the hall?” 

“it was dress just as i have seen him, often and often,” add 
annette. “ah! who could have thought—” 

emily’s patience was now exhausted, and she was reprimand her for 
such idle fancies, when a servant enter the room, and informed her, 
that a stranger without beg leave to speak with her. 

it immediately occur to emily, that this stranger was valancourt, 
and she told the servant to inform him, that she was engaged, and could 
not see any person. 

the servant, have deliver his message, return with one from the 
stranger, urge the first request, and saying, that he had something 
of consequence to communicate; while annette, who had hitherto sat 
silent and amazed, now start up, and crying, “it is ludovico!—it is 
ludovico!” ran out of the room. emily bade the servant follow her, and, 
if it really was ludovico, to show him into the parlour. 

in a few minutes, ludovico appeared, accompany by annette, who, as 
joy render her forgetful of all rule of decorum towards her 
mistress, would not suffer any person to be heard, for some time, but 
herself. emily express surprise and satisfaction, on seeing ludovico 
in safety, and the first emotion increased, when he deliver letters 
from count de villefort and the lady blanche, inform her of their 
late adventure, and of their present situation at an inn among the 
pyrenees, where they had been detain by the illness of mons. st. 
foix, and the indisposition of blanche, who added, that the baron st. 
foix was just arrive to attend his son to his château, where he would 
remain till the perfect recovery of his wounds, and then return to 
languedoc, but that her father and herself purpose to be at la vallée, 
on the following day. she added, that emily’s presence would be 
expect at the approach nuptials, and beg she would be prepared 
to proceed, in a few days to château-le-blanc. for an account of 
ludovico’s adventure, she refer her to himself; and emily, though 
much interested, concerning the means, by which he had disappear from 
the north apartments, had the forbearance to suspend the gratification 
of her curiosity, till he had taken some refreshment, and had converse 
with annette, whose joy, on seeing him in safety, could not have been 
more extravagant, had he arisen from the grave. 

meanwhile, emily peruse again the letters of her friends, whose 
expression of esteem and kindness were very necessary consolation to 
her heart, awaken as it was by the late interview to emotion of 
keen sorrow and regret. 

the invitation to château-le-blanc was pressed with so much kindness by 
the count and his daughter, who strengthen it by a message from the 
countess, and the occasion of it was so important to her friend, that 
emily could not refuse to accept it, nor, though she wish to remain 
in the quiet shades of her native home, could she avoid perceive the 
impropriety of remain there alone, since valancourt was again in the 
neighbourhood. sometimes, too, she thought, that change of scenery and 
the society of her friends might contribute, more than retirement, to 
restore her to tranquillity. 

when ludovico again appeared, she desire him to give a detail of his 
adventure in the north apartments, and to tell by what means he became 
a companion of the banditti, with whom the count had found him. 

he immediately obeyed, while annette, who had not yet had leisure to 
ask him many questions, on the subject, prepared to listen, with a 
countenance of extreme curiosity, venture to remind her lady of her 
incredulity, concerning spirits, in the castle of udolpho, and of her 
own sagacity in believe in them; while emily, blush at the 
consciousness of her late credulity, observed, that, if ludovico’s 
adventure could justify annette’s superstition, he had probably not 
been here to relate it. 

ludovico smile at annette, and bowed to emily, and then began as 
follows: 

“you may remember, madam, that, on the night, when i sat up in the 
north chamber, my lord, the count, and mons. henri accompany me 
thither, and that, while they remain there, nothing happen to 
excite any alarm. when they were gone i made a fire in the bedroom, 
and, not being inclined to sleep, i sat down on the hearth with a book 
i had brought with me to divert my mind. i confess i did sometimes look 
round the chamber, with something like apprehension—” 

“o very like it, i dare say,” interrupt annette, “and i dare say too, 
if the truth was known, you shook from head to foot.” 

“not quite so bad as that,” reply ludovico, smiling, “but several 
times, as the wind whistle round the castle, and shook the old 
casements, i did fancy i heard odd noises, and, once or twice, i got up 
and look about me; but nothing was to be seen, except the grim 
figures in the tapestry, which seem to frown upon me, as i look at 
them. i had sat thus for above an hour,” continue ludovico, “when 
again i thought i heard a noise, and glance my eyes round the room, to 
discover what it came from, but, not perceive anything, i began to 
read again, and, when i had finished the story i was upon, i felt 
drowsy, and drop asleep. but presently i was awaken by the noise i 
had heard before, and it seem to come from that part of the chamber, 
where the bed stood; and then, whether it was the story i had been 
reading that affected my spirits, or the strange reports, that had been 
spread of these apartments, i don’t know, but, when i look towards 
the bed again, i fancy i saw a man’s face within the dusky curtains.” 

at the mention of this, emily trembled, and look anxiously, 
remember the spectacle she had herself witness there with 
dorothée. 

“i confess, madam, my heart did fail me, at that instant,” continue 
ludovico, “but a return of the noise drew my attention from the bed, 
and i then distinct heard a sound, like that of a key, turning in a 
lock, but what surprise me more was, that i saw no door where the 
sound seem to come from. in the next moment, however, the arras near 
the bed was slow lifted, and a person appear behind it, enter 
from a small door in the wall. he stood for a moment as if half 
retreating, with his head bend under the arras which conceal the 
upper part of his face except his eyes scowl beneath the tapestry as 
he held it; and then, while he raise it higher, i saw the face of 
another man behind, look over his shoulder. i know not how it was, 
but, though my sword was upon the table before me, i had not the power 
just then to seize it, but sat quite still, watch them, with my eyes 
half shut as if i was asleep. i suppose they thought me so, and were 
debate what they should do, for i heard them whisper, and they stood 
in the same posture for the value of a minute, and then, i thought i 
perceive other face in the dusky beyond the door, and heard 
loud whispers.” 

“this door surprise me,” said emily, “because i understood, that the 
count had cause the arras to be lifted, and the wall examined, 
suspecting, that they might have conceal a passage through which you 
had departed.” 

“it do not appear so extraordinary to me, madam,” reply ludovico, 
“that this door should escape notice, because it was form in a narrow 
compartment, which appear to be part of the outward wall, and, if the 
count had not pass over it, he might have thought it was useless to 
search for a door where it seem as if no passage could communicate 
with one; but the truth was, that the passage was form within the 
wall itself.—but, to return to the men, whom i saw obscure beyond the 
door, and who did not suffer me to remain long in suspense, concerning 
their design. they all rush into the room, and surround me, though 
not before i had snatch up my sword to defend myself. but what could 
one man do against four? they soon disarm me, and, have fasten my 
arms, and gag my mouth, forced me through the private door, leave 
my sword upon the table, to assist, as they said, those who should come 
in the morning to look for me, in fight against the ghosts. they 
then led me through many narrow passages, cut, as i fancied, in the 
walls, for i had never seen them before, and down several flight of 
steps, till we came to the vault underneath the castle; and then 
opening a stone door, which i should have taken for the wall itself, we 
went through a long passage, and down other steps cut in the solid 
rock, when another door deliver us into a cave. after turning and 
twin about, for some time, we reach the mouth of it, and i found 
myself on the sea-beach at the foot of the cliffs, with the château 
above. a boat was in waiting, into which the ruffian got, force me 
along with them, and we soon reach a small vessel, that was at 
anchor, where other men appeared, when setting me aboard, two of the 
fellow who had seize me, followed, and the other two row back to 
the shore, while we set sail. i soon found out what all this meant, and 
what was the business of these men at the château. we landed in 
rousillon, and, after lingering several days about the shore, some of 
their comrade came down from the mountains, and carry me with them 
to the fort, where i remain till my lord so unexpected arrived, for 
they had taken good care to prevent my running away, have blindfold 
me, during the journey, and, if they had not done this, i think i never 
could have found my road to any town, through the wild country we 
traversed. after i reach the fort i was watch like a prisoner, and 
never suffer to go out, without two or three companions, and i became 
so weary of life, that i often wish to get rid of it.” 

“well, but they let you talk,” said annette, “they did not gagg you 
after they got you away from the château, so i don’t see what reason 
there was to be so very weary of living; to say nothing about the 
chance you had of seeing me again.” 

ludovico smiled, and emily also, who enquire what was the motive of 
these men for carry him off. 

“i soon found out, madam,” resume ludovico, “that they were pirates, 
who had, during many years, secrete their spoil in the vault of the 
castle, which, being so near the sea, suit their purpose well. to 
prevent detection they had try to have it believed, that the château 
was haunted, and, have discover the private way to the north 
apartments, which had been shut up ever since the death of the lady 
marchioness, they easily succeeded. the housekeeper and her husband, 
who were the only persons, that had inhabit the castle, for some 
years, were so terrify by the strange noise they heard in the 
nights, that they would live there no longer; a report soon went 
abroad, that it was haunted, and the whole country believe this the 
more readily, i suppose, because it had been said, that the lady 
marchioness had die in a strange way, and because my lord never would 
return to the place afterwards.” 

“but why,” said emily, “were not these pirate contented with the 
cave—why did they think it necessary to deposit their spoil in the 
castle?” 

“the cave, madam,” reply ludovico, “was open to anybody, and their 
treasure would not long have remain undiscovered there, but in the 
vault they were secure so long as the report prevail of their being 
haunted. thus then, it appears, that they brought at midnight, the 
spoil they took on the seas, and kept it till they had opportunity of 
dispose of it to advantage. the pirate were connected with spain 
smuggle and banditti, who live among the wild of the pyrenees, and 
carry on various kind of traffic, such as nobody would think of; and 
with this desperate horde of banditti i remained, till my lord arrived. 
i shall never forget what i felt, when i first discover him—i almost 
gave him up for lost! but i knew, that, if i show myself, the 
banditti would discover who he was, and probably murder us all, to 
prevent their secret in the château being detected. i, therefore, kept 
out of my lord’s sight, but had a strict watch upon the ruffians, and 
determined, if they offer him or his family violence, to discover 
myself, and fight for our lives. soon after, i overheard some of them 
lay a most diabolical plan for the murder and plunder of the whole 
party, when i contrived to speak to some of my lord’s attendants, 
telling them what was go forward, and we consult what was best to 
be done; meanwhile my lord, alarm at the absence of the lady blanche, 
demand her, and the ruffian have given some unsatisfactory answer, 
my lord and mons. st. foix became furious, so then we thought it a good 
time to discover the plot, and rush into the chamber, i call out, 
‘treachery! my lord count, defend yourself!’ his lordship and the 
chevalier drew their sword directly, and a hard battle we had, but we 
conquer at last, as, madam, you are already informed of by my lord 
count.” 

“this is an extraordinary adventure,” said emily, “and much praise is 
due, ludovico, to your prudence and intrepidity. there are some 
circumstances, however, concerning the north apartments, which still 
perplex me; but, perhaps, you may be able to explain them. did you ever 
hear the banditti relate anything extraordinary of these rooms?” 

“no, madam,” reply ludovico, “i never heard them speak about the 
rooms, except to laugh at the credulous of the old housekeeper, who 
once was very near catching one of the pirates; it was since the count 
arrive at the château, he said, and he laugh heartily as he related 
the trick he had play off.” 

a blush overspread emily’s cheek, and she impatient desire ludovico 
to explain himself. 

“why, my lady,” said he, “as this fellow was, one night in the bedroom, 
he heard somebody approach through the next apartment, and not 
have time to lift up the arras, and unfasten the door, he hid himself 
in the bed just by. there he lay for some time in as great a fright, i 
suppose—” 

“as you were in,” interrupt annette, “when you sat up so bold to 
watch by yourself.” 

“aye,” said ludovico, “in as great a fright as he ever made anybody 
else suffer; and presently the housekeeper and some other person came 
up to the bed, when he, thinking they were go to examine it, 
bethought him, that his only chance of escape detection, was by 
terrify them; so he lift up the counterpane, but that did not do, 
till he raise his face above it, and then they both set off, he said, 
as if they had seen the devil, and he got out of the rooms 
undiscovered.” 

emily could not forbear smile at this explanation of the deception, 
which had given her so much superstitious terror, and was surprised, 
that she could have suffer herself to be thus alarmed, till she 
considered, that, when the mind has once begun to yield to the weakness 
of superstition, trifle impress it with the force of conviction. 
still, however, she remember with awe the mysterious music, which had 
been heard, at midnight, near château-le-blanc, and she ask ludovico 
if he could give any explanation of it; but he could not. 

“i only know, madam,” he added, “that it did not belong to the pirates, 
for i have heard them laugh about it, and say, they believe the devil 
was in league with them there.” 

“yes, i will answer for it he was,” said annette, her countenance 
brightening, “i was sure all along, that he or his spirits had 
something to do with the north apartments, and now you see, madam, i am 
right at last.” 

“it cannot be denied, that his spirits were very busy in that part of 
the château,” reply emily, smiling. “but i am surprised, ludovico, 
that these pirate should persevere in their schemes, after the arrival 
of the count; what could they expect but certain detection?” 

“i have reason to believe, madam,” reply ludovico, “that it was their 
intention to persevere no long than was necessary for the removal of 
the stores, which were deposit in the vaults; and it appeared, that 
they had been employ in do so from within a short period after the 
count’s arrival; but, as they had only a few hour in the night for 
this business, and were carry on other scheme at the same time, the 
vault were not above half emptied, when they took me away. they 
glory exceedingly in this opportunity of confirm the superstitious 
reports, that had been spread of the north chambers, were careful to 
leave everything there as they had found it, the better to promote the 
deception, and frequently, in their jocose moods, would laugh at the 
consternation, which they believe the inhabitant of the castle had 
suffer upon my disappearing, and it was to prevent the possibility of 
my betray their secret, that they had remove me to such a distance. 
from that period they considered the château as nearly their own; but i 
found from the discourse of their comrades, that, though they were 
cautious, at first, in showing their power there, they had once very 
nearly betray themselves. going, one night, as was their custom, to 
the north chambers to repeat the noises, that had occasion such alarm 
among the servants, they heard, as they were about to unfasten the 
secret door, voice in the bedroom. my lord has since told me, that 
himself and m. henri were then in the apartment, and they heard very 
extraordinary sound of lamentation, which it seem were made by these 
fellows, with their usual design of spread terror; and my lord has 
owned, he then felt somewhat more, than surprise; but, as it was 
necessary to the peace of his family, that no notice should be taken, 
he was silent on the subject, and enjoin silence to his son.” 

emily, recollect the change, that had appear in the spirits of the 
count, after the night, when he had watch in the north room, now 
perceive the cause of it; and, have made some further enquiry upon 
this strange affair, she dismiss ludovico, and went to give orders 
for the accommodation of her friends, on the following day. 

in the evening, theresa, lame as she was, came to deliver the ring, 
with which valancourt had entrust her, and, when she present it, 
emily was much affected, for she remember to have seen him wear it 
often in happy days. she was, however, much displeased, that theresa 
had received it, and positively refuse to accept it herself, though to 
have done so would have afford her a melancholy pleasure. theresa 
entreated, expostulated, and then describe the distress of valancourt, 
when he had given the ring, and repeated the message, with which he had 
commission her to deliver it; and emily could not conceal the extreme 
sorrow this recital occasion her, but wept, and remain lost in 
thought. 

“alas! my dear young lady!” said theresa, “why should all this be? i 
have known you from your infancy, and it may well be supposed i love 
you, as if you were my own, and wish as much to see you happy. m. 
valancourt, to be sure, i have not known so long, but then i have 
reason to love him, as though he was my own son. i know how well you 
love one another, or why all this weeping and wailing?” emily wave her 
hand for theresa to be silent, who, disregard the signal, continued, 
“and how much you are alike in your temper and ways, and, that, if you 
were married, you would be the happiest couple in the whole 
province—then what is there to prevent your marrying? dear dear! to see 
how some people fling away their happiness, and then cry and lament 
about it, just as if it was not their own doing, and as if there was 
more pleasure in wail and weeping, than in being at peace. learning, 
to be sure, is a fine thing, but, if it teach folks no better than 
that, why i had rather be without it; if it would teach them to be 
happier, i would say something to it, then it would be learning and 
wisdom too.” 

age and long service had given theresa a privilege to talk, but emily 
now endeavour to check her loquacity, and, though she felt the 
just of some of her remarks, did not choose to explain the 
circumstances, that had determined her conduct towards valancourt. she, 
therefore, only told theresa, that it would much displease her to hear 
the subject renewed; that she had reason for her conduct, which she 
did not think it proper to mention, and that the ring must be returned, 
with an assurance, that she could not accept it with propriety; and, at 
the same time, she forbade theresa to repeat any future message from 
valancourt, as she value her esteem and kindness. theresa was 
afflicted, and made another attempt, though feeble, to interest her for 
valancourt, but the unusual displeasure, express in emily’s 
countenance, soon oblige her to desist, and she departed in wonder and 
lamentation. 

to relieve her mind, in some degree, from the painful recollections, 
that intrude upon it, emily busy herself in preparation for the 
journey into languedoc, and, while annette, who assist her, spoke 
with joy and affection of the safe return of ludovico, she was 
considering how she might best promote their happiness, and determined, 
if it appeared, that his affection was as unchanged as that of the 
simple and honest annette, to give her a marriage portion, and settle 
them on some part of her estate. these consideration led her to the 
remembrance of her father’s paternal domain, which his affair had 
formerly compel him to dispose of to m. quesnel, and which she 
frequent wish to regain, because st. aubert had lamented, that the 
chief lands of his ancestor had pass into another family, and 
because they had been his birth-place and the haunt of his early years. 
to the estate at thoulouse she had no peculiar attachment, and it was 
her wish to dispose of this, that she might purchase her paternal 
domains, if m. quesnel could be prevail on to part with them, which, 
as he talk much of living in italy, did not appear very improbable. 



chapter xv 

sweet is the breath of vernal shower, 
the bees’ collected treasure sweet, 
sweet music’s melting fall, but sweet yet 
the still, small voice of gratitude. 
gray 


on the following day, the arrival of her friend revive the droop 
emily, and la vallée became once more the scene of social kindness and 
of elegant hospitality. illness and the terror she had suffer had 
stolen from blanche much of her sprightliness, but all her affectionate 
simplicity remained, and, though she appear less blooming, she was 
not less engaging than before. the unfortunate adventure on the 
pyrenee had made the count very anxious to reach home, and, after 
little more than a week’s stay at la vallée, emily prepared to set out 
with her friends for languedoc, assign the care of her house, during 
her absence, to theresa. on the evening, preceding her departure, this 
old servant brought again the ring of valancourt, and, with tears, 
entreat her mistress to receive it, for that she had neither seen, 
nor heard of m. valancourt, since the night when he deliver it to 
her. as she said this, her countenance express more alarm, than she 
dare to utter; but emily, check her own propensity to fear, 
considered, that he had probably return to the residence of his 
brother, and, again refuse to accept the ring, bade theresa preserve 
it, till she saw him, which, with extreme reluctance, she promise to 
do. 

on the following day, count de villefort, with emily and the lady 
blanche, left la vallée, and, on the ensue evening, arrive at the 
château-le-blanc, where the countess, henri, and m. du pont, whom emily 
was surprise to find there, received them with much joy and 
congratulation. she was concerned to observe, that the count still 
encourage the hope of his friend, whose countenance declared, that 
his affection had suffer no abate from absence; and was much 
distressed, when, on the second evening after her arrival, the count, 
have withdrawn her from the lady blanche, with whom she was walking, 
renew the subject of m. du pont’s hopes. the mildness, with which she 
listen to his intercession at first, deceive him, as to her 
sentiments, he began to believe, that, her affection for valancourt 
being overcome, she was, at length, disposed to think favourable of m. 
du pont; and, when she afterwards convinced him of his mistake, he 
ventured, in the earnest of his wish to promote what he considered 
to be the happiness of two persons, whom he so much esteemed, gently to 
remonstrate with her, on thus suffering an ill-placed affection to 
poison the happiness of her most valuable years. 

observing her silence and the deep dejection of her countenance, he 
conclude with saying, “i will not say more now, but i will still 
believe, my dear mademoiselle st. aubert, that you will not always 
reject a person, so truly estimable as my friend du pont.” 

he spare her the pain of replying, by leave her; and she stroll 
on, somewhat displease with the count for have persevere to plead 
for a suit, which she had repeatedly rejected, and lost amidst the 
melancholy recollections, which this topic had revived, till she had 
insensible reach the border of the woods, that screen the 
monastery of st. clair, when, perceive how far she had wandered, she 
determined to extend her walk a little farther, and to enquire about 
the abbess and some of her friends among the nuns. 

though the evening was now drawing to a close, she accept the 
invitation of the friar, who open the gate, and, anxious to meet some 
of her old acquaintances, proceed towards the convent parlour. as she 
cross the lawn, that slope from the front of the monastery towards 
the sea, she was struck with the picture of repose, exhibit by some 
monks, sitting in the cloisters, which extend under the brow of the 
woods, that crown this eminence; where, as they meditated, at this 
twilight hour, holy subjects, they sometimes suffer their attention 
to be relieved by the scene before them, nor thought it profane to look 
at nature, now that it had exchange the brilliant colours of day for 
the sober hue of evening. before the cloisters, however, spread an 
ancient chesnut, whose ample branch were design to screen the full 
magnificence of a scene, that might tempt the wish to worldly 
pleasures; but still, beneath the dark and spread foliage, gleam a 
wide extent of ocean, and many a passing sail; while, to the right and 
left, thick wood were seen stretch along the winding shores. so 
much as this had been admitted, perhaps, to give to the secluded votary 
an image of the danger and vicissitudes of life, and to console him, 
now that he had renounce its pleasures, by the certainty of have 
escape its evils. as emily walk pensive along, considering how 
much suffering she might have escaped, had she become a votaress of the 
order, and remain in this retirement from the time of her father’s 
death, the vesper-bell struck up, and the monk retired slow toward 
the chapel, while she, pursue her way, enter the great hall, where 
an unusual silence seem to reign. the parlour too, which open from 
it, she found vacant, but, as the evening bell was sounding, she 
believe the nun had withdrawn into the chapel, and sat down to rest, 
for a moment, before she return to the château, where, however, the 
increase gloom made her now anxious to be. 

not many minutes had elapsed, before a nun, enter in haste, enquire 
for the abbess, and was retiring, without recollect emily, when she 
made herself known, and then learned, that a mass was go to be 
perform for the soul of sister agnes, who had been declining, for 
some time, and who was now believe to be dying. 

of her suffering the sister gave a melancholy account, and of the 
horrors, into which she had frequent started, but which had now 
yield to a dejection so gloomy, that neither the prayers, in which 
she was join by the sisterhood, nor the assurance of her confessor, 
had power to recall her from it, or to cheer her mind even with a 
momentary gleam of comfort. 

to this relation emily listen with extreme concern, and, recollect 
the frenzied manners and the expression of horror, which she had 
herself witness of agnes, together with the history, that sister 
frances had communicated, her compassion was heighten to a very 
painful degree. as the evening was already far advanced, emily did not 
now desire to see her, or to join in the mass, and, after leave many 
kind remembrance with the nun, for her old friends, she quit the 
monastery, and return over the cliff towards the château, meditate 
upon what she had just heard, till, at length she forced her mind upon 
less interesting subjects. 

the wind was high, and as she drew near the château, she often pause 
to listen to its awful sound, as it swept over the billows, that beat 
below, or groan along the surrounding woods; and, while she rest on 
a cliff at a short distance from the château, and look upon the wide 
waters, seen dim beneath the last shade of twilight, she thought of 
the following address: 

to the wind 

viewless, through heaven’s vast vault your course ye steer, 
unknown from whence ye come, or whither go! 
mysterious pow’rs! i hear ye murmur low, 
till swell your loud gust on my startle ear, 
and, awful! seem to say—some god is near! 
i love to list your midnight voice float 
in the dread storm, that o’er the ocean rolls, 
and, while their charm the angry wave controls, 
mix with its sullen roar, and sink remote. 
then, rising in the pause, a sweet note, 
the dirge of spirits, who your deed bewail, 
a sweet note oft swell while sleep the gale! 
but soon, ye sightless pow’rs! your rest is o’er, 
solemn and slow, ye rise upon the air, 
speak in the shrouds, and bid the sea-boy fear, 
and the faint-warbled dirge—is heard no more! 
oh! then i deprecate your awful reign! 
the loud lament yet bear not on your breath! 
bear not the crash of bark far on the main, 
bear not the cry of men, who cry in vain, 
the crew’s dread chorus sink into death! 
oh! give not these, ye pow’rs! i ask alone, 
as rapt i climb these dark romantic steeps, 
the elemental war, the billow’s moan; 
i ask the still, sweet tear, that listen fancy weeps! 




chapter xvi 

unnatural deed 
do breed unnatural troubles: infect mind 
to their deaf pillow will discharge their secrets. 
more needs she the divine, than the physician. 
macbeth 


on the following evening, the view of the convent towers, rising among 
the shadowy woods, remind emily of the nun, whose condition had so 
much affected her; and, anxious to know how she was, as well as to see 
some of her former friends, she and the lady blanche extend their 
walk to the monastery. at the gate stood a carriage, which, from the 
heat of the horses, appear to have just arrived; but a more than 
common still pervade the court and the cloisters, through which 
emily and blanche pass in their way to the great hall, where a nun, 
who was crossing to the staircase, reply to the enquiry of the 
former, that sister agnes was still living, and sensible, but that it 
was thought she could not survive the night. in the parlour, they found 
several of the boarders, who rejoice to see emily, and told her many 
little circumstances that had happen in the convent since her 
departure, and which were interesting to her only because they related 
to persons, whom she had regard with affection. while they thus 
converse the abbess enter the room, and express much satisfaction 
at seeing emily, but her manner was unusually solemn, and her 
countenance dejected. “our house,” said she, after the first 
salutation were over, “is truly a house of mourning—a daughter is now 
pay the debt of nature.—you have heard, perhaps, that our daughter 
agnes is dying?” 

emily express her sincere concern. 

“her death presents to us a great and awful lesson,” continue the 
abbess; “let us read it, and profit by it; let it teach us to prepare 
ourselves for the change, that await us all! you are young, and have 
it yet in your power to secure ‘the peace that passeth all 
understanding’—the peace of conscience. preserve it in your youth, that 
it may comfort you in age; for vain, alas! and imperfect are the good 
deed of our latter years, if those of our early life have been evil!” 

emily would have said, that good deeds, she hoped, were never vain; but 
she considered that it was the abbess who spoke, and she remain 
silent. 

“the latter days of agnes,” resume the abbess, “have been exemplary; 
would they might atone for the error of her former ones! her 
suffering now, alas! are great; let us believe, that they will make 
her peace hereafter! i have left her with her confessor, and a 
gentleman, whom she has long been anxious to see, and who is just 
arrive from paris. they, i hope, will be able to administer the 
repose, which her mind has hitherto wanted.” 

emily fervent join in the wish. 

“during her illness, she has sometimes name you,” resume the abbess; 
“perhaps, it would comfort her to see you; when her present visitor 
have left her, we will go to her chamber, if the scene will not be too 
melancholy for your spirits. but, indeed, to such scenes, however 
painful, we ought to accustom ourselves, for they are salutary to the 
soul, and prepare us for what we are ourselves to suffer.” 

emily became grave and thoughtful; for this conversation brought to her 
recollection the die moments of her beloved father, and she wish 
once more to weep over the spot, where his remains were buried. during 
the silence, which follow the abbess’ speech, many minute 
circumstances attend his last hour occur to her—his emotion on 
perceive himself to be in the neighbourhood of château-le-blanc—his 
request to be inter in a particular spot in the church of this 
monastery—and the solemn charge he had deliver to her to destroy 
certain papers, without examine them.—she recollect also the 
mysterious and horrible words in those manuscripts, upon which her eye 
had involuntary glanced; and, though they now, and, indeed, whenever 
she remember them, revive an excess of painful curiosity, concerning 
their full import, and the motive for her father’s command, it was 
ever her chief consolation, that she had strict obey him in this 
particular. 

little more was said by the abbess, who appear too much affected by 
the subject she had lately left, to be willing to converse, and her 
companion had been for some time silent from the same cause, when this 
general reverie was interrupt by the entrance of a stranger, monsieur 
bonnac, who had just quit the chamber of sister agnes. he appear 
much disturbed, but emily fancied, that his countenance had more the 
expression of horror, than of grief. have drawn the abbess to a 
distant part of the room, he converse with her for some time, during 
which she seem to listen with earnest attention, and he to speak with 
caution, and a more than common degree of interest. when he had 
concluded, he bowed silent to the rest of the company, and quit 
the room. the abbess, soon after, propose go to the chamber of 
sister agnes, to which emily consented, though not without some 
reluctance, and lady blanche remain with the boarder below. 

at the door of the chamber they met the confessor, whom, as he lift 
up his head on their approach, emily observe to be the same that had 
attend her die father; but he pass on, without notice her, and 
they enter the apartment, where, on a mattress, was laid sister 
agnes, with one nun watch in the chair beside her. her countenance 
was so much changed, that emily would scarcely have recollect her, 
had she not been prepared to do so: it was ghastly, and overspread with 
gloomy horror; her dim and hollow eyes were fixed on a crucifix, which 
she held upon her bosom; and she was so much engaged in thought, as not 
to perceive the abbess and emily, till they stood at the bedside. then, 
turning her heavy eyes, she fixed them, in wild horror, upon emily, 
and, screaming, exclaimed, “ah! that vision come upon me in my die 
hours!” 

emily start back in terror, and look for explanation to the abbess, 
who made her a signal not to be alarmed, and calm said to agnes, 
“daughter, i have brought mademoiselle st. aubert to visit you: i 
thought you would be glad to see her.” 

agnes made no reply; but, still gaze wildly upon emily, exclaimed, 
“it is her very self! oh! there is all that fascination in her look, 
which prove my destruction! what would you have—what is it you came to 
demand—retribution?—it will soon be yours—it is yours already. how many 
years have passed, since last i saw you! my crime is but as 
yesterday.—yet i am grown old beneath it; while you are still young and 
blooming—blooming as when you forced me to commit that most abhor 
deed! o! could i once forget it!—yet what would that avail?—the deed is 
done!” 

emily, extremely shocked, would now have left the room; but the abbess, 
taking her hand, try to support her spirits, and beg she would 
stay a few moments, when agnes would probably be calm, whom now she 
try to sooth. but the latter seem to disregard her, while she still 
fixed her eyes on emily, and added, “what are years of prayer and 
repentance? they cannot wash out the foul of murder!—yes, murder! 
where is he—where is he?—look there—look there!—see where he stalk 
along the room! why do you come to torment me now?” continue agnes, 
while her strain eyes were bent on air, “why was not i punish 
before?—o! do not frown so sternly! hah! there again! ’tis she herself! 
why do you look so piteous upon me—and smile, too? smile on me! what 
groan was that?” 

agnes sunk down, apparently lifeless, and emily, unable to support 
herself, lean against the bed, while the abbess and the attendant nun 
were apply the usual remedy to agnes. “peace,” said the abbess, 
when emily was go to speak, “the delirium is go off, she will 
soon revive. when was she thus before, daughter?” 

“not of many weeks, madam,” reply the nun, “but her spirits have been 
much agitate by the arrival of the gentleman she wish so much to 
see.” 

“yes,” observe the abbess, “that has undoubted occasion this 
paroxysm of frenzy. when she is better, we will leave her to repose.” 

emily very readily consented, but, though she could now give little 
assistance, she was unwill to quit the chamber, while any might be 
necessary. 

when agnes recover her senses, she again fixed her eyes on emily, but 
their wild expression was gone, and a gloomy melancholy had succeeded. 
it was some moments before she recover sufficient spirits to speak; 
she then said feebly—“the likeness is wonderful!—surely it must be 
something more than fancy. tell me, i conjure you,” she added, 
address emily, “though your name is st. aubert, are you not the 
daughter of the marchioness?” 

“what marchioness?” said emily, in extreme surprise; for she had 
imagined, from the calm of agnes’s manner, that her intellect were 
restored. the abbess gave her a significant glance, but she repeated 
the question. 

“what marchioness?” exclaim agnes, “i know but of one—the marchioness 
de villeroi.” 

emily, remember the emotion of her late father, upon the unexpected 
mention of this lady, and his request to be laid near to the tomb of 
the villerois, now felt greatly interested, and she entreat agnes to 
explain the reason of her question. the abbess would now have withdrawn 
emily from the room, who being, however, detain by a strong interest, 
repeated her entreaties. 

“bring me that casket, sister,” said agnes; “i will show her to you; 
yet you need only look in that mirror, and you will behold her; you 
surely are her daughter: such striking resemblance is never found but 
among near relations.” 

the nun brought the casket, and agnes, have direct her how to 
unlock it, she took thence a miniature, in which emily perceive the 
exact resemblance of the picture, which she had found among her late 
father’s papers. agnes held out her hand to receive it; gaze upon it 
earnest for some moments in silence; and then, with a countenance of 
deep despair, threw up her eyes to heaven, and pray inwardly. when 
she had finished, she return the miniature to emily. “keep it,” said 
she, “i bequeath it to you, for i must believe it is your right. i have 
frequent observe the resemblance between you; but never, till this 
day, did it strike upon my conscience so powerfully! stay, sister, do 
not remove the casket—there is another picture i would show.” 

emily tremble with expectation, and the abbess again would have 
withdrawn her. “agnes is still disordered,” said she, “you observe how 
she wanders. in these mood she say anything, and do not scruple, as 
you have witnessed, to accuse herself of the most horrible crimes.” 

emily, however, thought she perceive something more than madness in 
the inconsistent of agnes, whose mention of the marchioness, and 
production of her picture, had interested her so much, that she 
determined to obtain further information, if possible, respecting the 
subject of it. 

the nun return with the casket, and, agnes point out to her a 
secret drawer, she took from it another miniature. “here,” said agnes, 
as she offer it to emily, “learn a lesson for your vanity, at least; 
look well at this picture, and see if you can discover any resemblance 
between what i was, and what i am.” 

emily impatient received the miniature, which her eyes had scarcely 
glance upon, before her tremble hand had nearly suffer it to 
fall—it was the resemblance of the portrait of signora laurentini, 
which she had formerly seen in the castle of udolpho—the lady, who had 
disappear in so mysterious a manner, and whom montoni had been 
suspect of have cause to be murdered. 

in silent astonishment, emily continue to gaze alternate upon the 
picture and the die nun, endeavour to trace a resemblance between 
them, which no long existed. 

“why do you look so stern on me?” said agnes, mistake the nature of 
emily’s emotion. 

“i have seen this face before,” said emily, at length; “was it really 
your resemblance?” 

“you may well ask that question,” reply the nun,—“but it was once 
esteem a striking likeness of me. look at me well, and see what guilt 
has made me. i then was innocent; the evil passion of my nature slept. 
sister!” add she solemnly, and stretch forth her cold, damp hand 
to emily, who shudder at its touch—“sister! beware of the first 
indulgence of the passions; beware of the first! their course, if not 
checked then, is rapid—their force is uncontrollable—they lead us we 
know not whither—they lead us perhaps to the commission of crimes, for 
which whole years of prayer and penitence cannot atone!—such may be the 
force of even a single passion, that it overcome every other, and 
sear up every other approach to the heart. possess us like a fiend, 
it leads us on to the acts of a fiend, making us insensible to pity and 
to conscience. and, when its purpose is accomplished, like a fiend, it 
leaves us to the torture of those feelings, which its power had 
suspended—not annihilated,—to the torture of compassion, remorse, and 
conscience. then, we awaken as from a dream, and perceive a new world 
around us—we gaze in astonishment, and horror—but the deed is 
committed; not all the powers of heaven and earth united can undo 
it—and the spectre of conscience will not fly! what are 
riches—grandeur—health itself, to the luxury of a pure conscience, the 
health of the soul;—and what the suffering of poverty, disappointment, 
despair—to the anguish of an afflict one! o! how long is it since i 
knew that luxury! i believed, that i had suffer the most agonizing 
pang of human nature, in love, jealousy, and despair—but these pang 
were ease, compare with the sting of conscience, which i have since 
endured. i taste too what was call the sweet of revenge—but it was 
transient, it expire even with the object, that provoke it. remember, 
sister, that the passion are the seed of vice as well as of virtues, 
from which either may spring, accordingly as they are nurtured. unhappy 
they who have never been taught the art to govern them!” 

“alas! unhappy!” said the abbess, “and ill-informed of our holy 
religion!” emily listen to agnes, in silent awe, while she still 
examine the miniature, and became confirmed in her opinion of its 
strong resemblance to the portrait at udolpho. “this face is familiar 
to me,” said she, wish to lead the nun to an explanation, yet 
fear to discover too abrupt her knowledge of udolpho. 

“you are mistaken,” reply agnes, “you certainly never saw that 
picture before.” 

“no,” reply emily, “but i have seen one extremely like it.” 
“impossible,” said agnes, who may now be call the lady laurentini. 

“it was in the castle of udolpho,” continue emily, look steadfast 
at her. 

“of udolpho!” exclaim laurentini, “of udolpho in italy!” “the same,” 
reply emily. 

“you know me then,” said laurentini, “and you are the daughter of the 
marchioness.” emily was somewhat surprise at this abrupt assertion. “i 
am the daughter of the late mons. st. aubert,” said she; “and the lady 
you name is an utter stranger to me.” 

“at least you believe so,” rejoin laurentini. 

emily ask what reason there could be to believe otherwise. 

“the family likeness, that you bear her,” said the nun. “the 
marchioness, it is known, was attach to a gentleman of gascony, at 
the time when she accept the hand of the marquis, by the command of 
her father. ill-fated, unhappy woman!” 

emily, remember the extreme emotion which st. aubert had betray on 
the mention of the marchioness, would now have suffer something more 
than surprise, had her confidence in his integrity been less; as it 
was, she could not, for a moment, believe what the words of laurentini 
insinuated; yet she still felt strong interested, concerning them, 
and begged, that she would explain them further. 

“do not urge me on that subject,” said the nun, “it is to me a terrible 
one! would that i could blot it from my memory!” she sigh deeply, 
and, after the pause of a moment, ask emily, by what means she had 
discover her name? 

“by your portrait in the castle of udolpho, to which this miniature 
bear a striking resemblance,” reply emily. 

“you have been at udolpho then!” said the nun, with great emotion. 
“alas! what scene do the mention of it revive in my fancy—scenes of 
happiness—of suffering—and of horror!” 

at this moment, the terrible spectacle, which emily had witness in a 
chamber of that castle, occur to her, and she shuddered, while she 
look upon the nun—and recollect her late words—that “years of 
prayer and penitence could not wash out the foul of murder.” she 
was now compel to attribute these to another cause, than that of 
delirium. with a degree of horror, that almost deprived her of sense, 
she now believe she look upon a murderer; all the recollect 
behaviour of laurentini seem to confirm the supposition, yet emily 
was still lost in a labyrinth of perplexities, and, not knowing how to 
ask the questions, which might lead to truth, she could only hint them 
in broken sentences. 

“your sudden departure from udolpho”—said she. 

laurentini groaned. 

“the report that follow it,” continue emily—“the west chamber—the 
mournful veil—the object it conceals!—when murder are committed—” 

the nun shrieked. “what! there again!” said she, endeavour to raise 
herself, while her start eyes seem to follow some object round the 
room—“come from the grave! what! blood—blood too!—there was no 
blood—thou canst not say it!—nay, do not smile,—do not smile so 
piteously!” 

laurentini fell into convulsions, as she utter the last words; and 
emily, unable any long to endure the horror of the scene, hurried 
from the room, and sent some nun to the assistance of the abbess. 

the lady blanche, and the boarders, who were in the parlour, now 
assemble round emily, and, alarm by her manner and affrighte 
countenance, ask a hundred questions, which she avoid answer 
further, than by saying, that she believe sister agnes was dying. they 
received this as a sufficient explanation of her terror, and had then 
leisure to offer restoratives, which, at length, somewhat revive 
emily, whose mind was, however, so much shock with the terrible 
surmises, and perplexed with doubt by some words from the nun, that 
she was unable to converse, and would have left the convent 
immediately, had she not wish to know whether laurentini would 
survive the late attack. after wait some time, she was informed, 
that, the convulsion have ceased, laurentini seem to be reviving, 
and emily and blanche were departing, when the abbess appeared, who, 
drawing the former aside, said she had something of consequence to say 
to her, but, as it was late, she would not detain her then, and 
request to see her on the following day. 

emily promise to visit her, and, have taken leave, return with the 
lady blanche towards the château, on the way to which the deep gloom of 
the wood made blanche lament, that the evening was so far advanced; 
for the surrounding still and obscurity render her sensible of 
fear, though there was a servant to protect her; while emily was too 
much engaged by the horrors of the scene she had just witnessed, to be 
affected by the solemnity of the shades, otherwise than as they serve 
to promote her gloomy reverie, from which, however, she was at length 
recall by the lady blanche, who pointed out, at some distance, in the 
dusky path they were winding, two person slow advancing. it was 
impossible to avoid them without striking into a still more secluded 
part of the wood, whither the stranger might easily follow; but all 
apprehension vanished, when emily distinguished the voice of mons. du 
pont, and perceived, that his companion was the gentleman, whom she had 
seen at the monastery, and who was now converse with so much 
earnest as not immediately to perceive their approach. when du pont 
join the ladies, the stranger took leave, and they proceed to the 
château, where the count, when he heard of mons. bonnac, claim him 
for an acquaintance, and, on learning the melancholy occasion of his 
visit to languedoc, and that he was lodge at a small inn in the 
village, beg the favour of mons. du pont to invite him to the 
château. 

the latter was happy to do so, and the scruple of reserve, which made 
m. bonnac hesitate to accept the invitation, being at length overcome, 
they went to the château, where the kindness of the count and the 
sprightly of his son were exert to dissipate the gloom, that 
overhung the spirits of the stranger. m. bonnac was an officer in the 
france service, and appear to be about fifty; his figure was tall and 
commanding, his manners had received the last polish, and there was 
something in his countenance uncommonly interesting; for over features, 
which, in youth, must have been remarkably handsome, was spread a 
melancholy, that seem the effect of long misfortune, rather than of 
constitution, or temper. 

the conversation he held, during supper, was evidently an effort of 
politeness, and there were interval in which, unable to struggle 
against the feelings, that depressed him, he relapse into silence and 
abstraction, from which, however, the count, sometimes, withdrew him in 
a manner so delicate and benevolent, that emily, while she observe 
him, almost fancy she beheld her late father. 

the party separated, at an early hour, and then, in the solitude of her 
apartment, the scenes, which emily had lately witnessed, return to 
her fancy, with dreadful energy. that in the die nun she should have 
discover signora laurentini, who, instead of have been murder by 
montoni, was, as it now seemed, herself guilty of some dreadful crime, 
excited both horror and surprise in a high degree; nor did the hints, 
which she had dropped, respecting the marriage of the marchioness de 
villeroi, and the enquiry she had made concerning emily’s birth, 
occasion her a less degree of interest, though it was of a different 
nature. 

the history, which sister frances had formerly related, and had said to 
be that of agnes, it now appeared, was erroneous; but for what purpose 
it had been fabricated, unless the more effectually to conceal the true 
story, emily could not even guess. above all, her interest was excited 
as to the relation, which the story of the late marchioness de villeroi 
bore to that of her father; for, that some kind of relation exist 
between them, the grief of st. aubert, upon hearing her named, his 
request to be bury near her, and her picture, which had been found 
among his papers, certainly proved. sometimes it occur to emily, 
that he might have been the lover, to whom it was said the marchioness 
was attached, when she was compel to marry the marquis de villeroi; 
but that he had afterwards cherish a passion for her, she could not 
suffer herself to believe, for a moment. the papers, which he had so 
solemn enjoin her to destroy, she now fancy had related to this 
connection, and she wish more earnest than before to know the 
reasons, that made him consider the injunction necessary, which, had 
her faith in his principles been less, would have led to believe, that 
there was a mystery in her birth dishonourable to her parents, which 
those manuscript might have revealed. 

reflections, similar to these, engaged her mind, during the greater 
part of the night, and when, at length, she fell into a slumber, it was 
only to behold a vision of the die nun, and to awaken in horrors, 
like those she had witnessed. 

on the following morning, she was too much indisposed to attend her 
appointment with the abbess, and, before the day concluded, she heard, 
that sister agnes was no more. mons. bonnac received this intelligence, 
with concern; but emily observed, that he did not appear so much 
affected now, as on the preceding evening, immediately after quit 
the apartment of the nun, whose death was probably less terrible to 
him, than the confession he had been then call upon to witness. 
however this might be, he was perhaps consoled, in some degree, by a 
knowledge of the legacy bequeath him, since his family was large, and 
the extravagance of some part of it had lately been the means of 
involve him in great distress, and even in the horrors of a prison; 
and it was the grief he had suffer from the wild career of a 
favourite son, with the pecuniary anxiety and misfortune consequent 
upon it, that had given to his countenance the air of dejection, which 
had so much interested emily. 

to his friend mons. du pont he recite some particulars of his late 
sufferings, when it appeared, that he had been confine for several 
month in one of the prison of paris, with little hope of release, and 
without the comfort of seeing his wife, who had been absent in the 
country, endeavouring, though in vain, to procure assistance from his 
friends. when, at length, she had obtain an order for admittance, she 
was so much shock at the change, which long confinement and sorrow 
had made in his appearance, that she was seize with fits, which, by 
their long continuance, threaten her life. 

“our situation affected those, who happen to witness it,” continue 
mons. bonnac, “and one generous friend, who was in confinement at the 
same time, afterwards employ the first moments of his liberty in 
effort to obtain mine. he succeeded; the heavy debt, that oppress 
me, was discharged; and, when i would have express my sense of the 
obligation i had received, my benefactor was flee from my search. i 
have reason to believe he was the victim of his own generosity, and 
that he return to the state of confinement, from which he had 
release me; but every enquiry after him was unsuccessful. amiable and 
unfortunate valancourt!” 

“valancourt!” exclaim mons. du pont. “of what family?” 

“the valancourts, count duvarney,” reply mons. bonnac. 

the emotion of mons. du pont, when he discover the generous 
benefactor of his friend to be the rival of his love, can only be 
imagined; but, have overcome his first surprise, he dissipated the 
apprehension of mons. bonnac by acquaint him, that valancourt was 
at liberty, and had lately been in languedoc; after which his affection 
for emily prompt him to make some enquiries, respecting the conduct 
of his rival, during his stay at paris, of which m. bonnac appear to 
be well informed. the answer he received were such as convinced him, 
that valancourt had been much misrepresented, and, painful as was the 
sacrifice, he form the just design of relinquish his pursuit of 
emily to a lover, who, it now appeared, was not unworthy of the regard, 
with which she honour him. 

the conversation of mons. bonnac discovered, that valancourt, some time 
after his arrival at paris, had been drawn into the snares, which 
determined vice had spread for him, and that his hour had been chiefly 
divide between the party of the captivate marchioness and those 
game assemblies, to which the envy, or the avarice, of his brother 
officer had spare no art to seduce him. in these party he had lost 
large sums, in effort to recover small ones, and to such loss the 
count de villefort and mons. henri had been frequent witnesses. his 
resources were, at length, exhausted; and the count, his brother, 
exasperate by his conduct, refuse to continue the supplies necessary 
to his present mode of life, when valancourt, in consequence of 
accumulate debts, was thrown into confinement, where his brother 
suffer him to remain, in the hope, that punishment might effect a 
reform of conduct, which had not yet been confirmed by long habit. 

in the solitude of his prison, valancourt had leisure for reflection, 
and cause for repentance; here, too, the image of emily, which, amidst 
the dissipation of the city had been obscured, but never obliterate 
from his heart, revive with all the charm of innocence and beauty, to 
reproach him for have sacrifice his happiness and debase his 
talent by pursuits, which his noble faculty would formerly have 
taught him to consider were as tasteless as they were degrading. but, 
though his passion had been seduced, his heart was not depraved, nor 
had habit rivet the chains, that hung heavy on his conscience; and, 
as he retain that energy of will, which was necessary to burst them, 
he, at length, emancipate himself from the bondage of vice, but not 
till after much effort and severe suffering. 

being release by his brother from the prison, where he had witness 
the affecting meeting between mons. bonnac and his wife, with whom he 
had been for some time acquainted, the first use of his liberty form 
a striking instance of his humanity and his rashness; for with nearly 
all the money, just received from his brother, he went to a 
gaming-house, and gave it as a last stake for the chance of restore 
his friend to freedom, and to his afflict family. the event was 
fortunate, and, while he had await the issue of this momentous stake, 
he made a solemn vow never again to yield to the destructive and 
fascinating vice of gaming. 

have restore the venerable mons. bonnac to his rejoicing family, he 
hurried from paris to estuvière; and, in the delight of have made the 
wretched happy, forgot, for a while, his own misfortunes. soon, 
however, he remembered, that he had thrown away the fortune, without 
which he could never hope to marry emily; and life, unless pass with 
her, now scarcely appear supportable; for her goodness, refinement, 
and simplicity of heart, render her beauty more enchanting, if 
possible, to his fancy, than it had ever yet appeared. experience had 
taught him to understand the full value of the qualities, which he had 
before admired, but which the contrast character he had seen in the 
world made him now adore; and these reflections, increase the pang 
of remorse and regret, occasion the deep dejection, that had 
accompany him even into the presence of emily, of whom he considered 
himself no long worthy. to the ignominy of have received pecuniary 
obligation from the marchioness chamfort, or any other lady of 
intrigue, as the count de villefort had been informed, or of have 
been engaged in the depredate scheme of gamesters, valancourt had 
never submitted; and these were some of such scandal as often mingle 
with truth, against the unfortunate. count de villefort had received 
them from authority which he had no reason to doubt, and which the 
imprudent conduct he had himself witness in valancourt, had certainly 
induce him the more readily to believe. being such as emily could not 
name to the chevalier, he had no opportunity of refute them; and, 
when he confessed himself to be unworthy of her esteem, he little 
suspected, that he was confirm to her the most dreadful calumnies. 
thus the mistake had been mutual, and had remain so, when mons. 
bonnac explain the conduct of his generous, but imprudent young 
friend to du pont, who, with severe justice, determined not only to 
undeceive the count on this subject, but to resign all hope of emily. 
such a sacrifice as his love render this, was deserving of a noble 
reward, and mons. bonnac, if it had been possible for him to forget the 
benevolent valancourt, would have wish that emily might accept the 
just du pont. 

when the count was informed of the error he had committed, he was 
extremely shock at the consequence of his credulity, and the account 
which mons. bonnac gave of his friend’s situation, while at paris, 
convinced him, that valancourt had been entrap by the scheme of a 
set of dissipated young men, with whom his profession had partly 
oblige him to associate, rather than by an inclination to vice; and, 
charm by the humanity, and noble, though rash generosity, which his 
conduct towards mons. bonnac exhibited, he forgave him the transient 
errors, that had stain his youth, and restore him to the high degree 
of esteem, with which he had regard him, during their early 
acquaintance. but, as the least reparation he could now make valancourt 
was to afford him an opportunity of explain to emily his former 
conduct, he immediately wrote, to request his forgiveness of the 
unintentional injury he had done him, and to invite him to 
château-le-blanc. motive of delicacy withheld the count from inform 
emily of this letter, and of kindness from acquaint her with the 
discovery respecting valancourt, till his arrival should save her from 
the possibility of anxiety, as to its event; and this precaution spare 
her even severe inquietude, than the count had foreseen, since he was 
ignorant of the symptom of despair, which valancourt’s late conduct 
had betrayed. 



chapter xvii 

but in these cases, 
we still have judgment here; that we but teach 
bloody instructions, which, being taught, return 
to plague the inventor: thus even-handed justice 
commend the ingredient of our poison’d chalice 
to our own lips. 
macbeth 


some circumstances of an extraordinary nature now withdrew emily from 
her own sorrows, and excited emotions, which partook of both surprise 
and horror. 

a few days follow that, on which signora laurentini died, her will 
was open at the monastery, in the presence of the superior and mons. 
bonnac, when it was found, that one third of her personal property was 
bequeath to the nearest survive relative of the late marchioness de 
villeroi, and that emily was the person. 

with the secret of emily’s family the abbess had long been acquainted, 
and it was in observance of the earnest request of st. aubert, who was 
known to the friar, that attend him on his death-bed, that his 
daughter had remain in ignorance of her relationship to the 
marchioness. but some hints, which had fallen from signora laurentini, 
during her last interview with emily, and a confession of a very 
extraordinary nature, given in her die hours, had made the abbess 
think it necessary to converse with her young friend, on the topic she 
had not before venture to introduce; and it was for this purpose, that 
she had request to see her on the morning that follow her interview 
with the nun. emily’s indisposition had then prevent the intended 
conversation; but now, after the will had been examined, she received a 
summons, which she immediately obeyed, and became informed of 
circumstances, that powerful affected her. as the narrative of the 
abbess was, however, deficient in many particulars, of which the reader 
may wish to be informed, and the history of the nun is material 
connected with the fate of the marchioness de villeroi, we shall omit 
the conversation, that pass in the parlour of the convent, and mingle 
with our relation a brief history of 

laurentini di udolpho, 


who was the only child of her parents, and heiress of the ancient house 
of udolpho, in the territory of venice. it was the first misfortune of 
her life, and that which led to all her succeed misery, that the 
friends, who ought to have restrained her strong passions, and mildly 
instruct her in the art of governing them, nurture them by early 
indulgence. but they cherish their own failing in her; for their 
conduct was not the result of rational kindness, and, when they either 
indulged, or oppose the passion of their child, they gratify their 
own. thus they indulge her with weakness, and reprehend her with 
violence; her spirit was exasperate by their vehemence, instead of 
being correct by their wisdom; and their opposition became contest 
for victory, in which the due tender of the parents, and the 
affectionate duty of the child, were equally forgotten; but, as 
return fond disarm the parents’ resentment soonest, laurentini 
was suffer to believe that she had conquered, and her passion became 
strong by every effort, that had been employ to subdue them. 

the death of her father and mother in the same year left her to her own 
discretion, under the dangerous circumstances attendant on youth and 
beauty. she was fond of company, delight with admiration, yet 
disdainful of the opinion of the world, when it happen to contradict 
her inclinations; had a gay and brilliant wit, and was mistress of all 
the arts of fascination. her conduct was such as might have been 
expected, from the weakness of her principles and the strength of her 
passions. 

among her numerous admirer was the late marquis de villeroi, who, on 
his tour through italy, saw laurentini at venice, where she usually 
resided, and became her passionate adorer. equally captivate by the 
figure and accomplishment of the marquis, who was at that period one 
of the most distinguished noblemen of the france court, she had the art 
so effectually to conceal from him the dangerous trait of her 
character and the blemish of her late conduct, that he solicit her 
hand in marriage. 

before the nuptials were concluded, she retired to the castle of 
udolpho, whither the marquis followed, and, where her conduct, relaxing 
from the propriety, which she had lately assumed, discover to him the 
precipice, on which he stood. a minute enquiry than he had before 
thought it necessary to make, convinced him, that he had been deceive 
in her character, and she, whom he had design for his wife, 
afterwards became his mistress. 

have pass some week at udolpho, he was call abrupt to france, 
whither he return with extreme reluctance, for his heart was still 
fascinate by the arts of laurentini, with whom, however, he had on 
various pretence delay his marriage; but, to reconcile her to this 
separation, he now gave repeated promise of return to conclude the 
nuptials, as soon as the affair, which thus sudden call him to 
france, should permit. 

soothed, in some degree, by these assurances, she suffer him to 
depart; and, soon after, her relative, montoni, arrive at udolpho, 
renew the addresses, which she had before refused, and which she now 
again rejected. meanwhile, her thought were constant with the 
marquis de villeroi, for whom she suffer all the delirium of italy 
love, cherish by the solitude, to which she confine herself; for she 
had now lost all taste for the pleasure of society and the gaiety of 
amusement. her only indulgence were to sigh and weep over a miniature 
of the marquis; to visit the scenes, that had witness their 
happiness, to pour forth her heart to him in writing, and to count the 
weeks, the days, which must intervene before the period that he had 
mention as probable for his return. but this period pass without 
bring him; and week after week follow in heavy and almost 
intolerable expectation. during this interval, laurentini’s fancy, 
occupy incessant by one idea, became disordered; and, her whole 
heart being devoted to one object, life became hateful to her, when she 
believe that object lost. 

several month passed, during which she heard nothing from the marquis 
de villeroi, and her days were marked, at intervals, with the frenzy of 
passion and the sullen of despair. she secluded herself from all 
visitors, and, sometimes, remain in her apartment, for week 
together, refuse to speak to every person, except her favourite 
female attendant, writing scraps of letters, reading, again and again, 
those she had received from the marquis, weeping over his picture, and 
speak to it, for many hours, upbraiding, reproach and caress 
it alternately. 

at length, a report reach her, that the marquis had married in 
france, and, after suffering all the extreme of love, jealousy and 
indignation, she form the desperate resolution of go secret to 
that country, and, if the report prove true, of attempt a deep 
revenge. to her favourite woman only she confide the plan of her 
journey, and she engaged her to partake of it. have collected her 
jewels, which, descend to her from many branch of her family, were 
of immense value, and all her cash, to a very large amount, they were 
packed in a trunk, which was private convey to a neighbouring town, 
whither laurentini, with this only servant, followed, and thence 
proceed secret to leghorn, where they embark for france. 

when, on her arrival in languedoc, she found, that the marquis de 
villeroi had been married, for some months, her despair almost deprived 
her of reason, and she alternate project and abandoned the horrible 
design of murder the marquis, his wife and herself. at length she 
contrived to throw herself in his way, with an intention of reproach 
him, for his conduct, and of stabbing herself in his presence; but, 
when she again saw him, who so long had been the constant object of her 
thought and affections, resentment yield to love; her resolution 
failed; she tremble with the conflict of emotions, that assail her 
heart, and faint away. 

the marquis was not proof against her beauty and sensibility; all the 
energy, with which he had first loved, returned, for his passion had 
been resist by prudence, rather than overcome by indifference; and, 
since the honour of his family would not permit him to marry her, he 
had endeavour to subdue his love, and had so far succeeded, as to 
select the then marchioness for his wife, whom he love at first with a 
temper and rational affection. but the mild virtue of that amiable 
lady did not recompense him for her indifference, which appeared, 
notwithstanding her effort to conceal it; and he had, for some time, 
suspect that her affection were engaged by another person, when 
laurentini arrive in languedoc. this artful italy soon perceived, 
that she had regain her influence over him, and, soothe by the 
discovery, she determined to live, and to employ all her enchantment 
to win his consent to the diabolical deed, which she believe was 
necessary to the security of her happiness. she conduct her scheme 
with deep dissimulate and patient perseverance, and, have 
completely estrange the affection of the marquis from his wife, whose 
gentle goodness and unimpassioned manners had cease to please, when 
contrast with the captivate of the italian, she proceed to 
awaken in his mind the jealousy of pride, for it was no long that of 
love, and even pointed out to him the person, to whom she affirm the 
marchioness had sacrifice her honour; but laurentini had first 
extort from him a solemn promise to forbear avenge himself upon his 
rival. this was an important part of her plan, for she knew, that, if 
his desire of vengeance was restrained towards one party, it would burn 
more fierce towards the other, and he might then, perhaps, be 
prevail on to assist in the horrible act, which would release him 
from the only barrier, that withheld him from making her his wife. 

the innocent marchioness, meanwhile, observed, with extreme grief, the 
alteration in her husband’s manners. he became reserved and thoughtful 
in her presence; his conduct was austere, and sometimes even rude; and 
he left her, for many hour together, to weep for his unkindness, and 
to form plan for the recovery of his affection. his conduct afflict 
her the more, because, in obedience to the command of her father, she 
had accept his hand, though her affection were engaged to another, 
whose amiable disposition, she had reason to believe, would have 
ensure her happiness. this circumstance laurentini had discovered, 
soon after her arrival in france, and had made ample use of it in 
assist her designs upon the marquis, to whom she adduce such 
seeming proof of his wife’s infidelity, that, in the frantic rage of 
wound honour, he consent to destroy his wife. a slow poison was 
administered, and she fell a victim to the jealousy and subtlety of 
laurentini and to the guilty weakness of her husband. 

but the moment of laurentini’s triumph, the moment, to which she had 
look forward for the completion of all her wishes, prove only the 
commencement of a suffering, that never left her to her die hour. 

the passion of revenge, which had in part stimulate her to the 
commission of this atrocious deed, died, even at the moment when it was 
gratified, and left her to the horrors of unavailing pity and remorse, 
which would probably have empoisone all the years she had promise 
herself with the marquis de villeroi, had her expectations of an 
alliance with him been realised. but he, too, had found the moment of 
his revenge to be that of remorse, as to himself, and detestation, as 
to the partner of his crime; the feeling, which he had mistaken for 
conviction, was no more; and he stood astonished, and aghast, that no 
proof remain of his wife’s infidelity, now that she had suffer the 
punishment of guilt. even when he was informed, that she was dying, he 
had felt sudden and unaccountable reassure of her innocence, nor was 
the solemn assurance she made him in her last hour, capable of 
afford him a strong conviction of her blameless conduct. 

in the first horrors of remorse and despair, he felt inclined to 
deliver up himself and the woman, who had plunge him into this abyss 
of guilt, into the hand of justice; but, when the paroxysm of his 
suffering was over, his intention changed. laurentini, however, he saw 
only once afterwards, and that was, to curse her as the instigate of 
his crime, and to say, that he spare her life only on condition, that 
she pass the rest of her days in prayer and penance. overwhelm with 
disappointment, on receiving contempt and abhorrence from the man, for 
whose sake she had not scruple to stain her conscience with human 
blood, and, touched with horror of the unavailing crime she had 
committed, she renounce the world, and retired to the monastery of st. 
claire, a dreadful victim to unresisted passion. 

the marquis, immediately after the death of his wife, quit 
château-le-blanc, to which he never returned, and endeavour to lose 
the sense of his crime amidst the tumult of war, or the dissipation of 
a capital; but his effort were vain; a deep dejection hung over him 
ever after, for which his most intimate friend could not account, and 
he, at length, died, with a degree of horror nearly equal to that, 
which laurentini had suffered. the physician, who had observe the 
singular appearance of the unfortunate marchioness, after death, had 
been bribe to silence; and, as the surmise of a few of the servant 
had proceed no further than a whisper, the affair had never been 
investigated. whether this whisper ever reach the father of the 
marchioness, and, if it did, whether the difficulty of obtain proof 
deter him from prosecute the marquis de villeroi, is uncertain; 
but her death was deep lament by some part of her family, and 
particularly by her brother, m. st. aubert; for that was the degree of 
relationship, which had exist between emily’s father and the 
marchioness; and there is no doubt, that he suspect the manner of her 
death. many letters pass between the marquis and him, soon after the 
decease of his beloved sister, the subject of which was not known, but 
there is reason to believe, that they related to the cause of her 
death; and these were the papers, together with some letters of the 
marchioness, who had confide to her brother the occasion of her 
unhappiness, which st. aubert had so solemn enjoin his daughter to 
destroy: and anxiety for her peace had probably made him forbid her to 
enquire into the melancholy story, to which they alluded. such, indeed, 
had been his affliction, on the premature death of this his favourite 
sister, whose unhappy marriage had from the first excited his tenderest 
pity, that he never could hear her named, or mention her himself after 
her death, except to madame st. aubert. from emily, whose sensibility 
he fear to awaken, he had so careful conceal her history and 
name, that she was ignorant, till now, that she ever had such a 
relative as the marchioness de villeroi; and from this motive he had 
enjoin silence to his only survive sister, madame cheron, who had 
scrupulous observe his request. 

it was over some of the last pathetic letters of the marchioness, that 
st. aubert was weeping, when he was observe by emily, on the eve of 
her departure from la vallée, and it was her picture, which he had so 
tender caressed. her disastrous death may account for the emotion he 
had betrayed, on hearing her name by la voisin, and for his request to 
be inter near the monument of the villerois, where her remains were 
deposited, but not those of her husband, who was buried, where he died, 
in the north of france. 

the confessor, who attend st. aubert in his last moments, recollect 
him to be the brother of the late marchioness, when st. aubert, from 
tender to emily, had conjure him to conceal the circumstance, and 
to request that the abbess, to whose care he particularly recommend 
her, would do the same; a request, which had been exactly observed. 

laurentini, on her arrival in france, had careful conceal her name 
and family, and, the better to disguise her real history, had, on 
enter the convent, cause the story to be circulated, which had 
impose on sister frances, and it is probable, that the abbess, who did 
not preside in the convent, at the time of her noviciation, was also 
entire ignorant of the truth. the deep remorse, that seize on the 
mind of laurentini, together with the suffering of disappointed 
passion, for she still love the marquis, again unsettled her 
intellects, and, after the first paroxysm of despair were passed, a 
heavy and silent melancholy had settled upon her spirits, which 
suffer few interrupt from fit of frenzy, till the time of her 
death. during many years, it had been her only amusement to walk in the 
wood near the monastery, in the solitary hour of night, and to play 
upon a favourite instrument, to which she sometimes join the 
delightful melody of her voice, in the most solemn and melancholy airs 
of her native country, modulate by all the energetic feeling, that 
dwelt in her heart. the physician, who had attend her, recommend it 
to the superior to indulge her in this whim, as the only means of 
soothe her distempered fancy; and she was suffer to walk in the 
lonely hour of night, attend by the servant, who had accompany her 
from italy; but, as the indulgence transgress against the rule of 
the convent, it was kept as secret as possible; and thus the mysterious 
music of laurentini had combine with other circumstances, to produce a 
report, that not only the château, but its neighbourhood, was haunted. 

soon after her entrance into this holy community, and before she had 
shown any symptom of insanity there, she made a will, in which, after 
bequeath a considerable legacy to the convent, she divide the 
remainder of her personal property, which her jewel made very 
valuable, between the wife of mons. bonnac, who was an italy lady and 
her relation, and the nearest survive relative of the late 
marchioness de villeroi. as emily st. aubert was not only the nearest, 
but the sole relative, this legacy descended to her, and thus explain 
to her the whole mystery of her father’s conduct. 

the resemblance between emily and her unfortunate aunt had frequent 
been observe by laurentini, and had occasion the singular behaviour, 
which had formerly alarm her; but it was in the nun’s die hour, 
when her conscience gave her perpetual the idea of the marchioness, 
that she became more sensible, than ever, of this likeness, and, in her 
frenzy, deem it no resemblance of the person she had injured, but the 
original herself. the bold assertion, that had followed, on the 
recovery of her senses, that emily was the daughter of the marchioness 
de villeroi, arose from a suspicion that she was so; for, knowing that 
her rival, when she married the marquis, was attach to another lover, 
she had scarcely scruple to believe, that her honour had been 
sacrificed, like her own, to an unresisted passion. 

of a crime, however, to which emily had suspected, from her frenzied 
confession of murder, that she had been instrumental in the castle of 
udolpho, laurentini was innocent; and she had herself been deceived, 
concerning the spectacle, that formerly occasion her so much terror, 
and had since compel her, for a while, to attribute the horrors of 
the nun to a consciousness of a murder, committed in that castle. 

it may be remembered, that, in a chamber of udolpho, hung a black veil, 
whose singular situation had excited emily’s curiosity, and which 
afterwards disclose an object, that had overwhelm her with horror; 
for, on lift it, there appeared, instead of the picture she had 
expected, within a recess of the wall, a human figure of ghastly 
paleness, stretch at its length, and dress in the habiliment of 
the grave. what add to the horror of the spectacle, was, that the 
face appear partly decay and disfigure by worms, which were 
visible on the features and hands. on such an object, it will be 
readily believed, that no person could endure to look twice. emily, it 
may be recollected, had, after the first glance, let the veil drop, and 
her terror had prevent her from ever after provoking a renewal of 
such suffering, as she had then experienced. had she dare to look 
again, her delusion and her fear would have vanish together, and she 
would have perceived, that the figure before her was not human, but 
form of wax. the history of it is somewhat extraordinary, though not 
without example in the record of that fierce severity, which monkish 
superstition has sometimes inflict on mankind. a member of the house 
of udolpho, have committed some offence against the prerogative of 
the church, had been condemn to the penance of contemplating, during 
certain hour of the day, a waxen image, made to resemble a human body 
in the state, to which it is reduce after death. this penance, serving 
as a memento of the condition at which he must himself arrive, had been 
design to reprove the pride of the marquis of udolpho, which had 
formerly so much exasperate that of the romish church; and he had not 
only superstitious observe this penance himself, which, he had 
believed, was to obtain a pardon for all his sins, but had made it a 
condition in his will, that his descendant should preserve the image, 
on pain of forfeit to the church a certain part of his domain, that 
they also might profit by the humiliate moral it conveyed. the 
figure, therefore, had been suffer to retain its station in the wall 
of the chamber, but his descendant excuse themselves from observing 
the penance, to which he had been enjoined. 

this image was so horrible natural, that it is not surprising emily 
should have mistaken it for the object it resembled, nor, since she had 
heard such an extraordinary account, concerning the disappear of the 
late lady of the castle, and had such experience of the character of 
montoni, that she should have believe this to be the murder body of 
the lady laurentini, and that he had been the contrive of her death. 

the situation, in which she had discover it, occasion her, at 
first, much surprise and perplexity; but the vigilance, with which the 
door of the chamber, where it was deposited, were afterwards secured, 
had compel her to believe, that montoni, not daring to confide the 
secret of her death to any person, had suffer her remains to decay in 
this obscure chamber. the ceremony of the veil, however, and the 
circumstance of the door have been left open, even for a moment, had 
occasion her much wonder and some doubts; but these were not 
sufficient to overcome her suspicion of montoni; and it was the dread 
of his terrible vengeance, that had seal her lip in silence, 
concerning what she had seen in the west chamber. 

emily, in discover the marchioness de villeroi to have been the 
sister of mons. st. aubert, was variously affected; but, amidst the 
sorrow, which she suffer for her untimely death, she was release 
from an anxious and painful conjecture, occasion by the rash 
assertion of signora laurentini, concerning her birth and the honour of 
her parents. her faith in st. aubert’s principles would scarcely allow 
her to suspect that he had act dishonourably; and she felt such 
reluctance to believe herself the daughter of any other, than her, whom 
she had always considered and love as a mother, that she would hardly 
admit such a circumstance to be possible; yet the likeness, which it 
had frequent been affirm she bore to the late marchioness, the 
former behaviour of dorothée the old housekeeper, the assertion of 
laurentini, and the mysterious attachment, which st. aubert had 
discovered, awaken doubts, as to his connection with the marchioness, 
which her reason could neither vanquish, nor confirm. from these, 
however, she was now relieved, and all the circumstances of her 
father’s conduct were fully explained: but her heart was oppress by 
the melancholy catastrophe of her amiable relative, and by the awful 
lesson, which the history of the nun exhibited, the indulgence of whose 
passion had been the means of leading her gradual to the commission 
of a crime, from the prophecy of which in her early years she would 
have recoil in horror, and exclaimed—that it could not be!—a crime, 
which whole years of repentance and of the severest penance had not 
been able to obliterate from her conscience. 



chapter xviii 

then, fresh tear 
stood on her cheek, as doth the honey-dew 
upon a gather’d lily almost wither’d 
shakespeare 


after the late discoveries, emily was distinguished at the château by 
the count and his family, as a relative of the house of villeroi, and 
received, if possible, more friendly attention, than had yet been shown 
her. 

count de villefort’s surprise at the delay of an answer to his letter, 
which had been direct to valancourt, at estuvière, was mingle with 
satisfaction for the prudence, which had save emily from a share of 
the anxiety he now suffered, though, when he saw her still droop 
under the effect of his former error, all his resolution was necessary 
to restrain him from relate the truth, that would afford her a 
momentary relief. the approach nuptials of the lady blanche now 
divide his attention with this subject of his anxiety, for the 
inhabitant of the château were already busy in preparation for that 
event, and the arrival of mons. st. foix was daily expected. in the 
gaiety, which surround her, emily vain try to participate, her 
spirits being depressed by the late discoveries, and by the anxiety 
concerning the fate of valancourt, that had been occasion by the 
description of his manner, when he had deliver the ring. she seem 
to perceive in it the gloomy wild of despair; and, when she 
considered to what that despair might have urge him, her heart sunk 
with terror and grief. the state of suspense, as to his safety, to 
which she believe herself condemned, till she should return to la 
vallée, appear insupportable, and, in such moments, she could not 
even struggle to assume the composure, that had left her mind, but 
would often abrupt quit the company she was with, and endeavour to 
sooth her spirits in the deep solitude of the woods, that overbrowe 
the shore. here, the faint roar of foam waves, that beat below, and 
the sullen murmur of the wind among the branch around, were 
circumstances in unison with the temper of her mind; and she would sit 
on a cliff, or on the broken steps of her favourite watch-tower, 
observing the change colours of the evening clouds, and the gloom of 
twilight draw over the sea, till the white tops of billows, riding 
towards the shore, could scarcely be discern amidst the darken 
waters. the lines, engrave by valancourt on this tower, she frequent 
repeated with melancholy enthusiasm, and then would endeavour to check 
the recollection and the grief they occasioned, and to turn her 
thought to indifferent subjects. 

one evening, have wander with her lute to this her favourite spot, 
she enter the ruin tower, and ascend a winding staircase, that 
led to a small chamber, which was less decay than the rest of the 
building, and whence she had often gazed, with admiration, on the wide 
prospect of sea and land, that extend below. the sun was now setting 
on that tract of the pyrenees, which divide languedoc from rousillon, 
and, place herself opposite to a small grate window, which, like the 
wood-tops beneath, and the wave lower still, gleam with the red glow 
of the west, she touched the chord of her lute in solemn symphony, and 
then accompany it with her voice, in one of the simple and affecting 
airs, to which, in happy days, valancourt had often listen in 
rapture, and which she now adapt to the following lines. 

to melancholy 

spirit of love and sorrow—hail! 
thy solemn voice from far i hear, 
mingle with ev’ning’s die gale: 
hail, with this sadly-pleasing tear! 

o! at this still, this lonely hour, 
thine own sweet hour of close day, 
awake thy lute, whose charmful pow’r 
shall call up fancy to obey: 

to paint the wild romantic dream, 
that meet the poet’s muse eye, 
as, on the bank of shadowy stream, 
he breathe to her the fervid sigh. 

o lonely spirit! let thy song 
lead me through all thy sacred haunt; 
the minister’s moonlight aisle along, 
where spectre raise the midnight chaunt. 

i hear their dirge faint swell! 
then, sink at once in silence drear, 
while, from the pillar’d cloister’s cell, 
dim their gliding form appear! 

lead where the pine-woods wave on high, 
whose pathless sod is dark seen, 
as the cold moon, with tremble eye, 
darts her long beam the leaves between. 

lead to the mountain’s dusky head, 
where, far below, in shade profound, 
wide forests, plain and hamlet spread, 
and sad the chime of vesper sound, 

or guide me, where the dashing oar 
just break the still of the vale, 
as slow it track the winding shore, 
to meet the ocean’s distant sail: 

to pebbly banks, that neptune laves, 
with measur’d surges, loud and deep, 
where the dark cliff bends o’er the waves, 
and wild the wind of autumn sweep. 

there pause at midnight’s spectre hour, 
and list the long-resounding gale; 
and catch the fleeting moonlight’s pow’r, 
o’er foam sea and distant sail. 


the soft tranquill of the scene below, where the evening breeze 
scarcely curl the water, or swell the passing sail, that caught the 
last gleam of the sun, and where, now and then, a dip oar was all 
that disturbed the tremble radiance, conspire with the tender melody 
of her lute to lull her mind into a state of gentle sadness, and she 
sung the mournful song of past times, till the remembrance they 
awaken were too powerful for her heart, her tear fell upon the lute, 
over which she drooped, and her voice trembled, and was unable to 
proceed. 

though the sun had now sunk behind the mountains, and even his 
reflect light was fade from their highest points, emily did not 
leave the watch-tower, but continue to indulge her melancholy reverie, 
till a footstep, at a little distance, startle her, and, on look 
through the grate, she observe a person walking below, whom, however, 
soon perceive to be mons. bonnac, she return to the quiet 
thoughtful his step had interrupted. after some time, she again 
struck her lute, and sung her favourite air; but again a step disturbed 
her, and, as she pause to listen, she heard it ascend the staircase 
of the tower. the gloom of the hour, perhaps, made her sensible to some 
degree of fear, which she might not otherwise have felt; for, only a 
few minutes before, she had seen mons. bonnac pass. the steps were 
quick and bounding, and, in the next moment, the door of the chamber 
opened, and a person entered, whose features were veiled in the 
obscurity of twilight; but his voice could not be concealed, for it was 
the voice of valancourt! at the sound, never heard by emily, without 
emotion, she started, in terror, astonishment and doubtful pleasure, 
and had scarcely beheld him at her feet, when she sunk into a seat, 
overcome by the various emotions, that contend at her heart, and 
almost insensible to that voice, whose earnest and tremble call 
seem as if endeavour to save her. valancourt, as he hung over 
emily, deplore his own rash impatience, in have thus surprise her: 
for when he had arrive at the château, too anxious to await the return 
of the count, who, he understood, was in the grounds, he went himself 
to seek him, when, as he pass the tower, he was struck by the sound 
of emily’s voice, and immediately ascended. 

it was a considerable time before she revived, but, when her 
recollection returned, she repulse his attentions, with an air of 
reserve, and enquired, with as much displeasure as it was possible she 
could feel in these first moments of his appearance, the occasion of 
his visit. 

“ah emily!” said valancourt, “that air, those words—alas! i have, then, 
little to hope—when you cease to esteem me, you cease also to love 
me!” 

“most true, sir,” reply emily, endeavour to command her tremble 
voice; “and if you had value my esteem, you would not have given me 
this new occasion for uneasiness.” 

valancourt’s countenance change sudden from the anxiety of doubt 
to an expression of surprise and dismay: he was silent a moment, and 
then said, “i had been taught to hope for a very different reception! 
is it, then, true, emily, that i have lost your regard for ever? am i 
to believe, that, though your esteem for me may return—your affection 
never can? can the count have meditate the cruelty, which now torture 
me with a second death?” 

the voice, in which he spoke this, alarm emily as much as his words 
surprise her, and, with tremble impatience, she beg that he would 
explain them. 

“can any explanation be necessary?” said valancourt, “do you not know 
how cruel my conduct has been misrepresented? that the action of 
which you once believe me guilty (and, o emily! how could you so 
degrade me in your opinion, even for a moment!) those actions—i hold in 
as much contempt and abhorrence as yourself? are you, indeed, ignorant, 
that count de villefort has detect the slanders, that have rob me 
of all i hold dear on earth, and has invite me hither to justify to 
you my former conduct? it is surely impossible you can be uninformed of 
these circumstances, and i am again torture myself with a false 
hope!” 

the silence of emily confirmed this supposition; for the deep twilight 
would not allow valancourt to distinguish the astonishment and doubt 
joy, that fixed her features. for a moment, she continue unable to 
speak; then a profound sigh seem to give some relief to her spirits, 
and she said, 

“valancourt! i was, till this moment, ignorant of all the circumstances 
you have mentioned; the emotion i now suffer may assure you of the 
truth of this, and, that, though i had cease to esteem, i had not 
taught myself entire to forget you.” 

“this moment,” said valancourt, in a low voice, and leaning for support 
against the window—“this moment bring with it a conviction that 
overpower me!—i am dear to you then—still dear to you, my emily!” 

“is it necessary that i should tell you so?” she replied, “is it 
necessary, that i should say—these are the first moments of joy i have 
known, since your departure, and that they repay me for all those of 
pain i have suffer in the interval?” 

valancourt sigh deeply, and was unable to reply; but, as he pressed 
her hand to his lips, the tears, that fell over it, spoke a language, 
which could not be mistaken, and to which words were inadequate. 

emily, somewhat tranquillized, propose return to the château, and 
then, for the first time, recollect that the count had invite 
valancourt thither to explain his conduct, and that no explanation had 
yet been given. but, while she acknowledge this, her heart would not 
allow her to dwell, for a moment, on the possibility of his 
unworthiness; his look, his voice, his manner, all spoke the noble 
sincerity, which had formerly distinguished him; and she again 
permit herself to indulge the emotion of a joy, more surprising and 
powerful, than she had ever before experienced. 

neither emily, nor valancourt, were conscious how they reach the 
château, whither they might have been transfer by the spell of a 
fairy, for anything they could remember; and it was not, till they had 
reach the great hall, that either of them recollect there were 
other person in the world besides themselves. the count then came 
forth with surprise, and with the joyful of pure benevolence, to 
welcome valancourt, and to entreat his forgiveness of the injustice he 
had done him; soon after which, mons. bonnac join this happy group, 
in which he and valancourt were mutual rejoice to meet. 

when the first congratulations were over, and the general joy became 
somewhat more tranquil, the count withdrew with valancourt to the 
library, where a long conversation pass between them, in which the 
latter so clearly justified himself of the criminal parts of the 
conduct, impute to him, and so candidly confessed and so feeling 
lament the follies, which he had committed, that the count was 
confirmed in his belief of all he had hoped; and, while he perceive so 
many noble virtue in valancourt, and that experience had taught him to 
detest the follies, which before he had only not admired, he did not 
scruple to believe, that he would pass through life with the dignity of 
a wise and good man, or to entrust to his care the future happiness of 
emily st. aubert, for whom he felt the solicitude of a parent. of this 
he soon informed her, in a short conversation, when valancourt had left 
him. while emily listen to a relation of the services, that 
valancourt had render mons. bonnac, her eyes overflow with tear of 
pleasure, and the further conversation of count de villefort perfectly 
dissipated every doubt, as to the past and future conduct of him, to 
whom she now restored, without fear, the esteem and affection, with 
which she had formerly received him. 

when they return to the supper-room, the countess and lady blanche 
met valancourt with sincere congratulations; and blanche, indeed, was 
so much rejoice to see emily return to happiness, as to forget, for 
a while, that mons. st. foix was not yet arrive at the château, though 
he had been expect for some hours; but her generous sympathy was, 
soon after, reward by his appearance. he was now perfectly recover 
from the wounds, received, during his perilous adventure among the 
pyrenees, the mention of which serve to heighten to the parties, who 
had been involved in it, the sense of their present happiness. new 
congratulations pass between them, and round the supper-table 
appear a group of faces, smile with felicity, but with a felicity, 
which had in each a different character. the smile of blanche was frank 
and gay, that of emily tender and pensive; valancourt’s was rapturous, 
tender and gay alternately; mons. st. foix’s was joyous, and that of 
the count, as he look on the surrounding party, express the 
temper complacency of benevolence; while the features of the 
countess, henri, and mons. bonnac, discover faint trace of 
animation. poor mons. du pont did not, by his presence, throw a shade 
of regret over the company; for, when he had discovered, that 
valancourt was not unworthy of the esteem of emily, he determined 
seriously to endeavour at the conquest of his own hopeless affection, 
and had immediately withdrawn from château-le-blanc—a conduct, which 
emily now understood, and reward with her admiration and pity. 

the count and his guest continue together till a late hour, yielding 
to the delight of social gaiety, and to the sweets of friendship. when 
annette heard of the arrival of valancourt, ludovico had some 
difficulty to prevent her go into the supper-room, to express her 
joy, for she declared, that she had never been so rejoice at any 
_accident_ as this, since she had found ludovico himself. 



chapter xix 

now my task is smooth done, 
i can fly, or i can run 
quick to the green earth’s end, 
where the bow’d welkin low doth bend, 
and, from thence, can soar as soon 
to the corner of the moon. 
milton 


the marriage of the lady blanche and emily st. aubert were celebrated, 
on the same day, and with the ancient baronial magnificence, at 
château-le-blanc. the feast were held in the great hall of the castle, 
which, on this occasion, was hung with superb new tapestry, 
represent the exploit of charlemagne and his twelve peers; here, 
were seen the saracens, with their horrible visors, advance to 
battle; and there, were display the wild solemnity of incantation, 
and the necromantic feats, exhibit by the magician _jarl_ before the 
emperor. the sumptuous banner of the family of villeroi, which had 
long slept in dust, were once more unfurled, to wave over the gothic 
points of paint casements; and music echoed, in many a lingering 
close, through every winding gallery and colonnade of that vast 
edifice. 

as annette look down from the corridor upon the hall, whose arch 
and window were illuminate with brilliant festoon of lamps, and 
gaze on the splendid dress of the dancers, the costly livery of 
the attendants, the canopy of purple velvet and gold, and listen to 
the gay strain that float along the vaulted roof, she almost fancy 
herself in an enchant palace, and declared, that she had not met with 
any place, which charm her so much, since she read the fairy tales; 
nay, that the fairy themselves, at their nightly revel in this old 
hall, could display nothing finer; while old dorothée, as she survey 
the scene, sighed, and said, the castle look as it was wont to do in 
the time of her youth. 

after grace the festivity of château-le-blanc, for some days, 
valancourt and emily took leave of their kind friends, and return to 
la vallée, where the faithful theresa received them with unfeigned joy, 
and the pleasant shades welcome them with a thousand tender and 
affecting remembrances; and, while they wander together over the 
scenes, so long inhabit by the late mons. and madame st. aubert, and 
emily pointed out, with pensive affection, their favourite haunts, her 
present happiness was heightened, by considering, that it would have 
been worthy of their approbation, could they have witness it. 

valancourt led her to the plane-tree on the terrace, where he had first 
venture to declare his love, and where now the remembrance of the 
anxiety he had then suffered, and the retrospect of all the danger and 
misfortune they had each encountered, since last they sat together 
beneath its broad branches, exalted the sense of their present 
felicity, which, on this spot, sacred to the memory of st. aubert, they 
solemn vow to deserve, as far as possible, by endeavour to 
imitate his benevolence,—by remembering, that superior attainment of 
every sort bring with them duty of superior exertion,—and by 
afford to their fellow-beings, together with that portion of 
ordinary comforts, which prosperity always owe to misfortune, the 
example of lives pass in happy thankful to god, and, therefore, 
in careful tender to his creatures. 

soon after their return to la vallée, the brother of valancourt came to 
congratulate him on his marriage, and to pay his respects to emily, 
with whom he was so much pleased, as well as with the prospect of 
rational happiness, which these nuptials offer to valancourt, that he 
immediately resigned to him a part of the rich domain, the whole of 
which, as he had no family, would of course descend to his brother, on 
his decease. 

the estates, at thoulouse, were disposed of, and emily purchase of 
mons. quesnel the ancient domain of her late father, where, have 
given annette a marriage portion, she settled her as the housekeeper, 
and ludovico as the steward; but, since both valancourt and herself 
prefer the pleasant and long-loved shades of la vallée to the 
magnificence of epourville, they continue to reside there, passing, 
however, a few month in the year at the birth-place of st. aubert, in 
tender respect to his memory. 

the legacy, which had been bequeath to emily by signora laurentini, 
she beg valancourt would allow her to resign to mons. bonnac; and 
valancourt, when she made the request, felt all the value of the 
compliment it conveyed. the castle of udolpho, also, descended to the 
wife of mons. bonnac, who was the nearest survive relation of the 
house of that name, and thus affluence restore his long-oppressed 
spirits to peace, and his family to comfort. 

o! how joyful it is to tell of happiness, such as that of valancourt 
and emily; to relate, that, after suffering under the oppression of the 
vicious and the disdain of the weak, they were, at length, restore to 
each other—to the beloved landscape of their native country,—to the 
securest felicity of this life, that of aspire to moral and labour 
for intellectual improvement—to the pleasure of enlightened society, 
and to the exercise of the benevolence, which had always animate their 
hearts; while the bower of la vallée became, once more, the retreat of 
goodness, wisdom and domestic blessedness! 

o! useful may it be to have shown, that, though the vicious can 
sometimes pour affliction upon the good, their power is transient and 
their punishment certain; and that innocence, though oppress by 
injustice, shall, support by patience, finally triumph over 
misfortune! 

and, if the weak hand, that has record this tale, has, by its scenes, 
beguile the mourner of one hour of sorrow, or, by its moral, taught 
him to sustain it—the effort, however humble, has not been vain, nor is 
the writer unrewarded. 



end of the project gutenberg ebook of the mystery of udolpho, by ann radcliffe 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the mystery of udolpho *** 

***** this file should be name 3268-0.txt or 3268-0.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/3268/ 

produce by karalee coleman, and david widger 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition will 
be renamed. 

create the works from print edition not protect by u.s. copyright 
law means that no one own a united states copyright in these works, 
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united 
states without permission and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part 
of this license, apply to copy and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a register trademark, 
and may not be use if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receive 
specific permission. if you do not charge anything for copy of this 
ebook, comply with the rule is very easy. you may use this ebook 
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, 
performance and research. they may be modify and print and given 
away--you may do practically anything in the united states with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribute is subject to the 
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. 

start: full license 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full 
project gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or 
destroy all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your 
possession. if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound 
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this 
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection 
of project gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual 
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united 
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the 
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or create derivative works base on the work as long as 
all reference to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote 
free access to electronic works by freely share project gutenberg-tm 
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the 
project gutenberg-tm name associate with the work. you can easily 
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the 
same format with its attach full project gutenberg-tm license when 
you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are 
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, 
check the law of your country in addition to the terms of this 
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribute or create derivative works base on this work or any 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no 
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any 
country outside the united states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other 
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear 
prominent whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it 
under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this 
ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the 
united states, you'll have to check the law of the country where you 
are located before use this ebook. 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is 
derive from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (does not 
contain a notice indicate that it is post with permission of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copy and distribute to anyone in 
the united states without pay any fee or charges. if you are 
redistribute or providing access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associate with or appear on the work, you must comply 
either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any 
additional terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works 
post with the permission of the copyright holder found at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including 
any word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access 
to or distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official 
version post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense 
to the user, provide a copy, a means of export a copy, or a means 
of obtain a copy upon request, of the work in its original "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. any alternate format must include the 
full project gutenberg-tm license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
provided that 

* you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has 
agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment must be paid 
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are 
legal require to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty 
payment should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specify in 
section 4, "information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation." 

* you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all 
copy of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue 
all use of and all access to other copy of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days of 
receipt of the work. 

* you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than 
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing 
from both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
works not protect by u.s. copyright law in create the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate 
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damage disk or 
other medium, a computer virus, or computer code that damage or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you 
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in 
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person 
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second 
opportunity to receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if 
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing 
without further opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no 
other warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not 
limited to warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of 
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
violate the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or 
limitation permit by the applicable state law. the invalid or 
unenforceable of any provision of this agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in 
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the 
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, 
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirect from any of 
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this 
or any project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addition or deletion to any project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any 
defect you cause. 

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of 
computer including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it 
exist because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation 
from people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future 
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation and how your effort and donation can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at 
www.gutenberg.org 



section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: po box 750175, fairbanks, ak 99775, but its 
volunteer and employee are scattered throughout numerous 
locations. its business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up to 
date contact information can be found at the foundation's web site and 
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 

dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send 
donation or determine the status of compliance for any particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. to 
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 

section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
freely share with anyone. for forty years, he produce and 
distribute project gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of 
volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not 
necessarily keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper 
edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 



