the project gutenberg ebook of the wendigo, by algernon blackwood 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the wendigo 

author: algernon blackwood 

release date: january 31, 2004 [ebook #10897] 
[last updated: march 10, 2012] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the wendigo *** 




produce by suzanne shell, beginner projects, dave morgan and the 
online distribute proofread team. 





the wendigo 

algernon blackwood 

1910 




i 
preface 

a considerable number of hunting party were out that year without 
finding so much as a fresh trail; for the moose were uncommonly shy, and 
the various nimrod return to the bosom of their respective family 
with the best excuse the fact of their imagination could suggest. dr. 
cathcart, among others, came back without a trophy; but he brought 
instead the memory of an experience which he declare was worth all the 
bull moose that had ever been shot. but then cathcart, of aberdeen, was 
interested in other things besides moose--amongst them the vagary of 
the human mind. this particular story, however, found no mention in his 
book on collective hallucination for the simple reason (so he confide 
once to a fellow colleague) that he himself play too intimate a part 
in it to form a competent judgment of the affair as a whole.... 

besides himself and his guide, hank davis, there was young simpson, his 
nephew, a divinity student destined for the "wee kirk" (then on his 
first visit to canada backwoods), and the latter's guide, défago. 
joseph défago was a france "canuck," who had stray from his native 
province of quebec years before, and had got caught in rat portage when 
the canada pacific railway was a-building; a man who, in addition to 
his unparalleled knowledge of wood-craft and bush-lore, could also sing 
the old _voyageur_ song and tell a capital hunting yarn into the 
bargain. he was deep susceptible, moreover, to that singular spell 
which the wilderness lay upon certain lonely natures, and he love the 
wild solitude with a kind of romantic passion that amount almost to 
an obsession. the life of the backwoods fascinate him--whence, 
doubtless, his surpassing efficiency in dealing with their mysteries. 

on this particular expedition he was hank's choice. hank knew him and 
swore by him. he also swore at him, "jest as a pal might," and since he 
had a vocabulary of picturesque, if utterly meaningless, oaths, the 
conversation between the two stalwart and hardy woodsmen was often of a 
rather lively description. this river of expletives, however, hank 
agree to dam a little out of respect for his old "hunting boss," dr. 
cathcart, whom of course he address after the fashion of the country 
as "doc," and also because he understood that young simpson was already 
a "bit of a parson." he had, however, one objection to défago, and one 
only--which was, that the france canada sometimes exhibit what hank 
describe as "the output of a cursed and dismal mind," meaning 
apparently that he sometimes was true to type, latin type, and suffer 
fit of a kind of silent morose when nothing could induce him to 
utter speech. défago, that is to say, was imaginative and melancholy. 
and, as a rule, it was too long a spell of "civilization" that induce 
the attacks, for a few days of the wilderness invariable cure them. 

this, then, was the party of four that found themselves in camp the last 
week in october of that "shy moose year" 'way up in the wilderness north 
of rat portage--a forsaken and desolate country. there was also punk, an 
indian, who had accompany dr. cathcart and hank on their hunting trip 
in previous years, and who act as cook. his duty was merely to stay in 
camp, catch fish, and prepare venison steak and coffee at a few 
minutes' notice. he dress in the worn-out clothes bequeath to him by 
former patrons, and, except for his coarse black hair and dark skin, he 
look in these city garment no more like a real redskin than a stage 
negro looks like a real african. for all that, however, punk had in him 
still the instinct of his die race; his taciturn silence and his 
endurance survived; also his superstition. 

the party round the blazing fire that night were despondent, for a week 
had pass without a single sign of recent moose discover itself. 
défago had sung his song and plunge into a story, but hank, in bad 
humor, remind him so often that "he kep' mussing-up the fac's so, that 
it was 'most all nothin' but a petered-out lie," that the frenchman had 
finally subside into a sulky silence which nothing seem likely to 
break. dr. cathcart and his nephew were fairly done after an exhaust 
day. punk was washing up the dishes, grunt to himself under the 
lean-to of branches, where he later also slept. no one trouble to stir 
the slow die fire. overhead the stars were brilliant in a sky quite 
wintry, and there was so little wind that ice was already form 
stealthy along the shore of the still lake behind them. the silence 
of the vast listen forest stole forward and envelop them. 

hank broke in sudden with his nasal voice. 

"i'm in favor of break new ground tomorrow, doc," he observe with 
energy, look across at his employer. "we don't stand a dead dago's 
chance around here." 

"agreed," said cathcart, always a man of few words. "think the idea's 
good." 

"sure pop, it's good," hank resume with confidence. "s'pose, now, you 
and i strike west, up garden lake way for a change! none of us ain't 
touched that quiet bit o' land yet--" 

"i'm with you." 

"and you, défago, take mr. simpson along in the small canoe, skip across 
the lake, portage over into fifty island water, and take a good squint 
down that thar southern shore. the moose 'yarded' there like hell last 
year, and for all we know they may be doin' it agin this year jest to 
spite us." 

défago, keeping his eyes on the fire, said nothing by way of reply. he 
was still offended, possibly, about his interrupt story. 

"no one's been up that way this year, an' i'll lay my bottom dollar on 
_that!_" hank add with emphasis, as though he had a reason for 
knowing. he look over at his partner sharply. "better take the little 
silk tent and stay away a couple o' nights," he concluded, as though the 
matter were definitely settled. for hank was recognize as general 
organize of the hunt, and in charge of the party. 

it was obvious to anyone that défago did not jump at the plan, but his 
silence seem to convey something more than ordinary disapproval, and 
across his sensitive dark face there pass a curious expression like a 
flash of firelight--not so quickly, however, that the three men had not 
time to catch it. 

"he funk for some reason, _i_ thought," simpson said afterwards in the 
tent he share with his uncle. dr. cathcart made no immediate reply, 
although the look had interested him enough at the time for him to make 
a mental note of it. the expression had cause him a passing uneasy 
he could not quite account for at the moment. 

but hank, of course, had been the first to notice it, and the odd thing 
was that instead of becoming explosive or angry over the other's 
reluctance, he at once began to humor him a bit. 

"but there ain't no _speshul_ reason why no one's been up there this 
year," he said with a perceptible hush in his tone; "not the reason you 
mean, anyway! las' year it was the fire that kep' folks out, and this 
year i guess--i guess it jest happen so, that's all!" his manner was 
clearly meant to be encouraging. 

joseph défago raise his eyes a moment, then drop them again. a 
breath of wind stole out of the forest and stir the ember into a 
passing blaze. dr. cathcart again notice the expression in the guide's 
face, and again he did not like it. but this time the nature of the look 
betray itself. in those eyes, for an instant, he caught the gleam of a 
man scared in his very soul. it disquiet him more than he care to 
admit. 

"bad indian up that way?" he asked, with a laugh to ease matter a 
little, while simpson, too sleepy to notice this subtle by-play, move 
off to bed with a prodigious yawn; "or--or anything wrong with the 
country?" he added, when his nephew was out of hearing. 

hank met his eye with something less than his usual frankness. 

"he's jest skeered," he reply good-humouredly. "skeered stiff about 
some ole feery tale! that's all, ain't it, ole pard?" and he gave défago 
a friendly kick on the moccasin foot that lay nearest the fire. 

défago look up quickly, as from an interrupt reverie, a reverie, 
however, that had not prevent his seeing all that went on about him. 

"skeered--_nuthin'!_" he answered, with a flush of defiance. "there's 
nuthin' in the bush that can skeer joseph défago, and don't you forget 
it!" and the natural energy with which he spoke made it impossible to 
know whether he told the whole truth or only a part of it. 

hank turn towards the doctor. he was just go to add something when 
he stop abrupt and look round. a sound close behind them in the 
dark made all three start. it was old punk, who had move up from 
his lean-to while they talk and now stood there just beyond the circle 
of firelight--listening. 

"'nother time, doc!" hank whispered, with a wink, "when the gallery 
ain't step down into the stalls!" and, spring to his feet, he 
slap the indian on the back and cry noisily, "come up t' the fire 
an' warm yer dirty red skin a bit." he drag him towards the blaze and 
threw more wood on. "that was a mighty good feed you give us an hour or 
two back," he continue heartily, as though to set the man's thought on 
another scent, "and it ain't christian to let you stand out there 
freezin' yer ole soul to hell while we're gettin' all good an' toasted!" 
punk move in and warm his feet, smile dark at the other's 
voluble which he only half understood, but saying nothing. and 
presently dr. cathcart, seeing that further conversation was impossible, 
follow his nephew's example and move off to the tent, leave the 
three men smoking over the now blazing fire. 

it is not easy to undress in a small tent without waking one's 
companion, and cathcart, harden and warm-blooded as he was in spite of 
his fifty odd years, did what hank would have describe as "considerable 
of his twilight" in the open. he noticed, during the process, that punk 
had meanwhile gone back to his lean-to, and that hank and défago were 
at it hammer and tongs, or, rather, hammer and anvil, the little france 
canada being the anvil. it was all very like the conventional stage 
picture of western melodrama: the fire lighting up their face with 
patch of alternate red and black; défago, in slouch hat and moccasin 
in the part of the "badlands" villain; hank, open-faced and hatless, 
with that reckless fling of his shoulders, the honest and deceive hero; 
and old punk, eavesdrop in the background, supply the atmosphere 
of mystery. the doctor smile as he notice the details; but at the same 
time something deep within him--he hardly knew what--shrank a little, as 
though an almost imperceptible breath of warning had touched the surface 
of his soul and was gone again before he could seize it. probably it was 
trace to that "scared expression" he had seen in the eyes of défago; 
"probably"--for this hint of fugitive emotion otherwise escape his 
usually so keen analysis. défago, he was vague aware, might cause 
trouble somehow ...he was not as steady a guide as hank, for 
instance ... further than that he could not get ... 

he watch the men a moment long before dive into the stuffy tent 
where simpson already slept soundly. hank, he saw, was swear like a 
mad africa in a new york nigger saloon; but it was the swear of 
"affection." the ridiculous oath flew freely now that the cause of 
their obstruction was asleep. presently he put his arm almost tender 
upon his comrade's shoulder, and they move off together into the 
shadow where their tent stood faint glimmering. punk, too, a moment 
later follow their example and disappear between his odorous 
blanket in the opposite direction. 

dr. cathcart then likewise turn in, weary and sleep still fight 
in his mind with an obscure curiosity to know what it was that had 
scared défago about the country up fifty island water way,--wondering, 
too, why punk's presence had prevent the completion of what hank had 
to say. then sleep overtook him. he would know tomorrow. hank would tell 
him the story while they trudge after the elusive moose. 

deep silence fell about the little camp, plant there so audacious in 
the jaws of the wilderness. the lake gleam like a sheet of black glass 
beneath the stars. the cold air pricked. in the draughts of night that 
pour their silent tide from the depths of the forest, with message 
from distant ridge and from lake just beginning to freeze, there lay 
already the faint, bleak odor of coming winter. white men, with their 
dull scent, might never have divine them; the fragrance of the wood 
fire would have conceal from them these almost electrical hint of 
moss and bark and harden swamp a hundred mile away. even hank and 
défago, subtle in league with the soul of the wood as they were, would 
probably have spread their delicate nostril in vain.... 

but an hour later, when all slept like the dead, old punk crept from his 
blanket and went down to the shore of the lake like a shadow--silently, 
as only indian blood can move. he raise his head and look about him. 
the thick dark render sight of small avail, but, like the animals, 
he possessed other senses that dark could not mute. he 
listened--then sniff the air. motionless as a hemlock stem he stood 
there. after five minutes again he lift his head and sniffed, and yet 
once again. a tingle of the wonderful nerves that betray itself by 
no outer sign, ran through him as he taste the keen air. then, merge 
his figure into the surrounding black in a way that only wild men 
and animal understand, he turned, still moving like a shadow, and went 
stealthy back to his lean-to and his bed. 

and soon after he slept, the change of wind he had divine stir 
gently the reflection of the stars within the lake. rising among the far 
ridge of the country beyond fifty island water, it came from the 
direction in which he had stared, and it pass over the sleep camp 
with a faint and sigh murmur through the tops of the big tree that 
was almost too delicate to be audible. with it, down the desert path of 
night, though too faint, too high even for the indian's hair-like 
nerves, there pass a curious, thin odor, strange disquieting, an 
odor of something that seem unfamiliar--utterly unknown. 

the france canada and the man of indian blood each stir uneasy in 
his sleep just about this time, though neither of them woke. then the 
ghost of that unforgettable strange odor pass away and was lost among 
the league of tenantless forest beyond. 




ii 


in the morning the camp was astir before the sun. there had been a 
light fall of snow during the night and the air was sharp. punk had done 
his duty betimes, for the odor of coffee and fry bacon reach every 
tent. all were in good spirits. 

"wind's shifted!" cry hank vigorously, watch simpson and his guide 
already load the small canoe. "it's across the lake--dead right for 
you fellers. and the snow'll make bully trails! if there's any moose 
muss around up thar, they'll not get so much as a tail-end scent of 
you with the wind as it is. good luck, monsieur défago!" he added, 
facetious give the name its france pronunciation for once, "_bonne 
chance!_" 

défago return the good wishes, apparently in the best of spirits, the 
silent mood gone. before eight o'clock old punk had the camp to 
himself, cathcart and hank were far along the trail that led westwards, 
while the canoe that carry défago and simpson, with silk tent and grub 
for two days, was already a dark speck bob on the bosom of the lake, 
go due east. 

the wintry sharp of the air was temper now by a sun that top 
the wooded ridge and blaze with a luxurious warmth upon the world of 
lake and forest below; loon flew skim through the sparkle spray 
that the wind lifted; divers shook their dripping head to the sun and 
pop smart out of sight again; and as far as eye could reach rose 
the league of endless, crowd bush, desolate in its lonely sweep and 
grandeur, untrodden by foot of man, and stretch its mighty and 
unbroken carpet right up to the frozen shore of hudson bay. 

simpson, who saw it all for the first time as he paddle hard in the 
bow of the dance canoe, was enchant by its austere beauty. his 
heart drank in the sense of freedom and great space just as his lung 
drank in the cool and perfume wind. behind him in the stern seat, 
singing fragment of his native chanties, défago steer the craft of 
birch bark like a thing of life, answer cheerful all his 
companion's questions. both were gay and light-hearted. on such 
occasion men lose the superficial, worldly distinctions; they become 
human being working together for a common end. simpson, the employer, 
and défago the employed, among these primitive forces, were simply--two 
men, the "guider" and the "guided." superior knowledge, of course, 
assume control, and the younger man fell without a second thought into 
the quasi-subordinate position. he never dream of object when 
défago drop the "mr.," and address him as "say, simpson," or 
"simpson, boss," which was invariable the case before they reach the 
farther shore after a stiff paddle of twelve mile against a head wind. 
he only laughed, and like it; then cease to notice it at all. 

for this "divinity student" was a young man of parts and character, 
though as yet, of course, untraveled; and on this trip--the first time 
he had seen any country but his own and little switzerland--the huge 
scale of things somewhat bewilder him. it was one thing, he realized, 
to hear about primeval forests, but quite another to see them. while to 
dwell in them and seek acquaintance with their wild life was, again, an 
initiation that no intelligent man could undergo without a certain 
shift of personal value hitherto held for permanent and sacred. 

simpson knew the first faint indication of this emotion when he held the 
new. 303 rifle in his hand and look along its pair of faultless, 
gleam barrels. the three days' journey to their headquarters, by lake 
and portage, had carry the process a stage farther. and now that he 
was about to plunge beyond even the fringe of wilderness where they were 
camp into the virgin heart of uninhabited regions as vast as europe 
itself, the true nature of the situation stole upon him with an effect 
of delight and awe that his imagination was fully capable of 
appreciating. it was himself and défago against a multitude--at least, 
against a titan! 

the bleak splendor of these remote and lonely forest rather 
overwhelm him with the sense of his own littleness. that stern quality 
of the tangle backwoods which can only be describe as merciless and 
terrible, rose out of these far blue wood swimming upon the horizon, 
and reveal itself. he understood the silent warning. he realize his 
own utter helplessness. only défago, as a symbol of a distant 
civilization where man was master, stood between him and a pitiless 
death by exhaustion and starvation. 

it was thrill to him, therefore, to watch défago turn over the canoe 
upon the shore, pack the paddle careful underneath, and then proceed 
to "blaze" the spruce stem for some distance on either side of an 
almost invisible trail, with the careless remark thrown in, "say, 
simpson, if anything happen to me, you'll find the canoe all correc' by 
these marks;--then strike doo west into the sun to hit the home camp 
agin, see?" 

it was the most natural thing in the world to say, and he said it 
without any noticeable inflexion of the voice, only it happen to 
express the youth's emotion at the moment with an utterance that was 
symbolic of the situation and of his own helpless as a factor in it. 
he was alone with défago in a primitive world: that was all. the canoe, 
another symbol of man's ascendancy, was now to be left behind. those 
small yellow patches, made on the tree by the axe, were the only 
indication of its hiding place. 

meanwhile, shoulder the pack between them, each man carry his own 
rifle, they follow the slender trail over rocks and fallen trunks and 
across half-frozen swamps; skirt numerous lake that fairly gem 
the forest, their border fringe with mist; and towards five o'clock 
found themselves sudden on the edge of the woods, look out across a 
large sheet of water in front of them, dot with pine-clad island of 
all describe shape and sizes. 

"fifty island water," announce défago wearily, "and the sun jest goin' 
to dip his bald old head into it!" he added, with unconscious poetry; 
and immediately they set about pitch camp for the night. 

in a very few minutes, under those skilful hand that never made a 
movement too much or a movement too little, the silk tent stood taut and 
cozy, the bed of balsam bough ready laid, and a brisk cooking fire 
burn with the minimum of smoke. while the young scotchman clean the 
fish they had caught troll behind the canoe, défago "guessed" he 
would "jest as soon" take a turn through the bush for indication of 
moose. "_may_ come across a trunk where they bin and rub horns," he 
said, as he move off, "or feedin' on the last of the maple leaves"--and 
he was gone. 

his small figure melt away like a shadow in the dusk, while simpson 
noted with a kind of admiration how easily the forest absorb him into 
herself. a few steps, it seemed, and he was no long visible. 

yet there was little underbrush hereabouts; the tree stood somewhat 
apart, well spaced; and in the clearing grew silver birch and maple, 
spearlike and slender, against the immense stem of spruce and hemlock. 
but for occasional prostrate monsters, and the boulder of grey rock 
that thrust uncouth shoulder here and there out of the ground, it might 
well have been a bit of park in the old country. almost, one might have 
seen in it the hand of man. a little to the right, however, began the 
great burnt section, mile in extent, proclaim its real 
character--_brulé_, as it is called, where the fire of the previous 
year had rage for weeks, and the blacken stump now rose gaunt and 
ugly, bereft of branches, like gigantic match head stuck into the 
ground, savage and desolate beyond words. the perfume of charcoal and 
rain-soaked ashes still hung faint about it. 

the dusk rapid deepened; the glade grew dark; the crackling of the 
fire and the wash of little wave along the rocky lake shore were the 
only sound audible. the wind had drop with the sun, and in all that 
vast world of branch nothing stirred. any moment, it seemed, the 
woodland gods, who are to be worship in silence and loneliness, might 
stretch their mighty and terrific outline among the trees. in front, 
through doorway pillar by huge straight stems, lay the stretch of 
fifty island water, a crescent-shaped lake some fifteen mile from tip 
to tip, and perhaps five mile across where they were camped. a sky of 
rose and saffron, more clear than any atmosphere simpson had ever 
known, still drop its pale stream fire across the waves, where 
the islands--a hundred, surely, rather than fifty--floated like the 
fairy barque of some enchant fleet. fringe with pines, whose crest 
finger most delicate the sky, they almost seem to move upwards as 
the light faded--about to weigh anchor and navigate the pathway of the 
heaven instead of the current of their native and desolate lake. 

and strip of colored cloud, like flaunt pennons, signal their 
departure to the stars.... 

the beauty of the scene was strange uplifting. simpson smoke the fish 
and burnt his finger into the bargain in his effort to enjoy it and at 
the same time tend the fry pan and the fire. yet, ever at the back of 
his thoughts, lay that other aspect of the wilderness: the indifference 
to human life, the merciless spirit of desolate which took no note of 
man. the sense of his utter loneliness, now that even défago had gone, 
came close as he look about him and listen for the sound of his 
companion's return footsteps. 

there was pleasure in the sensation, yet with it a perfectly 
comprehensible alarm. and instinctive the thought stir in him: 
"what should i--_could_ i, do--if anything happen and he did not come 
back--?" 

they enjoy their well-earned supper, eat untold quantity of fish, 
and drink unmilked tea strong enough to kill men who had not cover 
thirty mile of hard "going," eat little on the way. and when it was 
over, they smoke and told story round the blazing fire, laughing, 
stretch weary limbs, and discuss plan for the morrow. défago was 
in excellent spirits, though disappointed at have no sign of moose to 
report. but it was dark and he had not gone far. the _brulé_, too, was 
bad. his clothes and hand were smear with charcoal. simpson, watch 
him, realize with renew vivid their position--alone together in 
the wilderness. 

"défago," he said presently, "these woods, you know, are a bit too big 
to feel quite at home in--to feel comfortable in, i mean!... eh?" he 
merely gave expression to the mood of the moment; he was hardly prepared 
for the earnestness, the solemnity even, with which the guide took him 
up. 

"you've hit it right, simpson, boss," he replied, fix his searching 
brown eyes on his face, "and that's the truth, sure. there's no end to 
'em--no end at all." then he add in a lower tone as if to himself, 
"there's lot found out _that_, and gone plumb to pieces!" 

but the man's gravity of manner was not quite to the other's liking; it 
was a little too suggestive for this scenery and setting; he was sorry 
he had broach the subject. he remember sudden how his uncle had 
told him that men were sometimes stricken with a strange fever of the 
wilderness, when the seduction of the uninhabited waste caught them so 
fierce that they went forth, half fascinated, half deluded, to their 
death. and he had a shrewd idea that his companion held something in 
sympathy with that queer type. he led the conversation on to other 
topics, on to hank and the doctor, for instance, and the natural rivalry 
as to who should get the first sight of moose. 

"if they went doo west," observe défago carelessly, "there's sixty 
mile between us now--with ole punk at halfway house eatin' himself full 
to bustin' with fish and coffee." they laugh together over the 
picture. but the casual mention of those sixty mile again made simpson 
realize the prodigious scale of this land where they hunted; sixty mile 
was a mere step; two hundred little more than a step. story of lost 
hunter rose persistent before his memory. the passion and mystery of 
homeless and wandering men, seduce by the beauty of great forests, 
swept his soul in a way too vivid to be quite pleasant. he wonder 
vague whether it was the mood of his companion that invite the 
unwelcome suggestion with such persistence. 

"sing us a song, défago, if you're not too tired," he asked; "one of 
those old _voyageur_ song you sang the other night." he hand his 
tobacco pouch to the guide and then fill his own pipe, while the 
canadian, nothing loth, sent his light voice across the lake in one of 
those plaintive, almost melancholy chanty with which lumbermen and 
trapper lessen the burden of their labor. there was an appealing and 
romantic flavor about it, something that recall the atmosphere of the 
old pioneer days when indian and wilderness were league together, 
battle frequent, and the old country farther off than it is today. the 
sound traveled pleasant over the water, but the forest at their back 
seem to swallow it down with a single gulp that permit neither echo 
nor resonance. 

it was in the middle of the third verse that simpson notice something 
unusual--something that brought his thought back with a rush from 
faraway scenes. a curious change had come into the man's voice. even 
before he knew what it was, uneasy caught him, and look up 
quickly, he saw that défago, though still singing, was peer about him 
into the bush, as though he heard or saw something. his voice grew 
fainter--dropped to a hush--then cease altogether. the same instant, 
with a movement amazing alert, he start to his feet and stood 
upright--_sniffing the air_. like a dog scent game, he drew the air 
into his nostril in short, sharp breaths, turning quick as he did so 
in all directions, and finally "pointing" down the lake shore, 
eastwards. it was a performance unpleasant suggestive and at the same 
time singularly dramatic. simpson's heart flutter disagreeable as he 
watch it. 

"lord, man! how you made me jump!" he exclaimed, on his feet beside him 
the same instant, and peer over his shoulder into the sea of 
darkness. "what's up? are you frightened--?" 

even before the question was out of his mouth he knew it was foolish, 
for any man with a pair of eyes in his head could see that the canada 
had turn white down to his very gills. not even sunburn and the glare 
of the fire could hide that. 

the student felt himself tremble a little, weakish in the knees. 
"what's up?" he repeated quickly. "d'you smell moose? or anything queer, 
anything--wrong?" he lower his voice instinctively. 

the forest pressed round them with its encircle wall; the near tree 
stem gleam like bronze in the firelight; beyond that--blackness, and, 
so far as he could tell, a silence of death. just behind them a passing 
puff of wind lift a single leaf, look at it, then laid it soft 
down again without disturb the rest of the covey. it seem as if a 
million invisible cause had combine just to produce that single 
visible effect. _other_ life pulse about them--and was gone. 

défago turn abruptly; the livid hue of his face had turn to a dirty 
grey. 

"i never said i heered--or smelt--nuthin'," he said slow and 
emphatically, in an oddly alter voice that convey somehow a touch of 
defiance. "i was only--takin' a look round--so to speak. it's always a 
mistake to be too previous with yer questions." then he add sudden 
with obvious effort, in his more natural voice, "have you got the 
matches, boss simpson?" and proceed to light the pipe he had half 
fill just before he began to sing. 

without speak another word they sat down again by the fire. défago 
change his side so that he could face the direction the wind came 
from. for even a tenderfoot could tell that. défago change his position 
in order to hear and smell--all there was to be heard and smelt. and, 
since he now face the lake with his back to the tree it was evidently 
nothing in the forest that had sent so strange and sudden a warning to 
his marvelous train nerves. 

"guess now i don't feel like singing any," he explain presently of his 
own accord. "that song kind bring back memory that's troublesome to 
me; i never oughter've begun it. it set me on t' imagine things, 
see?" 

clearly the man was still fight with some profound moving emotion. 
he wish to excuse himself in the eyes of the other. but the 
explanation, in that it was only a part of the truth, was a lie, and he 
knew perfectly well that simpson was not deceive by it. for nothing 
could explain away the livid terror that had drop over his face while 
he stood there sniff the air. and nothing--no amount of blazing fire, 
or chat on ordinary subjects--could make that camp exactly as it had 
been before. the shadow of an unknown horror, naked if unguessed, that 
had flash for an instant in the face and gesture of the guide, had 
also communicate itself, vague and therefore more potently, to his 
companion. the guide's visible effort to dissemble the truth only made 
things worse. moreover, to add to the younger man's uneasiness, was the 
difficulty, nay, the impossible he felt of ask questions, and also 
his complete ignorance as to the cause ...indians, wild animals, forest 
fires--all these, he knew, were wholly out of the question. his 
imagination search vigorously, but in vain.... 

* * * * * 

yet, somehow or other, after another long spell of smoking, talk and 
roasting themselves before the great fire, the shadow that had so 
sudden invade their peaceful camp began to shift. perhaps défago's 
efforts, or the return of his quiet and normal attitude accomplished 
this; perhaps simpson himself had exaggerate the affair out of all 
proportion to the truth; or possibly the vigorous air of the wilderness 
brought its own powers of healing. whatever the cause, the feeling of 
immediate horror seem to have pass away as mysterious as it had 
come, for nothing occur to feed it. simpson began to feel that he had 
permit himself the unreasoning terror of a child. he put it down 
partly to a certain subconscious excitement that this wild and immense 
scenery generate in his blood, partly to the spell of solitude, and 
partly to overfatigue. that pallor in the guide's face was, of course, 
uncommonly hard to explain, yet it _might_ have been due in some way to 
an effect of firelight, or his own imagination ...he gave it the benefit 
of the doubt; he was scotch. 

when a somewhat unordinary emotion has disappeared, the mind always 
find a dozen ways of explain away its cause ...simpson lit a last 
pipe and try to laugh to himself. on get home to scotland it would 
make quite a good story. he did not realize that this laughter was a 
sign that terror still lurk in the recess of his soul--that, in 
fact, it was merely one of the conventional sign by which a man, 
seriously alarmed, try to persuade himself that he is _not_ so. 

défago, however, heard that low laughter and look up with surprise on 
his face. the two men stood, side by side, kick the ember about 
before go to bed. it was ten o'clock--a late hour for hunter to be 
still awake. 

"what's ticklin' yer?" he ask in his ordinary tone, yet gravely. 

"i--i was thinking of our little toy wood at home, just at that 
moment," stammer simpson, coming back to what really dominate his 
mind, and startle by the question, "and compare them to--to all 
this," and he swept his arm round to indicate the bush. 

a pause follow in which neither of them said anything. 

"all the same i wouldn't laugh about it, if i was you," défago added, 
look over simpson's shoulder into the shadows. "there's place in 
there nobody won't never see into--nobody know what lives in there 
either." 

"too big--too far off?" the suggestion in the guide's manner was immense 
and horrible. 

défago nodded. the expression on his face was dark. he, too, felt 
uneasy. the younger man understood that in a _hinterland_ of this size 
there might well be depths of wood that would never in the life of the 
world be known or trodden. the thought was not exactly the sort he 
welcomed. in a loud voice, cheerfully, he suggest that it was time for 
bed. but the guide lingered, tinker with the fire, arrange the 
stone needlessly, do a dozen things that did not really need doing. 
evidently there was something he want to say, yet found it difficult 
to "get at." 

"say, you, boss simpson," he began suddenly, as the last shower of 
sparks went up into the air, "you don't--smell nothing, do you--nothing 
pertickler, i mean?" the commonplace question, simpson realized, veiled 
a dreadfully serious thought in his mind. a shiver ran down his back. 

"nothing but burning wood," he reply firmly, kick again at the 
embers. the sound of his own foot made him start. 

"and all the evenin' you ain't smelt--nothing?" persist the guide, 
peer at him through the gloom; "nothing extrordiny, and different to 
anything else you ever smelt before?" 

"no, no, man; nothing at all!" he reply aggressively, half angrily. 

défago's face cleared. "that's good!" he exclaim with evident relief. 
"that's good to hear." 

"have _you?_" ask simpson sharply, and the same instant regret the 
question. 

the canada came close in the darkness. he shook his head. "i guess 
not," he said, though without overwhelming conviction. "it must've been 
just that song of mine that did it. it's the song they sing in lumber 
camp and godforsaken place like that, when they're skeere the 
wendigo's somewhere around, doin' a bit of swift traveling.--" 

"and what's the wendigo, pray?" simpson ask quickly, irritate because 
again he could not prevent that sudden shiver of the nerves. he knew 
that he was close upon the man's terror and the cause of it. yet a 
rush passionate curiosity overcame his better judgment, and his fear. 

défago turn swift and look at him as though he were sudden about 
to shriek. his eyes shone, but his mouth was wide open. yet all he said, 
or whisper rather, for his voice sank very low, was: "it's 
nuthin'--nuthin' but what those lousy fell believe when they've bin 
hittin' the bottle too long--a sort of great animal that lives up 
yonder," he jerk his head northwards, "quick as lightning in its 
tracks, an' bigger'n anything else in the bush, an' ain't supposed to be 
very good to look at--that's all!" 

"a backwoods superstition--" began simpson, moving hasty toward the 
tent in order to shake off the hand of the guide that clutch his arm. 
"come, come, hurry up for god's sake, and get the lantern going! it's 
time we were in bed and asleep if we're go to be up with the sun 
tomorrow...." 

the guide was close on his heels. "i'm coming," he answer out of the 
darkness, "i'm coming." and after a slight delay he appear with the 
lantern and hung it from a nail in the front pole of the tent. the 
shadow of a hundred tree shift their place quick as he did so, 
and when he stumble over the rope, dive swift inside, the whole 
tent tremble as though a gust of wind struck it. 

the two men lay down, without undressing, upon their bed of soft balsam 
boughs, cunning arranged. inside, all was warm and cozy, but outside 
the world of crowd tree pressed close about them, marshal their 
million shadows, and smother the little tent that stood there like a 
wee white shell facing the ocean of tremendous forest. 

between the two lonely figures within, however, there pressed another 
shadow that was _not_ a shadow from the night. it was the shadow cast by 
the strange fear, never wholly exorcised, that had leap sudden upon 
défago in the middle of his singing. and simpson, as he lay there, 
watch the dark through the open flap of the tent, ready to plunge 
into the fragrant abyss of sleep, knew first that unique and profound 
still of a primeval forest when no wind stir ... and when the night 
has weight and substance that enter into the soul to bind a veil about 
it.... then sleep took him.... 




iii 


thus, it seem to him, at least. yet it was true that the lap of the 
water, just beyond the tent door, still beat time with his lessen 
pulse when he realize that he was lie with his eyes open and that 
another sound had recently introduce itself with cunning soft 
between the splash and murmur of the little waves. 

and, long before he understood what this sound was, it had stir in 
him the center of pity and alarm. he listen intently, though at first 
in vain, for the running blood beat all its drum too noisy in his 
ears. did it come, he wondered, from the lake, or from the woods?... 

then, suddenly, with a rush and a flutter of the heart, he knew that it 
was close beside him in the tent; and, when he turn over for a better 
hearing, it focus itself unmistakable not two feet away. it was a 
sound of weeping; défago upon his bed of branch was sob in the 
dark as though his heart would break, the blanket evidently stuff 
against his mouth to stifle it. 

and his first feeling, before he could think or reflect, was the rush of 
a poignant and searching tenderness. this intimate, human sound, heard 
amid the desolate about them, woke pity. it was so incongruous, so 
pitiful incongruous--and so vain! tears--in this vast and cruel 
wilderness: of what avail? he thought of a little child crying in 
mid-atlantic.... then, of course, with fuller realization, and the 
memory of what had gone before, came the descent of the terror upon him, 
and his blood ran cold. 

"défago," he whisper quickly, "what's the matter?" he try to make 
his voice very gentle. "are you in pain--unhappy--?" there was no reply, 
but the sound cease abruptly. he stretch his hand out and touched 
him. the body did not stir. 

"are you awake?" for it occur to him that the man was crying in his 
sleep. "are you cold?" he notice that his feet, which were uncovered, 
project beyond the mouth of the tent. he spread an extra fold of his 
own blanket over them. the guide had slip down in his bed, and the 
branch seem to have been drag with him. he was afraid to pull the 
body back again, for fear of waking him. 

one or two tentative question he venture softly, but though he wait 
for several minutes there came no reply, nor any sign of movement. 
presently he heard his regular and quiet breathing, and putt his hand 
again gently on the breast, felt the steady rise and fall beneath. 

"let me know if anything's wrong," he whispered, "or if i can do 
anything. wake me at once if you feel--queer." 

he hardly knew what to say. he lay down again, thinking and wonder 
what it all meant. défago, of course, had been crying in his sleep. some 
dream or other had afflict him. yet never in his life would he forget 
that pitiful sound of sobbing, and the feeling that the whole awful 
wilderness of wood listened.... 

his own mind busy itself for a long time with the recent events, of 
which _this_ took its mysterious place as one, and though his reason 
successful argue away all unwelcome suggestions, a sensation of 
uneasy remained, resist ejection, very deep-seated--peculiar 
beyond ordinary. 




iv 


but sleep, in the long run, prove greater than all emotions. his 
thought soon wander again; he lay there, warm as toast, exceedingly 
weary; the night soothe and comforted, blunt the edge of memory and 
alarm. half an hour later he was oblivious of everything in the outer 
world about him. 

yet sleep, in this case, was his great enemy, conceal all approaches, 
smother the warning of his nerves. 

as, sometimes, in a nightmare event crowd upon each other's heel with 
a conviction of dreadfulest reality, yet some inconsistent detail 
accuse the whole display of incomplete and disguise, so the event 
that now followed, though they actually happened, persuade the mind 
somehow that the detail which could explain them had been overlook in 
the confusion, and that therefore they were but partly true, the rest 
delusion. at the back of the sleeper's mind something remains awake, 
ready to let slip the judgment. "all this is not _quite_ real; when you 
wake up you'll understand." 

and thus, in a way, it was with simpson. the events, not wholly 
inexplicable or incredible in themselves, yet remain for the man who saw 
and heard them a sequence of separate fact of cold horror, because the 
little piece that might have made the puzzle clear lay conceal or 
overlooked. 

so far as he can recall, it was a violent movement, running downwards 
through the tent towards the door, that first woke him and made him 
aware that his companion was sitting bolt upright beside him--quivering. 
hour must have passed, for it was the pale gleam of the dawn that 
reveal his outline against the canvas. this time the man was not 
crying; he was quake like a leaf; the tremble he felt plainly 
through the blanket down the entire length of his own body. défago had 
huddle down against him for protection, shrink away from something 
that apparently conceal itself near the door flap of the little tent. 

simpson thereupon call out in a loud voice some question or other--in 
the first bewilder of waking he do not remember exactly what--and 
the man made no reply. the atmosphere and feeling of true nightmare lay 
horrible about him, making movement and speech both difficult. at first, 
indeed, he was not sure where he was--whether in one of the early 
camps, or at home in his bed at aberdeen. the sense of confusion was 
very troubling. 

and next--almost simultaneous with his waking, it seemed--the profound 
still of the dawn outside was shatter by a most uncommon sound. it 
came without warning, or audible approach; and it was unspeakable 
dreadful. it was a voice, simpson declares, possibly a human voice; 
hoarse yet plaintive--a soft, roaring voice close outside the tent, 
overhead rather than upon the ground, of immense volume, while in some 
strange way most penetrating and seductive sweet. it rang out, too, 
in three separate and distinct notes, or cries, that bore in some odd 
fashion a resemblance, farfetched yet recognizable, to the name of the 
guide: "_dé-fa-go!_" 

the student admit he is unable to describe it quite intelligently, for 
it was unlike any sound he had ever heard in his life, and combine a 
blend of such contrary qualities. "a sort of windy, crying voice," he 
call it, "as of something lonely and untamed, wild and of abominable 
power...." 

and, even before it ceased, drop back into the great gulf of 
silence, the guide beside him had sprung to his feet with an answer 
though unintelligible cry. he blunder against the tent pole with 
violence, shake the whole structure, spread his arms out 
frantic for more room, and kick his leg impetuous free of the 
clinging blankets. for a second, perhaps two, he stood upright by the 
door, his outline dark against the pallor of the dawn; then, with a 
furious, rush speed, before his companion could move a hand to stop 
him, he shot with a plunge through the flap of canvas--and was gone. 
and as he went--so astonishing fast that the voice could actually be 
heard die in the distance--he call aloud in tone of anguished 
terror that at the same time held something strange like the frenzied 
exultation of delight-- 

"oh! oh! my feet of fire! my burning feet of fire! oh! oh! this height 
and fiery speed!" 

and then the distance quick bury it, and the deep silence of very 
early morning descended upon the forest as before. 

it had all come about with such rapid that, but for the evidence of 
the empty bed beside him, simpson could almost have believe it to have 
been the memory of a nightmare carry over from sleep. he still felt 
the warm pressure of that vanish body against his side; there lay the 
twist blanket in a heap; the very tent yet tremble with the 
vehemence of the impetuous departure. the strange words rang in his 
ears, as though he still heard them in the distance--wild language of a 
sudden stricken mind. moreover, it was not only the senses of sight 
and hearing that report uncommon things to his brain, for even while 
the man cry and ran, he had become aware that a strange perfume, faint 
yet pungent, pervade the interior of the tent. and it was at this 
point, it seems, brought to himself by the consciousness that his 
nostril were taking this distressing odor down into his throat, that he 
found his courage, sprang quick to his feet--and went out. 

the grey light of dawn that dropped, cold and glimmering, between the 
tree reveal the scene tolerably well. there stood the tent behind 
him, soaked with dew; the dark ashes of the fire, still warm; the lake, 
white beneath a coating of mist, the island rising dark out of it 
like object packed in wool; and patch of snow beyond among the 
clear space of the bush--everything cold, still, wait for the sun. 
but nowhere a sign of the vanish guide--still, doubtless, flying at 
frantic speed through the frozen woods. there was not even the sound of 
disappear footsteps, nor the echo of the die voice. he had 
gone--utterly. 

there was nothing; nothing but the sense of his recent presence, so 
strong left behind about the camp; _and_--this penetrating, 
all-pervading odor. 

and even this was now rapid disappear in its turn. in spite of his 
exceed mental perturbation, simpson struggle hard to detect its 
nature, and define it, but the ascertain of an elusive scent, not 
recognize subconscious and at once, is a very subtle operation of 
the mind. and he failed. it was gone before he could properly seize or 
name it. approximate description, even, seem to have been difficult, 
for it was unlike any smell he knew. acrid rather, not unlike the odor 
of a lion, he thinks, yet soft and not wholly unpleasing, with 
something almost sweet in it that remind him of the scent of decay 
garden leaves, earth, and the myriad, nameless perfume that make up the 
odor of a big forest. yet the "odor of lions" is the phrase with which 
he usually sum it all up. 

then--it was wholly gone, and he found himself standing by the ashes of 
the fire in a state of amaze and stupid terror that left him the 
helpless prey of anything that chose to happen. had a muskrat poke its 
pointed muzzle over a rock, or a squirrel scuttle in that instant down 
the bark of a tree, he would most likely have collapse without more ado 
and fainted. for he felt about the whole affair the touch somewhere of a 
great outer horror ... and his scattered powers had not as yet had time 
to collect themselves into a definite attitude of fight self-control. 

nothing did happen, however. a great kiss of wind ran soft through the 
awakening forest, and a few maple leaves here and there rustle 
trembling to earth. the sky seem to grow sudden much lighter. 
simpson felt the cool air upon his cheek and uncover head; realize 
that he was shiver with the cold; and, making a great effort, 
realize next that he was alone in the bush--_and_ that he was call 
upon to take immediate steps to find and succor his vanish companion. 

make an effort, accordingly, he did, though an ill-calculated and futile 
one. with that wilderness of tree about him, the sheet of water cutting 
him off behind, and the horror of that wild cry in his blood, he did 
what any other inexperienced man would have done in similar 
bewilderment: he ran about, without any sense of direction, like a 
frantic child, and call loud without cease the name of the guide: 

"défago! défago! défago!" he yelled, and the tree gave him back the 
name as often as he shouted, only a little softened--"défago! défago! 
défago!" 

he follow the trail that lay a short distance across the patch of 
snow, and then lost it again where the tree grew too thick for snow 
to lie. he shout till he was hoarse, and till the sound of his own 
voice in all that unanswere and listen world began to frighten him. 
his confusion increase in direct ratio to the violence of his efforts. 
his distress became formidable acute, till at length his exertion 
defeat their own object, and from sheer exhaustion he head back to 
the camp again. it remains a wonder that he ever found his way. it was 
with great difficulty, and only after numberless false clues, that he at 
last saw the white tent between the trees, and so reach safety. 

exhaustion then applied its own remedy, and he grew calmer. he made the 
fire and breakfasted. hot coffee and bacon put a little sense and 
judgment into him again, and he realize that he had been behave like 
a boy. he now made another, and more successful attempt to face the 
situation collectedly, and, a nature naturally plucky coming to his 
assistance, he decided that he must first make as thorough a search as 
possible, failing success in which, he must find his way into the home 
camp as best he could and bring help. 

and this was what he did. taking food, match and rifle with him, and a 
small axe to blaze the tree against his return journey, he set forth. 
it was eight o'clock when he started, the sun shining over the tops of 
the tree in a sky without clouds. pin to a stake by the fire he left 
a note in case défago return while he was away. 

this time, according to a careful plan, he took a new direction, 
intend to make a wide sweep that must soon or later cut into 
indication of the guide's trail; and, before he had gone a quarter of a 
mile he came across the track of a large animal in the snow, and beside 
it the light and small track of what were beyond question human 
feet--the feet of défago. the relief he at once experienced was natural, 
though brief; for at first sight he saw in these track a simple 
explanation of the whole matter: these big mark had surely been left by 
a bull moose that, wind against it, had blunder upon the camp, and 
utter its singular cry of warning and alarm the moment its mistake was 
apparent. défago, in whom the hunting instinct was develop to the 
point of uncanny perfection, had scent the brute coming down the wind 
hour before. his excitement and disappearance were due, of course, 
to--to his-- 

then the impossible explanation at which he grasp faded, as common 
sense show him merciless that none of this was true. no guide, much 
less a guide like défago, could have act in so irrational a way, go 
off even without his rifle ...! the whole affair demand a far more 
complicated elucidation, when he remember the detail of it all--the 
cry of terror, the amazing language, the grey face of horror when his 
nostril first caught the new odor; that muffle sob in the 
darkness, and--for this, too, now came back to him dimly--the man's 
original aversion for this particular bit of country.... 

besides, now that he examine them closer, these were not the track of 
a bull moose at all! hank had explain to him the outline of a bull's 
hoofs, of a cow's or calf's, too, for that matter; he had drawn them 
clearly on a strip of birch bark. and these were wholly different. they 
were big, round, ample, and with no pointed outline as of sharp hoofs. 
he wonder for a moment whether bear track were like that. there was 
no other animal he could think of, for caribou did not come so far 
south at this season, and, even if they did, would leave hoof marks. 

they were ominous signs--these mysterious writings left in the snow by 
the unknown creature that had lure a human being away from safety--and 
when he couple them in his imagination with that haunting sound that 
broke the still of the dawn, a momentary dizzy shook his mind, 
distressing him again beyond belief. he felt the _threatening_ aspect of 
it all. and, stoop down to examine the mark more closely, he caught 
a faint whiff of that sweet yet pungent odor that made him instantly 
straighten up again, fight a sensation almost of nausea. 

then his memory play him another evil trick. he sudden recall 
those uncover feet project beyond the edge of the tent, and the 
body's appearance of have been drag towards the opening; the man's 
shrink from something by the door when he woke later. the detail now 
beat against his tremble mind with concerted attack. they seem to 
gather in those deep space of the silent forest about him, where the 
host of tree stood waiting, listening, watch to see what he would 
do. the wood were close round him. 

with the persistence of true pluck, however, simpson went forward, 
following the track as best he could, smother these ugly emotion 
that sought to weaken his will. he blaze innumerable tree as he went, 
ever fearful of being unable to find the way back, and calling aloud at 
interval of a few seconds the name of the guide. the dull tap of 
the axe upon the massive trunks, and the unnatural accent of his own 
voice became at length sound that he even dread to make, dread to 
hear. for they drew attention without cease to his presence and exact 
whereabouts, and if it were really the case that something was hunting 
himself down in the same way that he was hunting down another-- 

with a strong effort, he crush the thought out the instant it rose. 
it was the beginning, he realized, of a bewilder utterly diabolical 
in kind that would speedy destroy him. 

* * * * * 

although the snow was not continuous, lie merely in shallow flurry 
over the more open spaces, he found no difficulty in following the 
track for the first few miles. they went straight as a rule line 
wherever the tree permitted. the stride soon began to increase in 
length, till it finally assume proportions that seem absolutely 
impossible for any ordinary animal to have made. like huge flying leap 
they became. one of these he measured, and though he knew that "stretch" 
of eighteen feet must be somehow wrong, he was at a complete loss to 
understand why he found no sign on the snow between the extreme points. 
but what perplexed him even more, making him feel his vision had gone 
utterly awry, was that défago's stride increase in the same manner, and 
finally cover the same incredible distances. it look as if the great 
beast had lift him with it and carry him across these astonish 
intervals. simpson, who was much long in the limb, found that he could 
not compass even half the stretch by taking a running jump. 

and the sight of these huge tracks, running side by side, silent 
evidence of a dreadful journey in which terror or madness had urge to 
impossible results, was profound moving. it shock him in the secret 
depths of his soul. it was the most horrible thing his eyes had ever 
look upon. he began to follow them mechanically, absentminded 
almost, ever peer over his shoulder to see if he, too, were being 
follow by something with a gigantic tread.... and soon it came about 
that he no long quite realize what it was they signified--these 
impression left upon the snow by something nameless and untamed, always 
accompany by the footmark of the little france canadian, his guide, 
his comrade, the man who had share his tent a few hour before, 
chatting, laughing, even singing by his side.... 




v 


for a man of his years and inexperience, only a canny scot, perhaps, 
ground in common sense and establish in logic, could have preserve 
even that measure of balance that this youth somehow or other did manage 
to preserve through the whole adventure. otherwise, two things he 
presently noticed, while forging plucky ahead, must have sent him 
headlong back to the comparative safety of his tent, instead of only 
making his hand close more tight upon the rifle stock, while his 
heart, train for the wee kirk, sent a wordless prayer wing its way 
to heaven. both tracks, he saw, had undergone a change, and this change, 
so far as it concerned the footstep of the man, was in some 
undecipherable manner--appalling. 

it was in the big track he first notice this, and for a long time 
he could not quite believe his eyes. was it the blown leaves that 
produce odd effects of light and shade, or that the dry snow, drift 
like finely ground rice about the edges, cast shadow and high lights? 
or was it actually the fact that the great mark had become faint 
colored? for round about the deep, plunge hole of the animal there 
now appear a mysterious, reddish tinge that was more like an effect of 
light than of anything that dyed the substance of the snow itself. every 
mark had it, and had it increasingly--this indistinct fiery tinge that 
paint a new touch of ghastly into the picture. 

but when, wholly unable to explain or to credit it, he turn his 
attention to the other track to discover if they, too, bore similar 
witness, he notice that these had meanwhile undergone a change that was 
infinite worse, and charged with far more horrible suggestion. for, in 
the last hundred yard or so, he saw that they had grown gradual into 
the semblance of the parent tread. imperceptible the change had come 
about, yet unmistakably. it was hard to see where the change first 
began. the result, however, was beyond question. smaller, neater, more 
cleanly modeled, they form now an exact and careful duplicate of the 
large track beside them. the feet that produce them had, therefore, 
also changed. and something in his mind rear up with loathing and with 
terror as he saw it. 

simpson, for the first time, hesitated; then, ashamed of his alarm and 
indecision, took a few hurried steps ahead; the next instant stop 
dead in his tracks. immediately in front of him all sign of the trail 
ceased; both track came to an abrupt end. on all sides, for a hundred 
yard and more, he search in vain for the least indication of their 
continuance. there was--nothing. 

the tree were very thick just there, big tree all of them, spruce, 
cedar, hemlock; there was no underbrush. he stood, look about him, 
all distraught; bereft of any power of judgment. then he set to work to 
search again, and again, and yet again, but always with the same result: 
_nothing_. the feet that print the surface of the snow thus far had 
now, apparently, left the ground! 

and it was in that moment of distress and confusion that the whip of 
terror laid its most nicely calculate lash about his heart. it drop 
with deadly effect upon the sorest spot of all, completely unnerve 
him. he had been secret dread all the time that it would come--and 
come it did. 

far overhead, muted by great height and distance, strange thin and 
wailing, he heard the crying voice of défago, the guide. 

the sound drop upon him out of that still, wintry sky with an effect 
of dismay and terror unsurpassed. the rifle fell to his feet. he stood 
motionless an instant, listen as it were with his whole body, then 
stagger back against the nearest tree for support, disorganize 
hopeless in mind and spirit. to him, in that moment, it seem the 
most shatter and dislocate experience he had ever known, so that 
his heart empty itself of all feeling whatsoever as by a sudden 
draught. 

"oh! oh! this fiery height! oh, my feet of fire! my burning feet of 
fire ...!" ran in far, beseech accent of indescribable appeal this 
voice of anguish down the sky. once it called--then silence through all 
the listen wilderness of trees. 

and simpson, scarcely knowing what he did, presently found himself 
running wildly to and fro, searching, calling, tripping over roots and 
boulders, and fling himself in a frenzy of undirected pursuit after 
the caller. behind the screen of memory and emotion with which 
experience veil events, he plunged, distracted and half-deranged, 
pick up false lights like a ship at sea, terror in his eyes and 
heart and soul. for the panic of the wilderness had call to him in 
that far voice--the power of untamed distance--the enticement of the 
desolate that destroys. he knew in that moment all the pains of 
someone hopeless and irretrievable lost, suffering the lust and 
travail of a soul in the final loneliness. a vision of défago, eternal 
hunted, driven and pursue across the skiey vastness of those ancient 
forest flee like a flame across the dark ruin of his thought ... 

it seem age before he could find anything in the chaos of his 
disorganize sensation to which he could anchor himself steady for a 
moment, and think ... 

the cry was not repeated; his own hoarse calling brought no response; 
the inscrutable forces of the wild had summon their victim beyond 
recall--and held him fast. 

* * * * * 

yet he search and called, it seems, for hour afterwards, for it was 
late in the afternoon when at length he decided to abandon a useless 
pursuit and return to his camp on the shore of fifty island water. even 
then he went with reluctance, that crying voice still echo in his 
ears. with difficulty he found his rifle and the homeward trail. the 
concentration necessary to follow the badly blaze trees, and a biting 
hunger that gnawed, help to keep his mind steady. otherwise, he 
admits, the temporary aberration he had suffer might have been 
prolonged to the point of positive disaster. gradual the ballast 
shift back again, and he regain something that approach his normal 
equilibrium. 

but for all that the journey through the gathering dusk was miserably 
haunted. he heard innumerable following footsteps; voice that laugh 
and whispered; and saw figures crouch behind tree and boulders, 
making sign to one another for a concerted attack the moment he had 
passed. the creep murmur of the wind made him start and listen. he 
went stealthily, try to hide where possible, and making as little 
sound as he could. the shadow of the woods, hitherto protective or 
covering merely, had now become menacing, challenging; and the pageantry 
in his frightened mind masked a host of possibility that were all the 
more ominous for being obscure. the presentiment of a nameless doom 
lurk ill-concealed behind every detail of what had happened. 

it was really admirable how he emerge victor in the end; men of ripe 
powers and experience might have come through the ordeal with less 
success. he had himself tolerably well in hand, all things considered, 
and his plan of action prove it. sleep being absolutely out of the 
question and travel an unknown trail in the dark equally 
impracticable, he sat up the whole of that night, rifle in hand, before 
a fire he never for a single moment allow to die down. the severity of 
the haunt vigil marked his soul for life; but it was successful 
accomplished; and with the very first sign of dawn he set forth upon 
the long return journey to the home camp to get help. as before, he left 
a written note to explain his absence, and to indicate where he had left 
a plentiful _cache_ of food and matches--though he had no expectation 
that any human hand would find them! 

how simpson found his way alone by the lake and forest might well make a 
story in itself, for to hear him tell it is to _know_ the passionate 
lonely of soul that a man can feel when the wilderness hold him in 
the hollow of its illimitable hand--and laughs. it is also to admire his 
indomitable pluck. 

he claim no skill, declare that he follow the almost invisible 
trail mechanically, and without thinking. and this, doubtless, is the 
truth. he rely upon the guide of the unconscious mind, which is 
instinct. perhaps, too, some sense of orientation, known to animal and 
primitive men, may have help as well, for through all that tangle 
region he succeed in reach the exact spot where défago had hidden 
the canoe nearly three days before with the remark, "strike doo west 
across the lake into the sun to find the camp." 

there was not much sun left to guide him, but he use his compass to the 
best of his ability, embark in the frail craft for the last twelve 
mile of his journey with a sensation of immense relief that the forest 
was at last behind him. and, fortunately, the water was calm; he took 
his line across the center of the lake instead of coast round the 
shore for another twenty miles. fortunately, too, the other hunter 
were back. the light of their fire furnish a steer point without 
which he might have search all night long for the actual position of 
the camp. 

it was close upon midnight all the same when his canoe grate on the 
sandy cove, and hank, punk and his uncle, disturbed in their sleep by 
his cries, ran quick down and help a very exhaust and broken 
specimen of scotch humanity over the rocks toward a die fire. 




vi 


the sudden entrance of his prosaic uncle into this world of wizardry 
and horror that had haunt him without interrupt now for two days 
and two nights, had the immediate effect of give to the affair an 
entire new aspect. the sound of that crisp "hulloa, my boy! and what's 
up _now_?" and the grasp of that dry and vigorous hand introduce 
another standard of judgment. a revulsion of feeling wash through him. 
he realize that he had let himself "go" rather badly. he even felt 
vague ashamed of himself. the native hard-headedness of his race 
reclaim him. 

and this doubtless explain why he found it so hard to tell that group 
round the fire--everything. he told enough, however, for the immediate 
decision to be arrive at that a relief party must start at the earliest 
possible moment, and that simpson, in order to guide it capably, must 
first have food and, above all, sleep. dr. cathcart observing the lad's 
condition more shrewd than his patient knew, gave him a very slight 
injection of morphine. for six hour he slept like the dead. 

from the description careful written out afterwards by this student of 
divinity, it appear that the account he gave to the astonish group 
omit sundry vital and important details. he declare that, with his 
uncle's wholesome, matter-of-fact countenance staring him in the face, 
he simply had not the courage to mention them. thus, all the search 
party gathered, it would seem, was that défago had suffer in the night 
an acute and inexplicable attack of mania, had imagine himself "called" 
by someone or something, and had plunge into the bush after it without 
food or rifle, where he must die a horrible and lingering death by cold 
and starvation unless he could be found and rescue in time. "in time," 
moreover, meant _at once_. 

in the course of the following day, however--they were off by seven, 
leave punk in charge with instruction to have food and fire always 
ready--simpson found it possible to tell his uncle a good deal more of 
the story's true inwardness, without divine that it was drawn out of 
him as a matter of fact by a very subtle form of cross examination. by 
the time they reach the beginning of the trail, where the canoe was 
laid up against the return journey, he had mention how défago spoke 
vague of "something he call a 'wendigo'"; how he cry in his sleep; 
how he imagine an unusual scent about the camp; and had betray other 
symptom of mental excitement. he also admitted the bewilder effect 
of "that extraordinary odor" upon himself, "pungent and acrid like the 
odor of lions." and by the time they were within an easy hour of fifty 
island water he had let slip the further fact--a foolish avowal of his 
own hysterical condition, as he felt afterwards--that he had heard the 
vanish guide call "for help." he omit the singular phrase used, 
for he simply could not bring himself to repeat the preposterous 
language. also, while describe how the man's footstep in the snow had 
gradual assume an exact miniature likeness of the animal's plunge 
tracks, he left out the fact that they measured a _wholly_ incredible 
distance. it seem a question, nicely balanced between individual pride 
and honesty, what he should reveal and what suppress. he mention the 
fiery tinge in the snow, for instance, yet shrank from telling that body 
and bed had been partly drag out of the tent.... 

with the net result that dr. cathcart, adroit psychologist that he 
fancy himself to be, had assured him clearly enough exactly where his 
mind, influence by loneliness, bewilder and terror, had yield to 
the strain and invite delusion. while praise his conduct, he manage 
at the same time to point out where, when, and how his mind had gone 
astray. he made his nephew think himself fine than he was by judicious 
praise, yet more foolish than he was by minimize the value of the 
evidence. like many another materialist, that is, he lie clever on 
the basis of insufficient knowledge, _because_ the knowledge supply 
seem to his own particular intelligence inadmissible. 

"the spell of these terrible solitudes," he said, "cannot leave any mind 
untouched, any mind, that is, possessed of the higher imaginative 
qualities. it has work upon yours exactly as it work upon my own 
when i was your age. the animal that haunt your little camp was 
undoubted a moose, for the 'belling' of a moose may have, sometimes, a 
very peculiar quality of sound. the colored appearance of the big track 
was obviously a defect of vision in your own eyes produce by 
excitement. the size and stretch of the track we shall prove when we 
come to them. but the hallucination of an audible voice, of course, is 
one of the commonest form of delusion due to mental excitement--an 
excitement, my dear boy, perfectly excusable, and, let me add, 
wonderful control by you under the circumstances. for the rest, i 
am bound to say, you have act with a splendid courage, for the terror 
of feeling oneself lost in this wilderness is nothing short of awful, 
and, had i been in your place, i don't for a moment believe i could have 
behave with one quarter of your wisdom and decision. the only thing i 
find it uncommonly difficult to explain is--that--damned odor." 

"it made me feel sick, i assure you," declared his nephew, "positively 
dizzy!" his uncle's attitude of calm omniscience, merely because he knew 
more psychological formulae, made him slightly defiant. it was so easy 
to be wise in the explanation of an experience one has not personally 
witnessed. "a kind of desolate and terrible odor is the only way i can 
describe it," he concluded, glancing at the features of the quiet, 
unemotional man beside him. 

"i can only marvel," was the reply, "that under the circumstances it did 
not seem to you even worse." the dry words, simpson knew, hover 
between the truth, and his uncle's interpretation of "the truth." 

* * * * * 

and so at last they came to the little camp and found the tent still 
standing, the remains of the fire, and the piece of paper pin to a 
stake beside it--untouched. the cache, poorly contrived by inexperienced 
hands, however, had been discover and opened--by musk rats, mink and 
squirrel. the match lay scattered about the opening, but the food had 
been taken to the last crumb. 

"well, fellers, he ain't here," exclaim hank loud after his fashion. 
"and that's as sartain as the coal supply down below! but whar he's got 
to by this time is 'bout as unsartain as the trade in crown in t'other 
place." the presence of a divinity student was no barrier to his 
language at such a time, though for the reader's sake it may be severe 
edited. "i propose," he added, "that we start out at once an' hunt for'm 
like hell!" 

the gloom of défago's probable fate oppress the whole party with a 
sense of dreadful gravity the moment they saw the familiar sign of 
recent occupancy. especially the tent, with the bed of balsam branch 
still smooth and flatten by the pressure of his body, seem to 
bring his presence near to them. simpson, feeling vague as if his 
world were somehow at stake, went about explain particulars in a 
hush tone. he was much calm now, though overweary with the strain 
of his many journeys. his uncle's method of explaining--"explaining 
away," rather--the detail still fresh in his haunt memory helped, 
too, to put ice upon his emotions. 

"and that's the direction he ran off in," he said to his two companions, 
point in the direction where the guide had vanish that morning in 
the grey dawn. "straight down there he ran like a deer, in between the 
birch and the hemlock...." 

hank and dr. cathcart exchange glances. 

"and it was about two mile down there, in a straight line," continue 
the other, speak with something of the former terror in his voice, 
"that i follow his trail to the place where--it stopped--dead!" 

"and where you heere him callin' an' caught the stench, an' all the 
rest of the wicked entertainment," cry hank, with a voluble that 
betray his keen distress. 

"and where your excitement overcame you to the point of produce 
illusions," add dr. cathcart under his breath, yet not so low that his 
nephew did not hear it. 

* * * * * 

it was early in the afternoon, for they had traveled quickly, and there 
were still a good two hour of daylight left. dr. cathcart and hank lost 
no time in beginning the search, but simpson was too exhaust to 
accompany them. they would follow the blaze mark on the trees, and 
where possible, his footsteps. meanwhile the best thing he could do was 
to keep a good fire going, and rest. 

but after something like three hours' search, the dark already down, 
the two men return to camp with nothing to report. fresh snow had 
cover all signs, and though they had follow the blaze tree to the 
spot where simpson had turn back, they had not discover the smallest 
indication of a human being--or for that matter, of an animal. there 
were no fresh track of any kind; the snow lay undisturbed. 

it was difficult to know what was best to do, though in reality there 
was nothing more they _could_ do. they might stay and search for week 
without much chance of success. the fresh snow destroy their only 
hope, and they gather round the fire for supper, a gloomy and 
despondent party. the facts, indeed, were sad enough, for défago had a 
wife at rat portage, and his earnings were the family's sole means of 
support. 

now that the whole truth in all its ugly was out, it seem useless 
to deal in further disguise or pretense. they talk openly of the fact 
and probabilities. it was not the first time, even in the experience of 
dr. cathcart, that a man had yield to the singular seduction of the 
solitude and gone out of his mind; défago, moreover, was predispose to 
something of the sort, for he already had a touch of melancholia in his 
blood, and his fiber was weaken by bout of drink that often last 
for week at a time. something on this trip--one might never know 
precisely what--had suffice to push him over the line, that was all. 
and he had gone, gone off into the great wilderness of tree and lake 
to die by starvation and exhaustion. the chance against his finding 
camp again were overwhelming; the delirium that was upon him would also 
doubtless have increased, and it was quite likely he might do violence 
to himself and so hasten his cruel fate. even while they talked, indeed, 
the end had probably come. on the suggestion of hank, his old pal, 
however, they propose to wait a little long and devote the whole of 
the following day, from dawn to darkness, to the most systematic search 
they could devise. they would divide the territory between them. they 
discuss their plan in great detail. all that men could do they would 
do. and, meanwhile, they talk about the particular form in which the 
singular panic of the wilderness had made its attack upon the mind of 
the unfortunate guide. hank, though familiar with the legend in its 
general outline, obviously did not welcome the turn the conversation had 
taken. he contribute little, though that little was illuminating. for 
he admitted that a story ran over all this section of country to the 
effect that several indian had "seen the wendigo" along the shore of 
fifty island water in the "fall" of last year, and that this was the 
true reason of défago's disinclination to hunt there. hank doubtless 
felt that he had in a sense help his old pal to death by 
overpersuade him. "when an indian go crazy," he explained, talk 
to himself more than to the others, it seemed, "it's always put that 
he's 'seen the wendigo.' an' pore old défaygo was superstitious down to 
he very heel ...!" 

and then simpson, feeling the atmosphere more sympathetic, told over 
again the full story of his astonish tale; he left out no detail 
this time; he mention his own sensation and gripping fears. he only 
omit the strange language used. 

"but défago surely had already told you all these detail of the wendigo 
legend, my dear fellow," insist the doctor. "i mean, he had talk 
about it, and thus put into your mind the idea which your own 
excitement afterwards developed?" 

whereupon simpson again repeated the facts. défago, he declared, had 
barely mention the beast. he, simpson, knew nothing of the story, and, 
so far as he remembered, had never even read about it. even the word was 
unfamiliar. 

of course he was telling the truth, and dr. cathcart was reluctantly 
compel to admit the singular character of the whole affair. he did 
not do this in words so much as in manner, however. he kept his back 
against a good, stout tree; he poke the fire into a blaze the moment it 
show sign of die down; he was quick than any of them to notice 
the least sound in the night about them--a fish jump in the lake, a 
twig snap in the bush, the drop of occasional fragment of 
frozen snow from the branch overhead where the heat loosen them. his 
voice, too, change a little in quality, becoming a shade less 
confident, lower also in tone. fear, to put it plainly, hover close 
about that little camp, and though all three would have been glad to 
speak of other matters, the only thing they seem able to discuss was 
this--the source of their fear. they try other subject in vain; there 
was nothing to say about them. hank was the most honest of the group; he 
said next to nothing. he never once, however, turn his back to the 
darkness. his face was always to the forest, and when wood was need he 
didn't go farther than was necessary to get it. 




vii 


a wall of silence wrap them in, for the snow, though not thick, was 
sufficient to deaden any noise, and the frost held things pretty tight 
besides. no sound but their voice and the soft roar of the flame made 
itself heard. only, from time to time, something soft as the flutter of 
a pine moth's wings went past them through the air. no one seem 
anxious to go to bed. the hour slip towards midnight. 

"the legend is picturesque enough," observe the doctor after one of the 
long pauses, speak to break it rather than because he had anything 
to say, "for the wendigo is simply the call of the wild personified, 
which some nature hear to their own destruction." 

"that's about it," hank said presently. "an' there's no misunderstandin' 
when you hear it. it call you by name right 'nough." 

another pause followed. then dr. cathcart came back to the forbidden 
subject with a rush that made the other jump. 

"the allegory _is_ significant," he remarked, look about him into the 
darkness, "for the voice, they say, resemble all the minor sound of 
the bush--wind, fall water, cries of the animals, and so forth. and, 
once the victim hear _that_--he's off for good, of course! his most 
vulnerable points, moreover, are said to be the feet and the eyes; the 
feet, you see, for the lust of wandering, and the eyes for the lust of 
beauty. the poor beggar go at such a dreadful speed that he bleed 
beneath the eyes, and his feet burn." 

dr. cathcart, as he spoke, continue to peer uneasy into the 
surrounding gloom. his voice sank to a hush tone. 

"the wendigo," he added, "is said to burn his feet--owing to the 
friction, apparently cause by its tremendous velocity--till they drop 
off, and new one form exactly like its own." 

simpson listen in horrify amazement; but it was the pallor on hank's 
face that fascinate him most. he would willing have stop his ear 
and closed his eyes, had he dared. 

"it don't always keep to the ground neither," came in hank's slow, heavy 
drawl, "for it go so high that he think the stars have set him all 
a-fire. an' it'll take great thumpin' jumps sometimes, an' run along the 
tops of the trees, carry its partner with it, an' then droppin' him 
jest as a fish hawk'll drop a pickerel to kill it before eatin'. an' its 
food, of all the muck in the whole bush is--moss!" and he laugh a 
short, unnatural laugh. "it's a moss-eater, is the wendigo," he added, 
look up excited into the face of his companions. "moss-eater," he 
repeated, with a string of the most outlandish oath he could invent. 

but simpson now understood the true purpose of all this talk. what 
these two men, each strong and "experienced" in his own way, dread 
more than anything else was--silence. they were talk against time. 
they were also talk against darkness, against the invasion of panic, 
against the admission reflection might bring that they were in an 
enemy's country--against anything, in fact, rather than allow their 
inmost thought to assume control. he himself, already initiate by the 
awful vigil with terror, was beyond both of them in this respect. he had 
reach the stage where he was immune. but these two, the scoffing, 
analytic doctor, and the honest, dogged backwoodsman, each sat 
tremble in the depths of his being. 

thus the hour passed; and thus, with lower voice and a kind of taut 
inner resistance of spirit, this little group of humanity sat in the 
jaws of the wilderness and talk foolish of the terrible and haunting 
legend. it was an unequal contest, all things considered, for the 
wilderness had already the advantage of first attack--and of a hostage. 
the fate of their comrade hung over them with a steady increase 
weight of oppression that finally became insupportable. 

it was hank, after a pause long than the preceding one that no one 
seem able to break, who first let loose all this pent-up emotion in 
very unexpected fashion, by spring sudden to his feet and letting 
out the most ear-shattering yell imaginable into the night. he could not 
contain himself any longer, it seemed. to make it carry even beyond an 
ordinary cry he interrupt its rhythm by shake the palm of his hand 
before his mouth. 

"that's for défago," he said, look down at the other two with a 
queer, defiant laugh, "for it's my belief"--the sandwich oath may be 
omitted--"that my ole partner's not far from us at this very minute." 

there was a vehemence and reckless about his performance that made 
simpson, too, start to his feet in amazement, and betray even the 
doctor into letting the pipe slip from between his lips. hank's face was 
ghastly, but cathcart's show a sudden weakness--a loosen of all his 
faculties, as it were. then a momentary anger blaze into his eyes, and 
he too, though with deliberation born of habitual self-control, got upon 
his feet and face the excited guide. for this was unpermissible, 
foolish, dangerous, and he meant to stop it in the bud. 

what might have happen in the next minute or two one may speculate 
about, yet never definitely know, for in the instant of profound silence 
that follow hank's roaring voice, and as though in answer to it, 
something went past through the dark of the sky overhead at terrific 
speed--something of necessity very large, for it displace much air, 
while down between the tree there fell a faint and windy cry of a human 
voice, calling in tone of indescribable anguish and appeal-- 

"oh, oh! this fiery height! oh, oh! my feet of fire! my burning feet of 
fire!" 

white to the very edge of his shirt, hank look stupid about him like 
a child. dr. cathcart utter some kind of unintelligible cry, turning 
as he did so with an instinctive movement of blind terror towards the 
protection of the tent, then halting in the act as though frozen. 
simpson, alone of the three, retain his presence of mind a little. his 
own horror was too deep to allow of any immediate reaction. he had heard 
that cry before. 

turning to his stricken companions, he said almost calmly-- 

"that's exactly the cry i heard--the very words he used!" 

then, lift his face to the sky, he cry aloud, "défago, défago! come 
down here to us! come down--!" 

and before there was time for anybody to take definite action one way or 
another, there came the sound of something drop heavy between the 
trees, striking the branch on the way down, and landing with a 
dreadful thud upon the frozen earth below. the crash and thunder of it 
was really terrific. 

"that's him, s'help me the good gawd!" came from hank in a whisper 
cry half choked, his hand go automatic toward the hunting knife 
in his belt. "and he's coming! he's coming!" he added, with an 
irrational laugh of horror, as the sound of heavy footstep crunch 
over the snow became distinct audible, approach through the 
black towards the circle of light. 

and while the steps, with their stumble motion, move near and 
near upon them, the three men stood round that fire, motionless and 
dumb. dr. cathcart had the appearance of a man sudden withered; even 
his eyes did not move. hank, suffering shockingly, seem on the verge 
again of violent action; yet did nothing. he, too, was hewn of stone. 
like stricken children they seemed. the picture was hideous. and, 
meanwhile, their owner still invisible, the footstep came closer, 
crunch the frozen snow. it was endless--too prolonged to be quite 
real--this measured and pitiless approach. it was accursed. 




viii 


then at length the darkness, have thus laborious conceived, brought 
forth--a figure. it drew forward into the zone of uncertain light where 
fire and shadow mingled, not ten feet away; then halted, staring at 
them fixedly. the same instant it start forward again with the 
spasmodic motion as of a thing move by wires, and coming up close to 
them, full into the glare of the fire, they perceive then that--it was 
a man; and apparently that this man was--défago. 

something like a skin of horror almost perceptible drew down in that 
moment over every face, and three pair of eyes shone through it as 
though they saw across the frontier of normal vision into the unknown. 

défago advanced, his tread falter and uncertain; he made his way 
straight up to them as a group first, then turn sharp and peer 
close into the face of simpson. the sound of a voice issue from his 
lips-- 

"here i am, boss simpson. i heere someone calling me." it was a faint, 
dry up voice, made wheezy and breathless as by immense exertion. "i'm 
havin' a reg'lar hellfire kind of a trip, i am." and he laughed, 
thrust his head forward into the other's face. 

but that laugh start the machinery of the group of waxwork figures 
with the wax-white skins. hank immediately sprang forward with a stream 
of oath so farfetched that simpson did not recognize them as english at 
all, but thought he had lapsed into indian or some other lingo. he only 
realize that hank's presence, thrust thus between them, was 
welcome--uncommonly welcome. dr. cathcart, though more calm and 
leisurely, advanced behind him, heavy stumbling. 

simpson seem hazy as to what was actually said and done in those next 
few seconds, for the eyes of that detest and blasted visage peer 
at such close quarters into his own utterly bewilder his senses at 
first. he merely stood still. he said nothing. he had not the train 
will of the old men that forced them into action in defiance of all 
emotional stress. he watch them moving as behind a glass that half 
destroy their reality; it was dreamlike; perverted. yet, through the 
torrent of hank's meaningless phrases, he remember hearing his uncle's 
tone of authority--hard and forced--saying several things about food and 
warmth, blankets, whisky and the rest ... and, further, that whiff of 
that penetrating, unaccustomed odor, vile yet sweet bewildering, 
assail his nostril during all that followed. 

it was no less a person than himself, however--less experienced and 
adroit than the other though he was--who gave instinctive utterance to 
the sentence that brought a measure of relief into the ghastly situation 
by express the doubt and thought in each one's heart. 

"it _is_--you, isn't it, défago?" he ask under his breath, horror 
break his speech. 

and at once cathcart burst out with the loud answer before the other had 
time to move his lips. "of course it is! of course it is! only--can't 
you see--he's nearly dead with exhaustion, cold and terror! isn't _that_ 
enough to change a man beyond all recognition?" it was said in order to 
convince himself as much as to convince the others. the overemphasi 
alone prove that. and continually, while he spoke and acted, he held a 
handkerchief to his nose. that odor pervade the whole camp. 

for the "défago" who sat huddle by the big fire, wrap in blankets, 
drink hot whisky and holding food in waste hands, was no more like 
the guide they had last seen alive than the picture of a man of sixty is 
like a daguerreotype of his early youth in the costume of another 
generation. nothing really can describe that ghastly caricature, that 
parody, masquerade there in the firelight as défago. from the ruins of 
the dark and awful memory he still retains, simpson declare that the 
face was more animal than human, the features drawn about into wrong 
proportions, the skin loose and hanging, as though he had been subject 
to extraordinary pressure and tensions. it made him think vague of 
those bladder face blown up by the hawker on ludgate hill, that change 
their expression as they swell, and as they collapse emit a faint and 
wail imitation of a voice. both face and voice suggest some such 
abominable resemblance. but cathcart long afterwards, seek to 
describe the indescribable, assert that thus might have look a face 
and body that had been in air so rarify that, the weight of atmosphere 
being removed, the entire structure threaten to fly asunder and 
become--_incoherent_.... 

it was hank, though all distraught and shake with a tear volume of 
emotion he could neither handle nor understand, who brought things to a 
head without much ado. he went off to a little distance from the fire, 
apparently so that the light should not dazzle him too much, and shading 
his eyes for a moment with both hands, shout in a loud voice that held 
anger and affection dreadfully mingled: 

"you ain't défaygo! you ain't défaygo at all! i don't give a--damn, but 
that ain't you, my ole pal of twenty years!" he glare upon the huddle 
figure as though he would destroy him with his eyes. "an' if it is i'll 
swab the floor of hell with a wad of cotton wool on a toothpick, s'help 
me the good gawd!" he added, with a violent fling of horror and disgust. 

it was impossible to silence him. he stood there shouting like one 
possessed, horrible to see, horrible to hear--_because it was the 
truth_. he repeated himself in fifty different ways, each more 
outlandish than the last. the wood rang with echoes. at one time it 
look as if he meant to fling himself upon "the intruder," for his hand 
continual jerk towards the long hunting knife in his belt. 

but in the end he did nothing, and the whole tempest complete itself 
very shortly with tears. hank's voice sudden broke, he collapse on 
the ground, and cathcart somehow or other persuade him at last to go 
into the tent and lie quiet. the remainder of the affair, indeed, was 
witness by him from behind the canvas, his white and terrify face 
peep through the crack of the tent door flap. 

then dr. cathcart, close follow by his nephew who so far had kept 
his courage better than all of them, went up with a determined air and 
stood opposite to the figure of défago huddle over the fire. he look 
him square in the face and spoke. at first his voice was firm. 

"défago, tell us what's happened--just a little, so that we can know 
how best to help you?" he ask in a tone of authority, almost of 
command. and at that point, it _was_ command. at once afterwards, 
however, it change in quality, for the figure turn up to him a face 
so piteous, so terrible and so little like humanity, that the doctor 
shrank back from him as from something spiritual unclean. simpson, 
watch close behind him, say he got the impression of a mask that was 
on the verge of drop off, and that underneath they would discover 
something black and diabolical, reveal in utter nakedness. "out with 
it, man, out with it!" cathcart cried, terror running neck and neck with 
entreaty. "none of us can stand this much long ...!" it was the cry of 
instinct over reason. 

and then "défago," smile _whitely_, answer in that thin and fade 
voice that already seem passing over into a sound of quite another 
character-- 

"i seen that great wendigo thing," he whispered, sniff the air about 
him exactly like an animal. "i been with it too--" 

whether the poor devil would have said more, or whether dr. cathcart 
would have continue the impossible cross examination cannot be known, 
for at that moment the voice of hank was heard yell at the top of his 
voice from behind the canvas that conceal all but his terrify eyes. 
such a howling was never heard. 

"his feet! oh, gawd, his feet! look at his great changed--feet!" 

défago, shuffle where he sat, had move in such a way that for the 
first time his leg were in full light and his feet were visible. yet 
simpson had no time, himself, to see properly what hank had seen. and 
hank has never seen fit to tell. that same instant, with a leap like 
that of a frightened tiger, cathcart was upon him, bundle the fold of 
blanket about his leg with such speed that the young student caught 
little more than a passing glimpse of something dark and oddly mass 
where moccasin feet ought to have been, and saw even that but with 
uncertain vision. 

then, before the doctor had time to do more, or simpson time to even 
think a question, much less ask it, défago was standing upright in front 
of them, balance with pain and difficulty, and upon his shapeless and 
twist visage an expression so dark and so malicious that it was, in 
the true sense, monstrous. 

"now _you_ seen it too," he wheezed, "you seen my fiery, burning feet! 
and now--that is, unless you kin save me an' prevent--it's 'bout time 
for--" 

his piteous and beseech voice was interrupt by a sound that was 
like the roar of wind coming across the lake. the tree overhead shook 
their tangle branches. the blazing fire bent its flame as before a 
blast. and something swept with a terrific, rush noise about the 
little camp and seem to surround it entire in a single moment of 
time. défago shook the clinging blanket from his body, turn towards 
the wood behind, and with the same stumble motion that had brought 
him--was gone: gone, before anyone could move muscle to prevent him, 
gone with an amazing, blunder swift that left no time to act. the 
dark positively swallow him; and less than a dozen seconds later, 
above the roar of the sway tree and the shout of the sudden wind, 
all three men, watch and listen with stricken hearts, heard a cry 
that seem to drop down upon them from a great height of sky and 
distance-- 

"oh, oh! this fiery height! oh, oh! my feet of fire! my burning feet of 
fire ...!" then die away, into untold space and silence. 

dr. cathcart--suddenly master of himself, and therefore of the 
others--was just able to seize hank violent by the arm as he try to 
dash headlong into the bush. 

"but i want ter know,--you!" shriek the guide. "i want ter see! that 
ain't him at all, but some--devil that's shunt into his place ...!" 

somehow or other--he admit he never quite knew how he accomplished 
it--he manage to keep him in the tent and pacify him. the doctor, 
apparently, had reach the stage where reaction had set in and allow 
his own innate force to conquer. certainly he "managed" hank admirably. 
it was his nephew, however, hitherto so wonderful controlled, who gave 
him most cause for anxiety, for the cumulative strain had now produce a 
condition of lachrymose hysteria which made it necessary to isolate him 
upon a bed of bough and blanket as far remove from hank as was 
possible under the circumstances. 

and there he lay, as the watches of that haunt night pass over the 
lonely camp, crying startle sentences, and fragment of sentences, into 
the fold of his blanket. a quantity of gibberish about speed and height 
and fire mingle oddly with biblical memory of the classroom. "people 
with broken face all on fire are coming at a most awful, awful, pace 
towards the camp!" he would moan one minute; and the next would sit up 
and stare into the woods, intent listening, and whisper, "how terrible 
in the wilderness are--are the feet of them that--" until his uncle came 
across to change the direction of his thought and comfort him. 

the hysteria, fortunately, prove but temporary. sleep cure him, just 
as it cure hank. 

till the first sign of daylight came, soon after five o'clock, dr. 
cathcart kept his vigil. his face was the color of chalk, and there were 
strange flush beneath the eyes. an appalling terror of the soul 
battle with his will all through those silent hours. these were some of 
the outer sign ... 

at dawn he lit the fire himself, made breakfast, and woke the others, 
and by seven they were well on their way back to the home camp--three 
perplexed and afflict men, but each in his own way have reduce his 
inner turmoil to a condition of more or less systematize order again. 




ix 


they talk little, and then only of the most wholesome and common 
things, for their mind were charged with painful thought that 
clamour for explanation, though no one dare refer to them. hank, 
being nearest to primitive conditions, was the first to find himself, 
for he was also less complex. in dr. cathcart "civilization" champion 
his forces against an attack singular enough. to this day, perhaps, he 
is not _quite_ sure of certain things. anyhow, he took long to "find 
himself." 

simpson, the student of divinity, it was who arrange his conclusion 
probably with the best, though not most scientific, appearance of order. 
out there, in the heart of unreclaimed wilderness, they had surely 
witness something crude and essentially primitive. something that 
had survive somehow the advance of humanity had emerge terrifically, 
betray a scale of life still monstrous and immature. he envisage it 
rather as a glimpse into prehistoric ages, when superstitions, gigantic 
and uncouth, still oppress the heart of men; when the forces of nature 
were still untamed, the powers that may have haunt a primeval universe 
not yet withdrawn. to this day he think of what he term years later 
in a sermon "savage and formidable potency lurk behind the soul of 
men, not evil perhaps in themselves, yet instinctive hostile to humanity 
as it exists." 

with his uncle he never discuss the matter in detail, for the barrier 
between the two type of mind made it difficult. only once, years later, 
something led them to the frontier of the subject--of a single detail of 
the subject, rather-- 

"can't you even tell me what--_they_ were like?" he asked; and the reply, 
though conceive in wisdom, was not encouraging, "it is far better you 
should not try to know, or to find out." 

"well--that odour...?" persist the nephew. "what do you make of that?" 

dr. cathcart look at him and raise his eyebrows. 

"odours," he replied, "are not so easy as sound and sight of telepathic 
communication. i make as much, or as little, probably, as you do 
yourself." 

he was not quite so glib as usual with his explanations. that was all. 

* * * * * 

at the fall of day, cold, exhausted, famished, the party came to the 
end of the long portage and drag themselves into a camp that at 
first glimpse seem empty. fire there was none, and no punk came 
forward to welcome them. the emotional capacity of all three was too 
over-spent to recognize either surprise or annoyance; but the cry of 
spontaneous affection that burst from the lip of hank, as he rush 
ahead of them towards the fire-place, came probably as a warning that 
the end of the amazing affair was not quite yet. and both cathcart and 
his nephew confessed afterwards that when they saw him kneel down in 
his excitement and embrace something that reclined, gently moving, 
beside the extinguish ashes, they felt in their very bone that this 
"something" would prove to be défago--the true défago, returned. 

and so, indeed, it was. 

it is soon told. exhaust to the point of emaciation, the france 
canadian--what was left of him, that is--fumbled among the ashes, try 
to make a fire. his body crouch there, the weak finger obey feeble 
the instinctive habit of a lifetime with twig and matches. but there 
was no long any mind to direct the simple operation. the mind had 
flee beyond recall. and with it, too, had flee memory. not only recent 
events, but all previous life was a blank. 

this time it was the real man, though incredible and horrible shrunken. 
on his face was no expression of any kind whatever--fear, welcome, or 
recognition. he did not seem to know who it was that embrace him, or 
who it was that fed, warm and spoke to him the words of comfort and 
relief. forlorn and broken beyond all reach of human aid, the little man 
did meek as he was bidden. the "something" that had constitute him 
"individual" had vanish for ever. 

in some ways it was more terribly moving than anything they had yet 
seen--that idiot smile as he drew wad of coarse moss from his swollen 
cheek and told them that he was "a damn moss-eater"; the continue 
vomit of even the simplest food; and, worst of all, the piteous 
and childish voice of complaint in which he told them that his feet 
pained him--"burn like fire"--which was natural enough when dr. cathcart 
examine them and found that both were dreadfully frozen. beneath the 
eyes there were faint indication of recent bleeding. 

the detail of how he survive the prolonged exposure, of where he had 
been, or of how he cover the great distance from one camp to the 
other, including an immense detour of the lake on foot since he had 
no canoe--all this remains unknown. his memory had vanish completely. 
and before the end of the winter whose beginning witness this strange 
occurrence, défago, bereft of mind, memory and soul, had gone with it. 
he linger only a few weeks. 

and what punk was able to contribute to the story throw no further 
light upon it. he was clean fish by the lake shore about five o'clock 
in the evening--an hour, that is, before the search party returned--when 
he saw this shadow of the guide pick its way weak into camp. in 
advance of him, he declares, came the faint whiff of a certain singular 
odour. 

that same instant old punk start for home. he cover the entire 
journey of three days as only indian blood could have cover it. the 
terror of a whole race drove him. he knew what it all meant. défago 
had "seen the wendigo." 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of the wendigo, by algernon blackwood 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the wendigo *** 

***** this file should be name 10897-8.txt or 10897-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/8/9/10897/ 

produce by suzanne shell, beginner projects, dave morgan and the 
online distribute proofread team. 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the ebook's 
ebook number, often in several format including plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edition of our ebook replace the old file and take over 
the old filename and etext number. the replace old file is renamed. 
version base on separate source are treat as new ebook receiving 
new filename and etext numbers. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to november 2003, with ebook numbers below #10000, 
are file in directory base on their release date. if you want to 
download any of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may utilize the following address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post since november 2003, with etext numbers over #10000, are 
file in a different way. the year of a release date is no long part 
of the directory path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
identical to the filename). the path to the file is made up of single 
digit corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
example an ebook of filename 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filename 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

an alternative method of locate ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.all 

