project gutenberg's the shun house, by howard phillip lovecraft 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the shun house 

author: howard phillip lovecraft 

release date: march 2, 2010 [ebook #31469] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the shun house *** 




produce by greg weeks, stephen blundell and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









the 
shun house 

by h. p. lovecraft 


_a posthumous story of immense power, written by a master of weird 
fiction--a tale of a revolting horror in the cellar of an old 
house in new england_ 


howard phillip lovecraft die last march, at the height of his 
career. though only forty-six years of age, he had built up an 
international reputation by the artistry and impeccable literary 
craftsmanship of his weird tales; and he was regard on both side 
of the atlantic as probably the greatest contemporary master of 
weird fiction. his ability to create and sustain a mood of brood 
dread and unnamable horror is nowhere better shown than in the 
posthumous tale present here: "the shun house." 

preface 
from even the greatest of horrors irony is seldom absent. sometimes it 
enter directly into the composition of the events, while sometimes it 
relate only to their fortuitous position among person and places. the 
latter sort is splendid exemplify by a case in the ancient city of 
providence, where in the late forty edgar allan poe use to sojourn 
often during his unsuccessful woo of the gifted poetess, mrs. 
whitman. poe generally stop at the mansion house in benefit 
street--the rename golden ball inn whose roof has sheltered washington, 
jefferson, and lafayette--and his favorite walk led northward along the 
same street to mrs. whitman's home and the neighboring hillside 
churchyard of st. john's, whose hidden expanse of eighteenth century 
gravestone had for him a peculiar fascination. 

now the irony is this. in this walk, so many times repeated, the world's 
greatest master of the terrible and the bizarre was oblige to pass a 
particular house on the eastern side of the street; a dingy, antiquated 
structure perch on the abrupt rising side hill, with a great unkempt 
yard date from a time when the region was partly open country. it do 
not appear that he ever wrote or spoke of it, nor is there any evidence 
that he even notice it. and yet that house, to the two person in 
possession of certain information, equal or outrank in horror the 
wildest fantasy of the genius who so often pass it unknowingly, and 
stand stark leer as a symbol of all that is unutterable hideous. 

the house was--and for that matter still is--of a kind to attract the 
attention of the curious. originally a farm or semi-farm building, it 
follow the average new england colonial lines of the middle eighteenth 
century--the prosperous peaked-roof sort, with two story and 
dormerless attic, and with the georgia doorway and interior panelling 
dictate by the progress of taste at that time. it face south, with one 
gable end bury to the lower window in the eastward rising hill, and 
the other expose to the foundations toward the street. its 
construction, over a century and a half ago, had follow the grade 
and straighten of the road in that especial vicinity; for benefit 
street--at first call back street--was laid out as a lane winding 
amongst the graveyard of the first settlers, and straighten only when 
the removal of the body to the north burial ground made it decent 
possible to cut through the old family plots. 

at the start, the western wall had lain some twenty feet up a 
precipitous lawn from the roadway; but a widen of the street at about 
the time of the revolution shear off most of the intervene space, 
expose the foundations so that a brick basement wall had to be made, 
give the deep cellar a street frontage with door and one window above 
ground, close to the new line of public travel. when the sidewalk was 
laid out a century ago the last of the intervene space was removed; 
and poe in his walk must have seen only a sheer ascent of dull gray 
brick flush with the sidewalk and surmount at a height of ten feet by 
the antique shingle bulk of the house proper. 

[illustration: "that awful door in benefit street which i had left 
ajar."] 

the farm-like ground extend back very deep up the hill, almost to 
wheaton street. the space south of the house, abut on benefit 
street, was of course greatly above the existing sidewalk level, form 
a terrace bound by a high bank wall of damp, mossy stone pierce by a 
steep flight of narrow steps which led inward between canyon-like 
surface to the upper region of mangy lawn, rheumy brick walks, and 
neglect garden whose dismantle cement urns, rust kettle fallen 
from tripod of knotty sticks, and similar paraphernalia set off the 
weather-beaten front door with its broken fanlight, rot ionic 
pilasters, and wormy triangular pediment. 

* * * * * 

what i heard in my youth about the shun house was merely that people 
die there in alarming great numbers. that, i was told, was why the 
original owner had move out some twenty years after building the 
place. it was plainly unhealthy, perhaps because of the damp and 
fungous growth in the cellar, the general sickish smell, the draft of 
the hallways, or the quality of the well and pump water. these things 
were bad enough, and these were all that gain belief among the person 
whom i knew. only the notebook of my antiquarian uncle, doctor elihu 
whipple, reveal to me at length the darker, vague surmise which 
form an undercurrent of folklore among old-time servant and humble 
folk; surmise which never travelled far, and which were largely 
forgotten when providence grew to be a metropolis with a shift modern 
population. 

the general fact is, that the house was never regard by the solid part 
of the community as in any real sense "haunted." there were no 
widespread tale of rattling chains, cold current of air, extinguish 
lights, or face at the window. extremist sometimes said the house was 
"unlucky," but that is as far as even they went. what was really beyond 
dispute is that a frightful proportion of person die there; or more 
accurately, _had_ die there, since after some peculiar happening over 
sixty years ago the building had become desert through the sheer 
impossible of rent it. these person were not all cut off sudden 
by any one cause; rather did it seem that their vitality was insidious 
sapped, so that each one die the soon from whatever tendency to 
weakness he may have naturally had. and those who did not die display 
in vary degree a type of anemia or consumption, and sometimes a 
decline of the mental faculties, which spoke ill for the salubrious 
of the building. neighboring houses, it must be added, seem entire 
free from the noxious quality. 

this much i knew before my insistent questioning led my uncle to show me 
the note which finally embark us both on our hideous investigation. 
in my childhood the shun house was vacant, with barren, gnarled and 
terrible old trees, long, queer pale grass and nightmarish misshapen 
weeds in the high terrace yard where bird never lingered. we boys use 
to overrun the place, and i can still recall my youthful terror not only 
at the morbid strange of this sinister vegetation, but at the 
eldritch atmosphere and odor of the dilapidated house, whose unlock 
front door was often enter in quest of shudders. the small-paned 
window were largely broken, and a nameless air of desolate hung round 
the precarious panelling, shaky interior shutters, peel wall-paper, 
fall plaster, rickety staircases, and such fragment of batter 
furniture as still remained. the dust and cobweb add their touch of 
the fearful; and brave indeed was the boy who would voluntary ascend 
the ladder to the attic, a vast raftered length light only by small 
blinking window in the gable ends, and fill with a mass wreckage 
of chests, chairs, and spinning-wheels which infinite years of deposit 
had shroud and festoon into monstrous and hellish shapes. 

but after all, the attic was not the most terrible part of the house. it 
was the dank, humid cellar which somehow exert the strongest repulsion 
on us, even though it was wholly above ground on the street side, with 
only a thin door and window-pierced brick wall to separate it from the 
busy sidewalk. we scarcely knew whether to haunt it in spectral 
fascination, or to shun it for the sake of our soul and our sanity. for 
one thing, the bad odor of the house was strongest there; and for 
another thing, we did not like the white fungous growth which 
occasional sprang up in rainy summer weather from the hard earth 
floor. those fungi, grotesque like the vegetation in the yard outside, 
were truly horrible in their outlines; detest parody of toadstool 
and indian-pipes, whose like we had never seen in any other situation. 
they rot quickly, and at one stage became slightly phosphorescent; so 
that nocturnal passers-by sometimes spoke of witch-fires glowing behind 
the broken pane of the fetor-spreading windows. 

we never--even in our wildest halloween moods--visited this cellar 
by night, but in some of our daytime visit could detect the 
phosphorescence, especially when the day was dark and wet. there was 
also a subtle thing we often thought we detected--a very strange thing 
which was, however, merely suggestive at most. i refer to a sort of 
cloudy whitish pattern on the dirt floor--a vague, shift deposit of 
mold or niter which we sometimes thought we could trace amidst the 
sparse fungous growth near the huge fireplace of the basement kitchen. 
once in a while it struck us that this patch bore an uncanny resemblance 
to a doubled-up human figure, though generally no such kinship existed, 
and often there was no whitish deposit whatever. 

on a certain rainy afternoon when this illusion seem phenomenally 
strong, and when, in addition, i had fancy i glimpse a kind of thin, 
yellowish, shimmer exhalation rising from the nitrous pattern toward 
the yawn fireplace, i spoke to my uncle about the matter. he smile 
at this odd conceit, but it seem that his smile was tinge with 
reminiscence. later i heard that a similar notion enter into some of 
the wild ancient tale of the common folk--a notion likewise allude to 
ghoulish, wolfish shape taken by smoke from the great chimney, and 
queer contour assume by certain of the sinuous tree-roots that thrust 
their way into the cellar through the loose foundation-stones. 


2 

not till my adult years did my uncle set before me the note and data 
which he had collected concerning the shun house. doctor whipple was 
a sane, conservative physician of the old school, and for all his 
interest in the place was not eager to encourage young thought toward 
the abnormal. his own view, postulate simply a building and location 
of marked unsanitary qualities, had nothing to do with abnormality; 
but he realize that the very picturesque which arouse his own 
interest would in a boy's fanciful mind take on all manner of gruesome 
imaginative associations. 

the doctor was a bachelor; a white-haired, clean-shaven, old-fashioned 
gentleman, and a local historian of note, who had often broken a lance 
with such controversial guardian of tradition as sidney s. rider and 
thomas w. bicknell. he live with one man-servant in a georgia 
homestead with knocker and iron-railed steps, balanced eerie on the 
steep ascent of north court street beside the ancient brick court and 
colony house where his grandfather--a cousin of that celebrated 
privateersman, captain whipple, who burnt his majesty's armed schooner 
_gaspee_ in 1772--had vote in the legislature on may 4, 1776, for the 
independence of the rhode island colony. around him in the damp, 
low-ceiled library with the musty white panelling, heavy carve 
overmantel and small-paned, vine-shaded windows, were the relics and 
record of his ancient family, among which were many dubious allusion 
to the shun house in benefit street. that pest spot lie not far 
distant--for benefit runs ledgewise just above the court house along the 
precipitous hill up which the first settlement climbed. 

when, in the end, my insistent pester and mature years evoke from 
my uncle the hoard lore i sought, there lay before me a strange enough 
chronicle. long-winded, statistical, and dreary genealogy as some 
of the matter was, there ran through it a continuous thread of brooding, 
tenacious horror and preternatural malevolence which impress me even 
more than it had impress the good doctor. separate event fitted 
together uncannily, and seemingly irrelevant detail held mine of 
hideous possibilities. a new and burning curiosity grew in me, compare 
to which my boyish curiosity was feeble and inchoate. 

the first revelation led to an exhaustive research, and finally to that 
shudder quest which prove so disastrous to myself and mine. for at 
the last my uncle insist on join the search i had commenced, and 
after a certain night in that house he did not come away with me. i am 
lonely without that gentle soul whose long years were fill only with 
honor, virtue, good taste, benevolence, and learning. i have rear a 
marble urn to his memory in st. john's churchyard--the place that poe 
loved--the hidden grove of giant willow on the hill, where tomb and 
headstone huddle quiet between the hoary bulk of the church and the 
house and bank wall of benefit street. 

the history of the house, opening amidst a maze of dates, reveal no 
trace of the sinister either about its construction or about the 
prosperous and honorable family who built it. yet from the first a taint 
of calamity, soon increase to boding significance, was apparent. my 
uncle's careful compile record began with the building of the 
structure in 1763, and follow the theme with an unusual amount of 
detail. the shun house, it seems, was first inhabit by william 
harris and his wife rhoby dexter, with their children, elkanah, born in 
1755, abigail, born in 1757, william, jr., born in 1759, and ruth, born 
in 1761. harris was a substantial merchant and seaman in the west india 
trade, connected with the firm of obadiah brown and his nephews. after 
brown's death in 1761, the new firm of nichola brown & company made him 
master of the brig _prudence_, providence-built, of 120 tons, thus 
enabling him to erect the new homestead he had desire ever since his 
marriage. 

the site he had chosen--a recently straighten part of the new and 
fashionable back street, which ran along the side of the hill above 
crowded cheapside--was all that could be wished, and the building did 
justice to the location. it was the best that moderate means could 
afford, and harris hasten to move in before the birth of a fifth child 
which the family expected. that child, a boy, came in december; but was 
still-born. nor was any child to be born alive in that house for a 
century and a half. 

the next april, sickness occur among the children, and abigail and 
ruth die before the month was over. doctor job ive diagnose the 
trouble as some infantile fever, though other declared it was more of a 
mere wasting-away or decline. it seemed, in any event, to be contagious; 
for hannah bowen, one of the two servants, die of it in the following 
june. eli lideason, the other servant, constant complain of 
weakness; and would have return to his father's farm in rehoboth but 
for a sudden attachment for mehitabel pierce, who was hire to succeed 
hannah. he die the next year--a sad year indeed, since it marked the 
death of william harris himself, enfeeble as he was by the climate of 
martinique, where his occupation had kept him for considerable periods 
during the preceding decade. 

the widowed rhoby harris never recover from the shock of her husband's 
death, and the passing of her first-born elkanah two years later was the 
final blow to her reason. in 1768 she fell victim to a mild form of 
insanity, and was thereafter confine to the upper part of the house; 
her elder maiden sister, mercy dexter, have move in to take charge of 
the family. mercy was a plain, raw-boned woman of great strength; but 
her health visibly decline from the time of her advent. she was greatly 
devoted to her unfortunate sister, and had an especial affection for her 
only survive nephew william, who from a sturdy infant had become a 
sickly, spindle lad. in this year the servant mehitabel died, and the 
other servant, preserve smith, left without coherent explanation--or at 
least, with only some wild tale and a complaint that he dislike the 
smell of the place. for a time mercy could secure no more help, since 
the seven death and case of madness, all occur within five years' 
space, had begun to set in motion the body of fireside rumor which later 
became so bizarre. ultimately, however, she obtain new servant from 
out of town; ann white, a morose woman from that part of north kingstown 
now set off as the township of exeter, and a capable boston man name 
zena low. 

* * * * * 

it was ann white who first gave definite shape to the sinister idle 
talk. mercy should have known better than to hire anyone from the 
nooseneck hill country, for that remote bit of backwoods was then, as 
now, a seat of the most uncomfortable superstitions. as lately as 1892 
an exeter community exhume a dead body and ceremonious burnt its 
heart in order to prevent certain allege visitation injurious to the 
public health and peace, and one may imagine the point of view of the 
same section in 1768. ann's tongue was pernicious active, and within a 
few month mercy discharge her, filling her place with a faithful and 
amiable amazon from newport, maria robbins. 

meanwhile poor rhoby harris, in her madness, gave voice to dream and 
imagine of the most hideous sort. at times her scream became 
insupportable, and for long periods she would utter shriek horrors 
which necessitate her son's temporary residence with his cousin, peleg 
harris, in presbyterian lane near the new college building. the boy 
would seem to improve after these visits, and had mercy been as wise as 
she was well-meaning, she would have let him live permanent with 
peleg. just what mrs. harris cry out in her fit of violence, 
tradition hesitate to say; or rather, presents such extravagant 
account that they nullify themselves through sheer absurdity. certainly 
it sound absurd to hear that a woman educated only in the rudiments of 
france often shout for hour in a coarse and idiomatic form of that 
language, or that the same person, alone and guarded, complain wildly 
of a staring thing which bit and chew at her. in 1772 the servant 
zena died, and when mrs. harris heard of it she laugh with a shocking 
delight utterly foreign to her. the next year she herself died, and was 
laid to rest in the north burial ground beside her husband. 

upon the outbreak of trouble with great britain in 1775, william harris, 
despite his scant sixteen years and feeble constitution, manage to 
enlist in the army of observation under general greene; and from that 
time on enjoy a steady rise in health and prestige. in 1780, as a 
captain in the rhode island forces in new jersey under colonel angell, 
he met and married phebe hetfield of elizabethtown, whom he brought to 
providence upon his honorable discharge in the following year. 

the young soldier's return was not a thing of unmitigated happiness. the 
house, it is true, was still in good condition; and the street had been 
widen and change in name from back street to benefit street. but 
mercy dexter's once robust frame had undergone a sad and curious decay, 
so that she was now a stoop and pathetic figure with hollow voice and 
disconcert pallor--qualities share to a singular degree by the one 
remain servant maria. in the autumn of 1782 phebe harris gave birth 
to a still-born daughter, and on the fifteenth of the next may mercy 
dexter took leave of a useful, austere, and virtuous life. 

william harris, at last thorough convinced of the radical 
unhealthful nature of his abode, now took steps toward quit it and 
close it for ever. secure temporary quarters for himself and his 
wife at the newly open golden ball inn, he arrange for the building 
of a new and fine house in westminster street, in the grow part of 
the town across the great bridge. there, in 1785, his son dutee was 
born; and there the family dwelt till the encroachment of commerce 
drove them back across the river and over the hill to angell street, in 
the new east side residence district, where the late archer harris 
built his sumptuous but hideous french-roofed mansion in 1876. william 
and phebe both succumb to the yellow fever epidemic of 1797, but dutee 
was brought up by his cousin rathbone harris, peleg's son. 

rathbone was a practical man, and rent the benefit street house 
despite william's wish to keep it vacant. he considered it an obligation 
to his ward to make the most of all the boy's property, nor did he 
concern himself with the death and illness which cause so many 
change of tenants, or the steady grow aversion with which the 
house was generally regarded. it is likely that he felt only vexation 
when, in 1804, the town council ordered him to fumigate the place with 
sulfur, tar, and gum camphor on account of the much-discussed death of 
four persons, presumable cause by the then diminish fever epidemic. 
they said the place had a febrile smell. 

dutee himself thought little of the house, for he grew up to be a 
privateersman, and serve with distinction on the _vigilant_ under 
captain cahoone in the war of 1812. he return unharmed, married in 
1814, and became a father on that memorable night of september 23, 1815, 
when a great gale drove the waters of the bay over half the town, and 
float a tall sloop well up westminster street so that its mast almost 
tap the harris window in symbolic affirm that the new boy, 
welcome, was a seaman's son. 

welcome did not survive his father, but live to perish glorious at 
fredericksburg in 1862. neither he nor his son archer knew of the 
shun house as other than a nuisance almost impossible to 
rent--perhaps on account of the musty and sickly odor of unkempt old 
age. indeed, it never was rent after a series of death culminate in 
1861, which the excitement of the war tend to throw into obscurity. 
carrington harris, last of the male line, knew it only as a desert and 
somewhat picturesque center of legend until i told him my experience. he 
had meant to tear it down and build an apartment house on the site, but 
after my account decided to let it stand, install plumbing, and rent it. 
nor has he yet had any difficulty in obtain tenants. the horror has 
gone. 


3 

it may well be imagine how powerful i was affected by the annals of 
the harrises. in this continuous record there seem to me to brood a 
persistent evil beyond anything in nature as i had known it; an evil 
clearly connected with the house and not with the family. this 
impression was confirmed by my uncle's less systematic array of 
miscellaneous data--legends transcribe from servant gossip, cutting 
from the papers, copy of death certificate by fellow-physicians, and 
the like. all of this material i cannot hope to give, for my uncle was a 
tireless antiquarian and very deep interested in the shun house; 
but i may refer to several dominant points which earn notice by their 
recurrence through many report from diverse sources. for example, the 
servant gossip was practically unanimous in attribute to the fungous 
and malodorous _cellar_ of the house a vast supremacy in evil influence. 
there had been servants--ann white especially--who would not use the 
cellar kitchen, and at least three well-defined legend bore upon the 
queer quasi-human or diabolic outline assume by tree-roots and patch 
of mold in that region. these latter narrative interested me 
profoundly, on account of what i had seen in my boyhood, but i felt that 
most of the significance had in each case been largely obscure by 
addition from the common stock of local ghost lore. 

ann white, with her exeter superstition, had promulgate the most 
extravagant and at the same time most consistent tale; allege that 
there must lie bury beneath the house one of those vampires--the dead 
who retain their bodily form and live on the blood or breath of the 
living--whose hideous legion send their prey shape or spirits 
abroad by night. to destroy a vampire one must, the grandmother say, 
exhume it and burn its heart, or at least drive a stake through that 
organ; and ann's dogged insistence on a search under the cellar had been 
prominent in bring about her discharge. 

her tales, however, command a wide audience, and were the more readily 
accept because the house indeed stood on land once use for burial 
purposes. to me their interest depend less on this circumstance than 
on the peculiarly appropriate way in which they dovetail with certain 
other things--the complaint of the depart servant preserve smith, 
who had precede ann and never heard of her, that something "sucked his 
breath" at night; the death-certificates of the fever victim of 1804, 
issue by doctor chad hopkins, and showing the four deceased person all 
unaccountable lacking in blood; and the obscure passage of poor rhoby 
harris's ravings, where she complain of the sharp teeth of a 
glassy-eyed, half-visible presence. 

free from unwarranted superstition though i am, these things produce in 
me an odd sensation, which was intensify by a pair of widely separate 
newspaper cutting relate to death in the shun house--one from the 
_providence gazette and country-journal_ of april 12, 1815, and the 
other from the _daily transcript and chronicle_ of october 27, 
1845--each of which detailed an appalling grisly circumstance whose 
duplicate was remarkable. it seem that in both instance the die 
person, in 1815 a gentle old lady name stafford and in 1845 a 
schoolteacher of middle age name eleazar durfee, became transfigure in 
a horrible way, glaring glassy and attempt to bite the throat of 
the attend physician. even more puzzling, though, was the final case 
which put an end to the rent of the house--a series of anemia death 
precede by progressive madness wherein the patient would crafty 
attempt the lives of his relative by incision in the neck or wrist. 

this was in 1860 and 1861, when my uncle had just begun his medical 
practise; and before leave for the front he heard much of it from his 
elder professional colleagues. the really inexplicable thing was the way 
in which the victims--ignorant people, for the ill-smelling and widely 
shun house could now be rent to no others--would babble 
malediction in french, a language they could not possibly have studied 
to any extent. it made one think of poor rhoby harris nearly a century 
before, and so move my uncle that he commence collect historical 
data on the house after listening, some time subsequent to his return 
from the war, to the first-hand account of doctor chase and whitmarsh. 
indeed, i could see that my uncle had thought deep on the subject, and 
that he was glad of my own interest--an open-minded and sympathetic 
interest which enable him to discuss with me matter at which other 
would merely have laughed. his fancy had not gone so far as mine, but he 
felt that the place was rare in its imaginative potentialities, and 
worthy of note as an inspiration in the field of the grotesque and 
macabre. 

for my part, i was disposed to take the whole subject with profound 
seriousness, and began at once not only to review the evidence, but to 
accumulate as much more as i could. i talk with the elderly archer 
harris, then owner of the house, many times before his death in 1916; 
and obtain from him and his still survive maiden sister alice an 
authentic corroboration of all the family data my uncle had collected. 
when, however, i ask them what connection with france or its language 
the house could have, they confessed themselves as frankly baffle and 
ignorant as i. archer knew nothing, and all that miss harris could say 
was that an old allusion her grandfather, dutee harris, had heard of 
might have shed a little light. the old seaman, who had survive his son 
welcome's death in battle by two years, had not himself known the 
legend, but recall that his earliest nurse, the ancient maria robbins, 
seem dark aware of something that might have lent a weird 
significance to the france raving of rhoby harris, which she had so 
often heard during the last days of that hapless woman. maria had been 
at the shun house from 1769 till the removal of the family in 1783, 
and had seen mercy dexter die. once she hint to the child dutee of a 
somewhat peculiar circumstance in mercy's last moments, but he had soon 
forgotten all about it save that it was something peculiar. the 
granddaughter, moreover, recall even this much with difficulty. she 
and her brother were not so much interested in the house as was archer's 
son carrington, the present owner, with whom i talk after my 
experience. 

* * * * * 

have exhaust the harris family of all the information it could 
furnish, i turn my attention to early town record and deed with a 
zeal more penetrating than that which my uncle had occasional shown in 
the same work. what i wish was a comprehensive history of the site 
from its very settlement in 1636--or even before, if any narragansett 
indian legend could be unearth to supply the data. i found, at the 
start, that the land had been part of the long strip of home lot grant 
originally to john throckmorton; one of many similar strip beginning at 
the town street beside the river and extend up over the hill to a 
line roughly corresponding with the modern hope street. the throckmorton 
lot had later, of course, been much subdivided; and i became very 
assiduous in tracing that section through which back or benefit street 
was later run. it had, as rumor indeed said, been the throckmorton 
graveyard; but as i examine the record more carefully, i found that 
the grave had all been transfer at an early date to the north burial 
ground on the pawtucket west road. 

then sudden i came--by a rare piece of chance, since it was not in the 
main body of record and might easily have been missed--upon something 
which arouse my keenest eagerness, fitting in as it did with several of 
the queerest phase of the affair. it was the record of a lease, in 
1697, of a small tract of ground to an etienne roulet and wife. at last 
the france element had appeared--that, and another deep element of 
horror which the name conjure up from the darkest recess of my weird 
and heterogeneous reading--and i feverishly studied the platt of the 
locality as it had been before the cutting through and partial 
straighten of back street between 1747 and 1758. i found what i had 
half expected, that where the shun house now stood the roulet had 
laid out their graveyard behind a one-story and attic cottage, and that 
no record of any transfer of grave existed. the document, indeed, end 
in much confusion; and i was forced to ransack both the rhode island 
historical society and shepley library before i could find a local door 
which the name of etienne roulet would unlock. in the end i did find 
something; something of such vague but monstrous import that i set about 
at once to examine the cellar of the shun house itself with a new and 
excited minuteness. 

the roulets, it seemed, had come in 1696 from east greenwich, down the 
west shore of narragansett bay. they were huguenot from caude, and had 
encounter much opposition before the providence selectmen allow them 
to settle in the town. unpopular had dogged them in east greenwich, 
whither they had come in 1686, after the revocation of the edict of 
nantes, and rumor said that the cause of dislike extend beyond mere 
racial and national prejudice, or the land dispute which involved other 
france settler with the english in rivalry which not even governor 
andro could quell. but their ardent protestantism--too ardent, some 
whispered--and their evident distress when virtually driven from the 
village down the bay, had move the sympathy of the town fathers. here 
the stranger had been grant a haven; and the swarthy etienne roulet, 
less apt at agriculture than at reading queer books and drawing queer 
diagrams, was given a clerical post in the warehouse at pardon 
tillinghast's wharf, far south in town street. there had, however, been 
a riot of some sort later on--perhaps forty years later, after old 
roulet's death--and no one seem to hear of the family after that. 

for a century and more, it appeared, the roulet had been well 
remember and frequent discuss as vivid incident in the quiet 
life of a new england seaport. etienne's son paul, a surly fellow whose 
erratic conduct had probably provoke the riot which wipe out the 
family, was particularly a source of speculation; and though providence 
never share the witchcraft panic of her puritan neighbors, it was 
freely intimate by old wives that his prayer were neither utter at 
the proper time nor direct toward the proper object. all this had 
undoubted form the basis of the legend known by old maria robbins. 
what relation it had to the france ravings of rhoby harris and other 
inhabitant of the shun house, imagination or future discovery alone 
could determine. i wonder how many of those who had known the legend 
realize that additional link with the terrible which my wide reading 
had given me; that ominous item in the annals of morbid horror which 
tell of the creature _jacques roulet, of caude_, who in 1598 was 
condemn to death as a demoniac but afterward save from the stake by 
the paris parliament and shut in a madhouse. he had been found cover 
with blood and shred of flesh in a wood, shortly after the killing and 
rend of a boy by a pair of wolves. one wolf was seen to lope away 
unhurt. surely a pretty hearthside tale, with a queer significance as to 
name and place; but i decided that the providence gossip could not have 
generally known of it. had they known, the coincidence of name would 
have brought some drastic and frightened action--indeed, might not its 
limited whisper have precipitate the final riot which erase the 
roulet from the town? 

* * * * * 

i now visit the accursed place with increase frequency; study the 
unwholesome vegetation of the garden, examine all the wall of the 
building, and pore over every inch of the earthen cellar floor. 
finally, with carrington harris's permission, i fitted a key to the 
disused door opening from the cellar directly upon benefit street, 
prefer to have a more immediate access to the outside world than the 
dark stairs, ground-floor hall, and front door could give. there, where 
morbidity lurk most thickly, i search and poke during long 
afternoons when the sunlight filter in through the cobweb 
above-ground windows, and a sense of security glow from the unlock 
door which placed me only a few feet from the placid sidewalk outside. 
nothing new reward my efforts--only the same depress musty and 
faint suggestion of noxious odor and nitrous outline on the 
floor--and i fancy that many pedestrian must have watch me curious 
through the broken panes. 

at length, upon a suggestion of my uncle's, i decided to try the spot 
nocturnally; and one stormy midnight ran the beam of an electric torch 
over the moldy floor with its uncanny shape and distorted, 
half-phosphorescent fungi. the place had dispirit me curious that 
evening, and i was almost prepared when i saw--or thought i saw--amidst 
the whitish deposit a particularly sharp definition of the "huddled 
form" i had suspect from boyhood. its clear was astonish and 
unprecedented--and as i watch i seem to see again the thin, 
yellowish, shimmer exhalation which had startle me on that rainy 
afternoon so many years before. 

above the anthropomorphic patch of mold by the fireplace it rose; a 
subtle, sickish, almost luminous vapor which as it hung tremble in the 
damp seem to develop vague and shocking suggestion of form, 
gradual trail off into nebulous decay and passing up into the 
black of the great chimney with a fete in its wake. it was truly 
horrible, and the more so to me because of what i knew of the spot. 
refuse to flee, i watch it fade--and as i watch i felt that it was 
in turn watch me greedy with eyes more imaginable than visible. 
when i told my uncle about it he was greatly aroused; and after a tense 
hour of reflection, arrive at a definite and drastic decision. weigh 
in his mind the importance of the matter, and the significance of our 
relation to it, he insist that we both test--and if possible 
destroy--the horror of the house by a joint night or nights of 
aggressive vigil in that musty and fungus-cursed cellar. 


4 

on wednesday, june 25, 1919, after a proper notification of carrington 
harris which did not include surmise as to what we expect to find, my 
uncle and i convey to the shun house two camp chair and a fold 
camp cot, together with some scientific mechanism of greater weight and 
intricacy. these we placed in the cellar during the day, screening the 
window with paper and plan to return in the evening for our first 
vigil. we had lock the door from the cellar to the ground floor; and 
have a key to the outside cellar door, were prepared to leave our 
expensive and delicate apparatus--which we had obtain secret and at 
great cost--as many days as our vigil might be protracted. it was our 
design to sit up together till very late, and then watch singly till 
dawn in two-hour stretches, myself first and then my companion; the 
inactive member rest on the cot. 

the natural leadership with which my uncle procure the instrument from 
the laboratory of brown university and the cranston street armory, and 
instinctive assume direction of our venture, was a marvelous 
commentary on the potential vitality and resilience of a man of 
eighty-one. elihu whipple had live according to the hygienic law he 
had preach as a physician, and but for what happen later would be 
here in full vigor today. only two person suspect what did 
happen--carrington harris and myself. i had to tell harris because he 
own the house and deserve to know what had gone out of it. then too, 
we had spoken to him in advance of our quest; and i felt after my 
uncle's go that he would understand and assist me in some vitally 
necessary public explanations. he turn very pale, but agree to help 
me, and decided that it would now be safe to rent the house. 

to declare that we were not nervous on that rainy night of watch 
would be an exaggeration both gross and ridiculous. we were not, as i 
have said, in any sense childish superstitious, but scientific study 
and reflection had taught us that the known universe of three dimensions 
embrace the merest fraction of the whole cosmos of substance and 
energy. in this case an overwhelming preponderance of evidence from 
numerous authentic source pointed to the tenacious existence of certain 
forces of great power and, so far as the human point of view is 
concerned, exceptional malignancy. to say that we actually believe in 
vampire or werewolve would be a careless inclusive statement. rather 
must it be said that we were not prepared to deny the possibility of 
certain unfamiliar and unclassify modification of vital force and 
attenuate matter; existing very infrequent in three-dimensional space 
because of its more intimate connection with other spatial units, yet 
close enough to the boundary of our own to furnish us occasional 
manifestation which we, for lack of a proper vantage-point, may never 
hope to understand. 

in short, it seem to my uncle and me that an incontrovertible array 
of fact pointed to some lingering influence in the shun house; 
trace to one or another of the ill-favored france settler of two 
century before, and still operative through rare and unknown law of 
atomic and electronic motion. that the family of roulet had possessed an 
abnormal affinity for outer circle of entity--dark sphere which for 
normal folk hold only repulsion and terror--their record history 
seem to prove. had not, then, the riot of those bygone 
seventeen-thirties set moving certain kinetic pattern in the morbid 
brain of one or more of them--notably the sinister paul roulet--which 
obscure survive the body murder and bury by the mob, and 
continue to function in some multiple-dimensioned space along the 
original lines of force determined by a frantic hatred of the 
encroach community? 

such a thing was surely not a physical or biochemic impossible in 
the light of a new science which include the theory of relativity 
and intra-atomic action. one might easily imagine an alien nucleus of 
substance or energy, formless or otherwise, kept alive by imperceptible 
or immaterial subtraction from the life-force or bodily tissue and 
fluid of other and more palpable living things into which it penetrate 
and with whose fabric it sometimes completely merge itself. it might be 
active hostile, or it might be dictate merely by blind motive of 
self-preservation. in any case such a monster must of necessity be in 
our scheme of things an anomaly and an intruder, whose extirpate form 
a primary duty with every man not an enemy to the world's life, health, 
and sanity. 

what baffle us was our utter ignorance of the aspect in which we might 
encounter the thing. no sane person had ever seen it, and few had ever 
felt it definitely. it might be pure energy--a form ethereal and outside 
the realm of substance--or it might be partly material; some unknown and 
equivocal mass of plasticity, capable of change at will to nebulous 
approximation of the solid, liquid, gaseous, or tenuous unparticled 
states. the anthropomorphic patch of mold on the floor, the form of the 
yellowish vapor, and the curvature of the tree-roots in some of the old 
tales, all argue at least a remote and reminiscent connection with the 
human shape; but how representative or permanent that similarity might 
be, none could say with any kind of certainty. 

* * * * * 

we had devise two weapon to fight it; a large and specially fitted 
crook tube operate by powerful storage battery and provided with 
peculiar screen and reflectors, in case it prove intangible and 
oppose only by vigorous destructive ether radiations, and a pair of 
military flame-throwers of the sort use in the world war, in case it 
prove partly material and susceptible of mechanical destruction--for 
like the superstitious exeter rustics, we were prepared to burn the 
thing's heart out if heart exist to burn. all this aggressive 
mechanism we set in the cellar in position careful arrange with 
reference to the cot and chairs, and to the spot before the fireplace 
where the mold had taken strange shapes. that suggestive patch, by the 
way, was only faint visible when we placed our furniture and 
instruments, and when we return that evening for the actual vigil. for 
a moment i half doubt that i had ever seen it in the more definitely 
limn form--but then i thought of the legends. 

our cellar vigil began at ten p. m., daylight saving time, and as it 
continue we found no promise of pertinent developments. a weak, 
filter glow from the rain-harassed street-lamps outside, and a feeble 
phosphorescence from the detest fungi within, show the dripping 
stone of the walls, from which all trace of whitewash had vanished; the 
dank, fetid and mildew-tainted hard earth floor with its obscene fungi; 
the rot remains of what had been stools, chairs, and tables, and 
other more shapeless furniture; the heavy plank and massive beam of 
the ground floor overhead; the decrepit plank door leading to bin and 
chambers beneath other parts of the house; the crumble stone staircase 
with ruin wooden hand-rail; and the crude and cavernous fireplace of 
blacken brick where rust iron fragment reveal the past presence 
of hooks, andirons, spit, crane, and a door to the dutch oven--these 
things, and our austere cot and camp chairs, and the heavy and intricate 
destructive machinery we had brought. 

we had, as in my own former explorations, left the door to the street 
unlocked; so that a direct and practical path of escape might lie open 
in case of manifestation beyond our power to deal with. it was our idea 
that our continue nocturnal presence would call forth whatever malign 
entity lurk there; and that being prepared, we could dispose of the 
thing with one or the other of our provided means as soon as we had 
recognize and observe it sufficiently. how long it might require to 
evoke and extinguish the thing, we had no notion. it occur to us, 
too, that our venture was far from safe; for in what strength the thing 
might appear no one could tell. but we deem the game worth the hazard, 
and embark on it alone and unhesitatingly; conscious that the seek 
of outside aid would only expose us to ridicule and perhaps defeat our 
entire purpose. such was our frame of mind as we talked--far into the 
night, till my uncle's grow drowsy made me remind him to lie down 
for his two-hour sleep. 

something like fear chill me as i sat there in the small hour 
alone--i say alone, for one who sit by a sleeper is indeed alone; 
perhaps more alone than he can realize. my uncle breathe heavily, his 
deep inhale and exhalation accompany by the rain outside, and 
punctuate by another nerve-racking sound of distant dripping water 
within--for the house was repulsive damp even in dry weather, and in 
this storm positively swamp-like. i studied the loose, antique masonry 
of the wall in the fungus-light and the feeble ray which stole in from 
the street through the screen window; and once, when the noisome 
atmosphere of the place seem about to sicken me, i open the door and 
look up and down the street, feast my eyes on familiar sight and 
my nostril on wholesome air. still nothing occur to reward my 
watching; and i yawn repeatedly, fatigue get the better of 
apprehension. 

then the stirring of my uncle in his sleep attract my notice. he had 
turn restless on the cot several times during the latter half of the 
first hour, but now he was breathing with unusual irregularity, 
occasional heave a sigh which held more than a few of the quality 
of a choke moan. 

i turn my electric flashlight on him and found his face averted; so 
rising and crossing to the other side of the cot, i again flash the 
light to see if he seem in any pain. what i saw unnerve me most 
surprisingly, considering its relative triviality. it must have been 
merely the association of any odd circumstance with the sinister nature 
of our location and mission, for surely the circumstance was not in 
itself frightful or unnatural. it was merely that my uncle's facial 
expression, disturbed no doubt by the strange dream which our 
situation prompted, betray considerable agitation, and seem not at 
all characteristic of him. his habitual expression was one of kindly and 
well-bred calm, whereas now a variety of emotion seem struggle 
within him. i think, on the whole, that it was this _variety_ which 
chiefly disturbed me. my uncle, as he gasp and toss in increase 
perturbation and with eyes that had now start open, seem not one but 
many men, and suggest a curious quality of alienage from himself. 

* * * * * 

all at once he commence to mutter, and i did not like the look of his 
mouth and teeth as he spoke. the words were at first indistinguishable, 
and then--with a tremendous start--i recognize something about them 
which fill me with icy fear till i recall the breadth of my uncle's 
education and the interminable translate he had made from 
anthropology and antiquarian articles in the _revue des deux mondes_. 
for the venerable elihu whipple was mutter _in french_, and the few 
phrase i could distinguish seem connected with the darkest myth he 
had ever adapt from the famous paris magazine. 

sudden a perspiration broke out on the sleeper's forehead, and he 
leap abrupt up, half awake. the jumble of france change to a cry in 
english, and the hoarse voice shout excitedly, "my breath, my breath!" 
then the awakening became complete, and with a subsidence of facial 
expression to the normal state my uncle seize my hand and began to 
relate a dream whose nucleus of significance i could only surmise with a 
kind of awe. 

he had, he said, float off from a very ordinary series of 
dream-pictures into a scene whose strange was related to nothing he 
had ever read. it was of this world, and yet not of it--a shadowy 
geometric confusion in which could be seen elements of familiar things 
in most unfamiliar and perturb combinations. there was a suggestion 
of queer disorder pictures superimpose one upon another; an 
arrangement in which the essential of time as well as of space seem 
dissolve and mixed in the most illogical fashion. in this kaleidoscopic 
vortex of phantasmal image were occasional snap-shots, if one might use 
the term, of singular clear but unaccountable heterogeneity. 

once my uncle thought he lay in a careless dug open pit, with a crowd 
of angry face frame by straggle locks and three-cornered hat 
frown down on him. again he seem to be in the interior of a 
house--an old house, apparently--but the detail and inhabitant were 
constant changing, and he could never be certain of the face or the 
furniture, or even of the room itself, since door and window seem in 
just as great a state of flux as the presumable more mobile objects. it 
was queer--damnably queer--and my uncle spoke almost sheepishly, as if 
half expect not to be believed, when he declared that of the strange 
face many had unmistakable borne the features of the harris family. and 
all the while there was a personal sensation of choking, as if some 
pervasive presence had spread itself through his body and sought to 
possess itself of his vital processes. 

i shudder at the thought of those vital processes, worn as they were 
by eighty-one years of continuous functioning, in conflict with unknown 
forces of which the youngest and strongest system might well be afraid; 
but in another moment reflect that dream are only dreams, and that 
these uncomfortable vision could be, at most, no more than my uncle's 
reaction to the investigate and expectations which had lately fill 
our mind to the exclusion of all else. 

conversation, also, soon tend to dispel my sense of strangeness; and 
in time i yield to my yawn and took my turn at slumber. my uncle 
seem now very wakeful, and welcome his period of watch even though 
the nightmare had arouse him far ahead of his allot two hours. 

sleep seize me quickly, and i was at once haunt with dream of the 
most disturb kind. i felt, in my visions, a cosmic and abysmal 
loneness; with hostility surge from all side upon some prison where i 
lay confined. i seem bound and gagged, and taunt by the echo 
yell of distant multitude who thirst for my blood. my uncle's face 
came to me with less pleasant association than in waking hours, and i 
recall many futile struggle and attempt to scream. it was not a 
pleasant sleep, and for a second i was not sorry for the echo shriek 
which clove through the barrier of dream and flung me to a sharp and 
startle awake in which every actual object before my eyes stood out 
with more than natural clear and reality. 


5 

i had been lie with my face away from my uncle's chair, so that in 
this sudden flash of awakening i saw only the door to the street, the 
window, and the wall and floor and ceiling toward the north of the room, 
all photograph with morbid vivid on my brain in a light bright 
than the glow of the fungi or the ray from the street outside. it was 
not a strong or even a fairly strong light; certainly not nearly strong 
enough to read an average book by. but it cast a shadow of myself and 
the cot on the floor, and had a yellowish, penetrating force that hint 
at things more potent than luminosity. this i perceive with unhealthy 
sharp despite the fact that two of my other senses were violent 
assailed. for on my ear rang the reverberation of that shocking 
scream, while my nostril revolt at the stench which fill the place. 
my mind, as alert as my senses, recognize the grave unusual; and 
almost automatic i leap up and turn about to grasp the 
destructive instrument which we had left train on the moldy spot 
before the fireplace. as i turned, i dread what i was to see; for the 
scream had been in my uncle's voice, and i knew not against what menace 
i should have to defend him and myself. 

yet after all, the sight was worse than i had dreaded. there are horrors 
beyond horrors, and this was one of those nuclei of all dream 
hideous which the cosmos save to blast an accursed and unhappy few. 
out of the fungus-ridden earth steam up a vaporous corpse-light, 
yellow and diseased, which bubble and lap to a gigantic height in 
vague outline half human and half monstrous, through which i could see 
the chimney and fireplace beyond. it was all eyes--wolfish and 
mocking--and the rugose insect-like head dissolve at the top to a thin 
stream of mist which curl putrid about and finally vanish up the 
chimney. i say that i saw this thing, but it is only in conscious 
retrospection that i ever definitely trace its damnable approach to 
form. at the time, it was to me only a seething, dim phosphorescent 
cloud of fungous loathsomeness, envelop and dissolve to an 
abhorrent plasticity the one object on which all my attention was 
focussed. that object was my uncle--the venerable elihu whipple--who 
with blacken and decay features leer and gibber at me, and 
reach out dripping claw to rend me in the fury which this horror had 
brought. 

it was a sense of routine which kept me from go mad. i had drill 
myself in preparation for the crucial moment, and blind training save 
me. recognize the bubble evil as no substance reach by matter or 
material chemistry, and therefore ignore the flame-thrower which 
loom on my left, i threw on the current of the crook tube apparatus, 
and focus toward that scene of immortal blasphemous the strongest 
ether radiation which man's art can arouse from the space and fluid 
of nature. there was a bluish haze and a frenzied sputtering, and the 
yellowish phosphorescence grew dim to my eyes. but i saw the dim 
was only that of contrast, and that the wave from the machine had no 
effect whatever. 

then, in the midst of that demoniac spectacle, i saw a fresh horror 
which brought cries to my lip and sent me fumble and staggering 
toward that unlock door to the quiet street, careless of what abnormal 
terror i loose upon the world, or what thought or judgment of men i 
brought down upon my head. in that dim blend of blue and yellow the form 
of my uncle had commence a nauseous liquefaction whose essence elude 
all description, and in which there play across his vanish face 
such change of identity as only madness can conceive. he was at once a 
devil and a multitude, a charnel-house and a pageant. lit by the mixed 
and uncertain beams, that gelatinous face assume a dozen--a score--a 
hundred--aspects; grinning, as it sank to the ground on a body that 
melt like tallow, in the caricature likeness of legion strange and 
yet not strange. 

i saw the features of the harris line, masculine and feminine, adult and 
infantile, and other features old and young, coarse and refined, 
familiar and unfamiliar. for a second there flash a degrade 
counterfeit of a miniature of poor mad rhoby harris that i had seen in 
the school of design museum, and another time i thought i caught the 
raw-boned image of mercy dexter as i recall her from a painting in 
carrington harris's house. it was frightful beyond conception; toward 
the last, when a curious blend of servant and baby visage flicker 
close to the fungous floor where a pool of greenish grease was 
spreading, it seem as though the shift features fought against 
themselves and strove to form contour like those of my uncle's kindly 
face. i like to think that he exist at that moment, and that he try 
to bid me farewell. it seem to me i hiccup a farewell from my own 
parch throat as i lurch out into the street; a thin stream of grease 
following me through the door to the rain-drenched sidewalk. 

* * * * * 

the rest is shadowy and monstrous. there was no one in the soaking 
street, and in all the world there was no one i dare tell. i walk 
aimless south past college hill and the athenæum, down hopkins street, 
and over the bridge to the business section where tall building seem 
to guard me as modern material things guard the world from ancient and 
unwholesome wonder. then gray dawn unfold wet from the east, 
silhouette the archaic hill and its venerable steeples, and beckon 
me to the place where my terrible work was still unfinished. and in the 
end i went, wet, hatless, and daze in the morning light, and enter 
that awful door in benefit street which i had left ajar, and which still 
swung cryptic in full sight of the early householder to whom i 
dare not speak. 

the grease was gone, for the moldy floor was porous. and in front of the 
fireplace was no vestige of the giant doubled-up form trace in niter. 
i look at the cot, the chairs, the instruments, my neglect hat, and 
the yellow straw hat of my uncle. dazed was uppermost, and i could 
scarcely recall what was dream and what was reality. then thought 
trickle back, and i knew that i had witness things more horrible than 
i had dreamed. 

sitting down, i try to conjecture as nearly as sanity would let me 
just what had happened, and how i might end the horror, if indeed it had 
been real. matter it seem not to be, nor ether, nor anything else 
conceivable by mortal mind. what, then, but some exotic _emanation_; 
some vampirish vapor such as exeter rustic tell of as lurk over 
certain churchyards? this i felt was the clue, and again i look at the 
floor before the fireplace where the mold and niter had taken strange 
forms. 

in ten minutes my mind was made up, and taking my hat i set out for 
home, where i bathed, ate, and gave by telephone an order for a pickax, 
a spade, a military gas-mask, and six carboy of sulfur acid, all to 
be deliver the next morning at the cellar door of the shun house in 
benefit street. after that i try to sleep; and failing, pass the 
hour in reading and in the composition of inane verse to counteract my 
mood. 

at eleven a. m. the next day i commence digging. it was sunny weather, 
and i was glad of that. i was still alone, for as much as i fear the 
unknown horror i sought, there was more fear in the thought of telling 
anybody. later i told harris only through sheer necessity, and because 
he had heard odd tale from old people which disposed him ever so little 
toward belief. as i turn up the stinking black earth in front of the 
fireplace, my spade cause a viscous yellow ichor to ooze from the 
white fungi which it severed, i tremble at the dubious thought of what 
i might uncover. some secret of inner earth are not good for mankind, 
and this seem to me one of them. 

my hand shook perceptibly, but still i delved; after a while standing in 
the large hole i had made. with the deepen of the hole, which was 
about six feet square, the evil smell increased; and i lost all doubt of 
my imminent contact with the hellish thing whose emanate had cursed 
the house for over a century and a half. i wonder what it would look 
like--what its form and substance would be, and how big it might have 
wax through long age of life-sucking. at length i climb out of the 
hole and disperse the heaped-up dirt, then arrange the great carboy 
of acid around and near two sides, so that when necessary i might empty 
them all down the aperture in quick succession. after that i dump 
earth only along the other two sides; working more slow and don my 
gas-mask as the smell grew. i was nearly unnerve at my proximity to a 
nameless thing at the bottom of a pit. 

sudden my spade struck something soft than earth. i shuddered, and 
made a motion as if to climb out of the hole, which was now as deep as 
my neck. then courage returned, and i scrape away more dirt in the 
light of the electric torch i had provided. the surface i uncover was 
fishy and glassy--a kind of semi-putrid congeal jelly with suggestion 
of translucency. i scrape further, and saw that it had form. there was 
a rift where a part of the substance was fold over. the expose area 
was huge and roughly cylindrical; like a mammoth soft blue-white 
stovepipe double in two, its largest part some two feet in diameter. 
still more i scraped, and then abrupt i leap out of the hole and 
away from the filthy thing; frantic unstop and tilt the heavy 
carboys, and precipitate their corrosive contents one after another 
down that charnel gulf and upon the unthinkable abnormal whose titan 
_elbow_ i had seen. 

* * * * * 

the blind maelstrom of greenish-yellow vapor which surge 
tempestuous up from that hole as the flood of acid descended, will 
never leave my memory. all along the hill people tell of the yellow day, 
when virulent and horrible fumes arose from the factory waste dump in 
the providence river, but i know how mistaken they are as to the source. 
they tell, too, of the hideous roar which at the same time came from 
some disorder water-pipe or gas main underground--but again i could 
correct them if i dared. it was unspeakable shocking, and i do not see 
how i live through it. i did faint after empty the fourth carboy, 
which i had to handle after the fumes had begun to penetrate my mask; 
but when i recover i saw that the hole was emit no fresh vapors. 

the two remain carboy i empty down without particular result, and 
after a time i felt it safe to shovel the earth back into the pit. it 
was twilight before i was done, but fear had gone out of the place. the 
damp was less fetid, and all the strange fungi had wither to a 
kind of harmless grayish powder which blew ash-like along the floor. one 
of earth's nethermost terror had perish for ever; and if there be a 
hell, it had received at last the demon soul of an unhallowed thing. and 
as i pat down the last spadeful of mold, i shed the first of the many 
tear with which i have paid unaffected tribute to my beloved uncle's 
memory. 

the next spring no more pale grass and strange weeds came up in the 
shun house's terrace garden, and shortly afterward carrington harris 
rent the place. it is still spectral, but its strange fascinate 
me, and i shall find mixed with my relief a queer regret when it is torn 
down to make way for a tawdry shop or vulgar apartment building. the 
barren old tree in the yard have begun to bear small, sweet apples, and 
last year the bird nest in their gnarled boughs. 


[illustration] 




transcriber's note: 

this etext was produce from _weird tales_ october 1937. extensive 
research did not uncover any evidence that the u.s. copyright on 
this publication was renewed. minor spelling and typographic 
error have been correct without note. 





end of project gutenberg's the shun house, by howard phillip lovecraft 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the shun house *** 

***** this file should be name 31469-8.txt or 31469-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/4/6/31469/ 

produce by greg weeks, stephen blundell and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
