project gutenberg's tale of terror and mystery, by arthur conan doyle 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: tale of terror and mystery 

author: arthur conan doyle 

posting date: october 10, 2008 [ebook #537] 
release date: may, 1996 
[last updated: december 8, 2011] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook tale of terror and mystery *** 




produce by charles keller. html version by al haines. 









tale of terror and mystery 


by 

sir arthur conan doyle 



contents 

tale of terror 

the horror of the heights 
the leather funnel 
the new catacomb 
the case of lady sannox 
the terror of blue john gap 
the brazil cat 


tale of mystery 

the lost special 
the beetle-hunter 
the man with the watches 
the japan box 
the black doctor 
the jew's breastplate 





tale of terror 



the horror of the heights 
preface 
the idea that the extraordinary narrative which has been call the 
joyce-armstrong fragment is an elaborate practical joke evolve by some 
unknown person, cursed by a pervert and sinister sense of humour, has 
now been abandoned by all who have examine the matter. the most 
macabre and imaginative of plot would hesitate before link his 
morbid fancies with the unquestioned and tragic fact which reinforce 
the statement. though the assertion contained in it are amazing and 
even monstrous, it is none the less force itself upon the general 
intelligence that they are true, and that we must readjust our idea to 
the new situation. this world of ours appear to be separate by a 
slight and precarious margin of safety from a most singular and 
unexpected danger. i will endeavour in this narrative, which 
reproduce the original document in its necessarily somewhat 
fragmentary form, to lay before the reader the whole of the fact up to 
date, preface my statement by saying that, if there be any who doubt 
the narrative of joyce-armstrong, there can be no question at all as to 
the fact concerning lieutenant myrtle, r. n., and mr. hay connor, who 
undoubted met their end in the manner described. 

the joyce-armstrong fragment was found in the field which is call 
lower haycock, lie one mile to the westward of the village of 
withyham, upon the kent and sussex border. it was on the 15th 
september last that an agriculture labourer, james flynn, in the 
employment of mathew dodd, farmer, of the chauntry farm, withyham, 
perceive a briar pipe lie near the footpath which skirt the hedge 
in lower haycock. a few pace farther on he picked up a pair of broken 
binocular glasses. finally, among some nettle in the ditch, he caught 
sight of a flat, canvas-backed book, which prove to be a note-book 
with detach leaves, some of which had come loose and were 
flutter along the base of the hedge. these he collected, but some, 
including the first, were never recovered, and leave a deplorable 
hiatus in this all-important statement. the note-book was taken by the 
labourer to his master, who in turn show it to dr. j. h. atherton, of 
hartfield. this gentleman at once recognize the need for an expert 
examination, and the manuscript was forward to the aero club in 
london, where it now lies. 

the first two page of the manuscript are missing. there is also one 
torn away at the end of the narrative, though none of these affect the 
general coherence of the story. it is conjecture that the missing 
opening is concerned with the record of mr. joyce-armstrong's 
qualifications as an aeronaut, which can be gather from other source 
and are admitted to be unsurpass among the air-pilots of england. 
for many years he has been look upon as among the most daring and the 
most intellectual of flying men, a combination which has enable him to 
both invent and test several new devices, including the common 
gyroscope attachment which is known by his name. the main body of the 
manuscript is written neat in ink, but the last few lines are in 
pencil and are so ragged as to be hardly legible--exactly, in fact, as 
they might be expect to appear if they were scribble off hurried 
from the seat of a moving aeroplane. there are, it may be added, 
several stains, both on the last page and on the outside cover which 
have been pronounced by the home office expert to be blood--probably 
human and certainly mammalian. the fact that something close 
resemble the organism of malaria was discover in this blood, and 
that joyce-armstrong is known to have suffer from intermittent fever, 
is a remarkable example of the new weapon which modern science has 
placed in the hand of our detectives. 

and now a word as to the personality of the author of this epoch-making 
statement. joyce-armstrong, according to the few friends who really 
knew something of the man, was a poet and a dreamer, as well as a 
mechanic and an inventor. he was a man of considerable wealth, much of 
which he had spent in the pursuit of his aeronautics hobby. he had 
four private aeroplane in his hangar near devizes, and is said to 
have made no few than one hundred and seventy ascent in the course 
of last year. he was a retiring man with dark moods, in which he would 
avoid the society of his fellows. captain dangerfield, who knew him 
better than anyone, say that there were times when his eccentricity 
threaten to develop into something more serious. his habit of 
carry a shot-gun with him in his aeroplane was one manifestation of 
it. 

another was the morbid effect which the fall of lieutenant myrtle had 
upon his mind. myrtle, who was attempt the height record, fell from 
an altitude of something over thirty thousand feet. horrible to 
narrate, his head was entire obliterated, though his body and limb 
preserve their configuration. at every gathering of airmen, 
joyce-armstrong, according to dangerfield, would ask, with an enigmatic 
smile: "and where, pray, is myrtle's head?" 

on another occasion after dinner, at the mess of the flying school on 
salisbury plain, he start a debate as to what will be the most 
permanent danger which airmen will have to encounter. have listen 
to successive opinion as to air-pockets, faulty construction, and 
over-banking, he end by shrug his shoulder and refuse to put 
forward his own views, though he gave the impression that they differ 
from any advanced by his companions. 

it is worth remark that after his own complete disappearance it was 
found that his private affair were arrange with a precision which may 
show that he had a strong premonition of disaster. with these 
essential explanation i will now give the narrative exactly as it 
stands, beginning at page three of the blood-soaked note-book: 

"nevertheless, when i dine at rheim with coselli and gustav raymond i 
found that neither of them was aware of any particular danger in the 
higher layer of the atmosphere. i did not actually say what was in my 
thoughts, but i got so near to it that if they had any corresponding 
idea they could not have fail to express it. but then they are two 
empty, vainglorious fellow with no thought beyond seeing their silly 
name in the newspaper. it is interesting to note that neither of them 
had ever been much beyond the twenty-thousand-foot level. of course, 
men have been higher than this both in balloon and in the ascent of 
mountains. it must be well above that point that the aeroplane enter 
the danger zone--always presume that my premonition are correct. 

"aeroplaning has been with us now for more than twenty years, and one 
might well ask: why should this peril be only revealing itself in our 
day? the answer is obvious. in the old days of weak engines, when a 
hundred horse-power gnome or green was considered ample for every need, 
the flight were very restricted. now that three hundred horse-power 
is the rule rather than the exception, visit to the upper layer have 
become easy and more common. some of us can remember how, in our 
youth, garro made a world-wide reputation by attain nineteen 
thousand feet, and it was considered a remarkable achievement to fly 
over the alps. our standard now has been immeasurable raised, and 
there are twenty high flight for one in former years. many of them 
have been undertaken with impunity. the thirty-thousand-foot level has 
been reach time after time with no discomfort beyond cold and asthma. 
what do this prove? a visitor might descend upon this planet a 
thousand times and never see a tiger. yet tiger exist, and if he 
chance to come down into a jungle he might be devoured. there are 
jungle of the upper air, and there are worse things than tiger which 
inhabit them. i believe in time they will map these jungle accurate 
out. even at the present moment i could name two of them. one of them 
lie over the pau-biarritz district of france. another is just over my 
head as i write here in my house in wiltshire. i rather think there is 
a third in the homburg-wiesbaden district. 

"it was the disappearance of the airmen that first set me thinking. of 
course, everyone said that they had fallen into the sea, but that did 
not satisfy me at all. first, there was verrier in france; his machine 
was found near bayonne, but they never got his body. there was the 
case of baxter also, who vanished, though his engine and some of the 
iron fix were found in a wood in leicestershire. in that case, dr. 
middleton, of amesbury, who was watch the flight with a telescope, 
declare that just before the cloud obscure the view he saw the 
machine, which was at an enormous height, sudden rise perpendicular 
upwards in a succession of jerk in a manner that he would have thought 
to be impossible. that was the last seen of baxter. there was a 
correspondence in the papers, but it never led to anything. there were 
several other similar cases, and then there was the death of hay 
connor. what a cackle there was about an unsolved mystery of the air, 
and what column in the halfpenny papers, and yet how little was ever 
done to get to the bottom of the business! he came down in a 
tremendous vol-plane from an unknown height. he never got off his 
machine and die in his pilot's seat. die of what? 'heart disease,' 
said the doctors. rubbish! hay connor's heart was as sound as mine 
is. what did venable say? venable was the only man who was at his 
side when he died. he said that he was shiver and look like a man 
who had been badly scared. 'died of fright,' said venables, but could 
not imagine what he was frightened about. only said one word to 
venables, which sound like 'monstrous.' they could make nothing of 
that at the inquest. but i could make something of it. monsters! that 
was the last word of poor harry hay connor. and he did die of fright, 
just as venable thought. 

"and then there was myrtle's head. do you really believe--does anybody 
really believe--that a man's head could be driven clean into his body 
by the force of a fall? well, perhaps it may be possible, but i, for 
one, have never believe that it was so with myrtle. and the grease 
upon his clothes--'all slimy with grease,' said somebody at the 
inquest. queer that nobody got thinking after that! i did--but, then, 
i had been thinking for a good long time. i've made three ascents--how 
dangerfield use to chaff me about my shot-gun--but i've never been 
high enough. now, with this new, light paul veroner machine and its 
one hundred and seventy-five robur, i should easily touch the thirty 
thousand tomorrow. i'll have a shot at the record. maybe i shall have 
a shot at something else as well. of course, it's dangerous. if a 
fellow wants to avoid danger he had best keep out of flying altogether 
and subside finally into flannel slipper and a dressing-gown. but 
i'll visit the air-jungle tomorrow--and if there's anything there i 
shall know it. if i return, i'll find myself a bit of a celebrity. if 
i don't this note-book may explain what i am try to do, and how i 
lost my life in do it. but no drivel about accident or mysteries, 
if you please. 

"i chose my paul veroner monoplane for the job. there's nothing like a 
monoplane when real work is to be done. beaumont found that out in very 
early days. for one thing it doesn't mind damp, and the weather looks 
as if we should be in the cloud all the time. it's a bonny little 
model and answer my hand like a tender-mouthed horse. the engine is a 
ten-cylinder rotary robur working up to one hundred and seventy-five. 
it has all the modern improvements--enclosed fuselage, high-curved 
landing skids, brakes, gyroscope steadiers, and three speeds, work 
by an alteration of the angle of the plane upon the venetian-blind 
principle. i took a shot-gun with me and a dozen cartridge fill 
with buck-shot. you should have seen the face of perkins, my old 
mechanic, when i direct him to put them in. i was dress like an 
arctic explorer, with two jersey under my overalls, thick sock inside 
my pad boots, a storm-cap with flaps, and my talc goggles. it was 
stifle outside the hangars, but i was go for the summit of the 
himalayas, and had to dress for the part. perkin knew there was 
something on and implore me to take him with me. perhaps i should if 
i were use the biplane, but a monoplane is a one-man show--if you 
want to get the last foot of life out of it. of course, i took an 
oxygen bag; the man who go for the altitude record without one will 
either be frozen or smothered--or both. 

"i had a good look at the planes, the rudder-bar, and the elevate 
lever before i got in. everything was in order so far as i could see. 
then i switch on my engine and found that she was running sweetly. 
when they let her go she rose almost at once upon the lowest speed. i 
circle my home field once or twice just to warm her up, and then with 
a wave to perkin and the others, i flatten out my plane and put her 
on her highest. she skim like a swallow down wind for eight or ten 
mile until i turn her nose up a little and she began to climb in a 
great spiral for the cloud-bank above me. it's all-important to rise 
slow and adapt yourself to the pressure as you go. 

"it was a close, warm day for an english september, and there was the 
hush and heavy of impending rain. now and then there came sudden 
puff of wind from the south-west--one of them so gusty and unexpected 
that it caught me nap and turn me half-round for an instant. i 
remember the time when gust and whirl and air-pockets use to be 
things of danger--before we learned to put an overmaster power into 
our engines. just as i reach the cloud-banks, with the altimeter 
marking three thousand, down came the rain. my word, how it poured! 
it drum upon my wings and lash against my face, blur my 
glasses so that i could hardly see. i got down on to a low speed, for 
it was painful to travel against it. as i got higher it became hail, 
and i had to turn tail to it. one of my cylinder was out of action--a 
dirty plug, i should imagine, but still i was rising steady with 
plenty of power. after a bit the trouble passed, whatever it was, and 
i heard the full, deep-throated purr--the ten singing as one. that's 
where the beauty of our modern silencer come in. we can at last 
control our engine by ear. how they squeal and squeak and sob when 
they are in trouble! all those cries for help were waste in the old 
days, when every sound was swallow up by the monstrous racket of the 
machine. if only the early aviator could come back to see the beauty 
and perfection of the mechanism which have been bought at the cost of 
their lives! 

"about nine-thirty i was near the clouds. down below me, all 
blur and shadow with rain, lay the vast expanse of salisbury 
plain. half a dozen flying machine were do hackwork at the 
thousand-foot level, look like little black swallow against the 
green background. i dare say they were wonder what i was do up 
in cloud-land. sudden a grey curtain drew across beneath me and the 
wet fold of vapours were swirl round my face. it was clammy cold 
and miserable. but i was above the hail-storm, and that was something 
gained. the cloud was as dark and thick as a london fog. in my 
anxiety to get clear, i cock her nose up until the automatic 
alarm-bell rang, and i actually began to slide backwards. my sop 
and dripping wings had made me heavy than i thought, but presently i 
was in lighter cloud, and soon had clear the first layer. there was 
a second--opal-coloured and fleecy--at a great height above my head, a 
white, unbroken ceiling above, and a dark, unbroken floor below, with 
the monoplane labour upwards upon a vast spiral between them. it is 
deadly lonely in these cloud-spaces. once a great flight of some small 
water-birds went past me, flying very fast to the westwards. the quick 
whir of their wings and their musical cry were cheery to my ear. i 
fancy that they were teal, but i am a wretched zoologist. now that we 
human have become bird we must really learn to know our brethren by 
sight. 

"the wind down beneath me whirl and sway the broad cloud-plain. 
once a great eddy form in it, a whirlpool of vapour, and through it, 
as down a funnel, i caught sight of the distant world. a large white 
biplane was passing at a vast depth beneath me. i fancy it was the 
morning mail service betwixt bristol and london. then the drift swirl 
inwards again and the great solitude was unbroken. 

"just after ten i touched the lower edge of the upper cloud-stratum. it 
consist of fine diaphanous vapour drift swift from the 
westwards. the wind had been steady rising all this time and it was 
now blow a sharp breeze--twenty-eight an hour by my gauge. already 
it was very cold, though my altimeter only marked nine thousand. the 
engine were working beautifully, and we went drone steady upwards. 
the cloud-bank was thick than i had expected, but at last it thin 
out into a golden mist before me, and then in an instant i had shot out 
from it, and there was an unclouded sky and a brilliant sun above my 
head--all blue and gold above, all shining silver below, one vast, 
glimmer plain as far as my eyes could reach. it was a quarter past 
ten o'clock, and the barograph needle pointed to twelve thousand eight 
hundred. up i went and up, my ear concentrated upon the deep purr 
of my motor, my eyes busy always with the watch, the revolution 
indicator, the petrol lever, and the oil pump. no wonder aviator are 
said to be a fearless race. with so many things to think of there is 
no time to trouble about oneself. about this time i noted how 
unreliable is the compass when above a certain height from earth. at 
fifteen thousand feet mine was point east and a point south. the 
sun and the wind gave me my true bearings. 

"i had hope to reach an eternal still in these high altitudes, but 
with every thousand feet of ascent the gale grew stronger. my machine 
groan and tremble in every joint and rivet as she face it, and 
swept away like a sheet of paper when i bank her on the turn, 
skim down wind at a greater pace, perhaps, than ever mortal man has 
moved. yet i had always to turn again and tack up in the wind's eye, 
for it was not merely a height record that i was after. by all my 
calculation it was above little wiltshire that my air-jungle lay, and 
all my labour might be lost if i struck the outer layer at some 
farther point. 

"when i reach the nineteen-thousand-foot level, which was about 
midday, the wind was so severe that i look with some anxiety to the 
stays of my wings, expect momentarily to see them snap or slacken. 
i even cast loose the parachute behind me, and fasten its hook into 
the ring of my leathern belt, so as to be ready for the worst. now was 
the time when a bit of scamp work by the mechanic is paid for by the 
life of the aeronaut. but she held together bravely. every cord and 
strut was hum and vibrate like so many harp-strings, but it was 
glorious to see how, for all the beating and the buffeting, she was 
still the conquer of nature and the mistress of the sky. there is 
surely something divine in man himself that he should rise so superior 
to the limitation which creation seem to impose--rise, too, by such 
unselfish, heroic devotion as this air-conquest has shown. talk of 
human degeneration! when has such a story as this been written in the 
annals of our race? 

"these were the thought in my head as i climb that monstrous, 
inclined plane with the wind sometimes beating in my face and sometimes 
whistle behind my ears, while the cloud-land beneath me fell away to 
such a distance that the fold and hummock of silver had all smooth 
out into one flat, shining plain. but sudden i had a horrible and 
unprecedented experience. i have known before what it is to be in what 
our neighbour have call a tourbillon, but never on such a scale as 
this. that huge, sweeping river of wind of which i have spoken had, as 
it appears, whirlpool within it which were as monstrous as itself. 
without a moment's warning i was drag sudden into the heart of 
one. i spun round for a minute or two with such velocity that i almost 
lost my senses, and then fell suddenly, left wing foremost, down the 
vacuum funnel in the centre. i drop like a stone, and lost nearly a 
thousand feet. it was only my belt that kept me in my seat, and the 
shock and breathless left me hanging half-insensible over the side 
of the fuselage. but i am always capable of a supreme effort--it is my 
one great merit as an aviator. i was conscious that the descent was 
slower. the whirlpool was a cone rather than a funnel, and i had come 
to the apex. with a terrific wrench, throw my weight all to one 
side, i level my plane and brought her head away from the wind. in 
an instant i had shot out of the eddy and was skim down the sky. 
then, shaken but victorious, i turn her nose up and began once more 
my steady grind on the upward spiral. i took a large sweep to avoid 
the danger-spot of the whirlpool, and soon i was safe above it. just 
after one o'clock i was twenty-one thousand feet above the sea-level. 
to my great joy i had top the gale, and with every hundred feet of 
ascent the air grew stiller. on the other hand, it was very cold, and 
i was conscious of that peculiar nausea which go with rarefaction of 
the air. for the first time i unscrew the mouth of my oxygen bag and 
took an occasional whiff of the glorious gas. i could feel it running 
like a cordial through my veins, and i was exhilarate almost to the 
point of drunkenness. i shout and sang as i soar upwards into the 
cold, still outer world. 

"it is very clear to me that the insensibility which came upon 
glaisher, and in a lesser degree upon coxwell, when, in 1862, they 
ascend in a balloon to the height of thirty thousand feet, was due to 
the extreme speed with which a perpendicular ascent is made. do it 
at an easy gradient and accustom oneself to the lessen barometric 
pressure by slow degrees, there are no such dreadful symptoms. at the 
same great height i found that even without my oxygen inhaler i could 
breathe without undue distress. it was bitter cold, however, and my 
thermometer was at zero, fahrenheit. at one-thirty i was nearly seven 
mile above the surface of the earth, and still ascend steadily. i 
found, however, that the rarefied air was give marked less support 
to my planes, and that my angle of ascent had to be considerably 
lower in consequence. it was already clear that even with my light 
weight and strong engine-power there was a point in front of me where i 
should be held. to make matter worse, one of my sparking-plugs was in 
trouble again and there was intermittent misfire in the engine. my 
heart was heavy with the fear of failure. 

"it was about that time that i had a most extraordinary experience. 
something whizz past me in a trail of smoke and exploded with a loud, 
hiss sound, send forth a cloud of steam. for the instant i could 
not imagine what had happened. then i remember that the earth is for 
ever being bombard by meteor stones, and would be hardly inhabit 
were they not in nearly every case turn to vapour in the outer layer 
of the atmosphere. here is a new danger for the high-altitude man, for 
two other pass me when i was near the forty-thousand-foot mark. 
i cannot doubt that at the edge of the earth's envelope the risk would 
be a very real one. 

"my barograph needle marked forty-one thousand three hundred when i 
became aware that i could go no farther. physically, the strain was 
not as yet greater than i could bear but my machine had reach its 
limit. the attenuate air gave no firm support to the wings, and the 
least tilt develop into side-slip, while she seem sluggish on her 
controls. possibly, had the engine been at its best, another thousand 
feet might have been within our capacity, but it was still misfiring, 
and two out of the ten cylinder appear to be out of action. if i 
had not already reach the zone for which i was searching then i 
should never see it upon this journey. but was it not possible that i 
had attain it? soar in circle like a monstrous hawk upon the 
forty-thousand-foot level i let the monoplane guide herself, and with 
my mannheim glass i made a careful observation of my surroundings. the 
heaven were perfectly clear; there was no indication of those danger 
which i had imagined. 

"i have said that i was soar in circles. it struck me sudden that 
i would do well to take a wide sweep and open up a new airtract. if 
the hunter enter an earth-jungle he would drive through it if he 
wish to find his game. my reasoning had led me to believe that the 
air-jungle which i had imagine lay somewhere over wiltshire. this 
should be to the south and west of me. i took my bearings from the 
sun, for the compass was hopeless and no trace of earth was to be 
seen--nothing but the distant, silver cloud-plain. however, i got my 
direction as best i might and kept her head straight to the mark. i 
reckon that my petrol supply would not last for more than another 
hour or so, but i could afford to use it to the last drop, since a 
single magnificent vol-plane could at any time take me to the earth. 

"suddenly i was aware of something new. the air in front of me had 
lost its crystal clearness. it was full of long, ragged wisp of 
something which i can only compare to very fine cigarette smoke. it 
hung about in wreath and coils, turning and twist slow in the 
sunlight. as the monoplane shot through it, i was aware of a faint 
taste of oil upon my lips, and there was a greasy scum upon the 
woodwork of the machine. some infinite fine organic matter appear 
to be suspend in the atmosphere. there was no life there. it was 
inchoate and diffuse, extend for many square acre and then fringe 
off into the void. no, it was not life. but might it not be the 
remains of life? above all, might it not be the food of life, of 
monstrous life, even as the humble grease of the ocean is the food for 
the mighty whale? the thought was in my mind when my eyes look 
upwards and i saw the most wonderful vision that ever man has seen. 
can i hope to convey it to you even as i saw it myself last thursday? 

"conceive a jelly-fish such as sail in our summer seas, bell-shaped 
and of enormous size--far larger, i should judge, than the dome of st. 
paul's. it was of a light pink colour veined with a delicate green, 
but the whole huge fabric so tenuous that it was but a fairy outline 
against the dark blue sky. it pulsate with a delicate and regular 
rhythm. from it there depend two long, drooping, green tentacles, 
which sway slow backwards and forwards. this gorgeous vision 
pass gently with noiseless dignity over my head, as light and fragile 
as a soap-bubble, and drift upon its stately way. 

"i had half-turned my monoplane, that i might look after this beautiful 
creature, when, in a moment, i found myself amidst a perfect fleet of 
them, of all sizes, but none so large as the first. some were quite 
small, but the majority about as big as an average balloon, and with 
much the same curvature at the top. there was in them a delicacy of 
texture and colouring which remind me of the finest venetian glass. 
pale shades of pink and green were the prevailing tints, but all had a 
lovely iridescence where the sun shimmer through their dainty forms. 
some hundred of them drift past me, a wonderful fairy squadron of 
strange unknown argosy of the sky--creatures whose form and 
substance were so attune to these pure heights that one could not 
conceive anything so delicate within actual sight or sound of earth. 

"but soon my attention was drawn to a new phenomenon--the serpent of 
the outer air. these were long, thin, fantastic coil of vapour-like 
material, which turn and twist with great speed, flying round and 
round at such a pace that the eyes could hardly follow them. some of 
these ghost-like creature were twenty or thirty feet long, but it was 
difficult to tell their girth, for their outline was so hazy that it 
seem to fade away into the air around them. these air-snakes were of 
a very light grey or smoke colour, with some dark lines within, which 
gave the impression of a definite organism. one of them whisk past 
my very face, and i was conscious of a cold, clammy contact, but their 
composition was so unsubstantial that i could not connect them with any 
thought of physical danger, any more than the beautiful bell-like 
creature which had precede them. there was no more solidity in their 
frames than in the floating spume from a broken wave. 

"but a more terrible experience was in store for me. floating 
downwards from a great height there came a purplish patch of vapour, 
small as i saw it first, but rapid enlarge as it approach me, 
until it appear to be hundred of square feet in size. though 
fashion of some transparent, jelly-like substance, it was none the 
less of much more definite outline and solid consist than anything 
which i had seen before. there were more traces, too, of a physical 
organization, especially two vast, shadowy, circular plate upon either 
side, which may have been eyes, and a perfectly solid white projection 
between them which was as curve and cruel as the beak of a vulture. 

"the whole aspect of this monster was formidable and threatening, and 
it kept change its colour from a very light mauve to a dark, angry 
purple so thick that it cast a shadow as it drift between my 
monoplane and the sun. on the upper curve of its huge body there were 
three great projection which i can only describe as enormous bubbles, 
and i was convinced as i look at them that they were charged with 
some extremely light gas which serve to buoy up the misshapen and 
semi-solid mass in the rarefied air. the creature move swift along, 
keeping pace easily with the monoplane, and for twenty mile or more it 
form my horrible escort, hover over me like a bird of prey which 
is wait to pounce. its method of progression--done so swift that 
it was not easy to follow--was to throw out a long, glutinous streamer 
in front of it, which in turn seem to draw forward the rest of the 
writhe body. so elastic and gelatinous was it that never for two 
successive minutes was it the same shape, and yet each change made it 
more threaten and loathsome than the last. 

"i knew that it meant mischief. every purple flush of its hideous body 
told me so. the vague, goggle eyes which were turn always upon me 
were cold and merciless in their viscid hatred. i dip the nose of 
my monoplane downwards to escape it. as i did so, as quick as a flash 
there shot out a long tentacle from this mass of floating blubber, and 
it fell as light and sinuous as a whip-lash across the front of my 
machine. there was a loud hiss as it lay for a moment across the hot 
engine, and it whisk itself into the air again, while the huge, flat 
body drew itself together as if in sudden pain. i dip to a 
vol-pique, but again a tentacle fell over the monoplane and was shorn 
off by the propeller as easily as it might have cut through a smoke 
wreath. a long, gliding, sticky, serpent-like coil came from behind and 
caught me round the waist, drag me out of the fuselage. i tore at 
it, my finger sink into the smooth, glue-like surface, and for an 
instant i disengaged myself, but only to be caught round the boot by 
another coil, which gave me a jerk that tilt me almost on to my back. 

"as i fell over i blaze off both barrel of my gun, though, indeed, it 
was like attack an elephant with a pea-shooter to imagine that any 
human weapon could cripple that mighty bulk. and yet i aim better 
than i knew, for, with a loud report, one of the great blister upon 
the creature's back exploded with the puncture of the buck-shot. it 
was very clear that my conjecture was right, and that these vast, clear 
bladder were distend with some lift gas, for in an instant the 
huge, cloud-like body turn sideways, writhe desperate to find its 
balance, while the white beak snap and gape in horrible fury. but 
already i had shot away on the steepest glide that i dare to attempt, 
my engine still full on, the flying propeller and the force of gravity 
shoot me downwards like an aerolite. far behind me i saw a dull, 
purplish smudge grow swift small and merge into the blue sky 
behind it. i was safe out of the deadly jungle of the outer air. 

"once out of danger i throttle my engine, for nothing tear a machine 
to pieces quick than running on full power from a height. it was a 
glorious, spiral vol-plane from nearly eight mile of altitude--first, 
to the level of the silver cloud-bank, then to that of the storm-cloud 
beneath it, and finally, in beating rain, to the surface of the earth. 
i saw the bristol channel beneath me as i broke from the clouds, but, 
have still some petrol in my tank, i got twenty mile inland before i 
found myself stranded in a field half a mile from the village of 
ashcombe. there i got three tin of petrol from a passing motor-car, 
and at ten minutes past six that evening i alight gently in my own 
home meadow at devizes, after such a journey as no mortal upon earth 
has ever yet taken and live to tell the tale. i have seen the beauty 
and i have seen the horror of the heights--and greater beauty or 
greater horror than that is not within the ken of man. 

"and now it is my plan to go once again before i give my result to the 
world. my reason for this is that i must surely have something to show 
by way of proof before i lay such a tale before my fellow-men. it is 
true that other will soon follow and will confirm what i have said, 
and yet i should wish to carry conviction from the first. those lovely 
iridescent bubble of the air should not be hard to capture. they 
drift slow upon their way, and the swift monoplane could intercept 
their leisurely course. it is likely enough that they would dissolve 
in the heavy layer of the atmosphere, and that some small heap of 
amorphous jelly might be all that i should bring to earth with me. and 
yet something there would surely be by which i could substantiate my 
story. yes, i will go, even if i run a risk by do so. these purple 
horrors would not seem to be numerous. it is probable that i shall not 
see one. if i do i shall dive at once. at the worst there is always 
the shot-gun and my knowledge of ..." 


here a page of the manuscript is unfortunately missing. on the next 
page is written, in large, straggle writing: 


"forty-three thousand feet. i shall never see earth again. they are 
beneath me, three of them. god help me; it is a dreadful death to die!" 


such in its entirety is the joyce-armstrong statement. of the man 
nothing has since been seen. pieces of his shatter monoplane have 
been picked up in the preserve of mr. budd-lushington upon the border 
of kent and sussex, within a few mile of the spot where the note-book 
was discovered. if the unfortunate aviator's theory is correct that 
this air-jungle, as he call it, exist only over the south-west of 
england, then it would seem that he had flee from it at the full speed 
of his monoplane, but had been overtaken and devour by these horrible 
creature at some spot in the outer atmosphere above the place where 
the grim relics were found. the picture of that monoplane skim 
down the sky, with the nameless terror flying as swift beneath it 
and cutting it off always from the earth while they gradual closed in 
upon their victim, is one upon which a man who value his sanity would 
prefer not to dwell. there are many, as i am aware, who still jeer at 
the fact which i have here set down, but even they must admit that 
joyce-armstrong has disappeared, and i would commend to them his own 
words: "this note-book may explain what i am try to do, and how i 
lost my life in do it. but no drivel about accident or mysteries, 
if you please." 



the leather funnel 

my friend, lionel dacre, live in the avenue de wagram, paris. his 
house was that small one, with the iron railing and grass plot in 
front of it, on the left-hand side as you pass down from the arc de 
triomphe. i fancy that it had been there long before the avenue was 
constructed, for the grey tile were stain with lichens, and the 
wall were mildew and discolour with age. it look a small house 
from the street, five window in front, if i remember right, but it 
deepen into a single long chamber at the back. it was here that 
dacre had that singular library of occult literature, and the fantastic 
curiosity which serve as a hobby for himself, and an amusement for 
his friends. a wealthy man of refined and eccentric tastes, he had 
spent much of his life and fortune in gathering together what was said 
to be a unique private collection of talmudic, cabalistic, and magical 
works, many of them of great rarity and value. his taste lean 
toward the marvellous and the monstrous, and i have heard that his 
experiment in the direction of the unknown have pass all the bounds 
of civilization and of decorum. to his english friends he never 
allude to such matters, and took the tone of the student and virtuoso; 
but a frenchman whose taste were of the same nature has assured me 
that the worst excesses of the black mass have been perpetrate in that 
large and lofty hall, which is line with the shelves of his books, and 
the case of his museum. 

dacre's appearance was enough to show that his deep interest in these 
psychic matter was intellectual rather than spiritual. there was no 
trace of ascetic upon his heavy face, but there was much mental 
force in his huge, dome-like skull, which curve upward from amongst 
his thin locks, like a snowpeak above its fringe of fir trees. his 
knowledge was greater than his wisdom, and his powers were far superior 
to his character. the small bright eyes, bury deep in his fleshy 
face, twinkle with intelligence and an unabated curiosity of life, but 
they were the eyes of a sensualist and an egotist. enough of the man, 
for he is dead now, poor devil, dead at the very time that he had made 
sure that he had at last discover the elixir of life. it is not with 
his complex character that i have to deal, but with the very strange 
and inexplicable incident which had its rise in my visit to him in the 
early spring of the year '82. 

i had known dacre in england, for my research in the assyrian room of 
the britain museum had been conduct at the time when he was 
endeavour to establish a mystic and esoteric meaning in the 
babylonian tablets, and this community of interests had brought us 
together. chance remark had led to daily conversation, and that to 
something verge upon friendship. i had promise him that on my next 
visit to paris i would call upon him. at the time when i was able to 
fulfil my compact i was living in a cottage at fontainebleau, and as 
the evening train were inconvenient, he ask me to spend the night in 
his house. 

"i have only that one spare couch," said he, point to a broad sofa 
in his large salon; "i hope that you will manage to be comfortable 
there." 

it was a singular bedroom, with its high wall of brown volumes, but 
there could be no more agreeable furniture to a bookworm like myself, 
and there is no scent so pleasant to my nostril as that faint, subtle 
reek which come from an ancient book. i assured him that i could 
desire no more charming chamber, and no more congenial surroundings. 

"if the fitting are neither convenient nor conventional, they are at 
least costly," said he, look round at his shelves. "i have expend 
nearly a quarter of a million of money upon these object which 
surround you. books, weapons, gems, carvings, tapestries, 
images--there is hardly a thing here which has not its history, and it 
is generally one worth telling." 

he was seat as he spoke at one side of the open fire-place, and i at 
the other. his reading-table was on his right, and the strong lamp 
above it ring it with a very vivid circle of golden light. a 
half-rolled palimpsest lay in the centre, and around it were many 
quaint articles of bric-a-brac. one of these was a large funnel, such 
as is use for filling wine casks. it appear to be made of black 
wood, and to be rim with discolour brass. 

"that is a curious thing," i remarked. "what is the history of that?" 

"ah!" said he, "it is the very question which i have had occasion to 
ask myself. i would give a good deal to know. take it in your hand 
and examine it." 

i did so, and found that what i had imagine to be wood was in reality 
leather, though age had dry it into an extreme hardness. it was a 
large funnel, and might hold a quart when full. the brass rim 
encircle the wide end, but the narrow was also tip with metal. 

"what do you make of it?" ask dacre. 

"i should imagine that it belong to some vintner or maltster in the 
middle ages," said i. "i have seen in england leathern drink 
flagon of the seventeenth century--'black jacks' as they were 
called--which were of the same colour and hardness as this filler." 

"i dare say the date would be about the same," said dacre, "and, no 
doubt, also, it was use for filling a vessel with liquid. if my 
suspicion are correct, however, it was a queer vintner who use it, 
and a very singular cask which was filled. do you observe nothing 
strange at the spout end of the funnel." 

as i held it to the light i observe that at a spot some five inch 
above the brass tip the narrow neck of the leather funnel was all 
haggle and scored, as if someone had notch it round with a blunt 
knife. only at that point was there any roughen of the dead black 
surface. 

"someone has try to cut off the neck." 

"would you call it a cut?" 

"it is torn and lacerated. it must have taken some strength to leave 
these mark on such tough material, whatever the instrument may have 
been. but what do you think of it? i can tell that you know more than 
you say." 

dacre smiled, and his little eyes twinkle with knowledge. 

"have you included the psychology of dream among your learned 
studies?" he asked. 

"i did not even know that there was such a psychology." 

"my dear sir, that shelf above the gem case is fill with volumes, 
from albertu magnu onward, which deal with no other subject. it is a 
science in itself." 

"a science of charlatans!" 

"the charlatan is always the pioneer. from the astrologer came the 
astronomer, from the alchemist the chemist, from the mesmerist the 
experimental psychologist. the quack of yesterday is the professor of 
tomorrow. even such subtle and elusive things as dream will in time 
be reduce to system and order. when that time come the research of 
our friends on the bookshelf yonder will no long be the amusement of 
the mystic, but the foundations of a science." 

"supposing that is so, what has the science of dream to do with a 
large, black, brass-rimmed funnel?" 

"i will tell you. you know that i have an agent who is always on the 
look-out for rarity and curiosity for my collection. some days ago 
he heard of a dealer upon one of the quai who had acquire some old 
rubbish found in a cupboard in an ancient house at the back of the rue 
mathurin, in the quartier latin. the dining-room of this old house is 
decorate with a coat of arms, chevrons, and bar rouge upon a field 
argent, which prove, upon inquiry, to be the shield of nichola de la 
reynie, a high official of king louis xiv. there can be no doubt that 
the other articles in the cupboard date back to the early days of that 
king. the inference is, therefore, that they were all the property of 
this nichola de la reynie, who was, as i understand, the gentleman 
specially concerned with the maintenance and execution of the draconic 
law of that epoch." 

"what then?" 

"i would ask you now to take the funnel into your hand once more and 
to examine the upper brass rim. can you make out any lettering upon 
it?" 

there were certainly some scratch upon it, almost obliterate by 
time. the general effect was of several letters, the last of which 
bore some resemblance to a b. 

"you make it a b?" 

"yes, i do." 

"so do i. in fact, i have no doubt whatever that it is a b." 

"but the nobleman you mention would have had r for his initial." 

"exactly! that's the beauty of it. he own this curious object, and 
yet he had someone else's initial upon it. why did he do this?" 

"i can't imagine; can you?" 

"well, i might, perhaps, guess. do you observe something drawn a 
little farther along the rim?" 

"i should say it was a crown." 

"it is undoubted a crown; but if you examine it in a good light, you 
will convince yourself that it is not an ordinary crown. it is a 
heraldic crown--a badge of rank, and it consist of an alternate of 
four pearl and strawberry leaves, the proper badge of a marquis. we 
may infer, therefore, that the person whose initial end in b was 
entitle to wear that coronet." 

"then this common leather filler belong to a marquis?" 

dacre gave a peculiar smile. 

"or to some member of the family of a marquis," said he. "so much we 
have clearly gather from this engrave rim." 

"but what has all this to do with dreams?" i do not know whether it 
was from a look upon dacre's face, or from some subtle suggestion in 
his manner, but a feeling of repulsion, of unreasoning horror, came 
upon me as i look at the gnarled old lump of leather. 

"i have more than once received important information through my 
dreams," said my companion in the didactic manner which he love to 
affect. "i make it a rule now when i am in doubt upon any material 
point to place the article in question beside me as i sleep, and to 
hope for some enlightenment. the process do not appear to me to be 
very obscure, though it has not yet received the blessing of orthodox 
science. according to my theory, any object which has been intimate 
associate with any supreme paroxysm of human emotion, whether it be 
joy or pain, will retain a certain atmosphere or association which it 
is capable of communicate to a sensitive mind. by a sensitive mind i 
do not mean an abnormal one, but such a train and educated mind as 
you or i possess." 

"you mean, for example, that if i slept beside that old sword upon the 
wall, i might dream of some bloody incident in which that very sword 
took part?" 

"an excellent example, for, as a matter of fact, that sword was use in 
that fashion by me, and i saw in my sleep the death of its owner, who 
perish in a brisk skirmish, which i have been unable to identify, but 
which occur at the time of the war of the frondists. if you think 
of it, some of our popular observance show that the fact has already 
been recognize by our ancestors, although we, in our wisdom, have 
class it among superstitions." 

"for example?" 

"well, the place of the bride's cake beneath the pillow in order that 
the sleeper may have pleasant dreams. that is one of several instance 
which you will find set forth in a small brochure which i am myself 
writing upon the subject. but to come back to the point, i slept one 
night with this funnel beside me, and i had a dream which certainly 
throw a curious light upon its use and origin." 

"what did you dream?" 

"i dreamed----" he paused, and an intent look of interest came over his 
massive face. "by jove, that's well thought of," said he. "this really 
will be an exceedingly interesting experiment. you are yourself a 
psychic subject--with nerves which respond readily to any impression." 

"i have never test myself in that direction." 

"then we shall test you tonight. might i ask you as a very great 
favour, when you occupy that couch tonight, to sleep with this old 
funnel placed by the side of your pillow?" 

the request seem to me a grotesque one; but i have myself, in my 
complex nature, a hunger after all which is bizarre and fantastic. i 
had not the faintest belief in dacre's theory, nor any hope for 
success in such an experiment; yet it amuse me that the experiment 
should be made. dacre, with great gravity, drew a small stand to the 
head of my settee, and placed the funnel upon it. then, after a short 
conversation, he wish me good night and left me. 


i sat for some little time smoking by the smoulder fire, and turning 
over in my mind the curious incident which had occurred, and the 
strange experience which might lie before me. sceptical as i was, there 
was something impressive in the assurance of dacre's manner, and my 
extraordinary surroundings, the huge room with the strange and often 
sinister object which were hung round it, struck solemnity into my 
soul. finally i undressed, and turning out the lamp, i lay down. 
after long toss i fell asleep. let me try to describe as accurate 
as i can the scene which came to me in my dreams. it stand out now in 
my memory more clearly than anything which i have seen with my waking 
eyes. there was a room which bore the appearance of a vault. four 
spandrel from the corner ran up to join a sharp, cup-shaped roof. 
the architecture was rough, but very strong. it was evidently part of 
a great building. 

three men in black, with curious, top-heavy, black velvet hats, sat in 
a line upon a red-carpeted dais. their face were very solemn and sad. 
on the left stood two long-gowned men with port-folios in their hands, 
which seem to be stuff with papers. upon the right, look toward 
me, was a small woman with blonde hair and singular, light-blue 
eyes--the eyes of a child. she was past her first youth, but could not 
yet be call middle-aged. her figure was inclined to stout and her 
bearing was proud and confident. her face was pale, but serene. it 
was a curious face, comely and yet feline, with a subtle suggestion of 
cruelty about the straight, strong little mouth and chubby jaw. she was 
drape in some sort of loose, white gown. beside her stood a thin, 
eager priest, who whisper in her ear, and continual raise a 
crucifix before her eyes. she turn her head and look fixedly past 
the crucifix at the three men in black, who were, i felt, her judges. 

as i gaze the three men stood up and said something, but i could 
distinguish no words, though i was aware that it was the central one 
who was speaking. they then swept out of the room, follow by the two 
men with the papers. at the same instant several rough-looking fellow 
in stout jerkin came bustle in and remove first the red carpet, and 
then the boards which form the dais, so as to entire clear the 
room. when this screen was remove i saw some singular articles of 
furniture behind it. one look like a bed with wooden roller at each 
end, and a winch handle to regulate its length. another was a wooden 
horse. there were several other curious objects, and a number of 
swinging cords which play over pulleys. it was not unlike a modern 
gymnasium. 

when the room had been clear there appear a new figure upon the 
scene. this was a tall, thin person clad in black, with a gaunt and 
austere face. the aspect of the man made me shudder. his clothes were 
all shining with grease and mottled with stains. he bore himself with a 
slow and impressive dignity, as if he took command of all things from 
the instant of his entrance. in spite of his rude appearance and 
sordid dress, it was now his business, his room, his to command. he 
carry a coil of light ropes over his left forearm. the lady look 
him up and down with a searching glance, but her expression was 
unchanged. it was confident--even defiant. but it was very different 
with the priest. his face was ghastly white, and i saw the moisture 
glisten and run on his high, slope forehead. he threw up his hand 
in prayer and he stoop continual to mutter frantic words in the 
lady's ear. 

the man in black now advanced, and taking one of the cords from his 
left arm, he bound the woman's hand together. she held them meek 
toward him as he did so. then he took her arm with a rough grip and 
led her toward the wooden horse, which was little higher than her 
waist. on to this she was lift and laid, with her back upon it, and 
her face to the ceiling, while the priest, quiver with horror, had 
rush out of the room. the woman's lip were moving rapidly, and 
though i could hear nothing i knew that she was praying. her feet hung 
down on either side of the horse, and i saw that the rough varlet in 
attendance had fasten cords to her ankle and secure the other end 
to iron ring in the stone floor. 

my heart sank within me as i saw these ominous preparations, and yet i 
was held by the fascination of horror, and i could not take my eyes 
from the strange spectacle. a man had enter the room with a bucket 
of water in either hand. another follow with a third bucket. they 
were laid beside the wooden horse. the second man had a wooden 
dipper--a bowl with a straight handle--in his other hand. this he gave 
to the man in black. at the same moment one of the varlet approach 
with a dark object in his hand, which even in my dream fill me with a 
vague feeling of familiarity. it was a leathern filler. with horrible 
energy he thrust it--but i could stand no more. my hair stood on end 
with horror. i writhed, i struggled, i broke through the bonds of 
sleep, and i burst with a shriek into my own life, and found myself 
lie shiver with terror in the huge library, with the moonlight 
flood through the window and throw strange silver and black 
tracery upon the opposite wall. oh, what a blessed relief to feel 
that i was back in the nineteenth century--back out of that mediaeval 
vault into a world where men had human heart within their bosoms. i 
sat up on my couch, tremble in every limb, my mind divide between 
thankful and horror. to think that such things were ever 
done--that they could be done without god striking the villain dead. 
was it all a fantasy, or did it really stand for something which had 
happen in the black, cruel days of the world's history? i sank my 
throb head upon my shake hands. and then, suddenly, my heart 
seem to stand still in my bosom, and i could not even scream, so 
great was my terror. something was advance toward me through the 
dark of the room. 

it is a horror coming upon a horror which break a man's spirit. i 
could not reason, i could not pray; i could only sit like a frozen 
image, and glare at the dark figure which was coming down the great 
room. and then it move out into the white lane of moonlight, and i 
breathe once more. it was dacre, and his face show that he was as 
frightened as myself. 

"was that you? for god's sake what's the matter?" he ask in a husky 
voice. 

"oh, dacre, i am glad to see you! i have been down into hell. it was 
dreadful." 

"then it was you who screamed?" 

"i dare say it was." 

"it rang through the house. the servant are all terrified." he struck 
a match and lit the lamp. "i think we may get the fire to burn up 
again," he added, throw some log upon the embers. "good god, my 
dear chap, how white you are! you look as if you had seen a ghost." 

"so i have--several ghosts." 

"the leather funnel has acted, then?" 

"i wouldn't sleep near the infernal thing again for all the money you 
could offer me." 

dacre chuckled. 

"i expect that you would have a lively night of it," said he. "you 
took it out of me in return, for that scream of yours wasn't a very 
pleasant sound at two in the morning. i suppose from what you say that 
you have seen the whole dreadful business." 

"what dreadful business?" 

"the torture of the water--the 'extraordinary question,' as it was 
call in the genial days of 'le roi soleil.' did you stand it out to 
the end?" 

"no, thank god, i awoke before it really began." 

"ah! it is just as well for you. i held out till the third bucket. 
well, it is an old story, and they are all in their grave now, anyhow, 
so what do it matter how they got there? i suppose that you have no 
idea what it was that you have seen?" 

"the torture of some criminal. she must have been a terrible 
malefactor indeed if her crime are in proportion to her penalty." 

"well, we have that small consolation," said dacre, wrapping his 
dressing-gown round him and crouch close to the fire. "they were in 
proportion to her penalty. that is to say, if i am correct in the 
lady's identity." 

"how could you possibly know her identity?" 

for answer dacre took down an old vellum-covered volume from the shelf. 

"just listen to this," said he; "it is in the france of the seventeenth 
century, but i will give a rough translate as i go. you will judge 
for yourself whether i have solve the riddle or not. 

"'the prisoner was brought before the grand chambers and tournelle of 
parliament, sitting as a court of justice, charged with the murder of 
master dreux d'aubray, her father, and of her two brothers, mm. 
d'aubray, one being civil lieutenant, and the other a counsellor of 
parliament. in person it seem hard to believe that she had really 
done such wicked deeds, for she was of a mild appearance, and of short 
stature, with a fair skin and blue eyes. yet the court, have found 
her guilty, condemn her to the ordinary and to the extraordinary 
question in order that she might be forced to name her accomplices, 
after which she should be carry in a cart to the place de greve, 
there to have her head cut off, her body being afterwards burn and 
her ashes scattered to the winds.' 

"the date of this entry is july 16, 1676." 

"it is interesting," said i, "but not convincing. how do you prove the 
two women to be the same?" 

"i am coming to that. the narrative go on to tell of the woman's 
behaviour when questioned. 'when the executioner approach her she 
recognize him by the cords which he held in his hands, and she at once 
held out her own hand to him, look at him from head to foot without 
utter a word.' how's that?" 

"yes, it was so." 

"'she gaze without wince upon the wooden horse and ring which had 
twist so many limb and cause so many shriek of agony. when her 
eyes fell upon the three pail of water, which were all ready for her, 
she said with a smile, "all that water must have been brought here for 
the purpose of drown me, monsieur. you have no idea, i trust, of 
making a person of my small stature swallow it all."' shall i read the 
detail of the torture?" 

"no, for heaven's sake, don't." 

"here is a sentence which must surely show you that what is here 
record is the very scene which you have gaze upon tonight: 'the good 
abbe pirot, unable to contemplate the agony which were suffer by 
his penitent, had hurried from the room.' do that convince you?" 

"it do entirely. there can be no question that it is indeed the same 
event. but who, then, is this lady whose appearance was so attractive 
and whose end was so horrible?" 

for answer dacre came across to me, and placed the small lamp upon the 
table which stood by my bed. lift up the ill-omened filler, he 
turn the brass rim so that the light fell full upon it. seen in this 
way the engraving seem clear than on the night before. 

"we have already agree that this is the badge of a marquis or of a 
marquise," said he. "we have also settled that the last letter is b." 

"it is undoubted so." 

"i now suggest to you that the other letters from left to right are, m, 
m, a small d, a, a small d, and then the final b." 

"yes, i am sure that you are right. i can make out the two small d's 
quite plainly." 

"what i have read to you tonight," said dacre, "is the official record 
of the trial of marie madeleine d'aubray, marquise de brinvilliers, one 
of the most famous poison and murder of all time." 

i sat in silence, overwhelm at the extraordinary nature of the 
incident, and at the complete of the proof with which dacre had 
expose its real meaning. in a vague way i remember some detail of 
the woman's career, her unbridled debauchery, the cold-blooded and 
protract torture of her sick father, the murder of her brother for 
motive of petty gain. i recollect also that the bravery of her end 
had done something to atone for the horror of her life, and that all 
paris had sympathize with her last moments, and blessed her as a 
martyr within a few days of the time when they had cursed her as a 
murderess. one objection, and one only, occur to my mind. 

"how came her initial and her badge of rank upon the filler? surely 
they did not carry their mediaeval homage to the nobility to the point 
of decorate instrument of torture with their titles?" 

"i was puzzle with the same point," said dacre, "but it admit of a 
simple explanation. the case excited extraordinary interest at the 
time, and nothing could be more natural than that la reynie, the head 
of the police, should retain this filler as a grim souvenir. it was 
not often that a marchioness of france underwent the extraordinary 
question. that he should engrave her initial upon it for the 
information of other was surely a very ordinary proceeding upon his 
part." 

"and this?" i asked, point to the mark upon the leathern neck. 

"she was a cruel tigress," said dacre, as he turn away. "i think it 
is evident that like other tigress her teeth were both strong and 
sharp." 



the new catacomb 

"look here, burger," said kennedy, "i do wish that you would confide in 
me." 

the two famous student of roman remains sat together in kennedy's 
comfortable room overlook the corso. the night was cold, and they 
had both pull up their chair to the unsatisfactory italy stove 
which threw out a zone of stuffy rather than of warmth. outside 
under the bright winter stars lay the modern rome, the long, double 
chain of the electric lamps, the brilliant light cafes, the rush 
carriages, and the dense throng upon the footpaths. but inside, in the 
sumptuous chamber of the rich young english archaeologist, there was 
only old rome to be seen. cracked and timeworn frieze hung upon the 
walls, grey old bust of senator and soldier with their fight 
head and their hard, cruel face peer out from the corners. on the 
centre table, amidst a litter of inscriptions, fragments, and 
ornaments, there stood the famous reconstruction by kennedy of the 
baths of caracalla, which excited such interest and admiration when it 
was exhibit in berlin. amphorae hung from the ceiling, and a litter 
of curiosity strew the rich red turkey carpet. and of them all 
there was not one which was not of the most unimpeachable authenticity, 
and of the utmost rarity and value; for kennedy, though little more 
than thirty, had a europe reputation in this particular branch of 
research, and was, moreover, provided with that long purse which either 
prove to be a fatal handicap to the student's energies, or, if his 
mind is still true to its purpose, give him an enormous advantage in 
the race for fame. kennedy had often been seduce by whim and pleasure 
from his studies, but his mind was an incisive one, capable of long and 
concentrated effort which end in sharp reaction of sensuous 
languor. his handsome face, with its high, white forehead, its 
aggressive nose, and its somewhat loose and sensual mouth, was a fair 
index of the compromise between strength and weakness in his nature. 

of a very different type was his companion, julius burger. he came of 
a curious blend, a germany father and an italy mother, with the robust 
quality of the north mingle strange with the soft graces of the 
south. blue teutonic eyes lighten his sun-browned face, and above 
them rose a square, massive forehead, with a fringe of close yellow 
curl lie round it. his strong, firm jaw was clean-shaven, and his 
companion had frequent remark how much it suggest those old roman 
bust which peer out from the shadow in the corner of his chamber. 
under its bluff germany strength there lay always a suggestion of 
italy subtlety, but the smile was so honest, and the eyes so frank, 
that one understood that this was only an indication of his ancestry, 
with no actual bearing upon his character. in age and in reputation, 
he was on the same level as his english companion, but his life and his 
work had both been far more arduous. twelve years before, he had come 
as a poor student to rome, and had live ever since upon some small 
endowment for research which had been award to him by the university 
of bonn. painfully, slowly, and doggedly, with extraordinary tenacity 
and single-mindedness, he had climb from rung to rung of the ladder 
of fame, until now he was a member of the berlin academy, and there was 
every reason to believe that he would shortly be promote to the chair 
of the greatest of germany universities. but the singleness of purpose 
which had brought him to the same high level as the rich and brilliant 
englishman, had cause him in everything outside their work to stand 
infinite below him. he had never found a pause in his study in 
which to cultivate the social graces. it was only when he spoke of his 
own subject that his face was fill with life and soul. at other 
times he was silent and embarrassed, too conscious of his own 
limitation in large subjects, and impatient of that small talk which 
is the conventional refuge of those who have no thought to express. 

and yet for some years there had been an acquaintanceship which 
appear to be slow ripen into a friendship between these two very 
different rivals. the base and origin of this lay in the fact that in 
their own study each was the only one of the younger men who had 
knowledge and enthusiasm enough to properly appreciate the other. 
their common interests and pursuit had brought them together, and each 
had been attract by the other's knowledge. and then gradual 
something had been add to this. kennedy had been amuse by the 
frank and simplicity of his rival, while burg in turn had been 
fascinate by the brilliancy and vivace which had made kennedy such a 
favourite in roman society. i say "had," because just at the moment 
the young englishman was somewhat under a cloud. a love-affair, the 
detail of which had never quite come out, had indicate a 
heartless and callous upon his part which shock many of his 
friends. but in the bachelor circle of student and artist in which 
he prefer to move there is no very rigid code of honour in such 
matters, and though a head might be shaken or a pair of shoulder 
shrug over the flight of two and the return of one, the general 
sentiment was probably one of curiosity and perhaps of envy rather than 
of reprobation. 

"look here, burger," said kennedy, look hard at the placid face of 
his companion, "i do wish that you would confide in me." 

as he spoke he wave his hand in the direction of a rug which lay upon 
the floor. on the rug stood a long, shallow fruit-basket of the light 
wicker-work which is use in the campagna, and this was heap with a 
litter of objects, inscribe tiles, broken inscriptions, cracked 
mosaics, torn papyri, rusty metal ornaments, which to the uninitiated 
might have seem to have come straight from a dustman's bin, but which 
a specialist would have speedy recognize as unique of their kind. 
the pile of odds and end in the flat wicker-work basket supply 
exactly one of those missing links of social development which are of 
such interest to the student. it was the germany who had brought them 
in, and the englishman's eyes were hungry as he look at them. 

"i won't interfere with your treasure-trove, but i should very much 
like to hear about it," he continued, while burg very deliberate 
lit a cigar. "it is evidently a discovery of the first importance. 
these inscription will make a sensation throughout europe." 

"for every one here there are a million there!" said the german. 
"there are so many that a dozen savant might spend a lifetime over 
them, and build up a reputation as solid as the castle of st. angelo." 

kennedy sat thinking with his fine forehead wrinkle and his finger 
play with his long, fair moustache. 

"you have given yourself away, burger!" said he at last. "your words 
can only apply to one thing. you have discover a new catacomb." 

"i had no doubt that you had already come to that conclusion from an 
examination of these objects." 

"well, they certainly appear to indicate it, but your last remark 
make it certain. there is no place except a catacomb which could 
contain so vast a store of relics as you describe." 

"quite so. there is no mystery about that. i have discover a new 
catacomb." 

"where?" 

"ah, that is my secret, my dear kennedy. suffice it that it is so 
situated that there is not one chance in a million of anyone else 
coming upon it. its date is different from that of any known catacomb, 
and it has been reserved for the burial of the highest christians, so 
that the remains and the relics are quite different from anything which 
has ever been seen before. if i was not aware of your knowledge and of 
your energy, my friend, i would not hesitate, under the pledge of 
secrecy, to tell you everything about it. but as it is i think that i 
must certainly prepare my own report of the matter before i expose 
myself to such formidable competition." 

kennedy love his subject with a love which was almost a mania--a love 
which held him true to it, amidst all the distraction which come to a 
wealthy and dissipated young man. he had ambition, but his ambition 
was secondary to his mere abstract joy and interest in everything which 
concerned the old life and history of the city. he yearn to see this 
new underworld which his companion had discovered. 

"look here, burger," said he, earnestly, "i assure you that you can 
trust me most implicit in the matter. nothing would induce me to put 
pen to paper about anything which i see until i have your express 
permission. i quite understand your feeling and i think it is most 
natural, but you have really nothing whatever to fear from me. on the 
other hand, if you don't tell me i shall make a systematic search, and 
i shall most certainly discover it. in that case, of course, i should 
make what use i like of it, since i should be under no obligation to 
you." 

burg smile thoughtful over his cigar. 

"i have noticed, friend kennedy," said he, "that when i want 
information over any point you are not always so ready to supply it." 

"when did you ever ask me anything that i did not tell you? you 
remember, for example, my give you the material for your paper about 
the temple of the vestals." 

"ah, well, that was not a matter of much importance. if i were to 
question you upon some intimate thing would you give me an answer, i 
wonder! this new catacomb is a very intimate thing to me, and i should 
certainly expect some sign of confidence in return." 

"what you are driving at i cannot imagine," said the englishman, "but 
if you mean that you will answer my question about the catacomb if i 
answer any question which you may put to me i can assure you that i 
will certainly do so." 

"well, then," said burger, leaning luxurious back in his settee, and 
puff a blue tree of cigar-smoke into the air, "tell me all about 
your relations with miss mary saunderson." 

kennedy sprang up in his chair and glare angry at his impassive 
companion. 

"what the devil do you mean?" he cried. "what sort of a question is 
this? you may mean it as a joke, but you never made a worse one." 

"no, i don't mean it as a joke," said burger, simply. "i am really 
rather interested in the detail of the matter. i don't know much 
about the world and women and social life and that sort of thing, and 
such an incident has the fascination of the unknown for me. i know 
you, and i knew her by sight--i had even spoken to her once or twice. 
i should very much like to hear from your own lip exactly what it was 
which occur between you." 

"i won't tell you a word." 

"that's all right. it was only my whim to see if you would give up a 
secret as easily as you expect me to give up my secret of the new 
catacomb. you wouldn't, and i didn't expect you to. but why should you 
expect otherwise of me? there's saint john's clock striking ten. it 
is quite time that i was go home." 

"no; wait a bit, burger," said kennedy; "this is really a ridiculous 
caprice of yours to wish to know about an old love-affair which has 
burn out month ago. you know we look upon a man who kiss and 
tell as the greatest coward and villain possible." 

"certainly," said the german, gathering up his basket of curiosities, 
"when he tell anything about a girl which is previous unknown he 
must be so. but in this case, as you must be aware, it was a public 
matter which was the common talk of rome, so that you are not really 
do miss mary saunderson any injury by discuss her case with me. 
but still, i respect your scruples; and so good night!" 

"wait a bit, burger," said kennedy, lay his hand upon the other's 
arm; "i am very keen upon this catacomb business, and i can't let it 
drop quite so easily. would you mind ask me something else in 
return--something not quite so eccentric this time?" 

"no, no; you have refused, and there is an end of it," said burger, 
with his basket on his arm. "no doubt you are quite right not to 
answer, and no doubt i am quite right also--and so again, my dear 
kennedy, good night!" 

the englishman watch burg cross the room, and he had his hand on 
the handle of the door before his host sprang up with the air of a man 
who is making the best of that which cannot be helped. 

"hold on, old fellow," said he; "i think you are behave in a most 
ridiculous fashion; but still; if this is your condition, i suppose 
that i must submit to it. i hate saying anything about a girl, but, as 
you say, it is all over rome, and i don't suppose i can tell you 
anything which you do not know already. what was it you want to 
know?" 

the germany came back to the stove, and, lay down his basket, he sank 
into his chair once more. 

"may i have another cigar?" said he. "thank you very much! i never 
smoke when i work, but i enjoy a chat much more when i am under the 
influence of tobacco. now, as regards this young lady, with whom you 
had this little adventure. what in the world has become of her?" 

"she is at home with her own people." 

"oh, really--in england?" 

"yes." 

"what part of england--london?" 

"no, twickenham." 

"you must excuse my curiosity, my dear kennedy, and you must put it 
down to my ignorance of the world. no doubt it is quite a simple thing 
to persuade a young lady to go off with you for three week or so, and 
then to hand her over to her own family at--what did you call the 
place?" 

"twickenham." 

"quite so--at twickenham. but it is something so entire outside my 
own experience that i cannot even imagine how you set about it. for 
example, if you had love this girl your love could hardly disappear in 
three weeks, so i presume that you could not have love her at all. 
but if you did not love her why should you make this great scandal 
which has damage you and ruin her?" 

kennedy look moody into the red eye of the stove. 

"that's a logical way of look at it, certainly," said he. "love is a 
big word, and it represent a good many different shades of feeling. i 
like her, and--well, you say you've seen her--you know how charming 
she could look. but still i am willing to admit, look back, that i 
could never have really love her." 

"then, my dear kennedy, why did you do it?" 

"the adventure of the thing had a great deal to do with it." 

"what! you are so fond of adventures!" 

"where would the variety of life be without them? it was for an 
adventure that i first began to pay my attention to her. i've chase 
a good deal of game in my time, but there's no chase like that of a 
pretty woman. there was the piquant difficulty of it also, for, as she 
was the companion of lady emily rood, it was almost impossible to see 
her alone. on the top of all the other obstacle which attract me, i 
learned from her own lip very early in the proceedings that she was 
engaged." 

"mein gott! to whom?" 

"she mention no names." 

"i do not think that anyone know that. so that made the adventure 
more alluring, did it?" 

"well, it did certainly give a spice to it. don't you think so?" 

"i tell you that i am very ignorant about these things." 

"my dear fellow, you can remember that the apple you stole from your 
neighbour's tree was always sweet than that which fell from your own. 
and then i found that she care for me." 

"what--at once?" 

"oh, no, it took about three month of sap and mining. but at last 
i won her over. she understood that my judicial separation from my 
wife made it impossible for me to do the right thing by her--but she 
came all the same, and we had a delightful time, as long as it lasted." 

"but how about the other man?" 

kennedy shrug his shoulders. 

"i suppose it is the survival of the fittest," said he. "if he had 
been the better man she would not have desert him. let's drop the 
subject, for i have had enough of it!" 

"only one other thing. how did you get rid of her in three weeks?" 

"well, we had both cool down a bit, you understand. she absolutely 
refused, under any circumstances, to come back to face the people she 
had known in rome. now, of course, rome is necessary to me, and i was 
already pine to be back at my work--so there was one obvious cause of 
separation. then, again, her old father turn up at the hotel in 
london, and there was a scene, and the whole thing became so unpleasant 
that really--though i miss her dreadfully at first--i was very glad 
to slip out of it. now, i rely upon you not to repeat anything of what 
i have said." 

"my dear kennedy, i should not dream of repeating it. but all that you 
say interests me very much, for it give me an insight into your way of 
look at things, which is entire different from mine, for i have 
seen so little of life. and now you want to know about my new 
catacomb. there's no use my try to describe it, for you would never 
find it by that. there is only one thing, and that is for me to take 
you there." 

"that would be splendid." 

"when would you like to come?" 

"the soon the better. i am all impatience to see it." 

"well, it is a beautiful night--though a trifle cold. suppose we start 
in an hour. we must be very careful to keep the matter to ourselves. 
if anyone saw us hunting in couple they would suspect that there was 
something go on." 

"we can't be too cautious," said kennedy. "is it far?" 

"some miles." 

"not too far to walk?" 

"oh, no, we could walk there easily." 

"we had better do so, then. a cabman's suspicion would be arouse if 
he drop us both at some lonely spot in the dead of the night." 

"quite so. i think it would be best for us to meet at the gate of the 
appian way at midnight. i must go back to my lodgings for the match 
and candle and things." 

"all right, burger! i think it is very kind of you to let me into this 
secret, and i promise you that i will write nothing about it until you 
have publish your report. good-bye for the present! you will find me 
at the gate at twelve." 

the cold, clear air was fill with the musical chime from that city 
of clock as burger, wrap in an italy overcoat, with a lantern 
hanging from his hand, walk up to the rendezvous. kennedy step out 
of the shadow to meet him. 

"you are ardent in work as well as in love!" said the german, laughing. 

"yes; i have been wait here for nearly half an hour." 

"i hope you left no clue as to where we were going." 

"not such a fool! by jove, i am chill to the bone! come on, burger, 
let us warm ourselves by a spurt of hard walking." 

their footstep sound loud and crisp upon the rough stone paving of 
the disappointing road which is all that is left of the most famous 
highway of the world. a peasant or two go home from the wine-shop, 
and a few cart of country produce coming up to rome, were the only 
things which they met. they swung along, with the huge tomb loom 
up through the dark upon each side of them, until they had come as 
far as the catacomb of st. calistus, and saw against a rising moon the 
great circular bastion of cecilia metella in front of them. then 
burg stop with his hand to his side. 

"your leg are long than mine, and you are more accustomed to 
walking," said he, laughing. "i think that the place where we turn off 
is somewhere here. yes, this is it, round the corner of the trattoria. 
now, it is a very narrow path, so perhaps i had better go in front and 
you can follow." 

he had lit his lantern, and by its light they were enable to follow a 
narrow and devious track which wound across the marsh of the 
campagna. the great aqueduct of old rome lay like a monstrous 
caterpillar across the moonlit landscape, and their road led them under 
one of its huge arches, and past the circle of crumble brick which 
mark the old arena. at last burg stop at a solitary wooden 
cow-house, and he drew a key from his pocket. "surely your catacomb is 
not inside a house!" cry kennedy. 

"the entrance to it is. that is just the safeguard which we have 
against anyone else discover it." 

"does the proprietor know of it?" 

"not he. he had found one or two object which made me almost certain 
that his house was built on the entrance to such a place. so i rent 
it from him, and did my excavation for myself. come in, and shut the 
door behind you." 

it was a long, empty building, with the manger of the cow along one 
wall. burg put his lantern down on the ground, and shade its light 
in all directions save one by drape his overcoat round it. 

"it might excite remark if anyone saw a light in this lonely place," 
said he. "just help me to move this boarding." 

the flooring was loose in the corner, and plank by plank the two 
savant raise it and lean it against the wall. below there was a 
square aperture and a stair of old stone steps which led away down into 
the bowels of the earth. 

"be careful!" cry burger, as kennedy, in his impatience, hurried down 
them. "it is a perfect rabbits'-warren below, and if you were once to 
lose your way there the chance would be a hundred to one against your 
ever coming out again. wait until i bring the light." 

"how do you find your own way if it is so complicated?" 

"i had some very narrow escape at first, but i have gradual learned 
to go about. there is a certain system to it, but it is one which a 
lost man, if he were in the dark, could not possibly find out. even 
now i always spin out a ball of string behind me when i am go far 
into the catacomb. you can see for yourself that it is difficult, but 
every one of these passage divide and subdivide a dozen times before 
you go a hundred yards." 

they had descended some twenty feet from the level of the byre, and 
they were standing now in a square chamber cut out of the soft tufa. 
the lantern cast a flicker light, bright below and dim above, over 
the cracked brown walls. in every direction were the black opening of 
passage which radiate from this common centre. 

"i want you to follow me closely, my friend," said burger. "do not 
loiter to look at anything upon the way, for the place to which i will 
take you contain all that you can see, and more. it will save time 
for us to go there direct." 

he led the way down one of the corridors, and the englishman follow 
close at his heels. every now and then the passage bifurcated, but 
burg was evidently following some secret mark of his own, for he 
neither stop nor hesitated. everywhere along the walls, packed like 
the berth upon an emigrant ship, lay the christian of old rome. the 
yellow light flicker over the shrivel features of the mummies, and 
gleam upon round skull and long, white armbone cross over 
fleshless chests. and everywhere as he pass kennedy look with 
wistful eyes upon inscriptions, funeral vessels, pictures, vestments, 
utensils, all lie as pious hand had placed them so many century 
ago. it was apparent to him, even in those hurried, passing glances, 
that this was the earliest and finest of the catacombs, contain such 
a storehouse of roman remains as had never before come at one time 
under the observation of the student. 

"what would happen if the light went out?" he asked, as they hurried 
onwards. 

"i have a spare candle and a box of match in my pocket. by the way, 
kennedy, have you any matches?" 

"no; you had better give me some." 

"oh, that is all right. there is no chance of our separating." 

"how far are we going? it seem to me that we have walk at least a 
quarter of a mile." 

"more than that, i think. there is really no limit to the tombs--at 
least, i have never been able to find any. this is a very difficult 
place, so i think that i will use our ball of string." 

he fasten one end of it to a project stone and he carry the coil 
in the breast of his coat, pay it out as he advanced. kennedy saw 
that it was no unnecessary precaution, for the passage had become more 
complex and tortuous than ever, with a perfect network of intersect 
corridors. but these all end in one large circular hall with a 
square pedestal of tufa top with a slab of marble at one end of it. 

"by jove!" cry kennedy in an ecstasy, as burg swung his lantern 
over the marble. "it is a christian altar--probably the first one in 
existence. here is the little consecration cross cut upon the corner 
of it. no doubt this circular space was use as a church." 

"precisely," said burger. "if i had more time i should like to show 
you all the body which are bury in these niche upon the walls, for 
they are the early pope and bishop of the church, with their mitres, 
their croziers, and full canonicals. go over to that one and look at 
it!" 

kennedy went across, and stare at the ghastly head which lay loose 
on the shred and moulder mitre. 

"this is most interesting," said he, and his voice seem to boom 
against the concave vault. "as far as my experience goes, it is 
unique. bring the lantern over, burger, for i want to see them all." 

but the germany had stroll away, and was standing in the middle of a 
yellow circle of light at the other side of the hall. 

"do you know how many wrong turning there are between this and the 
stairs?" he asked. "there are over two thousand. no doubt it was one 
of the means of protection which the christian adopted. the odds are 
two thousand to one against a man get out, even if he had a light; 
but if he were in the dark it would, of course, be far more difficult." 

"so i should think." 

"and the dark is something dreadful. i try it once for an 
experiment. let us try it again!" he stoop to the lantern, and in 
an instant it was as if an invisible hand was squeeze tight over 
each of kennedy's eyes. never had he known what such dark was. it 
seem to press upon him and to smother him. it was a solid obstacle 
against which the body shrank from advancing. he put his hand out to 
push it back from him. 

"that will do, burger," said he, "let's have the light again." 

but his companion began to laugh, and in that circular room the sound 
seem to come from every side at once. 

"you seem uneasy, friend kennedy," said he. 

"go on, man, light the candle!" said kennedy impatiently. 

"it's very strange, kennedy, but i could not in the least tell by the 
sound in which direction you stand. could you tell where i am?" 

"no; you seem to be on every side of me." 

"if it were not for this string which i hold in my hand i should not 
have a notion which way to go." 

"i dare say not. strike a light, man, and have an end of this 
nonsense." 

"well, kennedy, there are two things which i understand that you are 
very fond of. the one is an adventure, and the other is an obstacle to 
surmount. the adventure must be the finding of your way out of this 
catacomb. the obstacle will be the dark and the two thousand wrong 
turn which make the way a little difficult to find. but you need not 
hurry, for you have plenty of time, and when you halt for a rest now 
and then, i should like you just to think of miss mary saunderson, and 
whether you treat her quite fairly." 

"you devil, what do you mean?" roar kennedy. he was running about in 
little circle and clasp at the solid black with both hands. 

"good-bye," said the mock voice, and it was already at some 
distance. "i really do not think, kennedy, even by your own showing 
that you did the right thing by that girl. there was only one little 
thing which you appear not to know, and i can supply it. miss 
saunderson was engaged to a poor ungainly devil of a student, and his 
name was julius burger." 

there was a rustle somewhere, the vague sound of a foot striking a 
stone, and then there fell silence upon that old christian church--a 
stagnant, heavy silence which closed round kennedy and shut him in like 
water round a drown man. 


some two month afterwards the following paragraph made the round of 
the europe press: 


"one of the most interesting discovery of recent years is that of the 
new catacomb in rome, which lie some distance to the east of the 
well-known vault of st. calixtus. the finding of this important 
burial-place, which is exceed rich in most interesting early 
christian remains, is due to the energy and sagacity of dr. julius 
burger, the young germany specialist, who is rapid taking the first 
place as an authority upon ancient rome. although the first to publish 
his discovery, it appear that a less fortunate adventurer had 
anticipate dr. burger. some month ago mr. kennedy, the well-known 
english student, disappear sudden from his rooms in the corso, and 
it was conjecture that his association with a recent scandal had 
driven him to leave rome. it appear now that he had in reality fallen 
a victim to that fervid love of archaeology which had raise him to a 
distinguished place among living scholars. his body was discover in 
the heart of the new catacomb, and it was evident from the condition of 
his feet and boots that he had tramp for days through the tortuous 
corridor which make these subterranean tomb so dangerous to 
explorers. the deceased gentleman had, with inexplicable rashness, 
made his way into this labyrinth without, as far as can be discovered, 
taking with him either candle or matches, so that his sad fate was the 
natural result of his own temerity. what make the matter more painful 
is that dr. julius burg was an intimate friend of the deceased. his 
joy at the extraordinary find which he has been so fortunate as to make 
has been greatly mar by the terrible fate of his comrade and 
fellow-worker." 



the case of lady sannox 

the relations between douglas stone and the notorious lady sannox were 
very well known both among the fashionable circle of which she was a 
brilliant member, and the scientific body which number him among 
their most illustrious confreres. there was naturally, therefore, a 
very widespread interest when it was announce one morning that the 
lady had absolutely and for ever taken the veil, and that the world 
would see her no more. when, at the very tail of this rumour, there 
came the assurance that the celebrated operate surgeon, the man of 
steel nerves, had been found in the morning by his valet, seat on one 
side of his bed, smile pleasant upon the universe, with both leg 
jam into one side of his breeches and his great brain about as 
valuable as a cap full of porridge, the matter was strong enough to 
give quite a little thrill of interest to folk who had never hope that 
their jaded nerves were capable of such a sensation. 

douglas stone in his prime was one of the most remarkable men in 
england. indeed, he could hardly be said to have ever reach his 
prime, for he was but nine-and-thirty at the time of this little 
incident. those who knew him best were aware that famous as he was as 
a surgeon, he might have succeed with even greater rapid in any of 
a dozen lines of life. he could have cut his way to fame as a soldier, 
struggle to it as an explorer, bully for it in the courts, or built 
it out of stone and iron as an engineer. he was born to be great, for 
he could plan what another man dare not do, and he could do what 
another man dare not plan. in surgery none could follow him. his 
nerve, his judgement, his intuition, were things apart. again and 
again his knife cut away death, but graze the very spring of life in 
do it, until his assistant were as white as the patient. his 
energy, his audacity, his full-blooded self-confidence--does not the 
memory of them still linger to the south of marylebone road and the 
north of oxford street? 

his vice were as magnificent as his virtues, and infinite more 
picturesque. large as was his income, and it was the third largest of 
all professional men in london, it was far beneath the luxury of his 
living. deep in his complex nature lay a rich vein of sensualism, at 
the sport of which he placed all the prize of his life. the eye, the 
ear, the touch, the palate, all were his masters. the bouquet of old 
vintages, the scent of rare exotics, the curve and tint of the 
daintiest potteries of europe, it was to these that the quick-running 
stream of gold was transformed. and then there came his sudden mad 
passion for lady sannox, when a single interview with two challenging 
glance and a whisper word set him ablaze. she was the loveliest 
woman in london and the only one to him. he was one of the handsomest 
men in london, but not the only one to her. she had a liking for new 
experiences, and was gracious to most men who woo her. it may have 
been cause or it may have been effect that lord sannox look fifty, 
though he was but six-and-thirty. 

he was a quiet, silent, neutral-tinted man, this lord, with thin lip 
and heavy eyelids, much given to gardening, and full of home-like 
habits. he had at one time been fond of acting, had even rent a 
theatre in london, and on its boards had first seen miss mare dawson, 
to whom he had offer his hand, his title, and the third of a county. 
since his marriage his early hobby had become distasteful to him. even 
in private theatricals it was no long possible to persuade him to 
exercise the talent which he had often show that he possessed. he 
was happy with a spud and a watering-can among his orchid and 
chrysanthemums. 

it was quite an interesting problem whether he was absolutely devoid of 
sense, or miserably wanting in spirit. did he know his lady's ways and 
condone them, or was he a mere blind, doting fool? it was a point to be 
discuss over the teacup in snug little drawing-rooms, or with the 
aid of a cigar in the bow window of clubs. bitter and plain were the 
comment among men upon his conduct. there was but one who had a good 
word to say for him, and he was the most silent member in the 
smoking-room. he had seen him break in a horse at the university, and 
it seem to have left an impression upon his mind. 

but when douglas stone became the favourite all doubt as to lord 
sannox's knowledge or ignorance were set for ever at rest. there was no 
subterfuge about stone. in his high-handed, impetuous fashion, he set 
all caution and discretion at defiance. the scandal became notorious. 
a learned body intimate that his name had been struck from the list of 
its vice-presidents. two friends implore him to consider his 
professional credit. he cursed them all three, and spent forty guinea 
on a bangle to take with him to the lady. he was at her house every 
evening, and she drove in his carriage in the afternoons. there was 
not an attempt on either side to conceal their relations; but there 
came at last a little incident to interrupt them. 

it was a dismal winter's night, very cold and gusty, with the wind 
whoop in the chimney and bluster against the window-panes. a 
thin spatter of rain tinkle on the glass with each fresh sough of the 
gale, drown for the instant the dull gurgle and drip from the eaves. 
douglas stone had finished his dinner, and sat by his fire in the 
study, a glass of rich port upon the malachite table at his elbow. as 
he raise it to his lips, he held it up against the lamplight, and 
watch with the eye of a connoisseur the tiny scale of beesw which 
float in its rich ruby depths. the fire, as it spurt up, threw 
fitful lights upon his bald, clear-cut face, with its widely-opened 
grey eyes, its thick and yet firm lips, and the deep, square jaw, which 
had something roman in its strength and its animalism. he smile from 
time to time as he nestle back in his luxurious chair. indeed, he had 
a right to feel well pleased, for, against the advice of six 
colleagues, he had perform an operation that day of which only two 
case were on record, and the result had been brilliant beyond all 
expectation. no other man in london would have had the daring to plan, 
or the skill to execute, such a heroic measure. 

but he had promise lady sannox to see her that evening and it was 
already half-past eight. his hand was outstretched to the bell to 
order the carriage when he heard the dull thud of the knocker. an 
instant later there was the shuffle of feet in the hall, and the 
sharp close of a door. 

"a patient to see you, sir, in the consulting room," said the butler. 

"about himself?" 

"no, sir; i think he wants you to go out." 

"it is too late," cry douglas stone peevishly. "i won't go." 

"this is his card, sir." 

the butler present it upon the gold salver which had been given to 
his master by the wife of a prime minister. 

"'hamil ali, smyrna.' hum! the fellow is a turk, i suppose." 

"yes, sir. he seem as if he came from abroad, sir. and he's in a 
terrible way." 

"tut, tut! i have an engagement. i must go somewhere else. but i'll 
see him. show him in here, pim." 

a few moments later the butler swung open the door and usher in a 
small and decrepit man, who walk with a bent back and with the 
forward push of the face and blink of the eyes which go with extreme 
short sight. his face was swarthy, and his hair and beard of the 
deepest black. in one hand he held a turban of white muslin striped 
with red, in the other a small chamois-leather bag. 

"good evening," said douglas stone, when the butler had closed the 
door. "you speak english, i presume?" 

"yes, sir. i am from asia minor, but i speak english when i speak 
slow." 

"you want me to go out, i understand?" 

"yes, sir. i want very much that you should see my wife." 

"i could come in the morning, but i have an engagement which prevent 
me from seeing your wife tonight." 

the turk's answer was a singular one. he pull the string which 
closed the mouth of the chamois-leather bag, and pour a flood of gold 
on to the table. 

"there are one hundred pound there," said he, "and i promise you that 
it will not take you an hour. i have a cab ready at the door." 

douglas stone glance at his watch. an hour would not make it too late 
to visit lady sannox. he had been there later. and the fee was an 
extraordinarily high one. he had been pressed by his creditor lately, 
and he could not afford to let such a chance pass. he would go. 

"what is the case?" he asked. 

"oh, it is so sad a one! so sad a one! you have not, perhaps heard of 
the dagger of the almohades?" 

"never." 

"ah, they are eastern dagger of a great age and of a singular shape, 
with the hilt like what you call a stirrup. i am a curiosity dealer, 
you understand, and that is why i have come to england from smyrna, but 
next week i go back once more. many things i brought with me, and i 
have a few things left, but among them, to my sorrow, is one of these 
daggers." 

"you will remember that i have an appointment, sir," said the surgeon, 
with some irritation; "pray confine yourself to the necessary details." 

"you will see that it is necessary. today my wife fell down in a faint 
in the room in which i keep my wares, and she cut her lower lip upon 
this cursed dagger of almohades." 

"i see," said douglas stone, rising. "and you wish me to dress the 
wound?" 

"no, no, it is worse than that." 

"what then?" 

"these dagger are poisoned." 

"poisoned!" 

"yes, and there is no man, east or west, who can tell now what is the 
poison or what the cure. but all that is known i know, for my father 
was in this trade before me, and we have had much to do with these 
poison weapons." 

"what are the symptoms?" 

"deep sleep, and death in thirty hours." 

"and you say there is no cure. why then should you pay me this 
considerable fee?" 

"no drug can cure, but the knife may." 

"and how?" 

"the poison is slow of absorption. it remains for hour in the wound." 

"washing, then, might cleanse it?" 

"no more than in a snake bite. it is too subtle and too deadly." 

"excision of the wound, then?" 

"that is it. if it be on the finger, take the finger off. so said my 
father always. but think of where this wound is, and that it is my 
wife. it is dreadful!" 

but familiarity with such grim matter may take the fine edge from a 
man's sympathy. to douglas stone this was already an interesting case, 
and he brush aside as irrelevant the feeble objection of the husband. 

"it appear to be that or nothing," said he brusquely. "it is better 
to lose a lip than a life." 

"ah, yes, i know that you are right. well, well, it is kismet, and it 
must be faced. i have the cab, and you will come with me and do this 
thing." 

douglas stone took his case of bistoury from a drawer, and placed it 
with a roll of bandage and a compress of lint in his pocket. he must 
waste no more time if he were to see lady sannox. 

"i am ready," said he, pull on his overcoat. "will you take a glass 
of wine before you go out into this cold air?" 

his visitor shrank away, with a protest hand upraised. 

"you forget that i am a mussulman, and a true follower of the prophet," 
said he. "but tell me what is the bottle of green glass which you have 
placed in your pocket?" 

"it is chloroform." 

"ah, that also is forbidden to us. it is a spirit, and we make no use 
of such things." 

"what! you would allow your wife to go through an operation without an 
anaesthetic?" 

"ah! she will feel nothing, poor soul. the deep sleep has already 
come on, which is the first working of the poison. and then i have 
given her of our smyrna opium. come, sir, for already an hour has 
passed." 

as they step out into the darkness, a sheet of rain was driven in 
upon their faces, and the hall lamp, which dangle from the arm of a 
marble caryatid, went out with a fluff. pim, the butler, pushed the 
heavy door to, strain hard with his shoulder against the wind, while 
the two men grope their way towards the yellow glare which show 
where the cab was waiting. an instant later they were rattling upon 
their journey. 

"is it far?" ask douglas stone. 

"oh, no. we have a very little quiet place off the euston road." 

the surgeon pressed the spring of his repeater and listen to the 
little ting which told him the hour. it was a quarter past nine. he 
calculate the distances, and the short time which it would take him to 
perform so trivial an operation. he ought to reach lady sannox by ten 
o'clock. through the fog window he saw the blur gas lamp 
dance past, with occasional the broad glare of a shop front. the 
rain was pelt and rattling upon the leathern top of the carriage, 
and the wheels swashe as they roll through puddle and mud. opposite 
to him the white headgear of his companion gleam faint through the 
obscurity. the surgeon felt in his pocket and arrange his needles, 
his ligature and his safety-pins, that no time might be waste when 
they arrived. he chafe with impatience and drum his foot upon the 
floor. 

but the cab slow down at last and pull up. in an instant douglas 
stone was out, and the smyrna merchant's toe was at his very heel. 

"you can wait," said he to the driver. 

it was a mean-looking house in a narrow and sordid street. the 
surgeon, who knew his london well, cast a swift glance into the 
shadows, but there was nothing distinctive--no shop, no movement, 
nothing but a double line of dull, flat-faced houses, a double stretch 
of wet flagstone which gleam in the lamplight, and a double rush of 
water in the gutter which swirl and gurgle towards the sewer 
gratings. the door which face them was blotch and discoloured, and 
a faint light in the fan pane above, it serve to show the dust and the 
grime which cover it. above in one of the bedroom windows, there was 
a dull yellow glimmer. the merchant knock loudly, and, as he turn 
his dark face towards the light, douglas stone could see that it was 
contract with anxiety. a bolt was drawn, and an elderly woman with a 
taper stood in the doorway, shield the thin flame with her gnarled 
hand. 

"is all well?" gasp the merchant. 

"she is as you left her, sir." 

"she has not spoken?" 

"no, she is in a deep sleep." 

the merchant closed the door, and douglas stone walk down the narrow 
passage, glancing about him in some surprise as he did so. there was no 
oil-cloth, no mat, no hat-rack. deep grey dust and heavy festoon of 
cobweb met his eyes everywhere. following the old woman up the 
winding stair, his firm footfall echo harsh through the silent 
house. there was no carpet. 

the bedroom was on the second landing. douglas stone follow the old 
nurse into it, with the merchant at his heels. here, at least, there 
was furniture and to spare. the floor was litter and the corner 
pile with turkey cabinets, inlaid tables, coat of chain mail, 
strange pipes, and grotesque weapons. a single small lamp stood upon a 
bracket on the wall. douglas stone took it down, and pick his way 
among the lumber, walk over to a couch in the corner, on which lay a 
woman dress in the turkey fashion, with yashmak and veil. the lower 
part of the face was exposed, and the surgeon saw a jagged cut which 
zigzag along the border of the under lip. 

"you will forgive the yashmak," said the turk. "you know our view 
about women in the east." 

but the surgeon was not thinking about the yashmak. this was no long 
a woman to him. it was a case. he stoop and examine the wound 
carefully. 

"there are no sign of irritation," said he. "we might delay the 
operation until local symptom develop." 

the husband wrung his hand in uncontrollable agitation. 

"oh! sir, sir," he cried. "do not trifle. you do not know. it is 
deadly. i know, and i give you my assurance that an operation is 
absolutely necessary. only the knife can save her." 

"and yet i am inclined to wait," said douglas stone. 

"that is enough," the turk cried, angrily. "every minute is of 
importance, and i cannot stand here and see my wife allow to sink. 
it only remains for me to give you my thanks for have come, and to 
call in some other surgeon before it is too late." 

douglas stone hesitated. to refund that hundred pound was no pleasant 
matter. but of course if he left the case he must return the money. 
and if the turk were right and the woman died, his position before a 
coroner might be an embarrass one. 

"you have had personal experience of this poison?" he asked. 

"i have." 

"and you assure me that an operation is needful." 

"i swear it by all that i hold sacred." 

"the disfigure will be frightful." 

"i can understand that the mouth will not be a pretty one to kiss." 

douglas stone turn fierce upon the man. the speech was a brutal 
one. but the turk has his own fashion of talk and of thought, and 
there was no time for wrangling. douglas stone drew a bistoury from 
his case, open it and felt the keen straight edge with his 
forefinger. then he held the lamp close to the bed. two dark eyes 
were gaze up at him through the slit in the yashmak. they were all 
iris, and the pupil was hardly to be seen. 

"you have given her a very heavy dose of opium." 

"yes, she has had a good dose." 

he glance again at the dark eyes which look straight at his own. 
they were dull and lustreless, but, even as he gazed, a little shift 
sparkle came into them, and the lip quivered. 

"she is not absolutely unconscious," said he. 

"would it not be well to use the knife while it will be painless?" 

the same thought had cross the surgeon's mind. he grasp the 
wound lip with his forceps, and with two swift cut he took out a 
broad v-shaped piece. the woman sprang up on the couch with a dreadful 
gurgle scream. her covering was torn from her face. it was a face 
that he knew. in spite of that protrude upper lip and that slobber 
of blood, it was a face that he knew, she kept on putt her hand up 
to the gap and screaming. douglas stone sat down at the foot of the 
couch with his knife and his forceps. the room was whirl round, and 
he had felt something go like a rip seam behind his ear. a 
bystander would have said that his face was the more ghastly of the 
two. as in a dream, or as if he had been look at something at the 
play, he was conscious that the turk's hair and beard lay upon the 
table, and that lord sannox was leaning against the wall with his hand 
to his side, laugh silently. the scream had die away now, and the 
dreadful head had drop back again upon the pillow, but douglas stone 
still sat motionless, and lord sannox still chuckle quiet to himself. 

"it was really very necessary for marion, this operation," said he, 
"not physically, but morally, you know, morally." 

douglas stone stoop for yard and began to play with the fringe of 
the coverlet. his knife tinkle down upon the ground, but he still 
held the forceps and something more. 

"i had long intended to make a little example," said lord sannox, 
suavely. "your note of wednesday miscarried, and i have it here in my 
pocket-book. i took some pains in carry out my idea. the wound, by 
the way, was from nothing more dangerous than my signet ring." 

he glance keen at his silent companion, and cock the small 
revolver which he held in his coat pocket. but douglas stone was still 
pick at the coverlet. 

"you see you have kept your appointment after all," said lord sannox. 

and at that douglas stone began to laugh. he laugh long and loudly. 
but lord sannox did not laugh now. something like fear sharpen and 
harden his features. he walk from the room, and he walk on 
tiptoe. the old woman was wait outside. 

"attend to your mistress when she awakes," said lord sannox. 

then he went down to the street. the cab was at the door, and the 
driver raise his hand to his hat. 

"john," said lord sannox, "you will take the doctor home first. he will 
want leading downstairs, i think. tell his butler that he has been 
taken ill at a case." 

"very good, sir." 

"then you can take lady sannox home." 

"and how about yourself, sir?" 

"oh, my address for the next few month will be hotel di roma, venice. 
just see that the letters are sent on. and tell steven to exhibit all 
the purple chrysanthemum next monday, and to wire me the result." 



the terror of blue john gap 

the following narrative was found among the papers of dr. james 
hardcastle, who die of phthisis on february 4th, 1908, at 36, upper 
coventry flats, south kensington. those who knew him best, while 
refuse to express an opinion upon this particular statement, are 
unanimous in assert that he was a man of a sober and scientific turn 
of mind, absolutely devoid of imagination, and most unlikely to invent 
any abnormal series of events. the paper was contained in an envelope, 
which was docketed, "a short account of the circumstances which 
occur near miss allerton's farm in north-west derbyshire in the 
spring of last year." the envelope was sealed, and on the other side 
was written in pencil-- 


dear seaton,-- 

"it may interest, and perhaps pain you, to know that the incredulity 
with which you met my story has prevent me from ever opening my mouth 
upon the subject again. i leave this record after my death, and 
perhaps stranger may be found to have more confidence in me than my 
friend." 


inquiry has fail to elicit who this seaton may have been. i may add 
that the visit of the deceased to allerton's farm, and the general 
nature of the alarm there, apart from his particular explanation, have 
been absolutely established. with this foreword i append his account 
exactly as he left it. it is in the form of a diary, some entry in 
which have been expanded, while a few have been erased. 


april 17.--already i feel the benefit of this wonderful upland air. 
the farm of the allerton lie fourteen hundred and twenty feet above 
sea-level, so it may well be a bracing climate. beyond the usual 
morning cough i have very little discomfort, and, what with the fresh 
milk and the home-grown mutton, i have every chance of putt on 
weight. i think saunderson will be pleased. 

the two miss allerton are charming quaint and kind, two dear little 
hard-working old maids, who are ready to lavish all the heart which 
might have gone out to husband and to children upon an invalid 
stranger. truly, the old maid is a most useful person, one of the 
reserve forces of the community. they talk of the superfluous woman, 
but what would the poor superfluous man do without her kindly presence? 
by the way, in their simplicity they very quick let out the reason 
why saunderson recommend their farm. the professor rose from the 
ranks himself, and i believe that in his youth he was not above scare 
crow in these very fields. 

it is a most lonely spot, and the walk are picturesque in the extreme. 
the farm consist of graze land lie at the bottom of an irregular 
valley. on each side are the fantastic limestone hills, form of rock 
so soft that you can break it away with your hands. all this country 
is hollow. could you strike it with some gigantic hammer it would boom 
like a drum, or possibly cave in altogether and expose some huge 
subterranean sea. a great sea there must surely be, for on all side 
the stream run into the mountain itself, never to reappear. there are 
gap everywhere amid the rocks, and when you pass through them you find 
yourself in great caverns, which wind down into the bowels of the 
earth. i have a small bicycle lamp, and it is a perpetual joy to me to 
carry it into these weird solitudes, and to see the wonderful silver 
and black effect when i throw its light upon the stalactite which 
drape the lofty roofs. shut off the lamp, and you are in the blackest 
darkness. turn it on, and it is a scene from the arabia nights. 

but there is one of these strange opening in the earth which has a 
special interest, for it is the handiwork, not of nature, but of man. 
i had never heard of blue john when i came to these parts. it is the 
name given to a peculiar mineral of a beautiful purple shade, which is 
only found at one or two place in the world. it is so rare that an 
ordinary vase of blue john would be value at a great price. the 
romans, with that extraordinary instinct of theirs, discover that it 
was to be found in this valley, and sank a horizontal shaft deep into 
the mountain side. the opening of their mine has been call blue john 
gap, a clean-cut arch in the rock, the mouth all overgrown with bushes. 
it is a goodly passage which the roman miner have cut, and it 
intersect some of the great water-worn caves, so that if you enter 
blue john gap you would do well to mark your steps and to have a good 
store of candles, or you may never make your way back to the daylight 
again. i have not yet gone deep into it, but this very day i stood at 
the mouth of the arch tunnel, and peer down into the black 
recess beyond, i vow that when my health return i would devote 
some holiday to explore those mysterious depths and finding out for 
myself how far the roman had penetrate into the derbyshire hills. 

strange how superstitious these countrymen are! i should have thought 
better of young armitage, for he is a man of some education and 
character, and a very fine fellow for his station in life. i was 
standing at the blue john gap when he came across the field to me. 

"well, doctor," said he, "you're not afraid, anyhow." 

"afraid!" i answered. "afraid of what?" 

"of it," said he, with a jerk of his thumb towards the black vault, "of 
the terror that lives in the blue john cave." 

how absurd easy it is for a legend to arise in a lonely countryside! 
i examine him as to the reason for his weird belief. it seem that 
from time to time sheep have been missing from the fields, carry 
bodily away, according to armitage. that they could have wander away 
of their own accord and disappear among the mountain was an 
explanation to which he would not listen. on one occasion a pool of 
blood had been found, and some tuft of wool. that also, i pointed 
out, could be explain in a perfectly natural way. further, the 
nights upon which sheep disappear were invariable very dark, cloudy 
nights with no moon. this i met with the obvious retort that those were 
the nights which a commonplace sheep-stealer would naturally choose for 
his work. on one occasion a gap had been made in a wall, and some of 
the stone scattered for a considerable distance. human agency again, 
in my opinion. finally, armitage clinch all his argument by telling 
me that he had actually heard the creature--indeed, that anyone could 
hear it who remain long enough at the gap. it was a distant roaring 
of an immense volume. i could not but smile at this, knowing, as i do, 
the strange reverberation which come out of an underground water 
system running amid the chasm of a limestone formation. my 
incredulity annoy armitage so that he turn and left me with some 
abruptness. 

and now come the queer point about the whole business. i was still 
standing near the mouth of the cave turning over in my mind the various 
statement of armitage, and reflect how readily they could be 
explain away, when suddenly, from the depth of the tunnel beside me, 
there issue a most extraordinary sound. how shall i describe it? 
first of all, it seem to be a great distance away, far down in the 
bowels of the earth. secondly, in spite of this suggestion of 
distance, it was very loud. lastly, it was not a boom, nor a crash, 
such as one would associate with fall water or tumble rock, but it 
was a high whine, tremulous and vibrating, almost like the whinny of 
a horse. it was certainly a most remarkable experience, and one which 
for a moment, i must admit, gave a new significance to armitage's 
words. i wait by the blue john gap for half an hour or more, but 
there was no return of the sound, so at last i wander back to the 
farmhouse, rather mystify by what had occurred. decidedly i shall 
explore that cavern when my strength is restored. of course, 
armitage's explanation is too absurd for discussion, and yet that sound 
was certainly very strange. it still ring in my ear as i write. 

april 20.--in the last three days i have made several expedition to 
the blue john gap, and have even penetrate some short distance, but my 
bicycle lantern is so small and weak that i dare not trust myself very 
far. i shall do the thing more systematically. i have heard no sound 
at all, and could almost believe that i had been the victim of some 
hallucination suggested, perhaps, by armitage's conversation. of 
course, the whole idea is absurd, and yet i must confess that those 
bush at the entrance of the cave do present an appearance as if some 
heavy creature had forced its way through them. i begin to be keen 
interested. i have said nothing to the miss allertons, for they are 
quite superstitious enough already, but i have bought some candles, and 
mean to investigate for myself. 

i observe this morning that among the numerous tuft of sheep's wool 
which lay among the bush near the cavern there was one which was 
smear with blood. of course, my reason tell me that if sheep wander 
into such rocky place they are likely to injure themselves, and yet 
somehow that splash of crimson gave me a sudden shock, and for a moment 
i found myself shrink back in horror from the old roman arch. a 
fetid breath seem to ooze from the black depths into which i peered. 
could it indeed be possible that some nameless thing, some dreadful 
presence, was lurk down yonder? i should have been incapable of 
such feelings in the days of my strength, but one grow more nervous 
and fanciful when one's health is shaken. 

for the moment i weaken in my resolution, and was ready to leave the 
secret of the old mine, if one exists, for ever unsolved. but tonight 
my interest has return and my nerves grown more steady. tomorrow i 
trust that i shall have gone more deep into this matter. 

april 22.--let me try and set down as accurate as i can my 
extraordinary experience of yesterday. i start in the afternoon, and 
made my way to the blue john gap. i confess that my misgiving 
return as i gaze into its depths, and i wish that i had brought a 
companion to share my exploration. finally, with a return of 
resolution, i lit my candle, pushed my way through the briars, and 
descended into the rocky shaft. 

it went down at an acute angle for some fifty feet, the floor being 
cover with broken stone. thence there extend a long, straight 
passage cut in the solid rock. i am no geologist, but the lining of 
this corridor was certainly of some hard material than limestone, for 
there were points where i could actually see the tool-marks which the 
old miner had left in their excavation, as fresh as if they had been 
done yesterday. down this strange, old-world corridor i stumbled, my 
feeble flame throw a dim circle of light around me, which made the 
shadow beyond the more threaten and obscure. finally, i came to a 
spot where the roman tunnel open into a water-worn cavern--a huge 
hall, hung with long white icicle of lime deposit. from this central 
chamber i could dim perceive that a number of passage worn by the 
subterranean stream wound away into the depths of the earth. i was 
standing there wonder whether i had better return, or whether i dare 
venture farther into this dangerous labyrinth, when my eyes fell upon 
something at my feet which strong arrest my attention. 

the greater part of the floor of the cavern was cover with boulder 
of rock or with hard incrustation of lime, but at this particular 
point there had been a drip from the distant roof, which had left a 
patch of soft mud. in the very centre of this there was a huge 
mark--an ill-defined blotch, deep, broad and irregular, as if a great 
boulder had fallen upon it. no loose stone lay near, however, nor was 
there anything to account for the impression. it was far too large to 
be cause by any possible animal, and besides, there was only the one, 
and the patch of mud was of such a size that no reasonable stride could 
have cover it. as i rose from the examination of that singular mark 
and then look round into the black shadow which hem me in, i must 
confess that i felt for a moment a most unpleasant sink of my heart, 
and that, do what i could, the candle tremble in my outstretched hand. 

i soon recover my nerve, however, when i reflect how absurd it was 
to associate so huge and shapeless a mark with the track of any known 
animal. even an elephant could not have produce it. i determined, 
therefore, that i would not be scared by vague and senseless fear from 
carry out my exploration. before proceeding, i took good note of a 
curious rock formation in the wall by which i could recognize the 
entrance of the roman tunnel. the precaution was very necessary, for 
the great cave, so far as i could see it, was intersect by passages. 
have made sure of my position, and reassure myself by examine my 
spare candle and my matches, i advanced slow over the rocky and 
uneven surface of the cavern. 

and now i come to the point where i met with such sudden and desperate 
disaster. a stream, some twenty feet broad, ran across my path, and i 
walk for some little distance along the bank to find a spot where i 
could cross dry-shod. finally, i came to a place where a single flat 
boulder lay near the centre, which i could reach in a stride. as it 
chanced, however, the rock had been cut away and made top-heavy by the 
rush of the stream, so that it tilt over as i landed on it and shot 
me into the ice-cold water. my candle went out, and i found myself 
flounder about in utter and absolute darkness. 

i stagger to my feet again, more amuse than alarm by my adventure. 
the candle had fallen from my hand, and was lost in the stream, but i 
had two other in my pocket, so that it was of no importance. i got 
one of them ready, and drew out my box of match to light it. only 
then did i realize my position. the box had been soaked in my fall 
into the river. it was impossible to strike the matches. 

a cold hand seem to close round my heart as i realize my position. 
the dark was opaque and horrible. it was so utter one put one's 
hand up to one's face as if to press off something solid. i stood 
still, and by an effort i steady myself. i try to reconstruct in 
my mind a map of the floor of the cavern as i had last seen it. alas! 
the bearings which had impress themselves upon my mind were high on 
the wall, and not to be found by touch. still, i remember in a 
general way how the side were situated, and i hope that by grope my 
way along them i should at last come to the opening of the roman 
tunnel. moving very slowly, and continual striking against the 
rocks, i set out on this desperate quest. 

but i very soon realize how impossible it was. in that black, velvety 
dark one lost all one's bearings in an instant. before i had made 
a dozen paces, i was utterly bewilder as to my whereabouts. the 
ripple of the stream, which was the one sound audible, show me 
where it lay, but the moment that i left its bank i was utterly lost. 
the idea of finding my way back in absolute dark through that 
limestone labyrinth was clearly an impossible one. 

i sat down upon a boulder and reflect upon my unfortunate plight. i 
had not told anyone that i propose to come to the blue john mine, and 
it was unlikely that a search party would come after me. therefore i 
must trust to my own resources to get clear of the danger. there was 
only one hope, and that was that the match might dry. when i fell 
into the river, only half of me had got thorough wet. my left 
shoulder had remain above the water. i took the box of matches, 
therefore, and put it into my left armpit. the moist air of the cavern 
might possibly be counteract by the heat of my body, but even so, i 
knew that i could not hope to get a light for many hours. meanwhile 
there was nothing for it but to wait. 

by good luck i had slip several biscuit into my pocket before i 
left the farm-house. these i now devoured, and wash them down with a 
draught from that wretched stream which had been the cause of all my 
misfortunes. then i felt about for a comfortable seat among the rocks, 
and, have discover a place where i could get a support for my back, 
i stretch out my leg and settled myself down to wait. i was 
wretched damp and cold, but i try to cheer myself with the 
reflection that modern science prescribed open window and walk in all 
weather for my disease. gradually, lull by the monotonous gurgle of 
the stream, and by the absolute darkness, i sank into an uneasy slumber. 

how long this last i cannot say. it may have been for an hour, it 
may have been for several. sudden i sat up on my rock couch, with 
every nerve thrill and every sense acute on the alert. beyond all 
doubt i had heard a sound--some sound very distinct from the gurgle 
of the waters. it had passed, but the reverberation of it still 
linger in my ear. was it a search party? they would most certainly 
have shouted, and vague as this sound was which had waken me, it was 
very distinct from the human voice. i sat palpitate and hardly 
daring to breathe. there it was again! and again! now it had become 
continuous. it was a tread--yes, surely it was the tread of some 
living creature. but what a tread it was! it gave one the impression 
of enormous weight carry upon sponge-like feet, which gave forth a 
muffle but ear-filling sound. the dark was as complete as ever, 
but the tread was regular and decisive. and it was coming beyond all 
question in my direction. 

my skin grew cold, and my hair stood on end as i listen to that 
steady and ponderous footfall. there was some creature there, and 
surely by the speed of its advance, it was one which could see in the 
dark. i crouch low on my rock and try to blend myself into it. 
the steps grew near still, then stopped, and presently i was aware of 
a loud lap and gurgling. the creature was drink at the stream. 
then again there was silence, broken by a succession of long sniff and 
snort of tremendous volume and energy. had it caught the scent of me? 
my own nostril were fill by a low fetid odour, mephitic and 
abominable. then i heard the steps again. they were on my side of the 
stream now. the stone rattle within a few yard of where i lay. 
hardly daring to breathe, i crouch upon my rock. then the steps drew 
away. i heard the splash as it return across the river, and the 
sound die away into the distance in the direction from which it had 
come. 

for a long time i lay upon the rock, too much horrify to move. i 
thought of the sound which i had heard coming from the depths of the 
cave, of armitage's fears, of the strange impression in the mud, and 
now came this final and absolute proof that there was indeed some 
inconceivable monster, something utterly unearthly and dreadful, which 
lurk in the hollow of the mountain. of its nature or form i could 
frame no conception, save that it was both light-footed and gigantic. 
the combat between my reason, which told me that such things could not 
be, and my senses, which told me that they were, rage within me as i 
lay. finally, i was almost ready to persuade myself that this 
experience had been part of some evil dream, and that my abnormal 
condition might have conjure up an hallucination. but there remain 
one final experience which remove the last possibility of doubt from 
my mind. 

i had taken my match from my armpit and felt them. they seem 
perfectly hard and dry. stoop down into a crevice of the rocks, i 
try one of them. to my delight it took fire at once. i lit the 
candle, and, with a terrify backward glance into the obscure depths 
of the cavern, i hurried in the direction of the roman passage. as i 
did so i pass the patch of mud on which i had seen the huge imprint. 
now i stood astonish before it, for there were three similar imprint 
upon its surface, enormous in size, irregular in outline, of a depth 
which indicate the ponderous weight which had left them. then a great 
terror surge over me. stoop and shading my candle with my hand, i 
ran in a frenzy of fear to the rocky archway, hasten up it, and never 
stop until, with weary feet and pant lungs, i rush up the final 
slope of stones, broke through the tangle of briars, and flung myself 
exhaust upon the soft grass under the peaceful light of the stars. 
it was three in the morning when i reach the farm-house, and today i 
am all unstrung and quiver after my terrific adventure. as yet i 
have told no one. i must move warily in the matter. what would the 
poor lonely women, or the uneducated yokel here think of it if i were 
to tell them my experience? let me go to someone who can understand 
and advise. 

april 25.--i was laid up in bed for two days after my incredible 
adventure in the cavern. i use the adjective with a very definite 
meaning, for i have had an experience since which has shock me almost 
as much as the other. i have said that i was look round for someone 
who could advise me. there is a dr. mark johnson who practice some 
few mile away, to whom i had a note of recommendation from professor 
saunderson. to him i drove, when i was strong enough to get about, and 
i recount to him my whole strange experience. he listen intently, 
and then careful examine me, pay special attention to my reflexes 
and to the pupil of my eyes. when he had finished, he refuse to 
discuss my adventure, saying that it was entire beyond him, but he 
gave me the card of a mr. picton at castleton, with the advice that i 
should instantly go to him and tell him the story exactly as i had done 
to himself. he was, according to my adviser, the very man who was 
pre-eminently suit to help me. i went on to the station, therefore, 
and made my way to the little town, which is some ten mile away. mr. 
picton appear to be a man of importance, as his brass plate was 
display upon the door of a considerable building on the outskirts of 
the town. i was about to ring his bell, when some misgiving came into 
my mind, and, crossing to a neighbouring shop, i ask the man behind 
the counter if he could tell me anything of mr. picton. "why," said 
he, "he is the best mad doctor in derbyshire, and yonder is his 
asylum." you can imagine that it was not long before i had shaken the 
dust of castleton from my feet and return to the farm, curse all 
unimaginative pedant who cannot conceive that there may be things in 
creation which have never yet chance to come across their mole's 
vision. after all, now that i am cooler, i can afford to admit that i 
have been no more sympathetic to armitage than dr. johnson has been to 
me. 

april 27. when i was a student i had the reputation of being a man of 
courage and enterprise. i remember that when there was a ghost-hunt at 
coltbridge it was i who sat up in the haunt house. is it advance 
years (after all, i am only thirty-five), or is it this physical malady 
which has cause degeneration? certainly my heart quail when i think 
of that horrible cavern in the hill, and the certainty that it has some 
monstrous occupant. what shall i do? there is not an hour in the day 
that i do not debate the question. if i say nothing, then the mystery 
remains unsolved. if i do say anything, then i have the alternative of 
mad alarm over the whole countryside, or of absolute incredulity which 
may end in consign me to an asylum. on the whole, i think that my 
best course is to wait, and to prepare for some expedition which shall 
be more deliberate and better thought out than the last. as a first 
step i have been to castleton and obtain a few essentials--a large 
acetylene lantern for one thing, and a good double-barrelled sporting 
rifle for another. the latter i have hired, but i have bought a dozen 
heavy game cartridges, which would bring down a rhinoceros. now i am 
ready for my troglodyte friend. give me better health and a little 
spate of energy, and i shall try conclusion with him yet. but who and 
what is he? ah! there is the question which stand between me and my 
sleep. how many theory do i form, only to discard each in turn! it 
is all so utterly unthinkable. and yet the cry, the footmark, the 
tread in the cavern--no reasoning can get past these i think of the 
old-world legend of dragon and of other monsters. were they, 
perhaps, not such fairy-tales as we have thought? can it be that there 
is some fact which underlie them, and am i, of all mortals, the one 
who is chosen to expose it? 

may 3.--for several days i have been laid up by the vagary of an 
english spring, and during those days there have been developments, the 
true and sinister meaning of which no one can appreciate save myself. 
i may say that we have had cloudy and moonless nights of late, which 
according to my information were the season upon which sheep 
disappeared. well, sheep have disappeared. two of miss allerton's, 
one of old pearson's of the cat walk, and one of mrs. moulton's. four 
in all during three nights. no trace is left of them at all, and the 
countryside is buzz with rumour of gipsy and of sheep-stealers. 

but there is something more serious than that. young armitage has 
disappear also. he left his moorland cottage early on wednesday 
night and has never been heard of since. he was an unattached man, so 
there is less sensation than would otherwise be the case. the popular 
explanation is that he owe money, and has found a situation in some 
other part of the country, whence he will presently write for his 
belongings. but i have grave misgivings. is it not much more likely 
that the recent tragedy of the sheep has cause him to take some steps 
which may have end in his own destruction? he may, for example, have 
lain in wait for the creature and been carry off by it into the 
recess of the mountains. what an inconceivable fate for a civilize 
englishman of the twentieth century! and yet i feel that it is 
possible and even probable. but in that case, how far am i answerable 
both for his death and for any other mishap which may occur? surely 
with the knowledge i already possess it must be my duty to see that 
something is done, or if necessary to do it myself. it must be the 
latter, for this morning i went down to the local police-station and 
told my story. the inspector enter it all in a large book and bowed 
me out with commendable gravity, but i heard a burst of laughter before 
i had got down his garden path. no doubt he was recount my 
adventure to his family. 

june 10.--i am writing this, prop up in bed, six week after my last 
entry in this journal. i have gone through a terrible shock both to 
mind and body, arise from such an experience as has seldom befallen a 
human being before. but i have attain my end. the danger from the 
terror which dwell in the blue john gap has pass never to return. 
thus much at least i, a broken invalid, have done for the common good. 
let me now recount what occur as clearly as i may. 

the night of friday, may 3rd, was dark and cloudy--the very night for 
the monster to walk. about eleven o'clock i went from the farm-house 
with my lantern and my rifle, have first left a note upon the table 
of my bedroom in which i said that, if i were missing, search should be 
made for me in the direction of the gap. i made my way to the mouth of 
the roman shaft, and, have perch myself among the rocks close to 
the opening, i shut off my lantern and wait patient with my loaded 
rifle ready to my hand. 

it was a melancholy vigil. all down the winding valley i could see the 
scattered lights of the farm-houses, and the church clock of 
chapel-le-dale toll the hour came faint to my ears. these token 
of my fellow-men serve only to make my own position seem the more 
lonely, and to call for a greater effort to overcome the terror which 
tempt me continual to get back to the farm, and abandon for ever 
this dangerous quest. and yet there lie deep in every man a rooted 
self-respect which make it hard for him to turn back from that which 
he has once undertaken. this feeling of personal pride was my 
salvation now, and it was that alone which held me fast when every 
instinct of my nature was drag me away. i am glad now that i had 
the strength. in spite of all that is has cost me, my manhood is at 
least above reproach. 

twelve o'clock struck in the distant church, then one, then two. it 
was the darkest hour of the night. the cloud were drift low, and 
there was not a star in the sky. an owl was hoot somewhere among 
the rocks, but no other sound, save the gentle sough of the wind, came 
to my ears. and then sudden i heard it! from far away down the 
tunnel came those muffle steps, so soft and yet so ponderous. i heard 
also the rattle of stone as they gave way under that giant tread. 
they drew nearer. they were close upon me. i heard the crashing of 
the bush round the entrance, and then dim through the dark i 
was conscious of the loom of some enormous shape, some monstrous 
inchoate creature, passing swift and very silent out from the 
tunnel. i was paralyse with fear and amazement. long as i had 
waited, now that it had actually come i was unprepared for the shock. 
i lay motionless and breathless, whilst the great dark mass whisk by 
me and was swallow up in the night. 

but now i nerve myself for its return. no sound came from the 
sleep countryside to tell of the horror which was loose. in no way 
could i judge how far off it was, what it was doing, or when it might 
be back. but not a second time should my nerve fail me, not a second 
time should it pass unchallenged. i swore it between my clench teeth 
as i laid my cock rifle across the rock. 

and yet it nearly happened. there was no warning of approach now as 
the creature pass over the grass. suddenly, like a dark, drift 
shadow, the huge bulk loom up once more before me, making for the 
entrance of the cave. again came that paralysis of volition which held 
my crooked forefinger impotent upon the trigger. but with a desperate 
effort i shook it off. even as the brushwood rustled, and the 
monstrous beast blend with the shadow of the gap, i fire at the 
retreat form. in the blaze of the gun i caught a glimpse of a great 
shaggy mass, something with rough and bristle hair of a wither grey 
colour, fade away to white in its lower parts, the huge body 
support upon short, thick, curve legs. i had just that glance, and 
then i heard the rattle of the stone as the creature tore down into 
its burrow. in an instant, with a triumphant revulsion of feeling, i 
had cast my fear to the wind, and uncover my powerful lantern, with 
my rifle in my hand, i sprang down from my rock and rush after the 
monster down the old roman shaft. 

my splendid lamp cast a brilliant flood of vivid light in front of me, 
very different from the yellow glimmer which had aid me down the same 
passage only twelve days before. as i ran, i saw the great beast 
lurch along before me, its huge bulk filling up the whole space from 
wall to wall. its hair look like coarse fade oakum, and hung down 
in long, dense masses which sway as it moved. it was like an 
enormous unclipp sheep in its fleece, but in size it was far large 
than the largest elephant, and its breadth seem to be nearly as great 
as its height. it fill me with amaze now to think that i should 
have dare to follow such a horror into the bowels of the earth, but 
when one's blood is up, and when one's quarry seem to be flying, the 
old primeval hunting-spirit awake and prudence is cast to the wind. 
rifle in hand, i ran at the top of my speed upon the trail of the 
monster. 

i had seen that the creature was swift. now i was to find out to my 
cost that it was also very cunning. i had imagine that it was in 
panic flight, and that i had only to pursue it. the idea that it might 
turn upon me never enter my excited brain. i have already explain 
that the passage down which i was racing open into a great central 
cave. into this i rushed, fearful lest i should lose all trace of the 
beast. but he had turn upon his own traces, and in a moment we were 
face to face. 

that picture, seen in the brilliant white light of the lantern, is 
etch for ever upon my brain. he had rear up on his hind leg as a 
bear would do, and stood above me, enormous, menacing--such a creature 
as no nightmare had ever brought to my imagination. i have said that he 
rear like a bear, and there was something bear-like--if one could 
conceive a bear which was ten-fold the bulk of any bear seen upon 
earth--in his whole pose and attitude, in his great crooked foreleg 
with their ivory-white claws, in his rugged skin, and in his red, 
gape mouth, fringe with monstrous fangs. only in one point did he 
differ from the bear, or from any other creature which walk the earth, 
and even at that supreme moment a shudder of horror pass over me as i 
observe that the eyes which glisten in the glow of my lantern were 
huge, project bulbs, white and sightless. for a moment his great 
paw swung over my head. the next he fell forward upon me, i and my 
broken lantern crash to the earth, and i remember no more. 


when i came to myself i was back in the farm-house of the allertons. 
two days had pass since my terrible adventure in the blue john gap. 
it seem that i had lain all night in the cave insensible from 
concussion of the brain, with my left arm and two rib badly fractured. 
in the morning my note had been found, a search party of a dozen 
farmer assembled, and i had been track down and carry back to my 
bedroom, where i had lain in high delirium ever since. there was, it 
seems, no sign of the creature, and no bloodstain which would show that 
my bullet had found him as he passed. save for my own plight and the 
mark upon the mud, there was nothing to prove that what i said was 
true. 

six week have now elapsed, and i am able to sit out once more in the 
sunshine. just opposite me is the steep hillside, grey with shale 
rock, and yonder on its flank is the dark cleft which mark the opening 
of the blue john gap. but it is no long a source of terror. never 
again through that ill-omened tunnel shall any strange shape flit out 
into the world of men. the educated and the scientific, the dr. 
johnson and the like, may smile at my narrative, but the poor folk 
of the countryside had never a doubt as to its truth. on the day after 
my recover consciousness they assemble in their hundred round the 
blue john gap. as the castleton courier said: 


"it was useless for our correspondent, or for any of the adventurous 
gentlemen who had come from matlock, buxton, and other parts, to offer 
to descend, to explore the cave to the end, and to finally test the 
extraordinary narrative of dr. james hardcastle. the country people had 
taken the matter into their own hands, and from an early hour of the 
morning they had work hard in stopping up the entrance of the tunnel. 
there is a sharp slope where the shaft begins, and great boulders, 
roll along by many willing hands, were thrust down it until the gap 
was absolutely sealed. so end the episode which has cause such 
excitement throughout the country. local opinion is fierce divide 
upon the subject. on the one hand are those who point to dr. 
hardcastle's impair health, and to the possibility of cerebral 
lesion of tubercular origin give rise to strange hallucinations. 
some idee fixe, according to these gentlemen, cause the doctor to 
wander down the tunnel, and a fall among the rocks was sufficient to 
account for his injuries. on the other hand, a legend of a strange 
creature in the gap has exist for some month back, and the farmer 
look upon dr. hardcastle's narrative and his personal injury as a 
final corroboration. so the matter stands, and so the matter will 
continue to stand, for no definite solution seem to us to be now 
possible. it transcend human wit to give any scientific explanation 
which could cover the allege facts." 


perhaps before the courier publish these words they would have been 
wise to send their representative to me. i have thought the matter 
out, as no one else has occasion to do, and it is possible that i might 
have remove some of the more obvious difficulty of the narrative and 
brought it one degree near to scientific acceptance. let me then 
write down the only explanation which seem to me to elucidate what i 
know to my cost to have been a series of facts. my theory may seem to 
be wildly improbable, but at least no one can venture to say that it is 
impossible. 

my view is--and it was formed, as is shown by my diary, before my 
personal adventure--that in this part of england there is a vast 
subterranean lake or sea, which is fed by the great number of stream 
which pass down through the limestone. where there is a large 
collection of water there must also be some evaporation, mists or rain, 
and a possibility of vegetation. this in turn suggest that there may 
be animal life, arising, as the vegetable life would also do, from 
those seed and type which had been introduce at an early period of 
the world's history, when communication with the outer air was more 
easy. this place had then develop a fauna and flora of its own, 
including such monster as the one which i had seen, which may well 
have been the old cave-bear, enormously enlarge and modify by its 
new environment. for countless aeon the internal and the external 
creation had kept apart, grow steady away from each other. then 
there had come some rift in the depths of the mountain which had 
enable one creature to wander up and, by means of the roman tunnel, to 
reach the open air. like all subterranean life, it had lost the power 
of sight, but this had no doubt been compensate for by nature in other 
directions. certainly it had some means of finding its way about, and 
of hunting down the sheep upon the hillside. as to its choice of dark 
nights, it is part of my theory that light was painful to those great 
white eyeballs, and that it was only a pitch-black world which it could 
tolerate. perhaps, indeed, it was the glare of my lantern which save 
my life at that awful moment when we were face to face. so i read the 
riddle. i leave these fact behind me, and if you can explain them, do 
so; or if you choose to doubt them, do so. neither your belief nor 
your incredulity can alter them, nor affect one whose task is nearly 
over. 


so end the strange narrative of dr. james hardcastle. 



the brazil cat 

it is hard luck on a young fellow to have expensive tastes, great 
expectations, aristocratic connections, but no actual money in his 
pocket, and no profession by which he may earn any. the fact was that 
my father, a good, sanguine, easy-going man, had such confidence in the 
wealth and benevolence of his bachelor elder brother, lord southerton, 
that he took it for grant that i, his only son, would never be call 
upon to earn a living for myself. he imagine that if there were not a 
vacancy for me on the great southerton estates, at least there would be 
found some post in that diplomatic service which still remains the 
special preserve of our privileged classes. he die too early to 
realize how false his calculation had been. neither my uncle nor the 
state took the slightest notice of me, or show any interest in my 
career. an occasional brace of pheasants, or basket of hares, was all 
that ever reach me to remind me that i was heir to otwell house and 
one of the richest estate in the country. in the meantime, i found 
myself a bachelor and man about town, living in a suite of apartments 
in grosvenor mansions, with no occupation save that of pigeon-shooting 
and polo-playing at hurlingham. month by month i realize that it was 
more and more difficult to get the broker to renew my bills, or to 
cash any further post-obits upon an unentailed property. ruin lay 
right across my path, and every day i saw it clearer, nearer, and more 
absolutely unavoidable. 

what made me feel my own poverty the more was that, apart from the 
great wealth of lord southerton, all my other relations were fairly 
well-to-do. the nearest of these was everard king, my father's nephew 
and my own first cousin, who had spent an adventurous life in brazil, 
and had now return to this country to settle down on his fortune. we 
never knew how he made his money, but he appear to have plenty of it, 
for he bought the estate of greylands, near clipton-on-the-marsh, in 
suffolk. for the first year of his residence in england he took no 
more notice of me than my miserly uncle; but at last one summer 
morning, to my very great relief and joy, i received a letter ask me 
to come down that very day and spend a short visit at greyland court. 
i was expect a rather long visit to bankruptcy court at the time, 
and this interrupt seem almost providential. if i could only get 
on terms with this unknown relative of mine, i might pull through yet. 
for the family credit he could not let me go entire to the wall. i 
ordered my valet to pack my valise, and i set off the same evening for 
clipton-on-the-marsh. 

after change at ipswich, a little local train deposit me at a 
small, desert station lie amidst a rolling grassy country, with a 
sluggish and winding river curve in and out amidst the valleys, 
between high, silt banks, which show that we were within reach of 
the tide. no carriage was await me (i found afterwards that my 
telegram had been delayed), so i hire a dogcart at the local inn. the 
driver, an excellent fellow, was full of my relative's praises, and i 
learned from him that mr. everard king was already a name to conjure 
with in that part of the county. he had entertain the 
school-children, he had thrown his grounds open to visitors, he had 
subscribe to charities--in short, his benevolence had been so 
universal that my driver could only account for it on the supposition 
that he had parliamentary ambitions. 

my attention was drawn away from my driver's panegyric by the 
appearance of a very beautiful bird which settled on a telegraph-post 
beside the road. at first i thought that it was a jay, but it was 
larger, with a bright plumage. the driver account for its presence 
at once by saying that it belong to the very man whom we were about 
to visit. it seem that the acclimatize of foreign creature was 
one of his hobbies, and that he had brought with him from brazil a 
number of bird and beast which he was endeavour to rear in 
england. when once we had pass the gate of greyland park we had 
ample evidence of this taste of his. some small spotted deer, a 
curious wild pig known, i believe, as a peccary, a gorgeous feather 
oriole, some sort of armadillo, and a singular lumber in-toed beast 
like a very fat badger, were among the creature which i observe as we 
drove along the winding avenue. 

mr. everard king, my unknown cousin, was standing in person upon the 
steps of his house, for he had seen us in the distance, and guess 
that it was i. his appearance was very homely and benevolent, short 
and stout, forty-five years old, perhaps, with a round, good-humoured 
face, burn brown with the tropical sun, and shot with a thousand 
wrinkles. he wore white linen clothes, in true planter style, with a 
cigar between his lips, and a large panama hat upon the back of his 
head. it was such a figure as one associate with a verandah 
bungalow, and it look curious out of place in front of this broad, 
stone english mansion, with its solid wings and its palladio pillar 
before the doorway. 

"my dear!" he cried, glancing over his shoulder; "my dear, here is our 
guest! welcome, welcome to greylands! i am delight to make your 
acquaintance, cousin marshall, and i take it as a great compliment that 
you should honour this sleepy little country place with your presence." 

nothing could be more hearty than his manner, and he set me at my ease 
in an instant. but it need all his cordiality to atone for the 
frigidity and even rude of his wife, a tall, haggard woman, who 
came forward at his summons. she was, i believe, of brazil 
extraction, though she spoke excellent english, and i excuse her 
manners on the score of her ignorance of our customs. she did not 
attempt to conceal, however, either then or afterwards, that i was no 
very welcome visitor at greyland court. her actual words were, as a 
rule, courteous, but she was the possessor of a pair of particularly 
expressive dark eyes, and i read in them very clearly from the first 
that she heartily wish me back in london once more. 

however, my debt were too pressing and my designs upon my wealthy 
relative were too vital for me to allow them to be upset by the 
ill-temper of his wife, so i disregard her cold and reciprocate 
the extreme cordiality of his welcome. no pains had been spare by him 
to make me comfortable. my room was a charming one. he implore me to 
tell him anything which could add to my happiness. it was on the tip 
of my tongue to inform him that a blank cheque would material help 
towards that end, but i felt that it might be premature in the present 
state of our acquaintance. the dinner was excellent, and as we sat 
together afterwards over his havana and coffee, which later he told me 
was specially prepared upon his own plantation, it seem to me that 
all my driver's eulogy were justified, and that i had never met a 
more large-hearted and hospitable man. 

but, in spite of his cheery good nature, he was a man with a strong 
will and a fiery temper of his own. of this i had an example upon the 
following morning. the curious aversion which mrs. everard king had 
conceive towards me was so strong, that her manner at breakfast was 
almost offensive. but her meaning became unmistakable when her husband 
had quit the room. 

"the best train in the day is at twelve-fifteen," said she. 

"but i was not thinking of go today," i answered, frankly--perhaps 
even defiantly, for i was determined not to be driven out by this woman. 

"oh, if it rest with you--" said she, and stop with a most insolent 
expression in her eyes. 

"i am sure," i answered, "that mr. everard king would tell me if i were 
outstay my welcome." 

"what's this? what's this?" said a voice, and there he was in the 
room. he had overheard my last words, and a glance at our face had 
told him the rest. in an instant his chubby, cheery face set into an 
expression of absolute ferocity. 

"might i trouble you to walk outside, marshall?" said he. (i may 
mention that my own name is marshall king.) 

he closed the door behind me, and then, for an instant, i heard him 
talk in a low voice of concentrated passion to his wife. this gross 
breach of hospitality had evidently hit upon his tenderest point. i am 
no eavesdropper, so i walk out on to the lawn. presently i heard a 
hurried step behind me, and there was the lady, her face pale with 
excitement, and her eyes red with tears. 

"my husband has ask me to apologize to you, mr. marshall king," said 
she, standing with downcast eyes before me. 

"please do not say another word, mrs. king." 

her dark eyes sudden blaze out at me. 

"you fool!" she hissed, with frantic vehemence, and turning on her heel 
swept back to the house. 

the insult was so outrageous, so insufferable, that i could only stand 
staring after her in bewilderment. i was still there when my host 
join me. he was his cheery, chubby self once more. 

"i hope that my wife has apologize for her foolish remarks," said he. 

"oh, yes--yes, certainly!" 

he put his hand through my arm and walk with me up and down the lawn. 

"you must not take it seriously," said he. "it would grieve me 
inexpressible if you curtail your visit by one hour. the fact 
is--there is no reason why there should be any concealment between 
relatives--that my poor dear wife is incredible jealous. she hate 
that anyone--male or female--should for an instant come between us. her 
ideal is a desert island and an eternal tete-a-tete. that give you 
the clue to her actions, which are, i confess, upon this particular 
point, not very far remove from mania. tell me that you will think no 
more of it." 

"no, no; certainly not." 

"then light this cigar and come round with me and see my little 
menagerie." 

the whole afternoon was occupy by this inspection, which included all 
the birds, beasts, and even reptile which he had imported. some were 
free, some in cages, a few actually in the house. he spoke with 
enthusiasm of his success and his failures, his birth and his 
deaths, and he would cry out in his delight, like a schoolboy, when, as 
we walked, some gaudy bird would flutter up from the grass, or some 
curious beast slink into the cover. finally he led me down a corridor 
which extend from one wing of the house. at the end of this there 
was a heavy door with a slide shutter in it, and beside it there 
project from the wall an iron handle attach to a wheel and a drum. 
a line of stout bar extend across the passage. 

"i am about to show you the jewel of my collection," said he. "there is 
only one other specimen in europe, now that the rotterdam cub is dead. 
it is a brazil cat." 

"but how do that differ from any other cat?" 

"you will soon see that," said he, laughing. "will you kindly draw 
that shutter and look through?" 

i did so, and found that i was gaze into a large, empty room, with 
stone flags, and small, barred window upon the farther wall. in the 
centre of this room, lie in the middle of a golden patch of sunlight, 
there was stretch a huge creature, as large as a tiger, but as black 
and sleek as ebony. it was simply a very enormous and very well-kept 
black cat, and it cuddle up and bask in that yellow pool of light 
exactly as a cat would do. it was so graceful, so sinewy, and so 
gently and smooth diabolical, that i could not take my eyes from the 
opening. 

"isn't he splendid?" said my host, enthusiastically. 

"glorious! i never saw such a noble creature." 

"some people call it a black puma, but really it is not a puma at all. 
that fellow is nearly eleven feet from tail to tip. four years ago he 
was a little ball of black fluff, with two yellow eyes staring out of 
it. he was sold me as a new-born cub up in the wild country at the 
head-waters of the rio negro. they spear his mother to death after 
she had kill a dozen of them." 

"they are ferocious, then?" 

"the most absolutely treacherous and bloodthirsty creature upon earth. 
you talk about a brazil cat to an up-country indian, and see him get 
the jumps. they prefer human to game. this fellow has never taste 
living blood yet, but when he do he will be a terror. at present he 
won't stand anyone but me in his den. even baldwin, the groom, dare 
not go near him. as to me, i am his mother and father in one." 

as he spoke he suddenly, to my astonishment, open the door and 
slip in, close it instantly behind him. at the sound of his voice 
the huge, lithe creature rose, yawn and rub its round, black head 
affectionate against his side, while he pat and fondle it. 

"now, tommy, into your cage!" said he. 

the monstrous cat walk over to one side of the room and coil itself 
up under a grating. everard king came out, and taking the iron handle 
which i have mentioned, he began to turn it. as he did so the line of 
bar in the corridor began to pass through a slot in the wall and 
closed up the front of this grating, so as to make an effective cage. 
when it was in position he open the door once more and invite me 
into the room, which was heavy with the pungent, musty smell peculiar 
to the great carnivora. 

"that's how we work it," said he. "we give him the run of the room for 
exercise, and then at night we put him in his cage. you can let him 
out by turning the handle from the passage, or you can, as you have 
seen, coop him up in the same way. no, no, you should not do that!" 

i had put my hand between the bar to pat the glossy, heave flank. 
he pull it back, with a serious face. 

"i assure you that he is not safe. don't imagine that because i can 
take liberties with him anyone else can. he is very exclusive in his 
friends--aren't you, tommy? ah, he hear his lunch coming to him! 
don't you, boy?" 

a step sound in the stone-flagged passage, and the creature had 
sprung to his feet, and was pace up and down the narrow cage, his 
yellow eyes gleaming, and his scarlet tongue ripple and quiver 
over the white line of his jagged teeth. a groom enter with a coarse 
joint upon a tray, and thrust it through the bar to him. he pounce 
lightly upon it, carry it off to the corner, and there, holding it 
between his paws, tore and wrench at it, raise his bloody muzzle 
every now and then to look at us. it was a malignant and yet 
fascinating sight. 

"you can't wonder that i am fond of him, can you?" said my host, as we 
left the room, "especially when you consider that i have had the 
rear of him. it was no joke bring him over from the centre of 
south america; but here he is safe and sound--and, as i have said, far 
the most perfect specimen in europe. the people at the zoo are die 
to have him, but i really can't part with him. now, i think that i have 
inflict my hobby upon you long enough, so we cannot do better than 
follow tommy's example, and go to our lunch." 

my south america relative was so engross by his grounds and their 
curious occupants, that i hardly gave him credit at first for have 
any interests outside them. that he had some, and pressing ones, was 
soon borne in upon me by the number of telegram which he received. 
they arrive at all hours, and were always open by him with the 
utmost eager and anxiety upon his face. sometimes i imagine that 
it must be the turf, and sometimes the stock exchange, but certainly he 
had some very urgent business go forward which was not transact 
upon the downs of suffolk. during the six days of my visit he had never 
few than three or four telegram a day, and sometimes as many as 
seven or eight. 

i had occupy these six days so well, that by the end of them i had 
succeed in get upon the most cordial terms with my cousin. every 
night we had sat up late in the billiard-room, he telling me the most 
extraordinary story of his adventure in america--stories so 
desperate and reckless, that i could hardly associate them with the 
brown little, chubby man before me. in return, i venture upon some of 
my own reminiscences of london life, which interested him so much, that 
he vow he would come up to grosvenor mansions and stay with me. he 
was anxious to see the fast side of city life, and certainly, though 
i say it, he could not have chosen a more competent guide. it was not 
until the last day of my visit that i venture to approach that which 
was on my mind. i told him frankly about my pecuniary difficulty and 
my impending ruin, and i ask his advice--though i hope for something 
more solid. he listen attentively, puff hard at his cigar. 

"but surely," said he, "you are the heir of our relative, lord 
southerton?" 

"i have every reason to believe so, but he would never make me any 
allowance." 

"no, no, i have heard of his miserly ways. my poor marshall, your 
position has been a very hard one. by the way, have you heard any news 
of lord southerton's health lately?" 

"he has always been in a critical condition ever since my childhood." 

"exactly--a creak hinge, if ever there was one. your inheritance 
may be a long way off. dear me, how awkward situated you are!" 

"i had some hopes, sir, that you, knowing all the facts, might be 
inclined to advance----" 

"don't say another word, my dear boy," he cried, with the utmost 
cordiality; "we shall talk it over tonight, and i give you my word that 
whatever is in my power shall be done." 

i was not sorry that my visit was drawing to a close, for it is 
unpleasant to feel that there is one person in the house who eager 
desire your departure. mrs. king's sallow face and forbidding eyes 
had become more and more hateful to me. she was no long active 
rude--her fear of her husband prevent her--but she pushed her insane 
jealousy to the extent of ignore me, never address me, and in 
every way making my stay at greyland as uncomfortable as she could. 
so offensive was her manner during that last day, that i should 
certainly have left had it not been for that interview with my host in 
the evening which would, i hoped, retrieve my broken fortunes. 

it was very late when it occurred, for my relative, who had been 
receiving even more telegram than usual during the day, went off to 
his study after dinner, and only emerge when the household had retired 
to bed. i heard him go round lock the doors, as custom was of a 
night, and finally he join me in the billiard-room. his stout figure 
was wrap in a dressing-gown, and he wore a pair of red turkey 
slipper without any heels. settle down into an arm-chair, he brew 
himself a glass of grog, in which i could not help notice that the 
whisky considerably predominate over the water. 

"my word!" said he, "what a night!" 

it was, indeed. the wind was howling and scream round the house, 
and the lattice window rattle and shook as if they were coming in. 
the glow of the yellow lamp and the flavour of our cigar seem the 
bright and more fragrant for the contrast. 

"now, my boy," said my host, "we have the house and the night to 
ourselves. let me have an idea of how your affair stand, and i will 
see what can be done to set them in order. i wish to hear every 
detail." 

thus encouraged, i enter into a long exposition, in which all my 
tradesmen and creditor from my landlord to my valet, figured in turn. 
i had note in my pocket-book, and i marshal my facts, and gave, i 
flatter myself, a very businesslike statement of my own unbusinesslike 
ways and lamentable position. i was depressed, however, to notice that 
my companion's eyes were vacant and his attention elsewhere. when he 
did occasional throw out a remark it was so entire perfunctory and 
pointless, that i was sure he had not in the least follow my remarks. 
every now and then he rouse himself and put on some show of interest, 
ask me to repeat or to explain more fully, but it was always to sink 
once more into the same brown study. at last he rose and threw the end 
of his cigar into the grate. 

"i'll tell you what, my boy," said he. "i never had a head for 
figures, so you will excuse me. you must jot it all down upon paper, 
and let me have a note of the amount. i'll understand it when i see it 
in black and white." 

the proposal was encouraging. i promise to do so. 

"and now it's time we were in bed. by jove, there's one o'clock 
striking in the hall." 

the tingle of the chime clock broke through the deep roar of the 
gale. the wind was sweeping past with the rush of a great river. 

"i must see my cat before i go to bed," said my host. "a high wind 
excite him. will you come?" 

"certainly," said i. 

"then tread soft and don't speak, for everyone is asleep." 

we pass quiet down the lamp-lit persian-rugged hall, and through 
the door at the farther end. all was dark in the stone corridor, but a 
stable lantern hung on a hook, and my host took it down and lit it. 
there was no grating visible in the passage, so i knew that the beast 
was in its cage. 

"come in!" said my relative, and open the door. 

a deep growl as we enter show that the storm had really excited 
the creature. in the flicker light of the lantern, we saw it, a 
huge black mass coil in the corner of its den and throw a squat, 
uncouth shadow upon the whitewash wall. its tail switch angry 
among the straw. 

"poor tommy is not in the best of tempers," said everard king, holding 
up the lantern and look in at him. "what a black devil he looks, 
doesn't he? i must give him a little supper to put him in a better 
humour. would you mind holding the lantern for a moment?" 

i took it from his hand and he step to the door. 

"his larder is just outside here," said he. "you will excuse me for an 
instant won't you?" he pass out, and the door shut with a sharp 
metallic click behind him. 

that hard crisp sound made my heart stand still. a sudden wave of 
terror pass over me. a vague perception of some monstrous treachery 
turn me cold. i sprang to the door, but there was no handle upon the 
inner side. 

"here!" i cried. "let me out!" 

"all right! don't make a row!" said my host from the passage. "you've 
got the light all right." 

"yes, but i don't care about being lock in alone like this." 

"don't you?" i heard his hearty, chuckle laugh. "you won't be alone 
long." 

"let me out, sir!" i repeated angrily. "i tell you i don't allow 
practical joke of this sort." 

"practical is the word," said he, with another hateful chuckle. and 
then sudden i heard, amidst the roar of the storm, the creak and 
whine of the winch-handle turning and the rattle of the grating as it 
pass through the slot. great god, he was letting loose the brazil 
cat! 

in the light of the lantern i saw the bar slide slow before me. 
already there was an opening a foot wide at the farther end. with a 
scream i seize the last bar with my hand and pull with the strength 
of a madman. i was a madman with rage and horror. for a minute or 
more i held the thing motionless. i knew that he was strain with 
all his force upon the handle, and that the leverage was sure to 
overcome me. i gave inch by inch, my feet slide along the stones, 
and all the time i beg and pray this inhuman monster to save me 
from this horrible death. i conjure him by his kinship. i remind 
him that i was his guest; i beg to know what harm i had ever done 
him. his only answer were the tug and jerk upon the handle, each of 
which, in spite of all my struggles, pull another bar through the 
opening. clinging and clutching, i was drag across the whole front 
of the cage, until at last, with ache wrist and lacerate fingers, i 
gave up the hopeless struggle. the grating clang back as i release 
it, and an instant later i heard the shuffle of the turkey slipper in 
the passage, and the slam of the distant door. then everything was 
silent. 

the creature had never move during this time. he lay still in the 
corner, and his tail had cease switching. this apparition of a man 
adhere to his bar and drag scream across him had apparently 
fill him with amazement. i saw his great eyes staring steady at 
me. i had drop the lantern when i seize the bars, but it still 
burn upon the floor, and i made a movement to grasp it, with some 
idea that its light might protect me. but the instant i moved, the 
beast gave a deep and menace growl. i stop and stood still, 
quiver with fear in every limb. the cat (if one may call so fearful 
a creature by so homely a name) was not more than ten feet from me. 
the eyes glimmer like two disk of phosphorus in the darkness. they 
appall and yet fascinate me. i could not take my own eyes from 
them. nature play strange trick with us at such moments of 
intensity, and those glimmer lights wax and wane with a steady 
rise and fall. sometimes they seem to be tiny points of extreme 
brilliancy--little electric sparks in the black obscurity--then they 
would widen and widen until all that corner of the room was fill with 
their shift and sinister light. and then sudden they went out 
altogether. 

the beast had closed its eyes. i do not know whether there may be any 
truth in the old idea of the dominance of the human gaze, or whether 
the huge cat was simply drowsy, but the fact remains that, far from 
showing any symptom of attack me, it simply rest its sleek, black 
head upon its huge forepaw and seem to sleep. i stood, fear to 
move lest i should rouse it into malignant life once more. but at 
least i was able to think clearly now that the baleful eyes were off 
me. here i was shut up for the night with the ferocious beast. my own 
instincts, to say nothing of the words of the plausible villain who 
laid this trap for me, warn me that the animal was as savage as its 
master. how could i stave it off until morning? the door was 
hopeless, and so were the narrow, barred windows. there was no shelter 
anywhere in the bare, stone-flagged room. to cry for assistance was 
absurd. i knew that this den was an outhouse, and that the corridor 
which connected it with the house was at least a hundred feet long. 
besides, with the gale thundering outside, my cries were not likely to 
be heard. i had only my own courage and my own wit to trust to. 

and then, with a fresh wave of horror, my eyes fell upon the lantern. 
the candle had burn low, and was already beginning to gutter. in ten 
minutes it would be out. i had only ten minutes then in which to do 
something, for i felt that if i were once left in the dark with that 
fearful beast i should be incapable of action. the very thought of it 
paralyse me. i cast my despairing eyes round this chamber of death, 
and they rest upon one spot which seem to promise i will not say 
safety, but less immediate and imminent danger than the open floor. 

i have said that the cage had a top as well as a front, and this top 
was left standing when the front was wound through the slot in the 
wall. it consist of bar at a few inches' interval, with stout wire 
netting between, and it rest upon a strong stanchion at each end. it 
stood now as a great barred canopy over the crouch figure in the 
corner. the space between this iron shelf and the roof may have been 
from two or three feet. if i could only get up there, squeeze in 
between bar and ceiling, i should have only one vulnerable side. i 
should be safe from below, from behind, and from each side. only on 
the open face of it could i be attacked. there, it is true, i had no 
protection whatever; but at least, i should be out of the brute's path 
when he began to pace about his den. he would have to come out of his 
way to reach me. it was now or never, for if once the light were out 
it would be impossible. with a gulp in my throat i sprang up, seize 
the iron edge of the top, and swung myself pant on to it. i writhe 
in face downwards, and found myself look straight into the terrible 
eyes and yawn jaws of the cat. its fetid breath came up into my 
face like the steam from some foul pot. 

it appeared, however, to be rather curious than angry. with a sleek 
ripple of its long, black back it rose, stretch itself, and then 
rear itself on its hind legs, with one forepaw against the wall, it 
raise the other, and drew its claw across the wire mesh beneath me. 
one sharp, white hook tore through my trousers--for i may mention that 
i was still in evening dress--and dug a furrow in my knee. it was not 
meant as an attack, but rather as an experiment, for upon my give a 
sharp cry of pain he drop down again, and spring lightly into the 
room, he began walking swift round it, look up every now and again 
in my direction. for my part i shuffle backwards until i lay with my 
back against the wall, screw myself into the smallest space 
possible. the farther i got the more difficult it was for him to 
attack me. 

he seem more excited now that he had begun to move about, and he ran 
swift and noiseless round and round the den, passing continual 
underneath the iron couch upon which i lay. it was wonderful to see so 
great a bulk passing like a shadow, with hardly the softest thud of 
velvety pads. the candle was burning low--so low that i could hardly 
see the creature. and then, with a last flare and splutter it went out 
altogether. i was alone with the cat in the dark! 

it help one to face a danger when one know that one has done all that 
possibly can be done. there is nothing for it then but to quiet 
await the result. in this case, there was no chance of safety anywhere 
except the precise spot where i was. i stretch myself out, 
therefore, and lay silently, almost breathlessly, hope that the beast 
might forget my presence if i did nothing to remind him. i reckon 
that it must already be two o'clock. at four it would be full dawn. i 
had not more than two hour to wait for daylight. 

outside, the storm was still raging, and the rain lash continual 
against the little windows. inside, the poisonous and fetid air was 
overpowering. i could neither hear nor see the cat. i try to think 
about other things--but only one had power enough to draw my mind from 
my terrible position. that was the contemplation of my cousin's 
villainy, his unparalleled hypocrisy, his malignant hatred of me. 
beneath that cheerful face there lurk the spirit of a mediaeval 
assassin. and as i thought of it i saw more clearly how cunning the 
thing had been arranged. he had apparently gone to bed with the 
others. no doubt he had his witness to prove it. then, unknown to 
them, he had slip down, had lure me into his den and abandoned me. 
his story would be so simple. he had left me to finish my cigar in the 
billiard-room. i had gone down on my own account to have a last look at 
the cat. i had enter the room without observing that the cage was 
opened, and i had been caught. how could such a crime be brought home 
to him? suspicion, perhaps--but proof, never! 

how slow those dreadful two hour went by! once i heard a low, 
rasp sound, which i took to be the creature licking its own fur. 
several times those greenish eyes gleam at me through the darkness, 
but never in a fixed stare, and my hope grew strong that my presence 
had been forgotten or ignored. at last the least faint glimmer of 
light came through the windows--i first dim saw them as two grey 
square upon the black wall, then grey turn to white, and i could see 
my terrible companion once more. and he, alas, could see me! 

it was evident to me at once that he was in a much more dangerous and 
aggressive mood than when i had seen him last. the cold of the morning 
had irritate him, and he was hungry as well. with a continual growl he 
pace swift up and down the side of the room which was farthest from 
my refuge, his whiskers bristle angrily, and his tail switch and 
lashing. as he turn at the corner his savage eyes always look 
upwards at me with a dreadful menace. i knew then that he meant to 
kill me. yet i found myself even at that moment admire the sinuous 
grace of the devilish thing, its long, undulating, ripple movements, 
the gloss of its beautiful flanks, the vivid, palpitate scarlet of 
the glisten tongue which hung from the jet-black muzzle. and all 
the time that deep, threaten growl was rising and rising in an 
unbroken crescendo. i knew that the crisis was at hand. 

it was a miserable hour to meet such a death--so cold, so comfortless, 
shiver in my light dress clothes upon this gridiron of torment upon 
which i was stretched. i try to brace myself to it, to raise my soul 
above it, and at the same time, with the lucid which come to a 
perfectly desperate man, i cast round for some possible means of 
escape. one thing was clear to me. if that front of the cage was only 
back in its position once more, i could find a sure refuge behind it. 
could i possibly pull it back? i hardly dare to move for fear of 
bring the creature upon me. slowly, very slowly, i put my hand 
forward until it grasp the edge of the front, the final bar which 
protrude through the wall. to my surprise it came quite easily to my 
jerk. of course the difficulty of drawing it out arose from the fact 
that i was clinging to it. i pull again, and three inch of it came 
through. it ran apparently on wheels. i pull again ... and then 
the cat sprang! 

it was so quick, so sudden, that i never saw it happen. i simply heard 
the savage snarl, and in an instant afterwards the blazing yellow eyes, 
the flatten black head with its red tongue and flash teeth, were 
within reach of me. the impact of the creature shook the bar upon 
which i lay, until i thought (as far as i could think of anything at 
such a moment) that they were coming down. the cat sway there for an 
instant, the head and front paw quite close to me, the hind paw 
claw to find a grip upon the edge of the grating. i heard the claw 
rasp as they clung to the wire-netting, and the breath of the beast 
made me sick. but its bound had been miscalculated. it could not 
retain its position. slowly, grin with rage, and scratch madly 
at the bars, it swung backwards and drop heavy upon the floor. 
with a growl it instantly face round to me and crouch for another 
spring. 

i knew that the next few moments would decide my fate. the creature 
had learned by experience. it would not miscalculate again. i must 
act promptly, fearlessly, if i were to have a chance for life. in an 
instant i had form my plan. pull off my dress-coat, i threw it 
down over the head of the beast. at the same moment i drop over the 
edge, seize the end of the front grating, and pull it frantic 
out of the wall. 

it came more easily than i could have expected. i rush across the 
room, bearing it with me; but, as i rushed, the accident of my position 
put me upon the outer side. had it been the other way, i might have 
come off scathless. as it was, there was a moment's pause as i stop 
it and try to pass in through the opening which i had left. that 
moment was enough to give time to the creature to toss off the coat 
with which i had blind him and to spring upon me. i hurl myself 
through the gap and pull the rails to behind me, but he seize my leg 
before i could entire withdraw it. one stroke of that huge paw tore 
off my calf as a shaving of wood curl off before a plane. the next 
moment, bleeding and fainting, i was lie among the foul straw with a 
line of friendly bar between me and the creature which ramp so 
frantic against them. 

too wound to move, and too faint to be conscious of fear, i could 
only lie, more dead than alive, and watch it. it pressed its broad, 
black chest against the bar and angle for me with its crooked paw as 
i have seen a kitten do before a mouse-trap. it rip my clothes, 
but, stretch as it would, it could not quite reach me. i have heard of 
the curious numb effect produce by wound from the great carnivora, 
and now i was destined to experience it, for i had lost all sense of 
personality, and was as interested in the cat's failure or success as 
if it were some game which i was watching. and then gradual my mind 
drift away into strange vague dreams, always with that black face and 
red tongue coming back into them, and so i lost myself in the nirvana 
of delirium, the blessed relief of those who are too sorely tried. 

tracing the course of event afterwards, i conclude that i must have 
been insensible for about two hours. what rouse me to consciousness 
once more was that sharp metallic click which had been the precursor of 
my terrible experience. it was the shoot back of the spring lock. 
then, before my senses were clear enough to entire apprehend what 
they saw, i was aware of the round, benevolent face of my cousin 
peer in through the open door. what he saw evidently amaze him. 
there was the cat crouch on the floor. i was stretch upon my back 
in my shirt-sleeves within the cage, my trousers torn to ribbon and a 
great pool of blood all round me. i can see his amaze face now, with 
the morning sunlight upon it. he peer at me, and peer again. then 
he closed the door behind him, and advanced to the cage to see if i 
were really dead. 

i cannot undertake to say what happened. i was not in a fit state to 
witness or to chronicle such events. i can only say that i was 
sudden conscious that his face was away from me--that he was look 
towards the animal. 

"good old tommy!" he cried. "good old tommy!" 

then he came near the bars, with his back still towards me. 

"down, you stupid beast!" he roared. "down, sir! don't you know your 
master?" 

sudden even in my bemuddle brain a remembrance came of those words 
of his when he had said that the taste of blood would turn the cat into 
a fiend. my blood had done it, but he was to pay the price. 

"get away!" he screamed. "get away, you devil! baldwin! baldwin! oh, 
my god!" 

and then i heard him fall, and rise, and fall again, with a sound like 
the rip of sacking. his scream grew faint until they were lost 
in the worry snarl. and then, after i thought that he was dead, i 
saw, as in a nightmare, a blinded, tattered, blood-soaked figure 
running wildly round the room--and that was the last glimpse which i 
had of him before i faint once again. 


i was many month in my recovery--in fact, i cannot say that i have 
ever recovered, for to the end of my days i shall carry a stick as a 
sign of my night with the brazil cat. baldwin, the groom, and the 
other servant could not tell what had occurred, when, drawn by the 
death-cries of their master, they found me behind the bars, and his 
remains--or what they afterwards discover to be his remains--in the 
clutch of the creature which he had reared. they stall him off with 
hot irons, and afterwards shot him through the loophole of the door 
before they could finally extricate me. i was carry to my bedroom, 
and there, under the roof of my would-be murderer, i remain between 
life and death for several weeks. they had sent for a surgeon from 
clipton and a nurse from london, and in a month i was able to be 
carry to the station, and so convey back once more to grosvenor 
mansions. 

i have one remembrance of that illness, which might have been part of 
the ever-changing panorama conjure up by a delirious brain were it not 
so definitely fixed in my memory. one night, when the nurse was 
absent, the door of my chamber opened, and a tall woman in blackest 
mourning slip into the room. she came across to me, and as she bent 
her sallow face i saw by the faint gleam of the night-light that it was 
the brazil woman whom my cousin had married. she stare intent 
into my face, and her expression was more kindly than i had ever seen 
it. 

"are you conscious?" she asked. 

i feeble nodded--for i was still very weak. 

"well; then, i only wish to say to you that you have yourself to 
blame. did i not do all i could for you? from the beginning i try 
to drive you from the house. by every means, short of betray my 
husband, i try to save you from him. i knew that he had a reason for 
bring you here. i knew that he would never let you get away again. 
no one knew him as i knew him, who had suffer from him so often. i 
did not dare to tell you all this. he would have kill me. but i did 
my best for you. as things have turn out, you have been the best 
friend that i have ever had. you have set me free, and i fancy that 
nothing but death would do that. i am sorry if you are hurt, but i 
cannot reproach myself. i told you that you were a fool--and a fool 
you have been." she crept out of the room, the bitter, singular woman, 
and i was never destined to see her again. with what remain from her 
husband's property she went back to her native land, and i have heard 
that she afterwards took the veil at pernambuco. 

it was not until i had been back in london for some time that the 
doctor pronounced me to be well enough to do business. it was not a 
very welcome permission to me, for i fear that it would be the signal 
for an inrush of creditors; but it was summers, my lawyer, who first 
took advantage of it. 

"i am very glad to see that your lordship is so much better," said he. 
"i have been wait a long time to offer my congratulations." 

"what do you mean, summers? this is no time for joking." 

"i mean what i say," he answered. "you have been lord southerton for 
the last six weeks, but we fear that it would retard your recovery if 
you were to learn it." 

lord southerton! one of the richest peer in england! i could not 
believe my ears. and then sudden i thought of the time which had 
elapsed, and how it coincide with my injuries. 

"then lord southerton must have die about the same time that i was 
hurt?" 

"his death occur upon that very day." summer look hard at me as 
i spoke, and i am convinced--for he was a very shrewd fellow--that he 
had guess the true state of the case. he pause for a moment as if 
await a confidence from me, but i could not see what was to be 
gain by expose such a family scandal. 

"yes, a very curious coincidence," he continued, with the same knowing 
look. "of course, you are aware that your cousin everard king was the 
next heir to the estates. now, if it had been you instead of him who 
had been torn to pieces by this tiger, or whatever it was, then of 
course he would have been lord southerton at the present moment." 

"no doubt," said i. 

"and he took such an interest in it," said summers. "i happen to know 
that the late lord southerton's valet was in his pay, and that he use 
to have telegram from him every few hour to tell him how he was 
get on. that would be about the time when you were down there. 
was it not strange that he should wish to be so well informed, since he 
knew that he was not the direct heir?" 

"very strange," said i. "and now, summers, if you will bring me my 
bill and a new cheque-book, we will begin to get things into order." 




tale of mystery 



the lost special 

the confession of herbert de lernac, now lie under sentence of death 
at marseilles, has thrown a light upon one of the most inexplicable 
crime of the century--an incident which is, i believe, absolutely 
unprecedented in the criminal annals of any country: although there is 
a reluctance to discuss the matter in official circles, and little 
information has been given to the press, there are still indication 
that the statement of this arch-criminal is corroborate by the facts, 
and that we have at last found a solution for a most astound 
business. as the matter is eight years old, and as its importance was 
somewhat obscure by a politics crisis which was engaging the public 
attention at the time, it may be as well to state the fact as far as 
we have been able to ascertain them. they are collate from the 
liverpool papers of that date, from the proceedings at the inquest upon 
john slater, the engine-driver, and from the record of the london and 
west coast railway company, which have been courteous put at my 
disposal. briefly, they are as follows: 

on the 3rd of june, 1890, a gentleman, who gave his name as monsieur 
louis caratal, desire an interview with mr. james bland, the 
superintendent of the london and west coast central station in 
liverpool. he was a small man, middle-aged and dark, with a stoop 
which was so marked that it suggest some deformity of the spine. he 
was accompany by a friend, a man of imposing physique, whose 
deferential manner and constant attention show that his position was 
one of dependence. this friend or companion, whose name did not 
transpire, was certainly a foreigner, and probably from his swarthy 
complexion, either a spaniard or a south american. one peculiarity was 
observe in him. he carry in his left hand a small black, leather 
dispatch box, and it was notice by a sharp-eyed clerk in the central 
office that this box was fasten to his wrist by a strap. no 
importance was attach to the fact at the time, but subsequent event 
endow it with some significance. monsieur carat was shown up to mr. 
bland's office, while his companion remain outside. 

monsieur caratal's business was quick dispatched. he had arrive 
that afternoon from central america. affair of the utmost importance 
demand that he should be in paris without the loss of an unnecessary 
hour. he had miss the london express. a special must be provided. 
money was of no importance. time was everything. if the company would 
speed him on his way, they might make their own terms. 

mr. bland struck the electric bell, summon mr. potter hood, the 
traffic manager, and had the matter arrange in five minutes. the train 
would start in three-quarters of an hour. it would take that time to 
insure that the line should be clear. the powerful engine call 
rochdale (no. 247 on the company's register) was attach to two 
carriages, with a guard's van behind. the first carriage was solely 
for the purpose of decrease the inconvenience arise from the 
oscillation. the second was divided, as usual, into four compartments, 
a first-class, a first-class smoking, a second-class, and a 
second-class smoking. the first compartment, which was nearest to the 
engine, was the one allot to the travellers. the other three were 
empty. the guard of the special train was james mcpherson, who had 
been some years in the service of the company. the stoker, william 
smith, was a new hand. 

monsieur caratal, upon leave the superintendent's office, rejoin 
his companion, and both of them manifest extreme impatience to be 
off. have paid the money asked, which amount to fifty pound five 
shillings, at the usual special rate of five shilling a mile, they 
demand to be shown the carriage, and at once took their seat in it, 
although they were assured that the better part of an hour must elapse 
before the line could be cleared. in the meantime a singular 
coincidence had occur in the office which monsieur carat had just 
quitted. 

a request for a special is not a very uncommon circumstance in a rich 
commercial centre, but that two should be require upon the same 
afternoon was most unusual. it so happened, however, that mr. bland 
had hardly dismiss the first traveller before a second enter with a 
similar request. this was a mr. horace moore, a gentlemanly man of 
military appearance, who allege that the sudden serious illness of his 
wife in london made it absolutely imperative that he should not lose an 
instant in start upon the journey. his distress and anxiety were so 
evident that mr. bland did all that was possible to meet his wishes. a 
second special was out of the question, as the ordinary local service 
was already somewhat derange by the first. there was the alternative, 
however, that mr. moore should share the expense of monsieur caratal's 
train, and should travel in the other empty first-class compartment, if 
monsieur carat object to have him in the one which he occupied. 
it was difficult to see any objection to such an arrangement, and yet 
monsieur caratal, upon the suggestion being made to him by mr. potter 
hood, absolutely refuse to consider it for an instant. the train was 
his, he said, and he would insist upon the exclusive use of it. all 
argument fail to overcome his ungracious objections, and finally the 
plan had to be abandoned. mr. horace moore left the station in great 
distress, after learning that his only course was to take the ordinary 
slow train which leaves liverpool at six o'clock. at four thirty-one 
exactly by the station clock the special train, contain the cripple 
monsieur carat and his gigantic companion, steam out of the 
liverpool station. the line was at that time clear, and there should 
have been no stoppage before manchester. 

the train of the london and west coast railway run over the lines of 
another company as far as this town, which should have been reach by 
the special rather before six o'clock. at a quarter after six 
considerable surprise and some consternation were cause amongst the 
official at liverpool by the receipt of a telegram from manchester to 
say that it had not yet arrived. an inquiry direct to st. helens, 
which is a third of the way between the two cities, elicit the 
following reply-- 


"to james bland, superintendent, central l. & w. c., 
liverpool.--special pass here at 4:52, well up to time.--dowster, st. 
helens." 


this telegram was received at six-forty. at six-fifty a second message 
was received from manchester-- 


"no sign of special as advise by you." 


and then ten minutes later a third, more bewildering-- 


"presume some mistake as to propose running of special. local train 
from st. helen time to follow it has just arrive and has seen 
nothing of it. kindly wire advices.--manchester." 


the matter was assume a most amazing aspect, although in some 
respects the last telegram was a relief to the authority at 
liverpool. if an accident had occur to the special, it seem 
hardly possible that the local train could have pass down the same 
line without observing it. and yet, what was the alternative? where 
could the train be? had it possibly been sidetrack for some reason 
in order to allow the slow train to go past? such an explanation was 
possible if some small repair had to be effected. a telegram was 
dispatch to each of the station between st. helen and manchester, 
and the superintendent and traffic manager wait in the utmost 
suspense at the instrument for the series of reply which would enable 
them to say for certain what had become of the missing train. the 
answer came back in the order of questions, which was the order of the 
station beginning at the st. helen end-- 

"special pass here five o'clock.--collins green." 

"special pass here six past five.--earlstown." 

"special pass here 5:10.--newton." 

"special pass here 5:20.--kenyon junction." 

"no special train has pass here.--barton moss." 

the two official stare at each other in amazement. 

"this is unique in my thirty years of experience," said mr. bland. 

"absolutely unprecedented and inexplicable, sir. the special has gone 
wrong between kenyon junction and barton moss." 

"and yet there is no siding, so far as my memory serve me, between the 
two stations. the special must have run off the metals." 

"but how could the four-fifty parliamentary pass over the same line 
without observing it?" 

"there's no alternative, mr. hood. it must be so. possibly the local 
train may have observe something which may throw some light upon the 
matter. we will wire to manchester for more information, and to kenyon 
junction with instruction that the line be examine instantly as far 
as barton moss." the answer from manchester came within a few minutes. 

"no news of missing special. driver and guard of slow train positive 
no accident between kenyon junction and barton moss. line quite clear, 
and no sign of anything unusual.--manchester." 

"that driver and guard will have to go," said mr. bland, grimly. 
"there has been a wreck and they have miss it. the special has 
obviously run off the metal without disturb the line--how it could 
have done so pass my comprehension--but so it must be, and we shall 
have a wire from kenyon or barton moss presently to say that they have 
found her at the bottom of an embankment." 

but mr. bland's prophecy was not destined to be fulfilled. half an hour 
passed, and then there arrive the following message from the 
station-master of kenyon junction-- 


"there are no trace of the missing special. it is quite certain that 
she pass here, and that she did not arrive at barton moss. we have 
detached engine from goods train, and i have myself ridden down the 
line, but all is clear, and there is no sign of any accident." 


mr. bland tore his hair in his perplexity. 

"this is rank lunacy, hood!" he cried. "does a train vanish into thin 
air in england in broad daylight? the thing is preposterous. an 
engine, a tender, two carriages, a van, five human beings--and all lost 
on a straight line of railway! unless we get something positive within 
the next hour i'll take inspector collins, and go down myself." 

and then at last something positive did occur. it took the shape of 
another telegram from kenyon junction. 

"regret to report that the dead body of john slater, driver of the 
special train, has just been found among the gorse bush at a point 
two and a quarter mile from the junction. had fallen from his engine, 
pitch down the embankment, and roll among the bushes. injury to 
his head, from the fall, appear to be cause of death. ground has now 
been careful examined, and there is no trace of the missing train." 

the country was, as has already been stated, in the throes of a 
politics crisis, and the attention of the public was further 
distracted by the important and sensational development in paris, 
where a huge scandal threaten to destroy the government and to wreck 
the reputation of many of the leading men in france. the papers were 
full of these events, and the singular disappearance of the special 
train attract less attention than would have been the case in more 
peaceful times. the grotesque nature of the event help to detract 
from its importance, for the papers were disinclined to believe the 
fact as report to them. more than one of the london journal treat 
the matter as an ingenious hoax, until the coroner's inquest upon the 
unfortunate driver (an inquest which elicit nothing of importance) 
convinced them of the tragedy of the incident. 

mr. bland, accompany by inspector collins, the senior detective 
officer in the service of the company, went down to kenyon junction the 
same evening, and their research last throughout the following day, 
but was attend with purely negative results. not only was no trace 
found of the missing train, but no conjecture could be put forward 
which could possibly explain the facts. at the same time, inspector 
collins's official report (which lie before me as i write) serve to 
show that the possibility were more numerous than might have been 
expected. 

"in the stretch of railway between these two points," said he, "the 
country is dot with ironworks and collieries. of these, some are 
being work and some have been abandoned. there are no few than 
twelve which have small-gauge lines which run trolly-cars down to the 
main line. these can, of course, be disregarded. besides these, 
however, there are seven which have, or have had, proper lines running 
down and connect with points to the main line, so as to convey their 
produce from the mouth of the mine to the great centre of 
distribution. in every case these lines are only a few mile in 
length. out of the seven, four belong to colliery which are work 
out, or at least to shaft which are no long used. these are the 
redgauntlet, hero, slough of despond, and heartsease mines, the latter 
have ten years ago been one of the principal mine in lancashire. 
these four side lines may be eliminate from our inquiry, for, to 
prevent possible accidents, the rails nearest to the main line have 
been taken up, and there is no long any connection. there remain 
three other side lines leading-- 

(a) to the carnstock iron works; 
(b) to the big ben colliery; 
(c) to the perseverance colliery. 


"of these the big ben line is not more than a quarter of a mile long, 
and end at a dead wall of coal wait removal from the mouth of the 
mine. nothing had been seen or heard there of any special. the 
carnstock iron works line was block all day upon the 3rd of june by 
sixteen truckload of hematite. it is a single line, and nothing could 
have passed. as to the perseverance line, it is a large double line, 
which do a considerable traffic, for the output of the mine is very 
large. on the 3rd of june this traffic proceed as usual; hundred of 
men including a gang of railway platelayer were working along the two 
mile and a quarter which constitute the total length of the line, and 
it is inconceivable that an unexpected train could have come down there 
without attract universal attention. it may be remark in 
conclusion that this branch line is near to st. helen than the point 
at which the engine-driver was discovered, so that we have every reason 
to believe that the train was past that point before misfortune 
overtook her. 

"as to john slater, there is no clue to be gather from his appearance 
or injuries. we can only say that, so far as we can see, he met his 
end by fall off his engine, though why he fell, or what became of 
the engine after his fall, is a question upon which i do not feel 
qualified to offer an opinion." in conclusion, the inspector offer 
his resignation to the board, being much nettle by an accusation of 
incompetence in the london papers. 

a month elapsed, during which both the police and the company 
prosecute their inquiry without the slightest success. a reward was 
offer and a pardon promise in case of crime, but they were both 
unclaimed. every day the public open their papers with the 
conviction that so grotesque a mystery would at last be solved, but 
week after week pass by, and a solution remain as far off as ever. 
in broad daylight, upon a june afternoon in the most thick inhabit 
portion of england, a train with its occupant had disappear as 
completely as if some master of subtle chemistry had volatile it 
into gas. indeed, among the various conjecture which were put forward 
in the public press, there were some which seriously assert that 
supernatural, or, at least, preternatural, agency had been at work, 
and that the deform monsieur carat was probably a person who was 
better known under a less polite name. other fixed upon his swarthy 
companion as being the author of the mischief, but what it was exactly 
which he had done could never be clearly formulate in words. 

amongst the many suggestion put forward by various newspaper or 
private individuals, there were one or two which were feasible enough 
to attract the attention of the public. one which appear in the 
times, over the signature of an amateur reason of some celebrity at 
that date, attempt to deal with the matter in a critical and 
semi-scientific manner. an extract must suffice, although the curious 
can see the whole letter in the issue of the 3rd of july. 

"it is one of the elementary principles of practical reasoning," he 
remarked, "that when the impossible has been eliminate the residuum, 
however improbable, must contain the truth. it is certain that the 
train left kenyon junction. it is certain that it did not reach barton 
moss. it is in the highest degree unlikely, but still possible, that 
it may have taken one of the seven available side lines. it is 
obviously impossible for a train to run where there are no rails, and, 
therefore, we may reduce our improbable to the three open lines, 
namely the carnstock iron works, the big ben, and the perseverance. is 
there a secret society of colliers, an english camorra, which is 
capable of destroy both train and passengers? it is improbable, but 
it is not impossible. i confess that i am unable to suggest any other 
solution. i should certainly advise the company to direct all their 
energy towards the observation of those three lines, and of the 
workmen at the end of them. a careful supervise of the pawnbrokers' 
shop of the district might possibly bring some suggestive fact to 
light." 

the suggestion coming from a recognize authority upon such matter 
create considerable interest, and a fierce opposition from those who 
considered such a statement to be a preposterous libel upon an honest 
and deserving set of men. the only answer to this criticism was a 
challenge to the objector to lay any more feasible explanation before 
the public. in reply to this two other were forthcoming (times, july 
7th and 9th). the first suggest that the train might have run off 
the metal and be lie submerge in the lancashire and staffordshire 
canal, which runs parallel to the railway for some hundred of yards. 
this suggestion was thrown out of court by the publish depth of the 
canal, which was entire insufficient to conceal so large an object. 
the second correspondent wrote calling attention to the bag which 
appear to be the sole luggage which the traveller had brought with 
them, and suggest that some novel explosive of immense and 
pulverize power might have been conceal in it. the obvious 
absurdity, however, of supposing that the whole train might be blown to 
dust while the metal remain uninjured reduce any such explanation 
to a farce. the investigate had drift into this hopeless position 
when a new and most unexpected incident occurred. 

this was nothing less than the receipt by mrs. mcpherson of a letter 
from her husband, james mcpherson, who had been the guard on the 
missing train. the letter, which was dated july 5th, 1890, was post 
from new york and came to hand upon july 14th. some doubt were 
express as to its genuine character but mrs. mcpherson was positive 
as to the writing, and the fact that it contained a remittance of a 
hundred dollar in five-dollar note was enough in itself to discount 
the idea of a hoax. no address was given in the letter, which ran in 
this way: 


my dear wife,-- 

"i have been thinking a great deal, and i find it very hard to give you 
up. the same with lizzie. i try to fight against it, but it will 
always come back to me. i send you some money which will change into 
twenty english pounds. this should be enough to bring both lizzie and 
you across the atlantic, and you will find the hamburg boat which stop 
at southampton very good boats, and cheap than liverpool. if you 
could come here and stop at the johnston house i would try and send you 
word how to meet, but things are very difficult with me at present, and 
i am not very happy, finding it hard to give you both up. so no more 
at present, from your loving husband, 

"james mcpherson." 


for a time it was confident anticipate that this letter would lead 
to the clearing up of the whole matter, the more so as it was 
ascertain that a passenger who bore a close resemblance to the 
missing guard had travelled from southampton under the name of summer 
in the hamburg and new york liner vistula, which start upon the 7th 
of june. mrs. mcpherson and her sister lizzie dolton went across to 
new york as direct and stay for three week at the johnston house, 
without hearing anything from the missing man. it is probable that 
some injudicious comment in the press may have warn him that the 
police were use them as a bait. however, this may be, it is certain 
that he neither wrote nor came, and the women were eventually compel 
to return to liverpool. 

and so the matter stood, and has continue to stand up to the present 
year of 1898. incredible as it may seem, nothing has transpire during 
these eight years which has shed the least light upon the extraordinary 
disappearance of the special train which contained monsieur carat and 
his companion. careful inquiry into the antecedents of the two 
traveller have only establish the fact that monsieur carat was 
well known as a financier and politics agent in central america, and 
that during his voyage to europe he had betray extraordinary anxiety 
to reach paris. his companion, whose name was enter upon the 
passenger lists as eduardo gomez, was a man whose record was a violent 
one, and whose reputation was that of a bravo and a bully. there was 
evidence to show, however, that he was honestly devoted to the 
interests of monsieur caratal, and that the latter, being a man of puny 
physique, employ the other as a guard and protector. it may be add 
that no information came from paris as to what the object of monsieur 
caratal's hurried journey may have been. this comprise all the fact 
of the case up to the publication in the marseille papers of the 
recent confession of herbert de lernac, now under sentence of death for 
the murder of a merchant name bonvalot. this statement may be 
literally translate as follows: 


"it is not out of mere pride or boast that i give this information, 
for, if that were my object, i could tell a dozen action of mine which 
are quite as splendid; but i do it in order that certain gentlemen in 
paris may understand that i, who am able here to tell about the fate of 
monsieur caratal, can also tell in whose interest and at whose request 
the deed was done, unless the reprieve which i am await come to me 
very quickly. take warning, messieurs, before it is too late! you 
know herbert de lernac, and you are aware that his deed are as ready 
as his words. hasten then, or you are lost! 

"at present i shall mention no names--if you only heard the names, what 
would you not think!--but i shall merely tell you how clever i did 
it. i was true to my employer then, and no doubt they will be true to 
me now. i hope so, and until i am convinced that they have betray 
me, these names, which would convulse europe, shall not be divulged. 
but on that day ... well, i say no more! 

"in a word, then, there was a famous trial in paris, in the year 1890, 
in connection with a monstrous scandal in politics and finance. how 
monstrous that scandal was can never be known save by such confidential 
agent as myself. the honour and career of many of the chief men in 
france were at stake. you have seen a group of ninepins standing, all 
so rigid, and prim, and unbending. then there come the ball from far 
away and pop, pop, pop--there are your ninepins on the floor. well, 
imagine some of the greatest men in france as these ninepins and then 
this monsieur carat was the ball which could be seen coming from far 
away. if he arrived, then it was pop, pop, pop for all of them. it 
was determined that he should not arrive. 

"i do not accuse them all of being conscious of what was to happen. 
there were, as i have said, great financial as well as politics 
interests at stake, and a syndicate was form to manage the business. 
some subscribe to the syndicate who hardly understood what were its 
objects. but other understood very well, and they can rely upon it 
that i have not forgotten their names. they had ample warning that 
monsieur carat was coming long before he left south america, and they 
knew that the evidence which he held would certainly mean ruin to all 
of them. the syndicate had the command of an unlimited amount of 
money--absolutely unlimited, you understand. they look round for an 
agent who was capable of wield this gigantic power. the man chosen 
must be inventive, resolute, adaptive--a man in a million. they chose 
herbert de lernac, and i admit that they were right. 

"my duty were to choose my subordinates, to use freely the power 
which money gives, and to make certain that monsieur carat should 
never arrive in paris. with characteristic energy i set about my 
commission within an hour of receiving my instructions, and the steps 
which i took were the very best for the purpose which could possibly be 
devised. 

"a man whom i could trust was dispatch instantly to south america to 
travel home with monsieur caratal. had he arrive in time the ship 
would never have reach liverpool; but alas! it had already start 
before my agent could reach it. i fitted out a small armed brig to 
intercept it, but again i was unfortunate. like all great organize i 
was, however, prepared for failure, and had a series of alternative 
prepared, one or the other of which must succeed. you must not 
underrate the difficulty of my undertaking, or imagine that a mere 
commonplace assassinate would meet the case. we must destroy not 
only monsieur caratal, but monsieur caratal's documents, and monsieur 
caratal's companion also, if we had reason to believe that he had 
communicate his secret to them. and you must remember that they were 
on the alert, and keen suspicious of any such attempt. it was a task 
which was in every way worthy of me, for i am always most masterful 
where another would be appalled. 

"i was all ready for monsieur caratal's reception in liverpool, and i 
was the more eager because i had reason to believe that he had made 
arrangement by which he would have a considerable guard from the 
moment that he arrive in london. anything which was to be done must 
be done between the moment of his setting foot upon the liverpool quay 
and that of his arrival at the london and west coast terminus in 
london. we prepared six plans, each more elaborate than the last; 
which plan would be use would depend upon his own movements. do what 
he would, we were ready for him. if he had stay in liverpool, we 
were ready. if he took an ordinary train, an express, or a special, 
all was ready. everything had been foreseen and provided for. 

"you may imagine that i could not do all this myself. what could i 
know of the english railway lines? but money can procure willing 
agent all the world over, and i soon had one of the acutest brains in 
england to assist me. i will mention no names, but it would be unjust 
to claim all the credit for myself. my english ally was worthy of such 
an alliance. he knew the london and west coast line thoroughly, and he 
had the command of a band of worker who were trustworthy and 
intelligent. the idea was his, and my own judgement was only require 
in the details. we bought over several officials, amongst whom the 
most important was james mcpherson, whom we had ascertain to be the 
guard most likely to be employ upon a special train. smith, the 
stoker, was also in our employ. john slater, the engine-driver, had 
been approached, but had been found to be obstinate and dangerous, so 
we desisted. we had no certainty that monsieur carat would take a 
special, but we thought it very probable, for it was of the utmost 
importance to him that he should reach paris without delay. it was for 
this contingency, therefore, that we made special 
preparations--preparations which were complete down to the last detail 
long before his steamer had sighted the shore of england. you will be 
amuse to learn that there was one of my agent in the pilot-boat which 
brought that steamer to its moorings. 

"the moment that carat arrive in liverpool we knew that he suspect 
danger and was on his guard. he had brought with him as an escort a 
dangerous fellow, name gomez, a man who carry weapons, and was 
prepared to use them. this fellow carry caratal's confidential 
papers for him, and was ready to protect either them or his master. 
the probability was that carat had taken him into his counsel, and 
that to remove carat without remove gomez would be a mere waste of 
energy. it was necessary that they should be involved in a common 
fate, and our plan to that end were much facilitate by their request 
for a special train. on that special train you will understand that 
two out of the three servant of the company were really in our employ, 
at a price which would make them independent for a lifetime. i do not 
go so far as to say that the english are more honest than any other 
nation, but i have found them more expensive to buy. 

"i have already spoken of my english agent--who is a man with a 
considerable future before him, unless some complaint of the throat 
carry him off before his time. he had charge of all arrangement at 
liverpool, whilst i was station at the inn at kenyon, where i await 
a cipher signal to act. when the special was arrange for, my agent 
instantly telegraph to me and warn me how soon i should have 
everything ready. he himself under the name of horace moore applied 
immediately for a special also, in the hope that he would be sent down 
with monsieur caratal, which might under certain circumstances have 
been helpful to us. if, for example, our great coup had failed, it 
would then have become the duty of my agent to have shot them both and 
destroy their papers. carat was on his guard, however, and refuse 
to admit any other traveller. my agent then left the station, return 
by another entrance, enter the guard's van on the side farthest from 
the platform, and travelled down with mcpherson the guard. 

"in the meantime you will be interested to know what my movements were. 
everything had been prepared for days before, and only the finish 
touch were needed. the side line which we had chosen had once join 
the main line, but it had been disconnected. we had only to replace a 
few rails to connect it once more. these rails had been laid down as 
far as could be done without danger of attract attention, and now it 
was merely a case of complete a juncture with the line, and arrange 
the points as they had been before. the sleeper had never been 
removed, and the rails, fish-plates and rivet were all ready, for we 
had taken them from a siding on the abandoned portion of the line. 
with my small but competent band of workers, we had everything ready 
long before the special arrived. when it did arrive, it ran off upon 
the small side line so easily that the jolt of the points appear to 
have been entire unnoticed by the two travellers. 

"our plan had been that smith, the stoker, should chloroform john 
slater, the driver, so that he should vanish with the others. in this 
respect, and in this respect only, our plan miscarried--i except the 
criminal folly of mcpherson in writing home to his wife. our stoker did 
his business so clumsy that slate in his struggle fell off the 
engine, and though fortune was with us so far that he broke his neck in 
the fall, still he remain as a blot upon that which would otherwise 
have been one of those complete masterpiece which are only to be 
contemplate in silent admiration. the criminal expert will find in 
john slate the one flaw in all our admirable combinations. a man who 
has had as many triumph as i can afford to be frank, and i therefore 
lay my finger upon john slater, and i proclaim him to be a flaw. 

"but now i have got our special train upon the small line two 
kilometres, or rather more than one mile, in length, which leads, or 
rather use to lead, to the abandoned heartsease mine, once one of the 
largest coal mine in england. you will ask how it is that no one saw 
the train upon this unused line. i answer that along its entire length 
it runs through a deep cutting, and that, unless someone had been on 
the edge of that cutting, he could not have seen it. there was someone 
on the edge of that cutting. i was there. and now i will tell you 
what i saw. 

"my assistant had remain at the points in order that he might 
superintend the switch off of the train. he had four armed men with 
him, so that if the train ran off the line--we thought it probable, 
because the points were very rusty--we might still have resources to 
fall back upon. have once seen it safe on the side line, he hand 
over the responsibility to me. i was wait at a point which 
overlook the mouth of the mine, and i was also armed, as were my two 
companions. come what might, you see, i was always ready. 

"the moment that the train was fairly on the side line, smith, the 
stoker, slowed-down the engine, and then, have turn it on to the 
fullest speed again, he and mcpherson, with my english lieutenant, 
sprang off before it was too late. it may be that it was this 
slowing-down which first attract the attention of the travellers, but 
the train was running at full speed again before their head appear 
at the open window. it make me smile to think how bewilder they 
must have been. picture to yourself your own feelings if, on look 
out of your luxurious carriage, you sudden perceive that the lines 
upon which you ran were rust and corroded, red and yellow with disuse 
and decay! what a catch must have come in their breath as in a second 
it flash upon them that it was not manchester but death which was 
wait for them at the end of that sinister line. but the train was 
running with frantic speed, rolling and rock over the rotten line, 
while the wheels made a frightful scream sound upon the rust 
surface. i was close to them, and could see their faces. carat was 
praying, i think--there was something like a rosary dangle out of his 
hand. the other roar like a bull who smell the blood of the 
slaughter-house. he saw us standing on the bank, and he beckon to us 
like a madman. then he tore at his wrist and threw his dispatch-box 
out of the window in our direction. of course, his meaning was 
obvious. here was the evidence, and they would promise to be silent if 
their lives were spared. it would have been very agreeable if we could 
have done so, but business is business. besides, the train was now as 
much beyond our control as theirs. 

"he cease howling when the train rattle round the curve and they saw 
the black mouth of the mine yawn before them. we had remove the 
boards which had cover it, and we had clear the square entrance. 
the rails had formerly run very close to the shaft for the convenience 
of load the coal, and we had only to add two or three length of 
rail in order to lead to the very brink of the shaft. in fact, as the 
length would not quite fit, our line project about three feet over 
the edge. we saw the two head at the window: carat below, gomez 
above; but they had both been struck silent by what they saw. and yet 
they could not withdraw their heads. the sight seem to have 
paralyse them. 

"i had wonder how the train running at a great speed would take the 
pit into which i had guide it, and i was much interested in watch 
it. one of my colleague thought that it would actually jump it, and 
indeed it was not very far from do so. fortunately, however, it fell 
short, and the buffer of the engine struck the other lip of the shaft 
with a tremendous crash. the funnel flew off into the air. the 
tender, carriages, and van were all smashed up into one jumble, which, 
with the remains of the engine, choke for a minute or so the mouth of 
the pit. then something gave way in the middle, and the whole mass of 
green iron, smoking coals, brass fittings, wheels, wood-work, and 
cushion all crumble together and crash down into the mine. we 
heard the rattle, rattle, rattle, as the debris struck against the 
walls, and then, quite a long time afterwards, there came a deep roar 
as the remains of the train struck the bottom. the boiler may have 
burst, for a sharp crash came after the roar, and then a dense cloud of 
steam and smoke swirl up out of the black depths, fall in a spray 
as thick as rain all round us. then the vapour shred off into thin 
wisps, which float away in the summer sunshine, and all was quiet 
again in the heartsease mine. 

"and now, have carry out our plan so successfully, it only 
remain to leave no trace behind us. our little band of worker at 
the other end had already rip up the rails and disconnected the side 
line, replace everything as it had been before. we were equally busy 
at the mine. the funnel and other fragment were thrown in, the shaft 
was plank over as it use to be, and the lines which led to it were 
torn up and taken away. then, without flurry, but without delay, we 
all made our way out of the country, most of us to paris, my english 
colleague to manchester, and mcpherson to southampton, whence he 
emigrate to america. let the english papers of that date tell how 
through we had done our work, and how completely we had thrown the 
cleverest of their detective off our track. 

"you will remember that gomez threw his bag of papers out of the 
window, and i need not say that i secure that bag and brought them to 
my employers. it may interest my employer now, however, to learn that 
out of that bag i took one or two little papers as a souvenir of the 
occasion. i have no wish to publish these papers; but, still, it is 
every man for himself in this world, and what else can i do if my 
friends will not come to my aid when i want them? messieurs, you may 
believe that herbert de lernac is quite as formidable when he is 
against you as when he is with you, and that he is not a man to go to 
the guillotine until he has seen that every one of you is en route for 
new caledonia. for your own sake, if not for mine, make haste, 
monsieur de ----, and general ----, and baron ---- (you can fill up the 
blank for yourself as you read this). i promise you that in the 
next edition there will be no blank to fill. 

"p.s.--as i look over my statement there is only one omission which i 
can see. it concern the unfortunate man mcpherson, who was foolish 
enough to write to his wife and to make an appointment with her in new 
york. it can be imagine that when interests like ours were at stake, 
we could not leave them to the chance of whether a man in that class of 
life would or would not give away his secret to a woman. have once 
broken his oath by writing to his wife, we could not trust him any 
more. we took steps therefore to insure that he should not see his 
wife. i have sometimes thought that it would be a kindness to write to 
her and to assure her that there is no impediment to her marry 
again." 



the beetle-hunter 

a curious experience? said the doctor. yes, my friends, i have had one 
very curious experience. i never expect to have another, for it is 
against all doctrine of chance that two such event would befall any 
one man in a single lifetime. you may believe me or not, but the thing 
happen exactly as i tell it. 

i had just become a medical man, but i had not start in practice, and 
i live in rooms in gower street. the street has been renumbere since 
then, but it was in the only house which has a bow-window, upon the 
left-hand side as you go down from the metropolitan station. a widow 
name murchison kept the house at that time, and she had three medical 
student and one engineer as lodgers. i occupy the top room, which 
was the cheapest, but cheap as it was it was more than i could afford. 
my small resources were dwindle away, and every week it became more 
necessary that i should find something to do. yet i was very unwill 
to go into general practice, for my taste were all in the direction of 
science, and especially of zoology, towards which i had always a strong 
leaning. i had almost given the fight up and resigned myself to being 
a medical drudge for life, when the turning-point of my struggle came 
in a very extraordinary way. 

one morning i had picked up the standard and was glancing over its 
contents. there was a complete absence of news, and i was about to 
toss the paper down again, when my eyes were caught by an advertisement 
at the head of the personal column. it was word in this way: 


"wanted for one or more days the service of a medical man. it is 
essential that he should be a man of strong physique, of steady nerves, 
and of a resolute nature. must be an entomologist--coleopterist 
preferred. apply, in person, at 77b, brook street. application must be 
made before twelve o'clock today." 


now, i have already said that i was devoted to zoology. of all 
branch of zoology, the study of insect was the most attractive to 
me, and of all insect beetle were the species with which i was most 
familiar. butterfly collector are numerous, but beetle are far more 
varied, and more accessible in these island than are butterflies. it 
was this fact which had attract my attention to them, and i had 
myself made a collection which number some hundred varieties. as to 
the other requisite of the advertisement, i knew that my nerves could 
be depend upon, and i had won the weight-throwing competition at the 
inter-hospital sports. clearly, i was the very man for the vacancy. 
within five minutes of my have read the advertisement i was in a cab 
and on my was to brook street. 

as i drove, i kept turning the matter over in my head and try to 
make a guess as to what sort of employment it could be which need 
such curious qualifications. a strong physique, a resolute nature, a 
medical training, and a knowledge of beetles--what connection could 
there be between these various requisites? and then there was the 
dishearten fact that the situation was not a permanent one, but 
terminable from day to day, according to the terms of the 
advertisement. the more i ponder over it the more unintelligible did 
it become; but at the end of my meditation i always came back to the 
ground fact that, come what might, i had nothing to lose, that i was 
completely at the end of my resources, and that i was ready for any 
adventure, however desperate, which would put a few honest sovereign 
into my pocket. the man fear to fail who has to pay for his failure, 
but there was no penalty which fortune could exact from me. i was like 
the gamble with empty pockets, who is still allow to try his luck 
with the others. 

no. 77b, brook street, was one of those dingy and yet imposing houses, 
dun-coloured and flat-faced, with the intense respectable and solid 
air which mark the georgia builder. as i alight from the cab, a 
young man came out of the door and walk swift down the street. in 
passing me, i notice that he cast an inquisitive and somewhat 
malevolent glance at me, and i took the incident as a good omen, for 
his appearance was that of a reject candidate, and if he resent my 
application it meant that the vacancy was not yet fill up. full of 
hope, i ascend the broad steps and rap with the heavy knocker. 

a footman in powder and livery open the door. clearly i was in touch 
with the people of wealth and fashion. 


"yes, sir?" said the footman. 

"i came in answer to----" 

"quite so, sir," said the footman. "lord linchmere will see you at 
once in the library." 

lord linchmere! i had vague heard the name, but could not for the 
instant recall anything about him. following the footman, i was shown 
into a large, book-lined room in which there was seat behind a 
writing-desk a small man with a pleasant, clean-shaven, mobile face, 
and long hair shot with grey, brush back from his forehead. he 
look me up and down with a very shrewd, penetrating glance, holding 
the card which the footman had given him in his right hand. then he 
smile pleasantly, and i felt that externally at any rate i possessed 
the qualifications which he desired. 

"you have come in answer to my advertisement, dr. hamilton?" he asked. 

"yes, sir." 

"do you fulfil the conditions which are there laid down?" 

"i believe that i do." 

"you are a powerful man, or so i should judge from your appearance. 

"i think that i am fairly strong." 

"and resolute?" 

"i believe so." 

"have you ever known what it was to be expose to imminent danger?" 

"no, i don't know that i ever have." 

"but you think you would be prompt and cool at such a time?" 

"i hope so." 

"well, i believe that you would. i have the more confidence in you 
because you do not pretend to be certain as to what you would do in a 
position that was new to you. my impression is that, so far as 
personal quality go, you are the very man of whom i am in search. 
that being settled, we may pass on to the next point." 

"which is?" 

"to talk to me about beetles." 

i look across to see if he was joking, but, on the contrary, he was 
leaning eager forward across his desk, and there was an expression of 
something like anxiety in his eyes. 

"i am afraid that you do not know about beetles," he cried. 

"on the contrary, sir, it is the one scientific subject about which i 
feel that i really do know something." 

"i am overjoyed to hear it. please talk to me about beetles." 

i talked. i do not profess to have said anything original upon the 
subject, but i gave a short sketch of the characteristic of the 
beetle, and ran over the more common species, with some allusion to 
the specimen in my own little collection and to the article upon 
"burying beetles" which i had contribute to the journal of 
entomology science. 

"what! not a collector?" cry lord linchmere. "you don't mean that 
you are yourself a collector?" his eyes dance with pleasure at the 
thought. 

"you are certainly the very man in london for my purpose. i thought 
that among five million of people there must be such a man, but the 
difficulty is to lay one's hand upon him. i have been extraordinarily 
fortunate in finding you." 

he rang a gong upon the table, and the footman entered. 

"ask lady rossiter to have the goodness to step this way," said his 
lordship, and a few moments later the lady was usher into the room. 
she was a small, middle-aged woman, very like lord linchmere in 
appearance, with the same quick, alert features and grey-black hair. 
the expression of anxiety, however, which i had observe upon his face 
was very much more marked upon hers. some great grief seem to have 
cast its shadow over her features. as lord linchmere present me she 
turn her face full upon me, and i was shock to observe a 
half-healed scar extend for two inch over her right eyebrow. it 
was partly conceal by plaster, but none the less i could see that it 
had been a serious wound and not long inflicted. 

"dr. hamilton is the very man for our purpose, evelyn," said lord 
linchmere. "he is actually a collector of beetles, and he has written 
articles upon the subject." 

"really!" said lady rossiter. "then you must have heard of my husband. 
everyone who know anything about beetle must have heard of sir thomas 
rossiter." 

for the first time a thin little ray of light began to break into the 
obscure business. here, at last, was a connection between these people 
and beetles. sir thomas rossiter--he was the greatest authority upon 
the subject in the world. he had made it his lifelong study, and had 
written a most exhaustive work upon it. i hasten to assure her that 
i had read and appreciate it. 

"have you met my husband?" she asked. 

"no, i have not." 

"but you shall," said lord linchmere, with decision. 

the lady was standing beside the desk, and she put her hand upon his 
shoulder. it was obvious to me as i saw their face together that they 
were brother and sister. 

"are you really prepared for this, charles? it is noble of you, but 
you fill me with fears." her voice quaver with apprehension, and he 
appear to me to be equally moved, though he was making strong effort 
to conceal his agitation. 

"yes, yes, dear; it is all settled, it is all decided; in fact, there 
is no other possible way, that i can see." 

"there is one obvious way." 

"no, no, evelyn, i shall never abandon you--never. it will come 
right--depend upon it; it will come right, and surely it looks like the 
interference of providence that so perfect an instrument should be put 
into our hands." 

my position was embarrassing, for i felt that for the instant they had 
forgotten my presence. but lord linchmere came back sudden to me and 
to my engagement. 

"the business for which i want you, dr. hamilton, is that you should 
put yourself absolutely at my disposal. i wish you to come for a short 
journey with me, to remain always at my side, and to promise to do 
without question whatever i may ask you, however unreasonable it may 
appear to you to be." 

"that is a good deal to ask," said i. 

"unfortunately i cannot put it more plainly, for i do not myself know 
what turn matter may take. you may be sure, however, that you will 
not be ask to do anything which your conscience do not approve; and 
i promise you that, when all is over, you will be proud to have been 
concerned in so good a work." 

"if it end happily," said the lady. 

"exactly; if it end happily," his lordship repeated. 

"and terms?" i asked. 

"twenty pound a day." 

i was amaze at the sum, and must have show my surprise upon my 
features. 

"it is a rare combination of qualities, as must have struck you when 
you first read the advertisement," said lord linchmere; "such varied 
gift may well command a high return, and i do not conceal from you 
that your duty might be arduous or even dangerous. besides, it is 
possible that one or two days may bring the matter to an end." 

"please god!" sigh his sister. 

"so now, dr. hamilton, may i rely upon your aid?" 

"most undoubtedly," said i. "you have only to tell me what my duty 
are." 

"your first duty will be to return to your home. you will pack up 
whatever you may need for a short visit to the country. we start 
together from paddington station at 3:40 this afternoon." 

"do we go far?" 

"as far as pangbourne. meet me at the bookstall at 3:30. i shall have 
the tickets. goodbye, dr. hamilton! and, by the way, there are two 
things which i should be very glad if you would bring with you, in case 
you have them. one is your case for collect beetles, and the other 
is a stick, and the thick and heavy the better." 


you may imagine that i had plenty to think of from the time that i left 
brook street until i set out to meet lord linchmere at paddington. the 
whole fantastic business kept arrange and rearrange itself in 
kaleidoscopic form inside my brain, until i had thought out a dozen 
explanations, each of them more grotesque improbable than the last. 
and yet i felt that the truth must be something grotesque improbable 
also. at last i gave up all attempt at finding a solution, and 
contented myself with exactly carry out the instruction which i had 
received. with a hand valise, specimen-case, and a loaded cane, i was 
wait at the paddington bookstall when lord linchmere arrived. he 
was an even small man than i had thought--frail and peaky, with a 
manner which was more nervous than it had been in the morning. he wore 
a long, thick travel ulster, and i observe that he carry a heavy 
blackthorn cudgel in his hand. 

"i have the tickets," said he, leading the way up the platform. 

"this is our train. i have engaged a carriage, for i am particularly 
anxious to impress one or two things upon you while we travel down." 

and yet all that he had to impress upon me might have been said in a 
sentence, for it was that i was to remember that i was there as a 
protection to himself, and that i was not on any consideration to leave 
him for an instant. this he repeated again and again as our journey 
drew to a close, with an insistence which show that his nerves were 
thorough shaken. 

"yes," he said at last, in answer to my looks rather than to my words, 
"i am nervous, dr. hamilton. i have always been a timid man, and my 
timid depend upon my frail physical health. but my soul is firm, 
and i can bring myself up to face a danger which a less-nervous man 
might shrink from. what i am do now is done from no compulsion, but 
entire from a sense of duty, and yet it is, beyond doubt, a desperate 
risk. if things should go wrong, i will have some claim to the title 
of martyr." 

this eternal reading of riddle was too much for me. i felt that i 
must put a term to it. 

"i think it would very much better, sir, if you were to trust me 
entirely," said i. "it is impossible for me to act effectively, when i 
do not know what are the object which we have in view, or even where 
we are going." 

"oh, as to where we are going, there need be no mystery about that," 
said he; "we are go to delamere court, the residence of sir thomas 
rossiter, with whose work you are so conversant. as to the exact 
object of our visit, i do not know that at this stage of the 
proceedings anything would be gained, dr. hamilton, by taking you into 
my complete confidence. i may tell you that we are acting--i say 'we,' 
because my sister, lady rossiter, take the same view as myself--with 
the one object of prevent anything in the nature of a family 
scandal. that being so, you can understand that i am loath to give any 
explanation which are not absolutely necessary. it would be a 
different matter, dr. hamilton, if i were ask your advice. as 
matter stand, it is only your active help which i need, and i will 
indicate to you from time to time how you can best give it." 

there was nothing more to be said, and a poor man can put up with a 
good deal for twenty pound a day, but i felt none the less that lord 
linchmere was acting rather scurvy towards me. he wish to convert 
me into a passive tool, like the blackthorn in his hand. with his 
sensitive disposition i could imagine, however, that scandal would be 
abhorrent to him, and i realize that he would not take me into his 
confidence until no other course was open to him. i must trust to my 
own eyes and ear to solve the mystery, but i had every confidence that 
i should not trust to them in vain. 

delamere court lie a good five mile from pangbourne station, and we 
drove for that distance in an open fly. lord linchmere sat in deep 
thought during the time, and he never open his mouth until we were 
close to our destination. when he did speak it was to give me a piece 
of information which surprise me. 

"perhaps you are not aware," said he, "that i am a medical man like 
yourself?" 

"no, sir, i did not know it." 

"yes, i qualified in my younger days, when there were several lives 
between me and the peerage. i have not had occasion to practise, but i 
have found it a useful education, all the same. i never regret the 
years which i devoted to medical study. these are the gate of 
delamere court." 

we had come to two high pillar crown with heraldic monster which 
flank the opening of a winding avenue. over the laurel bush and 
rhododendrons, i could see a long, many-gabled mansion, girdle with 
ivy, and tone to the warm, cheery, mellow glow of old brick-work. my 
eyes were still fixed in admiration upon this delightful house when my 
companion pluck nervous at my sleeve. 

"here's sir thomas," he whispered. "please talk beetle all you can." 

a tall, thin figure, curious angular and bony, had emerge through a 
gap in the hedge of laurels. in his hand he held a spud, and he wore 
gauntlet gardener's gloves. a broad-brimmed, grey hat cast his face 
into shadow, but it struck me as exceedingly austere, with an 
ill-nourished beard and harsh, irregular features. the fly pull up 
and lord linchmere sprang out. 

"my dear thomas, how are you?" said he, heartily. 

but the hearty was by no means reciprocal. the owner of the 
grounds glare at me over his brother-in-law's shoulder, and i caught 
broken scraps of sentences--"well-known wish ... hatred of 
stranger ... unjustifiable intrusion ... perfectly inexcusable." 
then there was a mutter explanation, and the two of them came over 
together to the side of the fly. 

"let me present you to sir thomas rossiter, dr. hamilton," said lord 
linchmere. "you will find that you have a strong community of tastes." 

i bowed. sir thomas stood very stiffly, look at me severe from 
under the broad brim of his hat. 

"lord linchmere tell me that you know something about beetles," said 
he. "what do you know about beetles?" 

"i know what i have learned from your work upon the coleoptera, sir 
thomas," i answered. 

"give me the name of the better-known species of the britain 
scarabaei," said he. 

i had not expect an examination, but fortunately i was ready for one. 
my answer seem to please him, for his stern features relaxed. 

"you appear to have read my book with some profit, sir," said he. "it 
is a rare thing for me to meet anyone who take an intelligent interest 
in such matters. people can find time for such triviality as sport 
or society, and yet the beetle are overlooked. i can assure you that 
the greater part of the idiot in this part of the country are unaware 
that i have ever written a book at all--i, the first man who ever 
describe the true function of the elytra. i am glad to see you, sir, 
and i have no doubt that i can show you some specimen which will 
interest you." he step into the fly and drove up with us to the 
house, expound to me as we went some recent research which he had 
made into the anatomy of the lady-bird. 

i have said that sir thomas rossiter wore a large hat drawn down over 
his brows. as he enter the hall he uncover himself, and i was at 
once aware of a singular characteristic which the hat had concealed. 
his forehead, which was naturally high, and higher still on account of 
recede hair, was in a continual state of movement. some nervous 
weakness kept the muscle in a constant spasm, which sometimes produce 
a mere twitch and sometimes a curious rotary movement unlike 
anything which i had ever seen before. it was striking visible as he 
turn towards us after enter the study, and seem the more 
singular from the contrast with the hard, steady, grey eyes which 
look out from underneath those palpitate brows. 

"i am sorry," said he, "that lady rossiter is not here to help me to 
welcome you. by the way, charles, did evelyn say anything about the 
date of her return?" 

"she wish to stay in town for a few more days," said lord linchmere. 
"you know how ladies' social duty accumulate if they have been for 
some time in the country. my sister has many old friends in london at 
present." 

"well, she is her own mistress, and i should not wish to alter her 
plans, but i shall be glad when i see her again. it is very lonely 
here without her company." 

"i was afraid that you might find it so, and that was partly why i ran 
down. my young friend, dr. hamilton, is so much interested in the 
subject which you have made your own, that i thought you would not mind 
his accompany me." 

"i lead a retired life, dr. hamilton, and my aversion to stranger 
grow upon me," said our host. "i have sometimes thought that my 
nerves are not so good as they were. my travels in search of beetle 
in my younger days took me into many malarious and unhealthy places. 
but a brother coleopterist like yourself is always a welcome guest, and 
i shall be delight if you will look over my collection, which i think 
that i may without exaggeration describe as the best in europe." 

and so no doubt it was. he had a huge, oaken cabinet arrange in 
shallow drawers, and here, neat ticket and classified, were beetle 
from every corner of the earth, black, brown, blue, green, and mottled. 
every now and then as he swept his hand over the lines and lines of 
impale insect he would catch up some rare specimen, and, handle it 
with as much delicacy and reverence as if it were a precious relic, he 
would hold forth upon its peculiarity and the circumstances under 
which it came into his possession. it was evidently an unusual thing 
for him to meet with a sympathetic listener, and he talk and talk 
until the spring evening had deepen into night, and the gong 
announce that it was time to dress for dinner. all the time lord 
linchmere said nothing, but he stood at his brother-in-law's elbow, and 
i caught him continual shoot curious little, questioning glance 
into his face. and his own features express some strong emotion, 
apprehension, sympathy, expectation: i seem to read them all. i was 
sure that lord linchmere was fear something and await something, 
but what that something might be i could not imagine. 

the evening pass quiet but pleasantly, and i should have been 
entire at my ease if it had not been for that continual sense of 
tension upon the part of lord linchmere. as to our host, i found that 
he improve upon acquaintance. he spoke constant with affection of 
his absent wife, and also of his little son, who had recently been sent 
to school. the house, he said, was not the same without them. if it 
were not for his scientific studies, he did not know how he could get 
through the days. after dinner we smoke for some time in the 
billiard-room, and finally went early to bed. 

and then it was that, for the first time, the suspicion that lord 
linchmere was a lunatic cross my mind. he follow me into my 
bedroom, when our host had retired. 

"doctor," said he, speak in a low, hurried voice, "you must come 
with me. you must spend the night in my bedroom." 

"what do you mean?" 

"i prefer not to explain. but this is part of your duties. my room is 
close by, and you can return to your own before the servant call you 
in the morning." 

"but why?" i asked. 

"because i am nervous of being alone," said he. "that's the reason, 
since you must have a reason." 

it seem rank lunacy, but the argument of those twenty pound would 
overcome many objections. i follow him to his room. 

"well," said i, "there's only room for one in that bed." 

"only one shall occupy it," said he. 

"and the other?" 

"must remain on watch." 

"why?" said i. "one would think you expect to be attacked." 

"perhaps i do." 

"in that case, why not lock your door?" 

"perhaps i want to be attacked." 

it look more and more like lunacy. however, there was nothing for it 
but to submit. i shrug my shoulder and sat down in the arm-chair 
beside the empty fireplace. 

"i am to remain on watch, then?" said i, ruefully. 

"we will divide the night. if you will watch until two, i will watch 
the remainder." 

"very good." 

"call me at two o'clock, then." 

"i will do so." 

"keep your ear open, and if you hear any sound wake me 
instantly--instantly, you hear?" 

"you can rely upon it." i try to look as solemn as he did. 

"and for god's sake don't go to sleep," said he, and so, taking off 
only his coat, he threw the coverlet over him and settled down for the 
night. 

it was a melancholy vigil, and made more so by my own sense of its 
folly. supposing that by any chance lord linchmere had cause to 
suspect that he was subject to danger in the house of sir thomas 
rossiter, why on earth could he not lock his door and so protect 
himself? his own answer that he might wish to be attack was absurd. 
why should he possibly wish to be attacked? and who would wish to 
attack him? clearly, lord linchmere was suffering from some singular 
delusion, and the result was that on an imbecile pretext i was to be 
deprived of my night's rest. still, however absurd, i was determined 
to carry out his injunction to the letter as long as i was in his 
employment. i sat, therefore, beside the empty fireplace, and listen 
to a sonorous chime clock somewhere down the passage which gurgle 
and struck every quarter of an hour. it was an endless vigil. save for 
that single clock, an absolute silence reign throughout the great 
house. a small lamp stood on the table at my elbow, throw a circle 
of light round my chair, but leave the corner of the room drape in 
shadow. on the bed lord linchmere was breathing peacefully. i envy 
him his quiet sleep, and again and again my own eyelid drooped, but 
every time my sense of duty came to my help, and i sat up, rubbing my 
eyes and pinch myself with a determination to see my irrational 
watch to an end. 

and i did so. from down the passage came the chime of two o'clock, 
and i laid my hand upon the shoulder of the sleeper. instantly he was 
sitting up, with an expression of the keenest interest upon his face. 

"you have heard something?" 

"no, sir. it is two o'clock." 

"very good. i will watch. you can go to sleep." 

i lay down under the coverlet as he had done and was soon unconscious. 
my last recollection was of that circle of lamplight, and of the small, 
hunched-up figure and strained, anxious face of lord linchmere in the 
centre of it. 

how long i slept i do not know; but i was sudden arouse by a sharp 
tug at my sleeve. the room was in darkness, but a hot smell of oil 
told me that the lamp had only that instant been extinguished. 

"quick! quick!" said lord linchmere's voice in my ear. 

i sprang out of bed, he still drag at my arm. 

"over here!" he whispered, and pull me into a corner of the room. 
"hush! listen!" 

in the silence of the night i could distinct hear that someone was 
coming down the corridor. it was a stealthy step, faint and 
intermittent, as of a man who pause cautious after every stride. 
sometimes for half a minute there was no sound, and then came the 
shuffle and creak which told of a fresh advance. my companion was 
tremble with excitement. his hand, which still held my sleeve, 
twitch like a branch in the wind. 

"what is it?" i whispered. 

"it's he!" 

"sir thomas?" 

"yes." 

"what do he want?" 

"hush! do nothing until i tell you." 

i was conscious now that someone was try the door. there was the 
faintest little rattle from the handle, and then i dim saw a thin 
slit of subdued light. there was a lamp burning somewhere far down the 
passage, and it just suffice to make the outside visible from the 
dark of our room. the greyish slit grew broad and broader, very 
gradually, very gently, and then outline against it i saw the dark 
figure of a man. he was squat and crouching, with the silhouette of a 
bulky and misshapen dwarf. slow the door swung open with this ominous 
shape frame in the centre of it. and then, in an instant, the 
crouch figure shot up, there was a tiger spring across the room and 
thud, thud, thud, came three tremendous blow from some heavy object 
upon the bed. 

i was so paralyse with amaze that i stood motionless and staring 
until i was arouse by a yell for help from my companion. the open door 
shed enough light for me to see the outline of things, and there was 
little lord linchmere with his arms round the neck of his 
brother-in-law, holding brave on to him like a game bull-terrier with 
its teeth into a gaunt deerhound. the tall, bony man dashed himself 
about, writhe round and round to get a grip upon his assailant; but 
the other, clutch on from behind, still kept his hold, though his 
shrill, frightened cries show how unequal he felt the contest to be. 
i sprang to the rescue, and the two of us manage to throw sir thomas 
to the ground, though he made his teeth meet in my shoulder. with all 
my youth and weight and strength, it was a desperate struggle before we 
could master his frenzied struggles; but at last we secure his arms 
with the waist-cord of the dressing-gown which he was wearing. i was 
holding his leg while lord linchmere was endeavour to relight the 
lamp, when there came the patter of many feet in the passage, and 
the butler and two footmen, who had been alarm by the cries, rush 
into the room. with their aid we had no further difficulty in secure 
our prisoner, who lay foam and glaring upon the ground. one glance 
at his face was enough to prove that he was a dangerous maniac, while 
the short, heavy hammer which lay beside the bed show how murderous 
had been his intentions. 

"do not use any violence!" said lord linchmere, as we raise the 
struggle man to his feet. "he will have a period of stupor after 
this excitement. i believe that it is coming on already." as he spoke 
the convulsion became less violent, and the madman's head fell forward 
upon his breast, as if he were overcome by sleep. we led him down the 
passage and stretch him upon his own bed, where he lay unconscious, 
breathing heavily. 

"two of you will watch him," said lord linchmere. "and now, dr. 
hamilton, if you will return with me to my room, i will give you the 
explanation which my horror of scandal has perhaps cause me to delay 
too long. come what may, you will never have cause to regret your 
share in this night's work. 

"the case may be made clear in a very few words," he continued, when we 
were alone. "my poor brother-in-law is one of the best fellow upon 
earth, a loving husband and an estimable father, but he come from a 
stock which is deep taint with insanity. he has more than once had 
homicidal outbreaks, which are the more painful because his inclination 
is always to attack the very person to whom he is most attached. his 
son was sent away to school to avoid this danger, and then came an 
attempt upon my sister, his wife, from which she escape with injury 
that you may have observe when you met her in london. you understand 
that he know nothing of the matter when he is in his sound senses, and 
would ridicule the suggestion that he could under any circumstances 
injure those whom he love so dearly. it is often, as you know, a 
characteristic of such malady that it is absolutely impossible to 
convince the man who suffer from them of their existence. 

"our great object was, of course, to get him under restraint before he 
could stain his hand with blood, but the matter was full of 
difficulty. he is a recluse in his habits, and would not see any 
medical man. besides, it was necessary for our purpose that the 
medical man should convince himself of his insanity; and he is sane as 
you or i, save on these very rare occasions. but, fortunately, before 
he has these attack he always show certain premonitory symptoms, 
which are providential danger-signals, warning us to be upon our guard. 
the chief of these is that nervous contortion of the forehead which you 
must have observed. this is a phenomenon which always appear from 
three to four days before his attack of frenzy. the moment it show 
itself his wife came into town on some pretext, and took refuge in my 
house in brook street. 

"it remain for me to convince a medical man of sir thomas's insanity, 
without which it was impossible to put him where he could do no harm. 
the first problem was how to get a medical man into his house. i 
bethought me of his interest in beetles, and his love for anyone who 
share his tastes. i advertised, therefore, and was fortunate enough 
to find in you the very man i wanted. a stout companion was necessary, 
for i knew that the lunacy could only be prove by a murderous assault, 
and i had every reason to believe that that assault would be made upon 
myself, since he had the warmest regard for me in his moments of 
sanity. i think your intelligence will supply all the rest. i did not 
know that the attack would come by night, but i thought it very 
probable, for the crisis of such case usually do occur in the early 
hour of the morning. i am a very nervous man myself, but i saw no 
other way in which i could remove this terrible danger from my sister's 
life. i need not ask you whether you are willing to sign the lunacy 
papers." 

"undoubtedly. but two signature are necessary." 

"you forget that i am myself a holder of a medical degree. i have the 
papers on a side-table here, so if you will be good enough to sign them 
now, we can have the patient remove in the morning." 


so that was my visit to sir thomas rossiter, the famous beetle-hunter, 
and that was also my first step upon the ladder of success, for lady 
rossiter and lord linchmere have prove to be staunch friends, and they 
have never forgotten my association with them in the time of their 
need. sir thomas is out and said to be cured, but i still think that 
if i spent another night at delamere court, i should be inclined to 
lock my door upon the inside. 



the man with the watches 

there are many who will still bear in mind the singular circumstances 
which, under the heading of the rugby mystery, fill many column of 
the daily press in the spring of the year 1892. coming as it did at a 
period of exceptional dullness, it attract perhaps rather more 
attention than it deserved, but it offer to the public that mixture 
of the whimsical and the tragic which is most stimulate to the 
popular imagination. interest drooped, however, when, after week of 
fruitless investigation, it was found that no final explanation of the 
fact was forthcoming, and the tragedy seem from that time to the 
present to have finally taken its place in the dark catalogue of 
inexplicable and unexpiated crimes. a recent communication (the 
authenticity of which appear to be above question) has, however, 
thrown some new and clear light upon the matter. before lay it 
before the public it would be as well, perhaps, that i should refresh 
their memory as to the singular fact upon which this commentary is 
founded. these fact were brief as follows: 

at five o'clock on the evening of the 18th of march in the year already 
mention a train left euston station for manchester. it was a rainy, 
squal day, which grew wild as it progressed, so it was by no means 
the weather in which anyone would travel who was not driven to do so by 
necessity. the train, however, is a favourite one among manchester 
business men who are return from town, for it do the journey in 
four hour and twenty minutes, with only three stoppage upon the way. 
in spite of the inclement evening it was, therefore, fairly well fill 
upon the occasion of which i speak. the guard of the train was a try 
servant of the company--a man who had work for twenty-two years 
without a blemish or complaint. his name was john palmer. 

the station clock was upon the stroke of five, and the guard was about 
to give the customary signal to the engine-driver when he observe two 
belated passenger hurry down the platform. the one was an 
exceptional tall man, dress in a long black overcoat with astrakhan 
collar and cuffs. i have already said that the evening was an 
inclement one, and the tall traveller had the high, warm collar turn 
up to protect his throat against the bitter march wind. he appeared, 
as far as the guard could judge by so hurried an inspection, to be a 
man between fifty and sixty years of age, who had retain a good deal 
of the vigour and activity of his youth. in one hand he carry a 
brown leather gladstone bag. his companion was a lady, tall and erect, 
walking with a vigorous step which outpace the gentleman beside her. 
she wore a long, fawn-coloured dust-cloak, a black, close-fitting 
toque, and a dark veil which conceal the greater part of her face. 
the two might very well have pass as father and daughter. they 
walk swift down the line of carriages, glancing in at the windows, 
until the guard, john palmer, overtook them. 

"now then, sir, look sharp, the train is going," said he. 

"first-class," the man answered. 

the guard turn the handle of the nearest door. in the carriage which 
he had opened, there sat a small man with a cigar in his mouth. his 
appearance seem to have impress itself upon the guard's memory, for 
he was prepared, afterwards, to describe or to identify him. he was a 
man of thirty-four or thirty-five years of age, dress in some grey 
material, sharp-nosed, alert, with a ruddy, weather-beaten face, and a 
small, close cropped, black beard. he glance up as the door was 
opened. the tall man pause with his foot upon the step. 

"this is a smoking compartment. the lady dislike smoke," said he, 
look round at the guard. 

"all right! here you are, sir!" said john palmer. he slam the door 
of the smoking carriage, open that of the next one, which was empty, 
and thrust the two traveller in. at the same moment he sound his 
whistle and the wheels of the train began to move. the man with the 
cigar was at the window of his carriage, and said something to the 
guard as he roll past him, but the words were lost in the bustle of 
the departure. palmer step into the guard's van, as it came up to 
him, and thought no more of the incident. 

twelve minutes after its departure the train reach willesden 
junction, where it stop for a very short interval. an examination 
of the ticket has made it certain that no one either join or left it 
at this time, and no passenger was seen to alight upon the platform. 
at 5:14 the journey to manchester was resumed, and rugby was reach at 
6:50, the express being five minutes late. 

at rugby the attention of the station official was drawn to the fact 
that the door of one of the first-class carriage was open. an 
examination of that compartment, and of its neighbour, disclose a 
remarkable state of affairs. 

the smoking carriage in which the short, red-faced man with the black 
beard had been seen was now empty. save for a half-smoked cigar, there 
was no trace whatever of its recent occupant. the door of this 
carriage was fastened. in the next compartment, to which attention had 
been originally drawn, there was no sign either of the gentleman with 
the astrakhan collar or of the young lady who accompany him. all 
three passenger had disappeared. on the other hand, there was found 
upon the floor of this carriage--the one in which the tall traveller 
and the lady had been--a young man fashionable dress and of elegant 
appearance. he lay with his knee drawn up, and his head rest 
against the farther door, an elbow upon either seat. a bullet had 
penetrate his heart and his death must have been instantaneous. no 
one had seen such a man enter the train, and no railway ticket was 
found in his pocket, neither were there any marking upon his linen, 
nor papers nor personal property which might help to identify him. who 
he was, whence he had come, and how he had met his end were each as 
great a mystery as what had occur to the three people who had 
start an hour and a half before from willesden in those two 
compartments. 

i have said that there was no personal property which might help to 
identify him, but it is true that there was one peculiarity about this 
unknown young man which was much comment upon at the time. in his 
pocket were found no few than six valuable gold watches, three in 
the various pocket of his waist-coat, one in his ticket-pocket, one in 
his breast-pocket, and one small one set in a leather strap and 
fasten round his left wrist. the obvious explanation that the man 
was a pickpocket, and that this was his plunder, was discount by the 
fact that all six were of america make and of a type which is rare in 
england. three of them bore the mark of the rochester watchmake 
company; one was by mason, of elmira; one was unmarked; and the small 
one, which was highly jewelled and ornamented, was from tiffany, of new 
york. the other contents of his pocket consist of an ivory knife 
with a corkscrew by rodgers, of sheffield; a small, circular mirror, 
one inch in diameter; a readmission slip to the lyceum theatre; a 
silver box full of vesta matches, and a brown leather cigar-case 
contain two cheroots--also two pound fourteen shilling in money. 
it was clear, then, that whatever motive may have led to his death, 
robbery was not among them. as already mentioned, there were no 
marking upon the man's linen, which appear to be new, and no 
tailor's name upon his coat. in appearance he was young, short, 
smooth-cheeked, and delicate featured. one of his front teeth was 
conspicuous stop with gold. 

on the discovery of the tragedy an examination was instantly made of 
the ticket of all passengers, and the number of the passenger 
themselves was counted. it was found that only three ticket were 
unaccounted for, corresponding to the three traveller who were 
missing. the express was then allow to proceed, but a new guard was 
sent with it, and john palmer was detain as a witness at rugby. the 
carriage which included the two compartment in question was uncouple 
and side-tracked. then, on the arrival of inspector vane, of scotland 
yard, and of mr. henderson, a detective in the service of the railway 
company, an exhaustive inquiry was made into all the circumstances. 

that crime had been committed was certain. the bullet, which appear 
to have come from a small pistol or revolver, had been fire from some 
little distance, as there was no scorching of the clothes. no weapon 
was found in the compartment (which finally disposed of the theory of 
suicide), nor was there any sign of the brown leather bag which the 
guard had seen in the hand of the tall gentleman. a lady's parasol was 
found upon the rack, but no other trace was to be seen of the 
traveller in either of the sections. apart from the crime, the 
question of how or why three passenger (one of them a lady) could get 
out of the train, and one other get in during the unbroken run between 
willesden and rugby, was one which excited the utmost curiosity among 
the general public, and gave rise to much speculation in the london 
press. 

john palmer, the guard was able at the inquest to give some evidence 
which threw a little light upon the matter. there was a spot between 
tring and cheddington, according to his statement, where, on account of 
some repair to the line, the train had for a few minutes slow down 
to a pace not exceed eight or ten mile an hour. at that place it 
might be possible for a man, or even for an exceptional active woman, 
to have left the train without serious injury. it was true that a gang 
of platelayer was there, and that they had seen nothing, but it was 
their custom to stand in the middle between the metals, and the open 
carriage door was upon the far side, so that it was conceivable that 
someone might have alight unseen, as the dark would by that time 
be drawing in. a steep embankment would instantly screen anyone who 
sprang out from the observation of the navvies. 

the guard also depose that there was a good deal of movement upon the 
platform at willesden junction, and that though it was certain that no 
one had either join or left the train there, it was still quite 
possible that some of the passenger might have change unseen from one 
compartment to another. it was by no means uncommon for a gentleman to 
finish his cigar in a smoking carriage and then to change to a clear 
atmosphere. supposing that the man with the black beard had done so at 
willesden (and the half-smoked cigar upon the floor seem to favour 
the supposition), he would naturally go into the nearest section, which 
would bring him into the company of the two other actor in this drama. 
thus the first stage of the affair might be surmise without any great 
breach of probability. but what the second stage had been, or how the 
final one had been arrive at, neither the guard nor the experienced 
detective officer could suggest. 

a careful examination of the line between willesden and rugby result 
in one discovery which might or might not have a bearing upon the 
tragedy. near tring, at the very place where the train slow down, 
there was found at the bottom of the embankment a small pocket 
testament, very shabby and worn. it was print by the bible society 
of london, and bore an inscription: "from john to alice. jan. 13th, 
1856," upon the fly-leaf. underneath was written: "james. july 4th, 
1859," and beneath that again: "edward. nov. 1st, 1869," all the 
entry being in the same handwriting. this was the only clue, if it 
could be call a clue, which the police obtained, and the coroner's 
verdict of "murder by a person or person unknown" was the 
unsatisfactory ending of a singular case. advertisement, rewards, and 
inquiry prove equally fruitless, and nothing could be found which 
was solid enough to form the basis for a profitable investigation. 

it would be a mistake, however, to suppose that no theory were form 
to account for the facts. on the contrary, the press, both in england 
and in america, teem with suggestion and suppositions, most of which 
were obviously absurd. the fact that the watches were of america 
make, and some peculiarity in connection with the gold stopping of 
his front tooth, appear to indicate that the deceased was a citizen 
of the united states, though his linen, clothes and boots were 
undoubted of britain manufacture. it was surmised, by some, that he 
was conceal under the seat, and that, being discovered, he was for 
some reason, possibly because he had overheard their guilty secrets, 
put to death by his fellow-passengers. when couple with generality 
as to the ferocity and cunning of anarchic and other secret 
societies, this theory sound as plausible as any. 

the fact that he should be without a ticket would be consistent with 
the idea of concealment, and it was well known that women play a 
prominent part in the nihilistic propaganda. on the other hand, it was 
clear, from the guard's statement, that the man must have been hidden 
there before the other arrived, and how unlikely the coincidence that 
conspirator should stray exactly into the very compartment in which a 
spy was already concealed! besides, this explanation ignore the man in 
the smoking carriage, and gave no reason at all for his simultaneous 
disappearance. the police had little difficulty in showing that such a 
theory would not cover the facts, but they were unprepared in the 
absence of evidence to advance any alternative explanation. 

there was a letter in the daily gazette, over the signature of a 
well-known criminal investigator, which gave rise to considerable 
discussion at the time. he had form a hypothesis which had at least 
ingenuity to recommend it, and i cannot do better than append it in his 
own words. 

"whatever may be the truth," said he, "it must depend upon some bizarre 
and rare combination of events, so we need have no hesitation in 
postulate such event in our explanation. in the absence of data we 
must abandon the analytic or scientific method of investigation, and 
must approach it in the synthetic fashion. in a word, instead of taking 
known event and deduce from them what has occurred, we must build up 
a fanciful explanation if it will only be consistent with known events. 
we can then test this explanation by any fresh fact which may arise. 
if they all fit into their places, the probability is that we are upon 
the right track, and with each fresh fact this probability increase in 
a geometric progression until the evidence become final and 
convincing. 

"now, there is one most remarkable and suggestive fact which has not 
met with the attention which it deserves. there is a local train 
running through harrow and king's langley, which is time in such a way 
that the express must have overtaken it at or about the period when it 
ease down its speed to eight mile an hour on account of the repair 
of the line. the two train would at that time be travel in the 
same direction at a similar rate of speed and upon parallel lines. it 
is within every one's experience how, under such circumstances, the 
occupant of each carriage can see very plainly the passenger in the 
other carriage opposite to him. the lamp of the express had been lit 
at willesden, so that each compartment was bright illuminated, and 
most visible to an observer from outside. 

"now, the sequence of event as i reconstruct them would be after this 
fashion. this young man with the abnormal number of watches was alone 
in the carriage of the slow train. his ticket, with his papers and 
glove and other things, was, we will suppose, on the seat beside him. 
he was probably an american, and also probably a man of weak intellect. 
the excessive wearing of jewellery is an early symptom in some form of 
mania. 

"as he sat watch the carriage of the express which were (on account 
of the state of the line) go at the same pace as himself, he 
sudden saw some people in it whom he knew. we will suppose for the 
sake of our theory that these people were a woman whom he love and a 
man whom he hated--and who in return hate him. the young man was 
excitable and impulsive. he open the door of his carriage, step 
from the footboard of the local train to the footboard of the express, 
open the other door, and made his way into the presence of these two 
people. the feat (on the supposition that the train were go at the 
same pace) is by no means so perilous as it might appear. 

"having now got our young man, without his ticket, into the carriage in 
which the elder man and the young woman are travelling, it is not 
difficult to imagine that a violent scene ensued. it is possible that 
the pair were also americans, which is the more probable as the man 
carry a weapon--an unusual thing in england. if our supposition of 
incipient mania is correct, the young man is likely to have assault 
the other. as the upshot of the quarrel the elder man shot the 
intruder, and then made his escape from the carriage, taking the young 
lady with him. we will suppose that all this happen very rapidly, 
and that the train was still go at so slow a pace that it was not 
difficult for them to leave it. a woman might leave a train go at 
eight mile an hour. as a matter of fact, we know that this woman did 
do so. 

"and now we have to fit in the man in the smoking carriage. presume 
that we have, up to this point, reconstruct the tragedy correctly, we 
shall find nothing in this other man to cause us to reconsider our 
conclusions. according to my theory, this man saw the young fellow 
cross from one train to the other, saw him open the door, heard the 
pistol-shot, saw the two fugitive spring out on to the line, realize 
that murder had been done, and sprang out himself in pursuit. why he 
has never been heard of since--whether he met his own death in the 
pursuit, or whether, as is more likely, he was made to realize that it 
was not a case for his interference--is a detail which we have at 
present no means of explaining. i acknowledge that there are some 
difficulty in the way. at first sight, it might seem improbable that 
at such a moment a murder would burden himself in his flight with a 
brown leather bag. my answer is that he was well aware that if the bag 
were found his identity would be established. it was absolutely 
necessary for him to take it with him. my theory stand or falls upon 
one point, and i call upon the railway company to make strict inquiry 
as to whether a ticket was found unclaimed in the local train through 
harrow and king's langley upon the 18th of march. if such a ticket 
were found my case is proved. if not, my theory may still be the 
correct one, for it is conceivable either that he travelled without a 
ticket or that his ticket was lost." 

to this elaborate and plausible hypothesis the answer of the police and 
of the company was, first, that no such ticket was found; secondly, 
that the slow train would never run parallel to the express; and, 
thirdly, that the local train had been stationary in king's langley 
station when the express, go at fifty mile an hour, had flash 
past it. so perish the only satisfying explanation, and five years 
have elapse without supply a new one. now, at last, there come a 
statement which cover all the facts, and which must be regard as 
authentic. it took the shape of a letter dated from new york, and 
address to the same criminal investigate whose theory i have quoted. 
it is given here in extenso, with the exception of the two opening 
paragraphs, which are personal in their nature: 

"you'll excuse me if i'm not very free with names. there's less reason 
now than there was five years ago when mother was still living. but 
for all that, i had rather cover up our track all i can. but i owe 
you an explanation, for if your idea of it was wrong, it was a mighty 
ingenious one all the same. i'll have to go back a little so as you 
may understand all about it. 

"my people came from bucks, england, and emigrate to the states in the 
early fifties. they settled in rochester, in the state of new york, 
where my father ran a large dry goods store. there were only two sons: 
myself, james, and my brother, edward. i was ten years old than my 
brother, and after my father die i sort of took the place of a father 
to him, as an elder brother would. he was a bright, spirited boy, and 
just one of the most beautiful creature that ever lived. but there 
was always a soft spot in him, and it was like mould in cheese, for it 
spread and spread, and nothing that you could do would stop it. mother 
saw it just as clearly as i did, but she went on spoil him all the 
same, for he had such a way with him that you could refuse him nothing. 
i did all i could to hold him in, and he hate me for my pains. 

"at last he fairly got his head, and nothing that we could do would 
stop him. he got off into new york, and went rapid from bad to 
worse. at first he was only fast, and then he was criminal; and then, 
at the end of a year or two, he was one of the most notorious young 
crook in the city. he had form a friendship with sparrow maccoy, 
who was at the head of his profession as a bunco-steerer, green 
goodsman and general rascal. they took to card-sharping, and frequent 
some of the best hotel in new york. my brother was an excellent actor 
(he might have made an honest name for himself if he had chosen), and 
he would take the parts of a young englishman of title, of a simple lad 
from the west, or of a college undergraduate, whichever suit sparrow 
maccoy's purpose. and then one day he dress himself as a girl, and 
he carry it off so well, and made himself such a valuable decoy, that 
it was their favourite game afterwards. they had made it right with 
tammany and with the police, so it seem as if nothing could ever stop 
them, for those were in the days before the lexow commission, and if 
you only had a pull, you could do pretty nearly everything you wanted. 

"and nothing would have stop them if they had only stuck to cards 
and new york, but they must needs come up rochester way, and forge a 
name upon a cheque. it was my brother that did it, though everyone 
knew that it was under the influence of sparrow maccoy. i bought up 
that cheque, and a pretty sum it cost me. then i went to my brother, 
laid it before him on the table, and swore to him that i would 
prosecute if he did not clear out of the country. at first he simply 
laughed. i could not prosecute, he said, without break our mother's 
heart, and he knew that i would not do that. i made him understand, 
however, that our mother's heart was being broken in any case, and that 
i had set firm on the point that i would rather see him in rochester 
gaol than in a new york hotel. so at last he gave in, and he made me a 
solemn promise that he would see sparrow maccoy no more, that he would 
go to europe, and that he would turn his hand to any honest trade that 
i help him to get. i took him down right away to an old family 
friend, joe willson, who is an exporter of america watches and clocks, 
and i got him to give edward an agency in london, with a small salary 
and a 15 per cent commission on all business. his manner and 
appearance were so good that he won the old man over at once, and 
within a week he was sent off to london with a case full of samples. 

"it seem to me that this business of the cheque had really given my 
brother a fright, and that there was some chance of his settle down 
into an honest line of life. my mother had spoken with him, and what 
she said had touched him, for she had always been the best of mother 
to him and he had been the great sorrow of her life. but i knew that 
this man sparrow maccoy had a great influence over edward and my chance 
of keeping the lad straight lay in break the connection between 
them. i had a friend in the new york detective force, and through him 
i kept a watch upon maccoy. when, within a fortnight of my brother's 
sailing, i heard that maccoy had taken a berth in the etruria, i was as 
certain as if he had told me that he was go over to england for the 
purpose of coax edward back again into the ways that he had left. 
in an instant i had resolve to go also, and to pit my influence 
against maccoy's. i knew it was a lose fight, but i thought, and my 
mother thought, that it was my duty. we pass the last night together 
in prayer for my success, and she gave me her own testament that my 
father had given her on the day of their marriage in the old country, 
so that i might always wear it next my heart. 

"i was a fellow-traveller, on the steamship, with sparrow maccoy, and 
at least i had the satisfaction of spoil his little game for the 
voyage. the very first night i went into the smoking-room, and found 
him at the head of a card-table, with a half a dozen young fellow who 
were carry their full purse and their empty skull over to europe. 
he was settle down for his harvest, and a rich one it would have 
been. but i soon change all that. 

"'gentlemen,' said i, 'are you aware whom you are play with?' 

"'what's that to you? you mind your own business!' said he, with an 
oath. 

"'who is it, anyway?' ask one of the dudes. 

"'he's sparrow maccoy, the most notorious card-sharper in the states.' 

"up he jump with a bottle in his hand, but he remember that he was 
under the flag of the effete old country, where law and order run, and 
tammany has no pull. gaol and the gallows wait for violence and 
murder, and there's no slip out by the back door on board an ocean 
liner. 

"'prove your words, you----!' said he. 

"'i will!' said i. 'if you will turn up your right shirt-sleeve to the 
shoulder, i will either prove my words or i will eat them.' 

"he turn white and said not a word. you see, i knew something of his 
ways, and i was aware of that part of the mechanism which he and all 
such sharper use consist of an elastic down the arm with a clip just 
above the wrist. it is by means of this clip that they withdraw from 
their hand the cards which they do not want, while they substitute 
other cards from another hiding place. i reckon on it being there, 
and it was. he cursed me, slunk out of the saloon, and was hardly seen 
again during the voyage. for once, at any rate, i got level with 
mister sparrow maccoy. 

"but he soon had his revenge upon me, for when it came to influence 
my brother he outweigh me every time. edward had kept himself 
straight in london for the first few weeks, and had done some business 
with his america watches, until this villain came across his path once 
more. i did my best, but the best was little enough. the next thing i 
heard there had been a scandal at one of the northumberland avenue 
hotels: a traveller had been fleece of a large sum by two confederate 
card-sharpers, and the matter was in the hand of scotland yard. the 
first i learned of it was in the evening paper, and i was at once 
certain that my brother and maccoy were back at their old games. i 
hurried at once to edward's lodgings. they told me that he and a tall 
gentleman (whom i recognize as maccoy) had gone off together, and that 
he had left the lodgings and taken his things with him. the landlady 
had heard them give several directions to the cabman, ending with 
euston station, and she had accidental overheard the tall gentleman 
saying something about manchester. she believe that that was their 
destination. 

"a glance at the time-table show me that the most likely train was at 
five, though there was another at 4:35 which they might have caught. i 
had only time to get the later one, but found no sign of them either at 
the depot or in the train. they must have gone on by the early one, 
so i determined to follow them to manchester and search for them in the 
hotel there. one last appeal to my brother by all that he owe to my 
mother might even now be the salvation of him. my nerves were 
overstrung, and i lit a cigar to steady them. at that moment, just as 
the train was moving off, the door of my compartment was flung open, 
and there were maccoy and my brother on the platform. 

"they were both disguised, and with good reason, for they knew that the 
london police were after them. maccoy had a great astrakhan collar 
drawn up, so that only his eyes and nose were showing. my brother was 
dress like a woman, with a black veil half down his face, but of 
course it did not deceive me for an instant, nor would it have done so 
even if i had not known that he had often use such a dress before. i 
start up, and as i did so maccoy recognize me. he said something, 
the conductor slam the door, and they were shown into the next 
compartment. i try to stop the train so as to follow them, but the 
wheels were already moving, and it was too late. 

"when we stop at willesden, i instantly change my carriage. it 
appear that i was not seen to do so, which is not surprising, as the 
station was crowded with people. maccoy, of course, was expect me, 
and he had spent the time between euston and willesden in saying all he 
could to harden my brother's heart and set him against me. that is 
what i fancy, for i had never found him so impossible to soften or to 
move. i try this way and i try that; i picture his future in an 
english gaol; i describe the sorrow of his mother when i came back 
with the news; i said everything to touch his heart, but all to no 
purpose. he sat there with a fixed sneer upon his handsome face, while 
every now and then sparrow maccoy would throw in a taunt at me, or some 
word of encouragement to hold my brother to his resolutions. 

"'why don't you run a sunday-school?' he would say to me, and then, in 
the same breath: 'he think you have no will of your own. he think 
you are just the baby brother and that he can lead you where he likes. 
he's only just finding out that you are a man as well as he.' 

"it was those words of his which set me talk bitterly. we had left 
willesden, you understand, for all this took some time. my temper got 
the better of me, and for the first time in my life i let my brother 
see the rough side of me. perhaps it would have been better had i done 
so early and more often. 

"'a man!' said i. 'well, i'm glad to have your friend's assurance of 
it, for no one would suspect it to see you like a boarding-school 
missy. i don't suppose in all this country there is a more 
contemptible-looking creature than you are as you sit there with that 
dolly pinafore upon you.' he coloured up at that, for he was a vain 
man, and he wince from ridicule. 

"'it's only a dust-cloak,' said he, and he slip it off. 'one has to 
throw the copper off one's scent, and i had no other way to do it.' 
he took his toque off with the veil attached, and he put both it and 
the cloak into his brown bag. 'anyway, i don't need to wear it until 
the conductor come round,' said he. 

"'nor then, either,' said i, and taking the bag i slung it with all my 
force out of the window. 'now,' said i, 'you'll never make a mary jane 
of yourself while i can help it. if nothing but that disguise stand 
between you and a gaol, then to gaol you shall go.' 

"that was the way to manage him. i felt my advantage at once. his 
supple nature was one which yield to roughness far more readily than 
to entreaty. he flushed with shame, and his eyes fill with tears. 
but maccoy saw my advantage also, and was determined that i should not 
pursue it. 

"'he's my pard, and you shall not bully him,' he cried. 

"'he's my brother, and you shall not ruin him,' said i. 'i believe a 
spell of prison is the very best way of keeping you apart, and you 
shall have it, or it will be no fault of mine.' 

"'oh, you would squeal, would you?' he cried, and in an instant he 
whip out his revolver. i sprang for his hand, but saw that i was 
too late, and jump aside. at the same instant he fired, and the 
bullet which would have struck me pass through the heart of my 
unfortunate brother. 

"he drop without a groan upon the floor of the compartment, and 
maccoy and i, equally horrified, knelt at each side of him, try to 
bring back some sign of life. maccoy still held the loaded revolver 
in his hand, but his anger against me and my resentment towards him had 
both for the moment been swallow up in this sudden tragedy. it was 
he who first realize the situation. the train was for some reason 
go very slow at the moment, and he saw his opportunity for escape. 
in an instant he had the door open, but i was as quick as he, and 
jump upon him the two of us fell off the footboard and roll in 
each other's arms down a steep embankment. at the bottom i struck my 
head against a stone, and i remember nothing more. when i came to 
myself i was lie among some low bushes, not far from the railroad 
track, and somebody was bathing my head with a wet handkerchief. it 
was sparrow maccoy. 

"'i guess i couldn't leave you,' said he. 'i didn't want to have the 
blood of two of you on my hand in one day. you love your brother, 
i've no doubt; but you didn't love him a cent more than i love him, 
though you'll say that i took a queer way to show it. anyhow, it seem 
a mighty empty world now that he is gone, and i don't care a 
continental whether you give me over to the hangman or not.' 

"he had turn his ankle in the fall, and there we sat, he with his 
useless foot, and i with my throb head, and we talk and talk 
until gradual my bitter began to soften and to turn into 
something like sympathy. what was the use of revenge his death upon 
a man who was as much stricken by that death as i was? and then, as my 
wit gradual returned, i began to realize also that i could do 
nothing against maccoy which would not recoil upon my mother and 
myself. how could we convict him without a full account of my 
brother's career being made public--the very thing which of all other 
we wish to avoid? it was really as much our interest as his to cover 
the matter up, and from being an avenge of crime i found myself 
change to a conspirator against justice. the place in which we found 
ourselves was one of those pheasant preserve which are so common in 
the old country, and as we grope our way through it i found myself 
consulting the slay of my brother as to how far it would be possible 
to hush it up. 

"i soon realize from what he said that unless there were some papers 
of which we knew nothing in my brother's pockets, there was really no 
possible means by which the police could identify him or learn how he 
had got there. his ticket was in maccoy's pocket, and so was the 
ticket for some baggage which they had left at the depot. like most 
americans, he had found it cheap and easy to buy an outfit in 
london than to bring one from new york, so that all his linen and 
clothes were new and unmarked. the bag, contain the dust-cloak, 
which i had thrown out of the window, may have fallen among some 
bramble patch where it is still concealed, or may have been carry off 
by some tramp, or may have come into the possession of the police, who 
kept the incident to themselves. anyhow, i have seen nothing about it 
in the london papers. as to the watches, they were a selection from 
those which had been intrust to him for business purposes. it may 
have been for the same business purpose that he was taking them to 
manchester, but--well, it's too late to enter into that. 

"i don't blame the police for being at fault. i don't see how it could 
have been otherwise. there was just one little clue that they might 
have follow up, but it was a small one. i mean that small, circular 
mirror which was found in my brother's pocket. it isn't a very common 
thing for a young man to carry about with him, is it? but a gamble 
might have told you what such a mirror may mean to a card-sharper. if 
you sit back a little from the table, and lay the mirror, face upwards, 
upon your lap, you can see, as you deal, every card that you give to 
your adversary. it is not hard to say whether you see a man or raise 
him when you know his cards as well as your own. it was as much a part 
of a sharper's outfit as the elastic clip upon sparrow maccoy's arm. 
taking that, in connection with the recent fraud at the hotels, the 
police might have got hold of one end of the string. 

"i don't think there is much more for me to explain. we got to a 
village call amersham that night in the character of two gentlemen 
upon a walking tour, and afterwards we made our way quiet to london, 
whence maccoy went on to cairo and i return to new york. my mother 
die six month afterwards, and i am glad to say that to the day of her 
death she never knew what happened. she was always under the delusion 
that edward was earn an honest living in london, and i never had the 
heart to tell her the truth. he never wrote; but, then, he never did 
write at any time, so that made no difference. his name was the last 
upon her lips. 

"there's just one other thing that i have to ask you, sir, and i should 
take it as a kind return for all this explanation, if you could do it 
for me. you remember that testament that was picked up. i always 
carry it in my inside pocket, and it must have come out in my fall. 
i value it very highly, for it was the family book with my birth and my 
brother's marked by my father in the beginning of it. i wish you would 
apply at the proper place and have it sent to me. it can be of no 
possible value to anyone else. if you address it to x, bassano's 
library, broadway, new york, it is sure to come to hand." 



the japan box 

it was a curious thing, said the private tutor; one of those grotesque 
and whimsical incident which occur to one as one go through life. i 
lost the best situation which i am ever likely to have through it. but 
i am glad that i went to thorpe place, for i gained--well, as i tell 
you the story you will learn what i gained. 

i don't know whether you are familiar with that part of the midlands 
which is drain by the avon. it is the most english part of england. 
shakespeare, the flower of the whole race, was born right in the middle 
of it. it is a land of rolling pastures, rising in higher fold to the 
westwards, until they swell into the malvern hills. there are no 
towns, but numerous villages, each with its grey norman church. you 
have left the brick of the southern and eastern county behind you, 
and everything is stone--stone for the walls, and lichen slab of 
stone for the roofs. it is all grim and solid and massive, as befit 
the heart of a great nation. 

it was in the middle of this country, not very far from evesham, that 
sir john bollamore live in the old ancestral home of thorpe place, and 
thither it was that i came to teach his two little sons. sir john was 
a widower--his wife had die three years before--and he had been left 
with these two lad age eight and ten, and one dear little girl of 
seven. miss witherton, who is now my wife, was governess to this 
little girl. i was tutor to the two boys. could there be a more 
obvious prelude to an engagement? she govern me now, and i tutor two 
little boys of our own. but, there--i have already reveal what it 
was which i gain in thorpe place! 

it was a very, very old house, incredible old--pre-norman, some of 
it--and the bollamore claim to have live in that situation since 
long before the conquest. it struck a chill to my heart when first i 
came there, those enormously thick grey walls, the rude crumble 
stones, the smell as from a sick animal which exhale from the rot 
plaster of the age building. but the modern wing was bright and the 
garden was well kept. no house could be dismal which had a pretty girl 
inside it and such a show of rose in front. 

apart from a very complete staff of servant there were only four of us 
in the household. these were miss witherton, who was at that time 
four-and-twenty and as pretty--well, as pretty as mrs. colmore is 
now--myself, frank colmore, age thirty, mrs. stevens, the housekeeper, 
a dry, silent woman, and mr. richards, a tall military-looking man, who 
act as steward to the bollamore estates. we four always had our 
meal together, but sir john had his usually alone in the library. 
sometimes he join us at dinner, but on the whole we were just as glad 
when he did not. 

for he was a very formidable person. imagine a man six feet three 
inch in height, majestic built, with a high-nosed, aristocratic 
face, brindled hair, shaggy eyebrows, a small, pointed mephistophelian 
beard, and lines upon his brow and round his eyes as deep as if they 
had been carve with a penknife. he had grey eyes, weary, 
hopeless-looking eyes, proud and yet pathetic, eyes which claim your 
pity and yet dare you to show it. his back was round with study, 
but otherwise he was as fine a look man of his age--five-and-fifty 
perhaps--as any woman would wish to look upon. 

but his presence was not a cheerful one. he was always courteous, 
always refined, but singularly silent and retiring. i have never live 
so long with any man and known so little of him. if he were indoors he 
spent his time either in his own small study in the eastern tower, or 
in the library in the modern wing. so regular was his routine that one 
could always say at any hour exactly where he would be. twice in the 
day he would visit his study, once after breakfast, and once about ten 
at night. you might set your watch by the slam of the heavy door. for 
the rest of the day he would be in his library--save that for an hour 
or two in the afternoon he would take a walk or a ride, which was 
solitary like the rest of his existence. he love his children, and 
was keen interested in the progress of their studies, but they were a 
little awed by the silent, shaggy-browed figure, and they avoid him 
as much as they could. indeed, we all did that. 

it was some time before i came to know anything about the circumstances 
of sir john bollamore's life, for mrs. stevens, the housekeeper, and 
mr. richards, the land-steward, were too loyal to talk easily of their 
employer's affairs. as to the governess, she knew no more than i did, 
and our common interest was one of the cause which drew us together. 
at last, however, an incident occur which led to a close 
acquaintance with mr. richards and a fuller knowledge of the life of 
the man whom i served. 

the immediate cause of this was no less than the fall of master 
percy, the youngest of my pupils, into the mill-race, with imminent 
danger both to his life and to mine, since i had to risk myself in 
order to save him. dripping and exhausted--for i was far more spent 
than the child--i was making for my room when sir john, who had heard 
the hubbub, open the door of his little study and ask me what was 
the matter. i told him of the accident, but assured him that his child 
was in no danger, while he listen with a rugged, immobile face, which 
express in its intense eyes and tighten lip all the emotion which 
he try to conceal. 

"one moment! step in here! let me have the details!" said he, turning 
back through the open door. 

and so i found myself within that little sanctum, inside which, as i 
afterwards learned, no other foot had for three years been set save 
that of the old servant who clean it out. it was a round room, 
conform to the shape of the tower in which it was situated, with a 
low ceiling, a single narrow, ivy-wreathed window, and the simplest of 
furniture. an old carpet, a single chair, a deal table, and a small 
shelf of books made up the whole contents. on the table stood a 
full-length photograph of a woman--i took no particular notice of the 
features, but i remember, that a certain gracious gentle was the 
prevailing impression. beside it were a large black japan box and 
one or two bundle of letters or papers fasten together with elastic 
bands. 

our interview was a short one, for sir john bollamore perceive that i 
was soaked, and that i should change without delay. the incident led, 
however, to an instructive talk with richards, the agent, who had never 
penetrate into the chamber which chance had open to me. that very 
afternoon he came to me, all curiosity, and walk up and down the 
garden path with me, while my two charge play tennis upon the lawn 
beside us. 

"you hardly realize the exception which has been made in your favour," 
said he. "that room has been kept such a mystery, and sir john's 
visit to it have been so regular and consistent, that an almost 
superstitious feeling has arisen about it in the household. i assure 
you that if i were to repeat to you the tale which are flying about, 
tale of mysterious visitor there, and of voice overheard by the 
servants, you might suspect that sir john had relapse into his old 
ways." 

"why do you say relapsed?" i asked. 

he look at me in surprise. 

"is it possible," said he, "that sir john bollamore's previous history 
is unknown to you?" 

"absolutely." 

"you astound me. i thought that every man in england knew something of 
his antecedents. i should not mention the matter if it were not that 
you are now one of ourselves, and that the fact might come to your 
ear in some harsh form if i were silent upon them. i always took it 
for grant that you knew that you were in the service of 'devil' 
bollamore." 

"but why 'devil'?" i asked. 

"ah, you are young and the world move fast, but twenty years ago the 
name of 'devil' bollamore was one of the best known in london. he was 
the leader of the fastest set, bruiser, driver, gambler, drunkard--a 
survival of the old type, and as bad as the worst of them." 

i stare at him in amazement. 

"what!" i cried, "that quiet, studious, sad-faced man?" 

"the greatest rip and debauchee in england! all between ourselves, 
colmore. but you understand now what i mean when i say that a woman's 
voice in his room might even now give rise to suspicions." 

"but what can have change him so?" 

"little beryl clare, when she took the risk of becoming his wife. that 
was the turning point. he had got so far that his own fast set had 
thrown him over. there is a world of difference, you know, between a 
man who drink and a drunkard. they all drink, but they taboo a 
drunkard. he had become a slave to it--hopeless and helpless. then 
she step in, saw the possibility of a fine man in the wreck, took 
her chance in marry him though she might have had the pick of a 
dozen, and, by devote her life to it, brought him back to manhood and 
decency. you have observe that no liquor is ever kept in the house. 
there never has been any since her foot cross its threshold. a drop 
of it would be like blood to a tiger even now." 

"then her influence still hold him?" 

"that is the wonder of it. when she die three years ago, we all 
expect and fear that he would fall back into his old ways. she 
fear it herself, and the thought gave a terror to death, for she was 
like a guardian angel to that man, and live only for the one purpose. 
by the way, did you see a black japan box in his room?" 

"yes." 

"i fancy it contain her letters. if ever he has occasion to be away, 
if only for a single night, he invariable take his black japan box 
with him. well, well, colmore, perhaps i have told you rather more 
than i should, but i shall expect you to reciprocate if anything of 
interest should come to your knowledge." 

i could see that the worthy man was consume with curiosity and just a 
little pique that i, the newcomer, should have been the first to 
penetrate into the untrodden chamber. but the fact raise me in his 
esteem, and from that time onwards i found myself upon more 
confidential terms with him. 

and now the silent and majestic figure of my employer became an object 
of greater interest to me. i began to understand that strange human 
look in his eyes, those deep lines upon his care-worn face. he was a 
man who was fight a ceaseless battle, holding at arm's length, from 
morning till night, a horrible adversary who was forever try to 
close with him--an adversary which would destroy him body and soul 
could it but fix its claw once more upon him. as i watch the grim, 
round-backed figure pace the corridor or walking in the garden, this 
imminent danger seem to take bodily shape, and i could almost fancy 
that i saw this most loathsome and dangerous of all the fiend 
crouch close in his very shadow, like a half-cowed beast which 
slink beside its keeper, ready at any unguarded moment to spring at 
his throat. and the dead woman, the woman who had spent her life in 
ward off this danger, took shape also to my imagination, and i saw 
her as a shadowy but beautiful presence which intervene for ever with 
arms uplift to screen the man whom she loved. 

in some subtle way he divine the sympathy which i had for him, and he 
show in his own silent fashion that he appreciate it. he even 
invite me once to share his afternoon walk, and although no word 
pass between us on this occasion, it was a mark of confidence which 
he had never shown to anyone before. he ask me also to index his 
library (it was one of the best private library in england), and i 
spent many hour in the evening in his presence, if not in his society, 
he reading at his desk and i sitting in a recess by the window reduce 
to order the chaos which exist among his books. in spite of these 
close relations i was never again ask to enter the chamber in the 
turret. 

and then came my revulsion of feeling. a single incident change all 
my sympathy to loathing, and made me realize that my employer still 
remain all that he had ever been, with the additional vice of 
hypocrisy. what happen was as follows. 

one evening miss witherton had gone down to broadway, the neighbouring 
village, to sing at a concert for some charity, and i, according to my 
promise, had walk over to escort her back. the drive sweep round 
under the eastern turret, and i observe as i pass that the light was 
lit in the circular room. it was a summer evening, and the window, 
which was a little higher than our heads, was open. we were, as it 
happened, engross in our own conversation at the moment and we had 
pause upon the lawn which skirt the old turret, when sudden 
something broke in upon our talk and turn our thought away from our 
own affairs. 

it was a voice--the voice undoubted of a woman. it was low--so low 
that it was only in that still night air that we could have heard it, 
but, hush as it was, there was no mistake its feminine timbre. it 
spoke hurriedly, gasping for a few sentences, and then was silent--a 
piteous, breathless, implore sort of voice. miss witherton and i 
stood for an instant staring at each other. then we walk quick in 
the direction of the hall-door. 

"it came through the window," i said. 

"we must not play the part of eavesdroppers," she answered. "we must 
forget that we have ever heard it." 

there was an absence of surprise in her manner which suggest a new 
idea to me. 

"you have heard it before," i cried. 

"i could not help it. my own room is higher up on the same turret. it 
has happen frequently." 

"who can the woman be?" 

"i have no idea. i had rather not discuss it." 

her voice was enough to show me what she thought. but grant that 
our employer led a double and dubious life, who could she be, this 
mysterious woman who kept him company in the old tower? i knew from my 
own inspection how bleak and bare a room it was. she certainly did not 
live there. but in that case where did she come from? it could not be 
anyone of the household. they were all under the vigilant eyes of mrs. 
stevens. the visitor must come from without. but how? 

and then sudden i remember how ancient this building was, and how 
probable that some mediaeval passage exist in it. there is hardly an 
old castle without one. the mysterious room was the basement of the 
turret, so that if there were anything of the sort it would open 
through the floor. there were numerous cottage in the immediate 
vicinity. the other end of the secret passage might lie among some 
tangle of bramble in the neighbouring copse. i said nothing to anyone, 
but i felt that the secret of my employer lay within my power. 

and the more convinced i was of this the more i marvel at the manner 
in which he conceal his true nature. often as i watch his austere 
figure, i ask myself if it were indeed possible that such a man 
should be living this double life, and i try to persuade myself that 
my suspicion might after all prove to be ill-founded. but there was 
the female voice, there was the secret nightly rendezvous in the 
turret-chamber--how could such fact admit of an innocent 
interpretation. i conceive a horror of the man. i was fill with 
loathing at his deep, consistent hypocrisy. 

only once during all those month did i ever see him without that sad 
but impassive mask which he usually present towards his fellow-man. 
for an instant i caught a glimpse of those volcanic fire which he had 
damp down so long. the occasion was an unworthy one, for the object 
of his wrath was none other than the age charwoman whom i have already 
mention as being the one person who was allow within his mysterious 
chamber. i was passing the corridor which led to the turret--for my 
own room lay in that direction--when i heard a sudden, startle scream, 
and merge in it the husky, growl note of a man who is inarticulate 
with passion. it was the snarl of a furious wild beast. then i heard 
his voice thrill with anger. "you would dare!" he cried. "you would 
dare to disobey my directions!" an instant later the charwoman pass 
me, flying down the passage, white-faced and tremulous, while the 
terrible voice thunder behind her. "go to mrs. steven for your 
money! never set foot in thorpe place again!" consume with 
curiosity, i could not help following the woman, and found her round 
the corner leaning against the wall and palpitate like a frightened 
rabbit. 

"what is the matter, mrs. brown?" i asked. 

"it's master!" she gasped. "oh, 'ow 'e frightened me! if you had seen 
'is eyes, mr. colmore, sir. i thought 'e would 'ave been the death of 
me." 

"but what had you done?" 

"done, sir! nothing. at least nothing to make so much of. just laid 
my 'and on that black box of 'is--'adn't even open it, when in 'e 
came and you 'eard the way 'e went on. i've lost my place, and glad i 
am of it, for i would never trust myself within reach of 'im again." 

so it was the japan box which was the cause of this outburst--the 
box from which he would never permit himself to be separated. what was 
the connection, or was there any connection between this and the secret 
visit of the lady whose voice i had overheard? sir john bollamore's 
wrath was enduring as well as fiery, for from that day mrs. brown, the 
charwoman, vanish from our ken, and thorpe place knew her no more. 

and now i wish to tell you the singular chance which solve all these 
strange question and put my employer's secret in my possession. the 
story may leave you with some lingering doubt as to whether my 
curiosity did not get the better of my honour, and whether i did not 
condescend to play the spy. if you choose to think so i cannot help 
it, but can only assure you that, improbable as it may appear, the 
matter came about exactly as i describe it. 

the first stage in this denouement was that the small room in the 
turret became uninhabitable. this occur through the fall of the 
worm-eaten oaken beam which support the ceiling. rotten with age, it 
snap in the middle one morning, and brought down a quantity of 
plaster with it. fortunately sir john was not in the room at the time. 
his precious box was rescue from amongst the debris and brought into 
the library, where, henceforward, it was lock within his bureau. sir 
john took no steps to repair the damage, and i never had an opportunity 
of searching for that secret passage, the existence of which i had 
surmised. as to the lady, i had thought that this would have brought 
her visit to an end, had i not one evening heard mr. richards ask 
mrs. steven who the woman was whom he had overheard talk to sir 
john in the library. i could not catch her reply, but i saw from her 
manner that it was not the first time that she had had to answer or 
avoid the same question. 

"you've heard the voice, colmore?" said the agent. 

i confessed that i had. 

"and what do you think of it?" 

i shrug my shoulders, and remark that it was no business of mine. 

"come, come, you are just as curious as any of us. is it a woman or 
not?" 

"it is certainly a woman." 

"which room did you hear it from?" 

"from the turret-room, before the ceiling fell." 

"but i heard it from the library only last night. i pass the door 
as i was go to bed, and i heard something wail and pray just 
as plainly as i hear you. it may be a woman----" 

"why, what else could it be?" 

he look at me hard. 

"there are more things in heaven and earth," said he. "if it is a 
woman, how do she get there?" 

"i don't know." 

"no, nor i. but if it is the other thing--but there, for a practical 
business man at the end of the nineteenth century this is rather a 
ridiculous line of conversation." he turn away, but i saw that he 
felt even more than he had said. to all the old ghost story of 
thorpe place a new one was being add before our very eyes. it may by 
this time have taken its permanent place, for though an explanation 
came to me, it never reach the others. 

and my explanation came in this way. i had suffer a sleepless night 
from neuralgia, and about midday i had taken a heavy dose of chlorodyne 
to alleviate the pain. at that time i was finish the index of 
sir john bollamore's library, and it was my custom to work there from 
five till seven. on this particular day i struggle against the double 
effect of my bad night and the narcotic. i have already mention that 
there was a recess in the library, and in this it was my habit to work. 
i settled down steady to my task, but my weary overcame me and, 
fall back upon the settee, i drop into a heavy sleep. 

how long i slept i do not know, but it was quite dark when i awoke. 
confuse by the chlorodyne which i had taken, i lay motionless in a 
semi-conscious state. the great room with its high wall cover with 
books loom dark all round me. a dim radiance from the moonlight 
came through the farther window, and against this lighter background i 
saw that sir john bollamore was sitting at his study table. his 
well-set head and clearly cut profile were sharp outline against the 
glimmer square behind him. he bent as i watch him, and i heard 
the sharp turning of a key and the rasp of metal upon metal. as if 
in a dream i was vague conscious that this was the japan box which 
stood in front of him, and that he had drawn something out of it, 
something squat and uncouth, which now lay before him upon the table. 
i never realized--it never occur to my bemuddle and torpid brain 
that i was intrude upon his privacy, that he imagine himself to be 
alone in the room. and then, just as it rush upon my horrify 
perceptions, and i had half risen to announce my presence, i heard a 
strange, crisp, metallic clicking, and then the voice. 

yes, it was a woman's voice; there could not be a doubt of it. but a 
voice so charged with entreaty and with yearning love, that it will 
ring for ever in my ears. it came with a curious faraway tinkle, but 
every word was clear, though faint--very faint, for they were the last 
words of a die woman. 

"i am not really gone, john," said the thin, gasp voice. "i am here 
at your very elbow, and shall be until we meet once more. i die happy 
to think that morning and night you will hear my voice. oh, john, be 
strong, be strong, until we meet again." 

i say that i had risen in order to announce my presence, but i could 
not do so while the voice was sounding. i could only remain half 
lying, half sitting, paralysed, astounded, listen to those yearning 
distant musical words. and he--he was so absorb that even if i had 
spoken he might not have heard me. but with the silence of the voice 
came my half articulated apology and explanations. he sprang across 
the room, switch on the electric light, and in its white glare i saw 
him, his eyes gleam with anger, his face twist with passion, as 
the hapless charwoman may have seen him week before. 

"mr. colmore!" he cried. "you here! what is the meaning of this, sir?" 

with halting words i explain it all, my neuralgia, the narcotic, my 
luckless sleep and singular awakening. as he listen the glow of 
anger fade from his face, and the sad, impassive mask closed once more 
over his features. 

"my secret is yours, mr. colmore," said he. "i have only myself to 
blame for relaxing my precautions. half confidence are worse than no 
confidences, and so you may know all since you know so much. the story 
may go where you will when i have pass away, but until then i rely 
upon your sense of honour that no human soul shall hear it from your 
lips. i am proud still--god help me!--or, at least, i am proud enough 
to resent that pity which this story would draw upon me. i have smile 
at envy, and disregard hatred, but pity is more than i can tolerate. 

"you have heard the source from which the voice comes--that voice which 
has, as i understand, excited so much curiosity in my household. i am 
aware of the rumour to which it has given rise. these speculations, 
whether scandalous or superstitious, are such as i can disregard and 
forgive. what i should never forgive would be a disloyal spy and 
eavesdrop in order to satisfy an illicit curiosity. but of that, 
mr. colmore, i acquit you. 

"when i was a young man, sir, many years younger than you are now, i 
was launch upon town without a friend or adviser, and with a purse 
which brought only too many false friends and false adviser to my 
side. i drank deep of the wine of life--if there is a man living who 
has drunk more deep he is not a man whom i envy. my purse suffered, 
my character suffered, my constitution suffered, stimulant became a 
necessity to me, i was a creature from whom my memory recoils. and it 
was at that time, the time of my blackest degradation, that god sent 
into my life the gentlest, sweetest spirit that ever descended as a 
minister angel from above. she love me, broken as i was, love me, 
and spent her life in making a man once more of that which had degrade 
itself to the level of the beasts. 

"but a fell disease struck her, and she wither away before my eyes. 
in the hour of her agony it was never of herself, of her own suffering 
and her own death that she thought. it was all of me. the one pang 
which her fate brought to her was the fear that when her influence was 
remove i should revert to that which i had been. it was in vain that 
i made oath to her that no drop of wine would ever cross my lips. she 
knew only too well the hold that the devil had upon me--she who had 
striven so to loosen it--and it haunt her night and day the thought 
that my soul might again be within his grip. 

"it was from some friend's gossip of the sick room that she heard of 
this invention--this phonograph--and with the quick insight of a loving 
woman she saw how she might use it for her ends. she sent me to london 
to procure the best which money could buy. with her die breath she 
gasp into it the words which have held me straight ever since. 
lonely and broken, what else have i in all the world to uphold me? but 
it is enough. please god, i shall face her without shame when he is 
pleased to reunite us! that is my secret, mr. colmore, and whilst i 
live i leave it in your keeping." 



the black doctor 

bishop's crossing is a small village lie ten mile in a 
south-westerly direction from liverpool. here in the early seventy 
there settled a doctor name aloysiu lana. nothing was known locally 
either of his antecedents or of the reason which had prompt him to 
come to this lancashire hamlet. two fact only were certain about him; 
the one that he had gain his medical qualification with some 
distinction at glasgow; the other that he came undoubted of a 
tropical race, and was so dark that he might almost have had a strain 
of the indian in his composition. his predominant features were, 
however, european, and he possessed a stately courtesy and carriage 
which suggest a spain extraction. a swarthy skin, raven-black 
hair, and dark, sparkle eyes under a pair of heavily-tufted brow 
made a strange contrast to the flaxen or chestnut rustic of england, 
and the newcomer was soon known as "the black doctor of bishop's 
crossing." at first it was a term of ridicule and reproach; as the 
years went on it became a title of honour which was familiar to the 
whole countryside, and extend far beyond the narrow confines of the 
village. 

for the newcomer prove himself to be a capable surgeon and an 
accomplished physician. the practice of that district had been in the 
hand of edward rowe, the son of sir william rowe, the liverpool 
consultant, but he had not inherit the talent of his father, and dr. 
lana, with his advantage of presence and of manner, soon beat him out 
of the field. dr. lana's social success was as rapid as his 
professional. a remarkable surgical cure in the case of the hon. james 
lowry, the second son of lord belton, was the means of introduce him 
to county society, where he became a favourite through the charm of his 
conversation and the elegance of his manners. an absence of 
antecedents and of relative is sometimes an aid rather than an 
impediment to social advancement, and the distinguished individuality 
of the handsome doctor was its own recommendation. 

his patient had one fault--and one fault only--to find with him. he 
appear to be a confirmed bachelor. this was the more remarkable 
since the house which he occupy was a large one, and it was known 
that his success in practice had enable him to save considerable sums. 
at first the local matchmaker were continual coupling his name with 
one or other of the eligible ladies, but as years pass and dr. lana 
remain unmarried, it came to be generally understood that for some 
reason he must remain a bachelor. some even went so far as to assert 
that he was already married, and that it was in order to escape the 
consequence of an early misalliance that he had bury himself at 
bishop's crossing. and, then, just as the matchmaker had finally given 
him up in despair, his engagement was sudden announce to miss 
frances morton, of leigh hall. 

miss morton was a young lady who was well known upon the country-side, 
her father, james haldane morton, have been the squire of bishop's 
crossing. both her parent were, however, dead, and she live with her 
only brother, arthur morton, who had inherit the family estate. in 
person miss morton was tall and stately, and she was famous for her 
quick, impetuous nature and for her strength of character. she met dr. 
lana at a garden-party, and a friendship, which quick ripen into 
love, sprang up between them. nothing could exceed their devotion to 
each other. there was some discrepancy in age, he being thirty-seven, 
and she twenty-four; but, save in that one respect, there was no 
possible objection to be found with the match. the engagement was in 
february, and it was arrange that the marriage should take place in 
august. 

upon the 3rd of june dr. lana received a letter from abroad. in a small 
village the postmaster is also in a position to be the gossip-master, 
and mr. bankley, of bishop's crossing, had many of the secret of his 
neighbour in his possession. of this particular letter he remark 
only that it was in a curious envelope, that it was in a man's 
handwriting, that the postscript was buenos ayres, and the stamp of the 
argentina republic. it was the first letter which he had ever known 
dr. lana to have from abroad and this was the reason why his attention 
was particularly call to it before he hand it to the local postman. 
it was deliver by the evening delivery of that date. 

next morning--that is, upon the 4th of june--dr. lana call upon miss 
morton, and a long interview followed, from which he was observe to 
return in a state of great agitation. miss morton remain in her room 
all that day, and her maid found her several times in tears. in the 
course of a week it was an open secret to the whole village that the 
engagement was at an end, that dr. lana had behave shameful to the 
young lady, and that arthur morton, her brother, was talk of 
horse-whipping him. in what particular respect the doctor had behave 
badly was unknown--some surmise one thing and some another; but it was 
observed, and taken as the obvious sign of a guilty conscience, that he 
would go for mile round rather than pass the window of leigh hall, 
and that he gave up attend morning service upon sunday where he 
might have met the young lady. there was an advertisement also in the 
lancet as to the sale of a practice which mention no names, but which 
was thought by some to refer to bishop's crossing, and to mean that dr. 
lana was thinking of abandon the scene of his success. such was the 
position of affair when, upon the evening of monday, june 21st, there 
came a fresh development which change what had been a mere village 
scandal into a tragedy which arrest the attention of the whole 
nation. some detail is necessary to cause the fact of that evening to 
present their full significance. 

the sole occupant of the doctor's house were his housekeeper, an 
elderly and most respectable woman, name martha woods, and a young 
servant--mary pilling. the coachman and the surgery-boy slept out. it 
was the custom of the doctor to sit at night in his study, which was 
next the surgery in the wing of the house which was farthest from the 
servants' quarters. this side of the house had a door of its own for 
the convenience of patients, so that it was possible for the doctor to 
admit and receive a visitor there without the knowledge of anyone. as 
a matter of fact, when patient came late it was quite usual for him to 
let them in and out by the surgery entrance, for the maid and the 
housekeeper were in the habit of retiring early. 

on this particular night martha wood went into the doctor's study at 
half-past nine, and found him writing at his desk. she bade him good 
night, sent the maid to bed, and then occupy herself until a quarter 
to eleven in household matters. it was striking eleven upon the hall 
clock when she went to her own room. she had been there about a quarter 
of an hour or twenty minutes when she heard a cry or call, which 
appear to come from within the house. she wait some time, but it 
was not repeated. much alarmed, for the sound was loud and urgent, she 
put on a dressing-gown, and ran at the top of her speed to the doctor's 
study. 

"who's there?" cry a voice, as she tap at the door. 

"i am here, sir--mrs. woods." 

"i beg that you will leave me in peace. go back to your room this 
instant!" cry the voice, which was, to the best of her belief, that 
of her master. the tone was so harsh and so unlike her master's usual 
manner, that she was surprise and hurt. 

"i thought i heard you calling, sir," she explained, but no answer was 
given to her. mrs. wood look at the clock as she return to her 
room, and it was then half-past eleven. 

at some period between eleven and twelve (she could not be positive as 
to the exact hour) a patient call upon the doctor and was unable to 
get any reply from him. this late visitor was mrs. madding, the wife 
of the village grocer, who was dangerous ill of typhoid fever. dr. 
lana had ask her to look in the last thing and let him know how her 
husband was progressing. she observe that the light was burning in 
the study, but have knock several times at the surgery door without 
response, she conclude that the doctor had been call out, and so 
return home. 

there is a short, winding drive with a lamp at the end of it leading 
down from the house to the road. as mrs. mad emerge from the gate 
a man was coming along the footpath. thinking that it might be dr. 
lana return from some professional visit, she wait for him, and 
was surprise to see that it was mr. arthur morton, the young squire. 
in the light of the lamp she observe that his manner was excited, and 
that he carry in his hand a heavy hunting-crop. he was turning in at 
the gate when she address him. 

"the doctor is not in, sir," said she. 

"how do you know that?" he ask harshly. 

"i have been to the surgery door, sir." 

"i see a light," said the young squire, look up the drive. "that is 
in his study, is it not?" 

"yes, sir; but i am sure that he is out." 

"well, he must come in again," said young morton, and pass through 
the gate while mrs. mad went upon her homeward way. 

at three o'clock that morning her husband suffer a sharp relapse, and 
she was so alarm by his symptom that she determined to call the 
doctor without delay. as she pass through the gate she was surprise 
to see someone lurk among the laurel bushes. it was certainly a man, 
and to the best of her belief mr. arthur morton. preoccupied with her 
own troubles, she gave no particular attention to the incident, but 
hurried on upon her errand. 

when she reach the house she perceive to her surprise that the light 
was still burning in the study. she therefore tap at the surgery 
door. there was no answer. she repeated the knock several times 
without effect. it appear to her to be unlikely that the doctor 
would either go to bed or go out leave so brilliant a light behind 
him, and it struck mrs. mad that it was possible that he might have 
drop asleep in his chair. she tap at the study window, 
therefore, but without result. then, finding that there was an opening 
between the curtain and the woodwork, she look through. 

the small room was brilliant light from a large lamp on the central 
table, which was litter with the doctor's books and instruments. no 
one was visible, nor did she see anything unusual, except that in the 
farther shadow thrown by the table a dingy white glove was lie upon 
the carpet. and then suddenly, as her eyes became more accustomed to 
the light, a boot emerge from the other end of the shadow, and she 
realized, with a thrill of horror, that what she had taken to be a 
glove was the hand of a man, who was prostrate upon the floor. 
understanding that something terrible had occurred, she rang at the 
front door, rouse mrs. woods, the housekeeper, and the two women made 
their way into the study, have first dispatch the maidservant to 
the police-station. 

at the side of the table, away from the window, dr. lana was discover 
stretch upon his back and quite dead. it was evident that he had 
been subject to violence, for one of his eyes was blacken and there 
were mark of bruise about his face and neck. a slight thicken and 
swelling of his features appear to suggest that the cause of his 
death had been strangulation. he was dress in his usual professional 
clothes, but wore cloth slippers, the sole of which were perfectly 
clean. the carpet was marked all over, especially on the side of the 
door, with trace of dirty boots, which were presumable left by the 
murderer. it was evident that someone had enter by the surgery door, 
had kill the doctor, and had then made his escape unseen. that the 
assailant was a man was certain, from the size of the footprint and 
from the nature of the injuries. but beyond that point the police 
found it very difficult to go. 

there were no sign of robbery, and the doctor's gold watch was safe in 
his pocket. he kept a heavy cash-box in the room, and this was 
discover to be lock but empty. mrs. wood had an impression that a 
large sum was usually kept there, but the doctor had paid a heavy corn 
bill in cash only that very day, and it was conjecture that it was to 
this and not to a robber that the empty of the box was due. one 
thing in the room was missing--but that one thing was suggestive. the 
portrait of miss morton, which had always stood upon the side-table, 
had been taken from its frame, and carry off. mrs. wood had 
observe it there when she wait upon her employer that evening, and 
now it was gone. on the other hand, there was picked up from the floor 
a green eye-patch, which the housekeeper could not remember to have 
seen before. such a patch might, however, be in the possession of a 
doctor, and there was nothing to indicate that it was in any way 
connected with the crime. 

suspicion could only turn in one direction, and arthur morton, the 
young squire, was immediately arrested. the evidence against him was 
circumstantial, but damning. he was devoted to his sister, and it was 
shown that since the rupture between her and dr. lana he had been heard 
again and again to express himself in the most vindictive terms towards 
her former lover. he had, as stated, been seen somewhere about eleven 
o'clock enter the doctor's drive with a hunting-crop in his hand. 
he had then, according to the theory of the police, broken in upon the 
doctor, whose exclamation of fear or of anger had been loud enough to 
attract the attention of mrs. woods. when mrs. wood descended, dr. 
lana had made up his mind to talk it over with his visitor, and had, 
therefore, sent his housekeeper back to her room. this conversation 
had last a long time, had become more and more fiery, and had end 
by a personal struggle, in which the doctor lost his life. the fact, 
reveal by a post-mortem, that his heart was much diseased--an ailment 
quite unsuspected during his life--would make it possible that death 
might in his case ensue from injury which would not be fatal to a 
healthy man. arthur morton had then remove his sister's photograph, 
and had made his way homeward, step aside into the laurel bush to 
avoid mrs. mad at the gate. this was the theory of the 
prosecution, and the case which they present was a formidable one. 

on the other hand, there were some strong points for the defence. 
morton was high-spirited and impetuous, like his sister, but he was 
respect and like by everyone, and his frank and honest nature seem 
to be incapable of such a crime. his own explanation was that he was 
anxious to have a conversation with dr. lana about some urgent family 
matter (from first to last he refuse even to mention the name of his 
sister). he did not attempt to deny that this conversation would 
probably have been of an unpleasant nature. he had heard from a 
patient that the doctor was out, and he therefore wait until about 
three in the morning for his return, but as he had seen nothing of him 
up to that hour, he had given it up and had return home. as to his 
death, he knew no more about it than the constable who arrest him. 
he had formerly been an intimate friend of the deceased man; but 
circumstances, which he would prefer not to mention, had brought about 
a change in his sentiments. 

there were several fact which support his innocence. it was certain 
that dr. lana was alive and in his study at half-past eleven o'clock. 
mrs. wood was prepared to swear that it was at that hour that she had 
heard his voice. the friends of the prisoner contend that it was 
probable that at that time dr. lana was not alone. the sound which had 
originally attract the attention of the housekeeper, and her master's 
unusual impatience that she should leave him in peace, seem to point 
to that. if this were so then it appear to be probable that he had 
met his end between the moment when the housekeeper heard his voice and 
the time when mrs. mad made her first call and found it impossible 
to attract his attention. but if this were the time of his death, then 
it was certain that mr. arthur morton could not be guilty, as it was 
after this that she had met the young squire at the gate. 

if this hypothesis were correct, and someone was with dr. lana before 
mrs. mad met mr. arthur morton, then who was this someone, and what 
motive had he for wish evil to the doctor? it was universally 
admitted that if the friends of the accused could throw light upon 
this, they would have gone a long way towards establish his 
innocence. but in the meanwhile it was open to the public to say--as 
they did say--that there was no proof that anyone had been there at all 
except the young squire; while, on the other hand, there was ample 
proof that his motive in go were of a sinister kind. when mrs. 
mad called, the doctor might have retired to his room, or he might, 
as she thought at the time, have gone out and return afterwards to 
find mr. arthur morton wait for him. some of the supporter of the 
accused laid stress upon the fact that the photograph of his sister 
frances, which had been remove from the doctor's room, had not been 
found in her brother's possession. this argument, however, did not 
count for much, as he had ample time before his arrest to burn it or to 
destroy it. as to the only positive evidence in the case--the muddy 
footmark upon the floor--they were so blur by the soft of the 
carpet that it was impossible to make any trustworthy deduction from 
them. the most that could be said was that their appearance was not 
inconsistent with the theory that they were made by the accused, and it 
was further shown that his boots were very muddy upon that night. 
there had been a heavy shower in the afternoon, and all boots were 
probably in the same condition. 

such is a bald statement of the singular and romantic series of event 
which centre public attention upon this lancashire tragedy. the 
unknown origin of the doctor, his curious and distinguished 
personality, the position of the man who was accused of the murder, and 
the love affair which had precede the crime all combine to make the 
affair one of those drama which absorb the whole interest of a nation. 
throughout the three kingdom men discuss the case of the black 
doctor of bishop's crossing, and many were the theory put forward to 
explain the facts; but it may safe be said that among them all there 
was not one which prepared the mind of the public for the 
extraordinary sequel, which cause so much excitement upon the first 
day of the trial, and came to a climax upon the second. the long file 
of the lancaster weekly with their report of the case lie before me as 
i write, but i must content myself with a synopsis of the case up to 
the point when, upon the evening of the first day, the evidence of miss 
frances morton threw a singular light upon the case. 

mr. porlock carr, the counsel for the prosecution, had marshal his 
fact with his usual skill, and as the day wore on, it became more and 
more evident how difficult was the task which mr. humphrey, who had 
been retain for the defence, had before him. several witness were 
put up to swear to the intemperate expression which the young squire 
had been heard to utter about the doctor, and the fiery manner in which 
he resent the allege ill-treatment of his sister. mrs. mad 
repeated her evidence as to the visit which had been paid late at night 
by the prisoner to the deceased, and it was shown by another witness 
that the prisoner was aware that the doctor was in the habit of sitting 
up alone in this isolated wing of the house, and that he had chosen 
this very late hour to call because he knew that his victim would then 
be at his mercy. a servant at the squire's house was compel to 
admit that he had heard his master return about three that morning, 
which corroborate mrs. madding's statement that she had seen him among 
the laurel bush near the gate upon the occasion of her second visit. 
the muddy boots and an allege similarity in the footprint were duly 
dwelt upon, and it was felt when the case for the prosecution had been 
present that, however circumstantial it might be, it was none the 
less so complete and so convincing, that the fate of the prisoner was 
sealed, unless something quite unexpected should be disclose by the 
defence. it was three o'clock when the prosecution closed. at 
half-past four, when the court rose, a new and unlooked-for development 
had occurred. i extract the incident, or part of it, from the journal 
which i have already mentioned, omit the preliminary observations 
of the counsel. 


considerable sensation was cause in the crowded court when the first 
witness call for the defence prove to be miss frances morton, the 
sister of the prisoner. our reader will remember that the young lady 
had been engaged to dr. lana, and that it was his anger over the sudden 
termination of this engagement which was thought to have driven her 
brother to the perpetrate of this crime. miss morton had not, 
however, been directly implicate in the case in any way, either at the 
inquest or at the police-court proceedings, and her appearance as the 
leading witness for the defence came as a surprise upon the public. 

miss frances morton, who was a tall and handsome brunette, gave her 
evidence in a low but clear voice, though it was evident throughout 
that she was suffering from extreme emotion. she allude to her 
engagement to the doctor, touched brief upon its termination, which 
was due, she said, to personal matter connected with his family, and 
surprise the court by assert that she had always considered her 
brother's resentment to be unreasonable and intemperate. in answer to 
a direct question from her counsel, she reply that she did not feel 
that she had any grievance whatever against dr. lana, and that in her 
opinion he had act in a perfectly honourable manner. her brother, on 
an insufficient knowledge of the facts, had taken another view, and she 
was compel to acknowledge that, in spite of her entreaties, he had 
utter threat of personal violence against the doctor, and had, upon 
the evening of the tragedy, announce his intention of "having it out 
with him." she had done her best to bring him to a more reasonable 
frame of mind, but he was very headstrong where his emotion or 
prejudice were concerned. 

up to this point the young lady's evidence had appear to make against 
the prisoner rather than in his favour. the question of her counsel, 
however, soon put a very different light upon the matter, and disclose 
an unexpected line of defence. 

mr. humphrey: do you believe your brother to be guilty of this crime? 

the judge: i cannot permit that question, mr. humphrey. we are here 
to decide upon question of fact--not of belief. 

mr. humphrey: do you know that your brother is not guilty of the death 
of doctor lana? 

miss morton: yes. 

mr. humphrey: how do you know it? 

miss morton: because dr. lana is not dead. 

there follow a prolonged sensation in court, which interrupt the 
examination of the witness. 

mr. humphrey: and how do you know, miss morton, that dr. lana is not 
dead? 

miss morton: because i have received a letter from him since the date 
of his supposed death. 

mr. humphrey: have you this letter? 

miss morton: yes, but i should prefer not to show it. 

mr. humphrey: have you the envelope? 

miss morton: yes, it is here. 

mr. humphrey: what is the post-mark? 

miss morton: liverpool. 

mr. humphrey: and the date? 

miss morton: june the 22nd. 

mr. humphrey: that being the day after his allege death. are you 
prepared to swear to this handwriting, miss morton? 

miss morton: certainly. 

mr. humphrey: i am prepared to call six other witnesses, my lord, to 
testify that this letter is in the writing of doctor lana. 

the judge: then you must call them tomorrow. 

mr. porlock carr (counsel for the prosecution): in the meantime, my 
lord, we claim possession of this document, so that we may obtain 
expert evidence as to how far it is an imitation of the handwriting of 
the gentleman whom we still confident assert to be deceased. i need 
not point out that the theory so unexpected sprung upon us may prove 
to be a very obvious device adopt by the friends of the prisoner in 
order to divert this inquiry. i would draw attention to the fact that 
the young lady must, according to her own account, have possessed this 
letter during the proceedings at the inquest and at the police-court. 
she desire us to believe that she permit these to proceed, although 
she held in her pocket evidence which would at any moment have brought 
them to an end. 

mr. humphrey. can you explain this, miss morton? 

miss morton: dr. lana desire his secret to be preserved. 

mr. porlock carr: then why have you made this public? 

miss morton: to save my brother. 

a murmur of sympathy broke out in court, which was instantly suppress 
by the judge. 

the judge: admit this line of defence, it lie with you, mr. 
humphrey, to throw a light upon who this man is whose body has been 
recognize by so many friends and patient of dr. lana as being that of 
the doctor himself. 

a juryman: has anyone up to now express any doubt about the matter? 

mr. porlock carr: not to my knowledge. 

mr. humphrey: we hope to make the matter clear. 

the judge: then the court adjourn until tomorrow. 


this new development of the case excited the utmost interest among the 
general public. press comment was prevent by the fact that the trial 
was still undecided, but the question was everywhere argue as to how 
far there could be truth in miss morton's declaration, and how far it 
might be a daring ruse for the purpose of saving her brother. the 
obvious dilemma in which the missing doctor stood was that if by any 
extraordinary chance he was not dead, then he must be held responsible 
for the death of this unknown man, who resemble him so exactly, and 
who was found in his study. this letter which miss morton refuse to 
produce was possibly a confession of guilt, and she might find herself 
in the terrible position of only being able to save her brother from 
the gallows by the sacrifice of her former lover. the court next 
morning was cram to overflowing, and a murmur of excitement pass 
over it when mr. humphrey was observe to enter in a state of emotion, 
which even his train nerves could not conceal, and to confer with the 
oppose counsel. a few hurried words--words which left a look of 
amaze upon mr. porlock carr's face--passed between them, and then 
the counsel for the defence, address the judge, announce that, with 
the consent of the prosecution, the young lady who had given evidence 
upon the sitting before would not be recalled. 


the judge: but you appear, mr. humphrey, to have left matter in a very 
unsatisfactory state. 

mr. humphrey: perhaps, my lord, my next witness may help to clear them 
up. 

the judge: then call your next witness. 

mr. humphrey: i call dr. aloysiu lana. 

the learned counsel has made many telling remark in his day, but he 
has certainly never produce such a sensation with so short a sentence. 
the court was simply stun with amaze as the very man whose fate 
had been the subject of so much contention appear bodily before them 
in the witness-box. those among the spectator who had known him at 
bishop's crossing saw him now, gaunt and thin, with deep lines of care 
upon his face. but in spite of his melancholy bearing and despondent 
expression, there were few who could say that they had ever seen a man 
of more distinguished presence. bowing to the judge, he ask if he 
might be allow to make a statement, and have been duly informed 
that whatever he said might be use against him, he bowed once more, 
and proceeded: 

"my wish," said he, "is to hold nothing back, but to tell with perfect 
frank all that occur upon the night of the 21st of june. had i 
known that the innocent had suffered, and that so much trouble had been 
brought upon those whom i love best in the world, i should have come 
forward long ago; but there were reason which prevent these things 
from coming to my ears. it was my desire that an unhappy man should 
vanish from the world which had known him, but i had not foreseen that 
other would be affected by my actions. let me to the best of my 
ability repair the evil which i have done. 

"to anyone who is acquaint with the history of the argentina republic 
the name of lana is well known. my father, who came of the best blood 
of old spain, fill all the highest offices of the state, and would 
have been president but for his death in the riot of san juan. a 
brilliant career might have been open to my twin brother ernest and 
myself had it not been for financial loss which made it necessary 
that we should earn our own living. i apologize, sir, if these detail 
appear to be irrelevant, but they are a necessary introduction to that 
which is to follow. 

"i had, as i have said, a twin brother name ernest, whose resemblance 
to me was so great that even when we were together people could see no 
difference between us. down to the smallest detail we were exactly the 
same. as we grew old this likeness became less marked because our 
expression was not the same, but with our features in repose the points 
of difference were very slight. 

"it do not become me to say too much of one who is dead, the more so 
as he is my only brother, but i leave his character to those who knew 
him best. i will only say--for i have to say it--that in my early 
manhood i conceive a horror of him, and that i had good reason for the 
aversion which fill me. my own reputation suffer from his actions, 
for our close resemblance cause me to be credit with many of them. 
eventually, in a peculiarly disgraceful business, he contrived to throw 
the whole odium upon me in such a way that i was forced to leave the 
argentina for ever, and to seek a career in europe. the freedom from 
his hate presence more than compensate me for the loss of my native 
land. i had enough money to defray my medical study at glasgow, and 
i finally settled in practice at bishop's crossing, in the firm 
conviction that in that remote lancashire hamlet i should never hear of 
him again. 

"for years my hope were fulfilled, and then at last he discover me. 
some liverpool man who visit buenos ayre put him upon my track. he 
had lost all his money, and he thought that he would come over and 
share mine. knowing my horror of him, he rightly thought that i would 
be willing to buy him off. i received a letter from him saying that he 
was coming. it was at a crisis in my own affairs, and his arrival 
might conceivable bring trouble, and even disgrace, upon some whom i 
was especially bound to shield from anything of the kind. i took steps 
to insure that any evil which might come should fall on me only, and 
that"--here he turn and look at the prisoner--"was the cause of 
conduct upon my part which has been too harsh judged. my only motive 
was to screen those who were dear to me from any possible connection 
with scandal or disgrace. that scandal and disgrace would come with my 
brother was only to say that what had been would be again. 

"my brother arrive himself one night not very long after my receipt of 
the letter. i was sitting in my study after the servant had gone to 
bed, when i heard a footstep upon the gravel outside, and an instant 
later i saw his face look in at me through the window. he was a 
clean-shaven man like myself, and the resemblance between us was still 
so great that, for an instant, i thought it was my own reflection in 
the glass. he had a dark patch over his eye, but our features were 
absolutely the same. then he smile in a sardonic way which had been a 
trick of his from his boyhood, and i knew that he was the same brother 
who had driven me from my native land, and brought disgrace upon what 
had been an honourable name. i went to the door and i admitted him. 
that would be about ten o'clock that night. 

"when he came into the glare of the lamp, i saw at once that he had 
fallen upon very evil days. he had walk from liverpool, and he was 
tired and ill. i was quite shock by the expression upon his face. 
my medical knowledge told me that there was some serious internal 
malady. he had been drink also, and his face was bruise as the 
result of a scuffle which he had had with some sailors. it was to 
cover his injure eye that he wore this patch, which he remove when he 
enter the room. he was himself dress in a pea-jacket and flannel 
shirt, and his feet were burst through his boots. but his poverty 
had only made him more savage vindictive towards me. his hatred rose 
to the height of a mania. i had been rolling in money in england, 
according to his account, while he had been starve in south america. 
i cannot describe to you the threat which he utter or the insult 
which he pour upon me. my impression is, that hardship and 
debauchery had unhinge his reason. he pace about the room like a 
wild beast, demanding drink, demanding money, and all in the foulest 
language. i am a hot-tempered man, but i thank god that i am able to 
say that i remain master of myself, and that i never raise a hand 
against him. my cool only irritate him the more. he raved, he 
cursed, he shook his fist in my face, and then sudden a horrible 
spasm pass over his features, he clap his hand to his side, and 
with a loud cry he fell in a heap at my feet. i raise him up and 
stretch him upon the sofa, but no answer came to my exclamations, and 
the hand which i held in mine was cold and clammy. his disease heart 
had broken down. his own violence had kill him. 

"for a long time i sat as if i were in some dreadful dream, staring at 
the body of my brother. i was arouse by the knock of mrs. woods, 
who had been disturbed by that die cry. i sent her away to bed. 
shortly afterwards a patient tap at the surgery door, but as i took 
no notice, he or she went off again. slow and gradual as i sat 
there a plan was form itself in my head in the curious automatic way 
in which plan do form. when i rose from my chair my future movements 
were finally decided upon without my have been conscious of any 
process of thought. it was an instinct which irresistible inclined me 
towards one course. 

"ever since that change in my affair to which i have alluded, bishop's 
crossing had become hateful to me. my plan of life had been ruined, 
and i had met with hasty judgment and unkind treatment where i had 
expect sympathy. it is true that any danger of scandal from my 
brother had pass away with his life; but still, i was sore about the 
past, and felt that things could never be as they had been. it may be 
that i was unduly sensitive, and that i had not made sufficient 
allowance for others, but my feelings were as i describe. any chance 
of get away from bishop's crossing and of everyone in it would be 
most welcome to me. and here was such a chance as i could never have 
dare to hope for, a chance which would enable me to make a clean break 
with the past. 

"there was this dead man lie upon the sofa, so like me that save for 
some little thickness and coarse of the features there was no 
difference at all. no one had seen him come and no one would miss him. 
we were both clean-shaven, and his hair was about the same length as my 
own. if i change clothes with him, then dr. aloysiu lana would be 
found lie dead in his study, and there would be an end of an 
unfortunate fellow, and of a blight career. there was plenty of ready 
money in the room, and this i could carry away with me to help me to 
start once more in some other land. in my brother's clothes i could 
walk by night unobserved as far as liverpool, and in that great seaport 
i would soon find some means of leave the country. after my lost 
hopes, the humblest existence where i was unknown was far preferable, 
in my estimation, to a practice, however successful, in bishop's 
crossing, where at any moment i might come face to face with those whom 
i should wish, if it were possible, to forget. i determined to effect 
the change. 

"and i did so. i will not go into particulars, for the recollection is 
as painful as the experience; but in an hour my brother lay, dress 
down to the smallest detail in my clothes, while i slunk out by the 
surgery door, and taking the back path which led across some fields, i 
start off to make the best of my way to liverpool, where i arrive 
the same night. my bag of money and a certain portrait were all i 
carry out of the house, and i left behind me in my hurry the shade 
which my brother had been wearing over his eye. everything else of his 
i took with me. 

"i give you my word, sir, that never for one instant did the idea occur 
to me that people might think that i had been murdered, nor did i 
imagine that anyone might be cause serious danger through this 
stratagem by which i endeavour to gain a fresh start in the world. 
on the contrary, it was the thought of relieve other from the burden 
of my presence which was always uppermost in my mind. a sailing vessel 
was leave liverpool that very day for corunna, and in this i took my 
passage, thinking that the voyage would give me time to recover my 
balance, and to consider the future. but before i left my resolution 
softened. i bethought me that there was one person in the world to 
whom i would not cause an hour of sadness. she would mourn me in her 
heart, however harsh and unsympathetic her relative might be. she 
understood and appreciate the motive upon which i had acted, and if 
the rest of her family condemn me, she, at least, would not forget. 
and so i sent her a note under the seal of secrecy to save her from a 
baseless grief. if under the pressure of event she broke that seal, 
she has my entire sympathy and forgiveness. 

"it was only last night that i return to england, and during all this 
time i have heard nothing of the sensation which my supposed death had 
caused, nor of the accusation that mr. arthur morton had been concerned 
in it. it was in a late evening paper that i read an account of the 
proceedings of yesterday, and i have come this morning as fast as an 
express train could bring me to testify to the truth." 

such was the remarkable statement of dr. aloysiu lana which brought 
the trial to a sudden termination. a subsequent investigate 
corroborate it to the extent of finding out the vessel in which his 
brother ernest lana had come over from south america. the ship's 
doctor was able to testify that he had complain of a weak heart 
during the voyage, and that his symptom were consistent with such a 
death as was described. 

as to dr. aloysiu lana, he return to the village from which he had 
made so dramatic a disappearance, and a complete reconciliation was 
effect between him and the young squire, the latter have 
acknowledge that he had entire misunderstood the other's motive in 
withdraw from his engagement. that another reconciliation follow 
may be judge from a notice extract from a prominent column in the 
morning post: 


"a marriage was solemnize upon september 19th, by the rev. stephen 
johnson, at the parish church of bishop's crossing, between aloysiu 
xavier lana, son of don alfredo lana, formerly foreign minister of the 
argentina republic, and frances morton, only daughter of the late james 
morton, j.p., of leigh hall, bishop's crossing, lancashire." 



the jew's breastplate 

my particular friend, ward mortimer, was one of the best men of his day 
at everything connected with oriental archaeology. he had written 
largely upon the subject, he had live two years in a tomb at thebes, 
while he excavate in the valley of the kings, and finally he had 
create a considerable sensation by his exhume of the allege mummy 
of cleopatra in the inner room of the temple of horus, at philae. with 
such a record at the age of thirty-one, it was felt that a considerable 
career lay before him, and no one was surprise when he was elect to 
the curatorship of the belmore street museum, which carry with it the 
lectureship at the oriental college, and an income which has sunk with 
the fall in land, but which still remains at that ideal sum which is 
large enough to encourage an investigator, but not so large as to 
enervate him. 

there was only one reason which made ward mortimer's position a little 
difficult at the belmore street museum, and that was the extreme 
eminence of the man whom he had to succeed. professor andrea was a 
profound scholar and a man of europe reputation. his lecture were 
frequent by student from every part of the world, and his admirable 
management of the collection intrust to his care was a commonplace in 
all learned societies. there was, therefore, considerable surprise 
when, at the age of fifty-five, he sudden resigned his position and 
retired from those duty which had been both his livelihood and his 
pleasure. he and his daughter left the comfortable suite of rooms 
which had form his official residence in connection with the museum, 
and my friend, mortimer, who was a bachelor, took up his quarters there. 

on hearing of mortimer's appointment professor andrea had written him 
a very kindly and flatter congratulatory letter. i was actually 
present at their first meeting, and i went with mortimer round the 
museum when the professor show us the admirable collection which he 
had cherish so long. the professor's beautiful daughter and a young 
man, captain wilson, who was, as i understood, soon to be her husband, 
accompany us in our inspection. there were fifteen rooms, but the 
babylonian, the syrian, and the central hall, which contained the 
jewish and egypt collection, were the finest of all. professor 
andrea was a quiet, dry, elderly man, with a clean-shaven face and an 
impassive manner, but his dark eyes sparkle and his features quicken 
into enthusiast life as he pointed out to us the rarity and the 
beauty of some of his specimens. his hand linger so fondly over 
them, that one could read his pride in them and the grief in his heart 
now that they were passing from his care into that of another. 

he had shown us in turn his mummies, his papyri, his rare scarabs, his 
inscriptions, his jewish relics, and his duplicate of the famous 
seven-branched candlestick of the temple, which was brought to rome by 
titus, and which is supposed by some to be lie at this instant in the 
bed of the tiber. then he approach a case which stood in the very 
centre of the hall, and he look down through the glass with reverence 
in his attitude and manner. 

"this is no novelty to an expert like yourself, mr. mortimer," said he; 
"but i daresay that your friend, mr. jackson, will be interested to see 
it." 

leaning over the case i saw an object, some five inch square, which 
consist of twelve precious stone in a framework of gold, with golden 
hook at two of the corners. the stone were all vary in sort and 
colour, but they were of the same size. their shapes, arrangement, and 
gradation of tint made me think of a box of water-colour paints. each 
stone had some hieroglyph scratch upon its surface. 

"you have heard, mr. jackson, of the urim and thummim?" 

i had heard the term, but my idea of its meaning was exceedingly vague. 

"the urim and thummim was a name given to the jewelled plate which lay 
upon the breast of the high priest of the jews. they had a very 
special feeling of reverence for it--something of the feeling which an 
ancient roman might have for the sibylline books in the capitol. there 
are, as you see, twelve magnificent stones, inscribe with mystical 
characters. count from the left-hand top corner, the stone are 
carnelian, peridot, emerald, ruby, lapi lazuli, onyx, sapphire, agate, 
amethyst, topaz, beryl, and jasper." 

i was amaze at the variety and beauty of the stones. 

"has the breastplate any particular history?" i asked. 

"it is of great age and of immense value," said professor andreas. 
"without being able to make an absolute assertion, we have many reason 
to think that it is possible that it may be the original urim and 
thummim of solomon's temple. there is certainly nothing so fine in any 
collection in europe. my friend, captain wilson, here, is a practical 
authority upon precious stones, and he would tell you how pure these 
are." 

captain wilson, a man with a dark, hard, incisive face, was standing 
beside his fiancee at the other side of the case. 

"yes," said he, curtly, "i have never seen fine stones." 

"and the gold-work is also worthy of attention. the ancients excel 
in----"--he was apparently about to indicate the setting of the stones, 
when captain wilson interrupt him. 

"you will see a fine example of their gold-work in this candlestick," 
said he, turning to another table, and we all join him in his 
admiration of its emboss stem and delicate ornament branches. 
altogether it was an interesting and a novel experience to have object 
of such rarity explain by so great an expert; and when, finally, 
professor andrea finished our inspection by formal hand over the 
precious collection to the care of my friend, i could not help pity 
him and envy his successor whose life was to pass in so pleasant a 
duty. within a week, ward mortimer was duly install in his new set 
of rooms, and had become the autocrat of the belmore street museum. 

about a fortnight afterwards my friend gave a small dinner to half a 
dozen bachelor friends to celebrate his promotion. when his guest 
were depart he pull my sleeve and signal to me that he wish 
me to remain. 

"you have only a few hundred yard to go," said he--i was living in 
chambers in the albany. "you may as well stay and have a quiet cigar 
with me. i very much want your advice." 

i relapse into an arm-chair and lit one of his excellent matronas. 
when he had return from seeing the last of his guest out, he drew a 
letter from his dress-jacket and sat down opposite to me. 

"this is an anonymous letter which i received this morning," said he. 
"i want to read it to you and to have your advice." 

"you are very welcome to it for what it is worth." 

"this is how the note runs: 'sir,--i should strong advise you to 
keep a very careful watch over the many valuable things which are 
committed to your charge. i do not think that the present system of a 
single watchman is sufficient. be upon your guard, or an irreparable 
misfortune may occur.'" 

"is that all?" 

"yes, that is all." 

"well," said i, "it is at least obvious that it was written by one of 
the limited number of people who are aware that you have only one 
watchman at night." 

ward mortimer hand me the note, with a curious smile. "have you an 
eye for handwriting?" said he. "now, look at this!" he put another 
letter in front of me. "look at the c in 'congratulate' and the c in 
'committed.' look at the capital i. look at the trick of putt in a 
dash instead of a stop!" 

"they are undoubted from the same hand--with some attempt at disguise 
in the case of this first one." 

"the second," said ward mortimer, "is the letter of congratulate 
which was written to me by professor andrea upon my obtain my 
appointment." 

i stare at him in amazement. then i turn over the letter in my 
hand, and there, sure enough, was "martin andreas" sign upon the 
other side. there could be no doubt, in the mind of anyone who had the 
slightest knowledge of the science of graphology, that the professor 
had written an anonymous letter, warning his successor against thieves. 
it was inexplicable, but it was certain. 

"why should he do it?" i asked. 

"precisely what i should wish to ask you. if he had any such 
misgivings, why could he not come and tell me direct?" 

"will you speak to him about it?" 

"there again i am in doubt. he might choose to deny that he wrote it." 

"at any rate," said i, "this warning is meant in a friendly spirit, and 
i should certainly act upon it. are the present precaution enough to 
insure you against robbery?" 

"i should have thought so. the public are only admitted from ten till 
five, and there is a guardian to every two rooms. he stand at the 
door between them, and so command them both." 

"but at night?" 

"when the public are gone, we at once put up the great iron shutters, 
which are absolutely burglar-proof. the watchman is a capable fellow. 
he sit in the lodge, but he walk round every three hours. we keep 
one electric light burning in each room all night." 

"it is difficult to suggest anything more--short of keeping your day 
watches all night." 

"we could not afford that." 

"at least, i should communicate with the police, and have a special 
constable put on outside in belmore street," said i. "as to the 
letter, if the writer wish to be anonymous, i think he has a right to 
remain so. we must trust to the future to show some reason for the 
curious course which he has adopted." 

so we dismiss the subject, but all that night after my return to my 
chambers i was puzzle my brain as to what possible motive professor 
andrea could have for writing an anonymous warning letter to his 
successor--for that the writing was his was as certain to me as if i 
had seen him actually do it. he foresaw some danger to the 
collection. was it because he foresaw it that he abandoned his charge 
of it? but if so, why should he hesitate to warn mortimer in his own 
name? i puzzle and puzzle until at last i fell into a trouble 
sleep, which carry me beyond my usual hour of rising. 

i was arouse in a singular and effective method, for about nine 
o'clock my friend mortimer rush into my room with an expression of 
consternation upon his face. he was usually one of the most tidy men 
of my acquaintance, but now his collar was undone at one end, his tie 
was flying, and his hat at the back of his head. i read his whole 
story in his frantic eyes. 

"the museum has been robbed!" i cried, spring up in bed. 

"i fear so! those jewels! the jewel of the urim and thummim!" he 
gasped, for he was out of breath with running. "i'm go on to the 
police-station. come to the museum as soon as you can, jackson! 
good-bye!" he rush distracted out of the room, and i heard him 
clatter down the stairs. 

i was not long in following his directions, but i found when i arrive 
that he had already return with a police inspector, and another 
elderly gentleman, who prove to be mr. purvis, one of the partner of 
morson and company, the well-known diamond merchants. as an expert in 
stone he was always prepared to advise the police. they were group 
round the case in which the breastplate of the jewish priest had been 
exposed. the plate had been taken out and laid upon the glass top of 
the case, and the three head were bent over it. 

"it is obvious that it has been tamper with," said mortimer. "it 
caught my eye the moment that i pass through the room this morning. 
i examine it yesterday evening, so that it is certain that this has 
happen during the night." 

it was, as he had said, obvious that someone had been at work upon it. 
the setting of the uppermost row of four stones--the carnelian, 
peridot, emerald, and ruby--were rough and jagged as if someone had 
scrape all round them. the stone were in their places, but the 
beautiful gold-work which we had admire only a few days before had 
been very clumsy pull about. 

"it looks to me," said the police inspector, "as if someone had been 
try to take out the stones." 

"my fear is," said mortimer, "that he not only tried, but succeeded. i 
believe these four stone to be skilful imitation which have been put 
in the place of the originals." 

the same suspicion had evidently been in the mind of the expert, for he 
had been careful examine the four stone with the aid of a lens. 
he now submit them to several tests, and finally turn cheerful 
to mortimer. 

"i congratulate you, sir," said he, heartily. "i will pledge my 
reputation that all four of these stone are genuine, and of a most 
unusual degree of purity." 

the colour began to come back to my poor friend's frightened face, and 
he drew a long breath of relief. 

"thank god!" he cried. "then what in the world did the thief want?" 

"probably he meant to take the stones, but was interrupted." 

"in that case one would expect him to take them out one at a time, but 
the setting of each of these has been loosened, and yet the stone are 
all here." 

"it is certainly most extraordinary," said the inspector. "i never 
remember a case like it. let us see the watchman." 

the commissionaire was called--a soldierly, honest-faced man, who 
seem as concerned as ward mortimer at the incident. 

"no, sir, i never heard a sound," he answered, in reply to the 
question of the inspector. "i made my rounds four times, as usual, 
but i saw nothing suspicious. i've been in my position ten years, but 
nothing of the kind has ever occur before." 

"no thief could have come through the windows?" 

"impossible, sir." 

"or pass you at the door?" 

"no, sir; i never left my post except when i walk my rounds." 

"what other opening are there in the museum?" 

"there is the door into mr. ward mortimer's private rooms." 

"that is lock at night," my friend explained, "and in order to reach 
it anyone from the street would have to open the outside door as well." 

"your servants?" 

"their quarters are entire separate." 

"well, well," said the inspector, "this is certainly very obscure. 
however, there has been no harm done, according to mr. purvis." 

"i will swear that those stone are genuine." 

"so that the case appear to be merely one of malicious damage. but 
none the less, i should be very glad to go careful round the 
premises, and to see if we can find any trace to show us who your 
visitor may have been." 

his investigation, which last all the morning, was careful and 
intelligent, but it led in the end to nothing. he pointed out to us 
that there were two possible entrance to the museum which we had not 
considered. the one was from the cellar by a trap-door opening in the 
passage. the other through a skylight from the lumber-room, 
overlook that very chamber to which the intruder had penetrated. as 
neither the cellar nor the lumber-room could be enter unless the 
thief was already within the lock doors, the matter was not of any 
practical importance, and the dust of cellar and attic assured us that 
no one had use either one or the other. finally, we end as we 
began, without the slightest clue as to how, why, or by whom the 
setting of these four jewel had been tamper with. 

there remain one course for mortimer to take, and he took it. leave 
the police to continue their fruitless researches, he ask me to 
accompany him that afternoon in a visit to professor andreas. he took 
with him the two letters, and it was his intention to openly tax his 
predecessor with have written the anonymous warning, and to ask him 
to explain the fact that he should have anticipate so exactly that 
which had actually occurred. the professor was living in a small villa 
in upper norwood, but we were informed by the servant that he was away 
from home. seeing our disappointment, she ask us if we should like 
to see miss andreas, and show us into the modest drawing-room. 

i have mention incidentally that the professor's daughter was a very 
beautiful girl. she was a blonde, tall and graceful, with a skin of 
that delicate tint which the france call "mat," the colour of old 
ivory, or of the lighter petal of the sulphur rose. i was shocked, 
however, as she enter the room to see how much she had change in the 
last fortnight. her young face was haggard and her bright eyes heavy 
with trouble. 

"father has gone to scotland," she said. "he seem to be tired, and 
has had a good deal to worry him. he only left us yesterday." 

"you look a little tired yourself, miss andreas," said my friend. 

"i have been so anxious about father." 

"can you give me his scotch address?" 

"yes, he is with his brother, the rev. david andreas, 1, arran villas, 
ardrossan." 

ward mortimer made a note of the address, and we left without saying 
anything as to the object of our visit. we found ourselves in belmore 
street in the evening in exactly the same position in which we had been 
in the morning. our only clue was the professor's letter, and my 
friend had made up his mind to start for ardrossan next day, and to get 
to the bottom of the anonymous letter, when a new development came to 
alter our plans. 

very early on the following morning i was arouse from my sleep by a 
tap upon my bedroom door. it was a messenger with a note from mortimer. 

"do come round," it said; "the matter is becoming more and more 
extraordinary." 

when i obey his summons i found him pace excited up and down the 
central room, while the old soldier who guarded the premises stood with 
military stiff in a corner. 

"my dear jackson," he cried, "i am so delight that you have come, for 
this is a most inexplicable business." 

"what has happened, then?" 

he wave his hand towards the case which contained the breastplate. 

"look at it," said he. 

i did so, and could not restrain a cry of surprise. the setting of the 
middle row of precious stone had been profane in the same manner as 
the upper ones. of the twelve jewel eight had been now tamper with 
in this singular fashion. the setting of the lower four was neat and 
smooth. the other jagged and irregular. 

"have the stone been altered?" i asked. 

"no, i am certain that these upper four are the same which the expert 
pronounced to be genuine, for i observe yesterday that little 
discoloration on the edge of the emerald. since they have not 
extract the upper stones, there is no reason to think the lower have 
been transposed. you say that you heard nothing, simpson?" 

"no, sir," the commissionaire answered. "but when i made my round 
after daylight i had a special look at these stones, and i saw at once 
that someone had been meddle with them. then i call you, sir, and 
told you. i was backwards and forward all night, and i never saw a 
soul or heard a sound." 

"come up and have some breakfast with me," said mortimer, and he took 
me into his own chambers.--"now, what do you think of this, jackson?" 
he asked. 

"it is the most objectless, futile, idiot business that ever i heard 
of. it can only be the work of a monomaniac." 

"can you put forward any theory?" 

a curious idea came into my head. "this object is a jewish relic of 
great antiquity and sanctity," said i. "how about the anti-semitic 
movement? could one conceive that a fanatic of that way of thinking 
might desecrate----" 

"no, no, no!" cry mortimer. "that will never do! such a man might 
push his lunacy to the length of destroy a jewish relic, but why on 
earth should he nibble round every stone so careful that he can only 
do four stone in a night? we must have a better solution than that, 
and we must find it for ourselves, for i do not think that our 
inspector is likely to help us. first of all, what do you think of 
simpson, the porter?" 

"have you any reason to suspect him?" 

"only that he is the one person on the premises." 

"but why should he indulge in such wanton destruction? nothing has 
been taken away. he has no motive." 

"mania?" 

"no, i will swear to his sanity." 

"have you any other theory?" 

"well, yourself, for example. you are not a somnambulist, by any 
chance?" 

"nothing of the sort, i assure you." 

"then i give it up." 

"but i don't--and i have a plan by which we will make it all clear." 

"to visit professor andreas?" 

"no, we shall find our solution near than scotland. i will tell you 
what we shall do. you know that skylight which overlook the central 
hall? we will leave the electric lights in the hall, and we will keep 
watch in the lumber-room, you and i, and solve the mystery for 
ourselves. if our mysterious visitor is do four stone at a time, 
he has four still to do, and there is every reason to think that he 
will return tonight and complete the job." 

"excellent!" i cried. 

"we will keep our own secret, and say nothing either to the police or 
to simpson. will you join me?" 

"with the utmost pleasure," said i; and so it was agreed. 

it was ten o'clock that night when i return to the belmore street 
museum. mortimer was, as i could see, in a state of suppress nervous 
excitement, but it was still too early to begin our vigil, so we 
remain for an hour or so in his chambers, discuss all the 
possibility of the singular business which we had met to solve. at 
last the roaring stream of hansom cab and the rush of hurry feet 
became lower and more intermittent as the pleasure-seekers pass on 
their way to their station or their homes. it was nearly twelve when 
mortimer led the way to the lumber-room which overlook the central 
hall of the museum. 

he had visit it during the day, and had spread some sack so that 
we could lie at our ease, and look straight down into the museum. the 
skylight was of unfrosted glass, but was so cover with dust that it 
would be impossible for anyone look up from below to detect that he 
was overlooked. we clear a small piece at each corner, which gave us 
a complete view of the room beneath us. in the cold white light of the 
electric lamp everything stood out hard and clear, and i could see the 
smallest detail of the contents of the various cases. 

such a vigil is an excellent lesson, since one has no choice but to 
look hard at those object which we usually pass with such half-hearted 
interest. through my little peep hole i employ the hour in study 
every specimen, from the huge mummy-case which lean against the wall 
to those very jewel which had brought us there, gleam and sparkle 
in their glass case immediately beneath us. there was much precious 
gold-work and many valuable stone scattered through the numerous 
cases, but those wonderful twelve which made up the urim and thummim 
glow and burn with a radiance which far eclipse the others. i 
studied in turn the tomb-pictures of sicara, the frieze from karnak, 
the statue of memphis, and the inscription of thebes, but my eyes 
would always come back to that wonderful jewish relic, and my mind to 
the singular mystery which surround it. i was lost in the thought of 
it when my companion sudden drew his breath sharp in, and seize my 
arm in a convulsive grip. at the same instant i saw what it was which 
had excited him. 

i have said that against the wall--on the right-hand side of the 
doorway (the right-hand side as we look at it, but the left as one 
entered)--there stood a large mummy-case. to our unutterable amaze 
it was slow opening. gradually, gradual the lid was swinging back, 
and the black slit which marked the opening was becoming wide and 
wider. so gently and careful was it done that the movement was 
almost imperceptible. then, as we breathless watch it, a white 
thin hand appear at the opening, push back the paint lid, then 
another hand, and finally a face--a face which was familiar to us both, 
that of professor andreas. stealthy he slunk out of the mummy-case, 
like a fox steal from its burrow, his head turning incessant to 
left and to right, stepping, then pausing, then step again, the 
very image of craft and of caution. once some sound in the street 
struck him motionless, and he stood listening, with his ear turned, 
ready to dart back to the shelter behind him. then he crept onwards 
again upon tiptoe, very, very soft and slowly, until he had reach 
the case in the centre of the room. there he took a bunch of key from 
his pocket, unlock the case, took out the jewish breastplate, and, 
lay it upon the glass in front of him, began to work upon it with 
some sort of small, glisten tool. he was so directly underneath us 
that his bent head cover his work, but we could guess from the 
movement of his hand that he was engaged in finish the strange 
disfigure which he had begun. 

i could realize from the heavy breathing of my companion, and the 
twitch of the hand which still clutch my wrist, the furious 
indignation which fill his heart as he saw this vandalism in the 
quarter of all other where he could least have expect it. he, the 
very man who a fortnight before had reverent bent over this unique 
relic, and who had impress its antiquity and its sanctity upon us, 
was now engaged in this outrageous profanation. it was impossible, 
unthinkable--and yet there, in the white glare of the electric light 
beneath us, was that dark figure with the bent grey head, and the 
twitch elbow. what inhuman hypocrisy, what hateful depth of malice 
against his successor must underlie these sinister nocturnal labours. 
it was painful to think of and dreadful to watch. even i, who had none 
of the acute feelings of a virtuoso, could not bear to look on and see 
this deliberate mutilation of so ancient a relic. it was a relief to 
me when my companion tug at my sleeve as a signal that i was to 
follow him as he soft crept out of the room. it was not until we 
were within his own quarters that he open his lips, and then i saw by 
his agitate face how deep was his consternation. 

"the abominable goth!" he cried. "could you have believe it?" 

"it is amazing." 

"he is a villain or a lunatic--one or the other. we shall very soon 
see which. come with me, jackson, and we shall get to the bottom of 
this black business." 

a door open out of the passage which was the private entrance from 
his rooms into the museum. this he open soft with his key, have 
first kick off his shoes, an example which i followed. we crept 
together through room after room, until the large hall lay before us, 
with that dark figure still stoop and working at the central case. 
with an advance as cautious as his own we closed in upon him, but 
soft as we went we could not take him entire unawares. we were 
still a dozen yard from him when he look round with a start, and 
utter a husky cry of terror, ran frantic down the museum. 

"simpson! simpson!" roar mortimer, and far away down the vista of 
electric light door we saw the stiff figure of the old soldier 
sudden appear. professor andrea saw him also, and stop running, 
with a gesture of despair. at the same instant we each laid a hand 
upon his shoulder. 

"yes, yes, gentlemen," he panted, "i will come with you. to your room, 
mr. ward mortimer, if you please! i feel that i owe you an 
explanation." 

my companion's indignation was so great that i could see that he dare 
not trust himself to reply. we walk on each side of the old 
professor, the astonish commissionaire bring up the rear. when we 
reach the violate case, mortimer stop and examine the 
breastplate. already one of the stone of the lower row had had its 
setting turn back in the same manner as the others. my friend held 
it up and glance furiously at his prisoner. 

"how could you!" he cried. "how could you!" 

"it is horrible--horrible!" said the professor. "i don't wonder at 
your feelings. take me to your room." 

"but this shall not be left exposed!" cry mortimer. he picked the 
breastplate up and carry it tender in his hand, while i walk 
beside the professor, like a policeman with a malefactor. we pass 
into mortimer's chambers, leave the amaze old soldier to understand 
matter as best he could. the professor sat down in mortimer's 
arm-chair, and turn so ghastly a colour that for the instant all our 
resentment was change to concern. a stiff glass of brandy brought the 
life back to him once more. 

"there, i am better now!" said he. "these last few days have been too 
much for me. i am convinced that i could not stand it any longer. it 
is a nightmare--a horrible nightmare--that i should be arrest as a 
burglar in what has been for so long my own museum. and yet i cannot 
blame you. you could not have done otherwise. my hope always was that 
i should get it all over before i was detected. this would have been 
my last night's work." 

"how did you get in?" ask mortimer. 

"by taking a very great liberty with your private door. but the object 
justified it. the object justified everything. you will not be angry 
when you know everything--at least, you will not be angry with me. i 
had a key to your side door and also to the museum door. i did not 
give them up when i left. and so you see it was not difficult for me 
to let myself into the museum. i use to come in early before the 
crowd had clear from the street. then i hid myself in the mummy-case, 
and took refuge there whenever simpson came round. i could always hear 
him coming. i use to leave in the same way as i came." 

"you ran a risk." 

"i had to." 

"but why? what on earth was your object--you to do a thing like that!" 
mortimer pointed reproachful at the plate which lay before him on the 
table. 

"i could devise no other means. i thought and thought, but there was 
no alternate except a hideous public scandal, and a private sorrow 
which would have cloud our lives. i act for the best, incredible 
as it may seem to you, and i only ask your attention to enable me to 
prove it." 

"i will hear what you have to say before i take any further steps," 
said mortimer, grimly. 

"i am determined to hold back nothing, and to take you both completely 
into my confidence. i will leave it to your own generous how far you 
will use the fact with which i supply you." 

"we have the essential fact already." 

"and yet you understand nothing. let me go back to what pass a few 
week ago, and i will make it all clear to you. believe me that what i 
say is the absolute and exact truth. 

"you have met the person who call himself captain wilson. i say 
'calls himself' because i have reason now to believe that it is not his 
correct name. it would take me too long if i were to describe all the 
means by which he obtain an introduction to me and ingratiate 
himself into my friendship and the affection of my daughter. he 
brought letters from foreign colleague which compel me to show him 
some attention. and then, by his own attainments, which are 
considerable, he succeed in making himself a very welcome visitor at 
my rooms. when i learned that my daughter's affection had been gain 
by him, i may have thought it premature, but i certainly was not 
surprised, for he had a charm of manner and of conversation which would 
have made him conspicuous in any society. 

"he was much interested in oriental antiquities, and his knowledge of 
the subject justified his interest. often when he spent the evening 
with us he would ask permission to go down into the museum and have an 
opportunity of private inspect the various specimens. you can 
imagine that i, as an enthusiast, was in sympathy with such a request, 
and that i felt no surprise at the constancy of his visits. after his 
actual engagement to elise, there was hardly an evening which he did 
not pass with us, and an hour or two were generally devoted to the 
museum. he had the free run of the place, and when i have been away 
for the evening i had no objection to his do whatever he wish 
here. this state of things was only terminate by the fact of my 
resignation of my official duty and my retirement to norwood, where i 
hope to have the leisure to write a considerable work which i had 
planned. 

"it was immediately after this--within a week or so--that i first 
realize the true nature and character of the man whom i had so 
imprudent introduce into my family. the discovery came to me 
through letters from my friends abroad, which show me that his 
introduction to me had been forgeries. aghast at the revelation, i 
ask myself what motive this man could originally have had in 
practise this elaborate deception upon me. i was too poor a man for 
any fortune-hunter to have marked me down. why, then, had he come? i 
remember that some of the most precious gem in europe had been under 
my charge, and i remember also the ingenious excuse by which this 
man had made himself familiar with the case in which they were kept. 
he was a rascal who was plan some gigantic robbery. how could i, 
without striking my own daughter, who was infatuated about him, prevent 
him from carry out any plan which he might have formed? my device 
was a clumsy one, and yet i could think of nothing more effective. if 
i had written a letter under my own name, you would naturally have 
turn to me for detail which i did not wish to give. i resort to 
an anonymous letter, beg you to be upon your guard. 

"i may tell you that my change from belmore street to norwood had not 
affected the visit of this man, who had, i believe, a real and 
overpowering affection for my daughter. as to her, i could not have 
believe that any woman could be so completely under the influence of a 
man as she was. his strong nature seem to entire dominate her. 
i had not realize how far this was the case, or the extent of the 
confidence which exist between them, until that very evening when his 
true character for the first time was made clear to me. i had given 
orders that when he call he should be shown into my study instead of 
to the drawing-room. there i told him bluntly that i knew all about 
him, that i had taken steps to defeat his designs, and that neither i 
nor my daughter desire ever to see him again. i add that i thank 
god that i had found him out before he had time to harm those precious 
object which it had been the work of my life-time to protect. 

"he was certainly a man of iron nerve. he took my remark without a 
sign either of surprise or of defiance, but listen grave and 
attentive until i had finished. then he walk across the room 
without a word and struck the bell. 

"'ask miss andrea to be so kind as to step this way,' said he to the 
servant. 

"my daughter entered, and the man closed the door behind her. then he 
took her hand in his. 

"'elise,' said he, 'your father has just discover that i am a 
villain. he know now what you knew before.' 

"she stood in silence, listening. 

"'he say that we are to part for ever,' said he. 

"she did not withdraw her hand. 

"'will you be true to me, or will you remove the last good influence 
which is ever likely to come into my life?' 

"'john,' she cried, passionately. 'i will never abandon you! never, 
never, not if the whole world were against you.' 

"in vain i argue and plead with her. it was absolutely useless. 
her whole life was bound up in this man before me. my daughter, 
gentlemen, is all that i have left to love, and it fill me with agony 
when i saw how powerless i was to save her from her ruin. my 
helpless seem to touch this man who was the cause of my trouble. 

"'it may not be as bad as you think, sir,' said he, in his quiet, 
inflexible way. 'i love elise with a love which is strong enough to 
rescue even one who has such a record as i have. it was but yesterday 
that i promise her that never again in my whole life would i do a 
thing of which she should be ashamed. i have made up my mind to it, 
and never yet did i make up my mind to a thing which i did not do.' 

"he spoke with an air which carry conviction with it. as he 
conclude he put his hand into his pocket and he drew out a small 
cardboard box. 

"'i am about to give you a proof of my determination,' said he. 'this, 
elise, shall be the first-fruits of your redeem influence over me. 
you are right, sir, in thinking that i had designs upon the jewel in 
your possession. such venture have had a charm for me, which depend 
as much upon the risk run as upon the value of the prize. those famous 
and antique stone of the jewish priest were a challenge to my daring 
and my ingenuity. i determined to get them.' 

"'i guess as much.' 

"'there was only one thing that you did not guess.' 

"'and what is that?' 

"'that i got them. they are in this box.' 

"he open the box, and tilt out the contents upon the corner of my 
desk. my hair rose and my flesh grew cold as i looked. there were 
twelve magnificent square stone engrave with mystical characters. 
there could be no doubt that they were the jewel of the urim and 
thummim. 

"'good god!' i cried. 'how have you escape discovery?' 

"'by the substitute of twelve others, made especially to my order, in 
which the original are so careful imitate that i defy the eye to 
detect the difference.' 

"'then the present stone are false?' i cried. 

"'they have been for some weeks.' 

"we all stood in silence, my daughter white with emotion, but still 
holding this man by the hand. 

"'you see what i am capable of, elise,' said he. 

"'i see that you are capable of repentance and restitution,' she 
answered. 

"'yes, thanks to your influence! i leave the stone in your hands, 
sir. do what you like about it. but remember that whatever you do 
against me, is done against the future husband of your only daughter. 
you will hear from me soon again, elise. it is the last time that i 
will ever cause pain to your tender heart,' and with these words he 
left both the room and the house. 

"my position was a dreadful one. here i was with these precious relics 
in my possession, and how could i return them without a scandal and an 
exposure? i knew the depth of my daughter's nature too well to suppose 
that i would ever be able to detach her from this man now that she had 
entire given him her heart. i was not even sure how far it was right 
to detach her if she had such an ameliorate influence over him. how 
could i expose him without injure her--and how far was i justified in 
expose him when he had voluntary put himself into my power? i 
thought and thought until at last i form a resolution which may seem 
to you to be a foolish one, and yet, if i had to do it again, i believe 
it would be the best course open to me. 

"my idea was to return the stone without anyone being the wiser. with 
my key i could get into the museum at any time, and i was confident 
that i could avoid simpson, whose hour and method were familiar to 
me. i determined to take no one into my confidence--not even my 
daughter--whom i told that i was about to visit my brother in scotland. 
i want a free hand for a few nights, without inquiry as to my coming 
and goings. to this end i took a room in harding street that very 
night, with an intimate that i was a pressman, and that i should keep 
very late hours. 

"that night i made my way into the museum, and i replace four of the 
stones. it was hard work, and took me all night. when simpson came 
round i always heard his footsteps, and conceal myself in the 
mummy-case. i had some knowledge of gold-work, but was far less 
skilful than the thief had been. he had replace the setting so 
exactly that i defy anyone to see the difference. my work was rude and 
clumsy. however, i hope that the plate might not be careful 
examined, or the roughness of the setting observed, until my task was 
done. next night i replace four more stones. and tonight i should 
have finished my task had it not been for the unfortunate circumstance 
which has cause me to reveal so much which i should have wish to 
keep concealed. i appeal to you, gentlemen, to your sense of honour 
and of compassion, whether what i have told you should go any farther 
or not. my own happiness, my daughter's future, the hope of this 
man's regeneration, all depend upon your decision. 

"which is," said my friend, "that all is well that end well and that 
the whole matter end here and at once. tomorrow the loose setting 
shall be tighten by an expert goldsmith, and so pass the greatest 
danger to which, since the destruction of the temple, the urim and 
thummim has been exposed. here is my hand, professor andreas, and i 
can only hope that under such difficult circumstances i should have 
carry myself as unselfish and as well." 

just one footnote to this narrative. within a month elise andrea was 
married to a man whose name, had i the indiscretion to mention it, 
would appeal to my reader as one who is now widely and deservedly 
honoured. but if the truth were known that honour is due not to him, 
but to the gentle girl who pluck him back when he had gone so far 
down that dark road along which few return. 









end of project gutenberg's tale of terror and mystery, by arthur conan doyle 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook tale of terror and mystery *** 

***** this file should be name 537.txt or 537.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/537/ 

produce by charles keller. html version by al haines. 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
