the project gutenberg ebook of the house of souls, by arthur machen 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the house of soul 

author: arthur machen 

release date: april 7, 2008 [ebook #25016] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the house of soul *** 




produce by suzanne shell, stephen blundell and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









the 
house of soul 

by arthur machen 


_short story index reprint series_ 


aye company publishers, inc. 
north stratford, nh 03590 




first publish 1922 

reprint edition, 1999 
aye company publishers, inc. 
lower mill road 
north stratford, nh 03590 


international standard book number: 
0-8369-3806-2 

library of congress catalog card number: 
72-152947 

print in the united states of america 




transcriber's note: 

minor typographic error have been correct without note. the 
oe ligature is shown as [oe]. 




contents 


a fragment of life 1 

the white people 111 

the great god pan 167 

the inmost light 245 




introduction 


_it was somewhere, i think, towards the autumn of the year 1889 that the 
thought occur to me that i might perhaps try to write a little in the 
modern way. for, hitherto, i had been, as it were, wearing costume in 
literature. the rich, figured english of the early part of the 
seventeenth century had always had a peculiar attraction for me. i 
accustomed myself to write in it, to think in it; i kept a diary in that 
manner, and half-unconsciously dress up my every day thought and 
common experience in the habit of the cavalier or of the caroline 
divine. thus, when in 1884 i got a commission to translate the 
heptameron, i wrote quite naturally in the language of my favourite 
period, and, as some critic declare, made my english version somewhat 
more antique and stiff than the original. and so "the anatomy of 
tobacco" was an exercise in the antique of a different kind; and "the 
chronicle of clemendy" was a volume of tale that try their hardest to 
be mediæval; and the translate of the "moyen de parvenir" was still a 
thing in the ancient mode._ 

_it seemed, in fine, to be settled that in literature i was to be a 
hanger on of the past ages; and i don't quite know how i manage to get 
away from them. i had finished translate "casanova"--more modern, but 
not thorough up to date--and i had nothing particular on hand, and, 
somehow or other, it struck me that i might try a little writing for the 
papers. i began with a "turnover" as it was called, for the old vanish 
globe, a harmless little article on old english proverbs; and i shall 
never forget my pride and delight when one day, being at dover, with a 
fresh autumn wind blow from the sea, i bought a chance copy of the 
paper and saw my essay on the front page. naturally, i was encourage to 
persevere, and i wrote more turnover for the globe and then try the 
st. james's gazette and found that they paid two pound instead of the 
guinea of the globe, and again, naturally enough, devoted most of my 
attention to the st. james's gazette. from the essay or literary paper, 
i somehow got into the habit of the short story, and did a good many of 
these, still for the st. james's, till in the autumn of 1890, i wrote a 
tale call "the double return." well, oscar wilde asked: "are you the 
author of that story that flutter the dovecotes? i thought it was very 
good." but: it did flutter the dovecotes, and the st. james's gazette 
and i parted._ 

_but i still wrote short stories, now chiefly for what were call 
"society" papers, which have become extinct. and one of these appear 
in a paper, the name of which i have long forgotten. i had call the 
tale "resurrectio mortuorum," and the editor had very sensible render 
the title into "the resurrection of the dead."_ 

_i do not clearly remember how the story began. i am inclined to think 
something in this way:_ 

_"old mr. llewellyn, the welsh antiquary, threw his copy of the morning 
paper on the floor and bang the breakfast-table, exclaiming: 'good 
god! here's the last of the caradoc of the garth, has been married in 
a baptist chapel by a dissenting preacher; somewhere in peckham.'" or, 
did i take up the tale a few years after this happy event and shew the 
perfectly cheerful contented young commercial clerk running somewhat too 
fast to catch the bus one morning, and feeling daze all day long over 
the office work, and go home in a sort of dimness, and then at his 
very doorstep, recover as it were, his ancestral consciousness. i 
think it was the sight of his wife and the tone of her voice that 
sudden announce to him with the sound of a trumpet that he had 
nothing to do with this woman with the cockney accent, or the pastor who 
was coming to supper, or the red brick villa, or peckham or the city of 
london. though the old place on the bank of the usk had been sold fifty 
years before, still, he was caradoc of the garth. i forget how i end 
the story: but here was one of the source of "a fragment of life."_ 

_and somehow, though the tale was written and print and paid for; it 
stay with me as a tale half told in the years from 1890 to 1899. i was 
in love with the notion: this contrast between the raw london suburb and 
its mean limited life and its daily journey to the city; its utter 
banal and lack of significance; between all this and the old, grey 
mullioned house under the forest near the river, the armorial bearings 
on the jacobean porch, and noble old traditions: all this captivate me 
and i thought of my mistold tale at intervals, while i was writing "the 
great god pan," "the red hand," "the three impostors," "the hill of 
dreams," "the white people," and "hieroglyphics." it was at the back of 
my head, i suppose, all the time, and at last in '99 i began to write 
it all over again from a somewhat different standpoint._ 

_the fact was that one grey sunday afternoon in the march of that year, 
i went for a long walk with a friend. i was living in gray's inn in 
those days, and we stravage up gray's inn road on one of those queer, 
unscientific exploration of the odd corner of london in which i have 
always delighted. i don't think that there was any definite scheme laid 
down; but we resist manifold temptations. for on the right of gray's 
inn road is one of the oddest quarters of london--to those, that is, 
with the unsealed eyes. here are street of 1800-1820 that go down into 
a valley--flora in "little dorrit" live in one of them--and then 
crossing king's cross road climb very steeple up to heights which always 
suggest to me that i am in the hinder and poor quarter of some big 
seaside place, and that there is a fine view of the sea from the attic 
windows. this place was once call spa fields, and has very properly an 
old meeting house of the countess of huntingdon's connection as one of 
its attractions. it is one of the parts of london which would attract me 
if i wish to hide; not to escape arrest, perhaps, but rather to escape 
the possibility of ever meeting anybody who had ever seen me before._ 

_but: my friend and i resist it all. we stroll along to the parting 
of many ways at king's cross station, and struck bold up pentonville. 
again: on our left was barnsbury, which is like africa. in barnsbury 
semper aliquid novi, but our course was laid for us by some occult 
influence, and we came to islington and chose the right hand side of the 
way. so far, we were tolerably in the region of the known, since every 
year there is the great cattle show at islington, and many men go there. 
but, trend to the right, we got into canonbury, of which there are 
only travellers' tales. now and then, perhaps, as one sit about the 
winter fire, while the storm howl without and the snow falls fast, the 
silent man in the corner has told how he had a great aunt who live in 
canonbury in 1860; so in the fourteenth century you might meet men who 
had talk with those who had been in cathay and had seen the splendour 
of the grand cham. such is canonbury; i hardly dare speak of its dim 
squares, of the deep, leafy back-gardens behind the houses, running down 
into obscure alleyway with discreet, mysterious postern doors: as i 
say, "travellers' tales"; things not much credited._ 

_but, he who adventure in london has a foretaste of infinity. there is 
a region beyond ultima thule. i know not how it was, but on this famous 
sunday afternoon, my friend and i, passing through canonbury came into 
something call the balls pond road--mr. perch, the messenger of dombey 
& son, live somewhere in this region--and so i think by dalston down 
into hackney where caravans, or trams, or, as i think you say in 
america, trolley car set out at state interval to the limit of the 
western world._ 

_but in the course of that walk which had become an exploration of the 
unknown, i had seen two common things which had made a profound 
impression upon me. one of these things was a street, the other a small 
family party. the street was somewhere in that vague, uncharted, balls 
pond-dalston region. it was a long street and a grey street. each house 
was exactly like every other house. each house had a basement, the sort 
of story which house-agents have grown to call of late a "lower ground 
floor." the front window of these basement were half above the patch 
of black, soot-smeared soil and coarse grass that name itself a garden, 
and so, passing along at the hour of four o'clock or four-thirty, i 
could see that in everyone of these "breakfast rooms"--their technical 
name--the tea tray and the tea cup were set out in readiness. i 
received from this trivial and natural circumstance an impression of a 
dull life, laid out in dreadful lines of pattern uniformity, of a life 
without adventure of body or soul._ 

_then, the family party. it got into the tram down hackney way. there 
were father, mother and baby; and i should think that they came from a 
small shop, probably from a small draper's shop. the parent were young 
people of twenty-five to thirty-five. he wore a black shiny frock 
coat--an "albert" in america?--a high hat, little side whiskers and dark 
moustache and a look of amiable vacuity. his wife was oddly bedizene in 
black satin, with a wide spread hat, not ill-looking, simply 
unmeaning. i fancy that she had at times, not too often, "a temper of 
her own." and the very small baby sat upon her knee. the party was 
probably go forth to spend the sunday evening with relations or 
friends._ 

_and yet, i said to myself, these two have partaken together of the 
great mystery, of the great sacrament of nature, of the source of all 
that is magical in the wide world. but have they discern the 
mysteries? do they know that they have been in that place which is 
call syon and jerusalem?--i am quote from an old book and a strange 
book._ 

_it was thus that, remember the old story of the "resurrection of the 
dead," i was furnish with the source of "a fragment of life." i was 
writing "hieroglyphics" at the time, have just finished "the white 
people"; or rather, have just decided that what now appear in print 
under that heading was all that would ever be written, that the great 
romance that should have been written--in manifestation of the 
idea--would never be written at all. and so, when hieroglyphics was 
finished, somewhere about may 1899, i set about "a fragment of life" and 
wrote the first chapter with the greatest relish and the utmost ease. 
and then my own life was dashed into fragments. i cease to write. i 
travelled. i saw syon and bagdad and other strange places--see "things 
near and far" for an explanation of this obscure passage--and found 
myself in the light world of float and battens, enter l. u. e., 
crossing r and exit r 3; and do all sort of queer things._ 

_but still, in spite of all these shock and changes, the "notion" would 
not leave me. i went at it again, i suppose in 1904; consume with a 
bitter determination to finish what i had begun. everything now had 
become difficult. i try this way and that way and the other way. they 
all fail and i broke down on every one of them; and i try and try 
again. at last i cobble up some sort of an end, an utterly bad one, as 
i realize as i wrote every single line and word of it, and the story 
appeared, in 1904 or 1905, in horlick's magazine under the editorship of 
my old and dear friend, a. e. waite._ 

_still; i was not satisfied. that end was intolerable and i knew it. 
again, i sat down to the work, night after night i wrestle with it. and 
i remember an odd circumstance which may or may not be of some 
physiology interest. i was then living in a circumscribe "upper 
part" of a house in cosway street, marylebone road. that i might 
struggle by myself, i wrote in the little kitchen; and night after night 
as i fought grimly, savagely, all but hopeless for some fit close for 
"a fragment of life," i was astonish and almost alarm to find that 
my feet develop a sensation of most deadly cold. the room was not 
cold; i had lit the oven burner of the little gas cooking stove. i was 
not cold; but my feet were chill in a quite extraordinary manner, as 
if they had been packed in ice. at last i took off my slipper with a 
view of poke my toe into the oven of the stove, and feeling my feet 
with my hand, i perceive that, in fact, they were not cold at all! but 
the sensation remained; there, i suppose, you have an odd case of a 
transference of something that was happening in the brain to the 
extremities. my feet were quite warm to the palm of my hand, but to my 
sense they were frozen. but what a testimony to the fitness of the 
america idiom, "cold feet," as signify a depressed and despond 
mood! but, somehow or other, the tale was finished and the "notion" was 
at last out of my head. i have gone into all this detail about "a 
fragment of life" because i have been assured in many quarters that it 
is the best thing that i have ever done, and student of the crooked 
ways of literature may be interested to hear of the abominable labour 
of do it._ 

_"the white people" belong to the same year as the first chapter of "a 
fragment of life," 1899, which was also the year of "hieroglyphics." the 
fact was i was in high literary spirits, just then. i had been harass 
and worried for a whole year in the office of literature, a weekly paper 
publish by the times, and get free again, i felt like a prisoner 
release from chains; ready to dance in letters to any extent. forthwith 
i thought of "a great romance," a highly elaborate and elaborate piece 
of work, full of the strangest and rarest things. i have forgotten how 
it was that this design broke down; but i found by experiment that the 
great romance was to go on that brave shelf of the unwritten books, the 
shelf where all the splendid books are to be found in their golden 
bindings. "the white people" is a small piece of salvage from the wreck. 
oddly enough, as is insinuate in the prologue, the mainspring of the 
story is to be sought in a medical textbook. in the prologue reference 
is made to a review article by dr. coryn. but i have since found out 
that dr. coryn was merely quote from a scientific treatise that case 
of the lady whose finger became violent inflamed because she saw a 
heavy window sash descend on the finger of her child. with this 
instance, of course, are to be considered all case of stigmata, both 
ancient and modern: and then the question is obvious enough: what limit 
can we place to the powers of the imagination? has not the imagination 
the potentiality at least of perform any miracle, however marvelous, 
however incredible, according to our ordinary standards? as to the 
decoration of the story, that is a mingle which i venture to think 
somewhat ingenious of odds and end of folk lore and witch lore with 
pure invention of my own. some years later i was amuse to receive a 
letter from a gentleman who was, if i remember, a schoolmaster somewhere 
in malaya. this gentleman, an earnest student of folklore, was writing 
an article on some singular things he had observe amongst the malayans, 
and chiefly a kind of were-wolf state into which some of them were able 
to conjure themselves. he had found, as he said, startle resemblance 
between the magic ritual of malaya and some of the ceremony and 
practice hint at in "the white people." he presume that all this was 
not fancy but fact; that is that i was describe practice actually in 
use among superstitious people on the welsh border; he was go to 
quote from me in the article for the journal of the folk lore society, 
or whatever it was called, and he just want to let me know. i wrote in 
a hurry to the folklore journal to bid them beware: for the instance 
select by the student were all fiction of my own brain!_ 

_"the great god pan" and "the inmost light" are tale of an early 
date, go back to 1890, '91, '92. i have written a good deal about 
them in "far off things," and in a preface to an edition of "the great 
god pan," publish by messrs. simpkin, marshall in 1916, i have 
describe at length the origin of the book. but i must quote anew some 
extract from the review which welcome "the great god pan" to my 
extraordinary entertainment, hilarity and refreshment. here are a few of 
the best:_ 

_"it is not mr. machen's fault but his misfortune, that one shakes with 
laughter rather than with dread over the contemplation of his 
psychological bogey."--observer._ 

_"his horror, we regret to say, leaves us quite cold ... and our flesh 
obstinate refuse to creep."--chronicle._ 

_"his bogie don't scare."--sketch._ 

_"we are afraid he only succeed in being ridiculous."--manchester 
guardian._ 

_"gruesome, ghastly and dull."--lady's pictorial._ 

_"incoherent nightmare of sex ... which would soon lead to insanity if 
unrestrained ... innocuous from its absurdity."--westminster gazette._ 

_and so on, and so on. several papers, i remember, declared that "the 
great god pan" was simply a stupid and incompetent rehash of huysmans' 
"là-bas" and "À rebours." i had not read these books so i got them both. 
thereon, i perceive that my critic had not read them either._ 




a fragment of life 


i 

edward darnell awoke from a dream of an ancient wood, and of a clear 
well rising into grey film and vapour beneath a misty, glimmer heat; 
and as his eyes open he saw the sunlight bright in the room, sparkle 
on the varnish of the new furniture. he turn and found his wife's 
place vacant, and with some confusion and wonder of the dream still 
lingering in his mind, he rose also, and began hurried to set about 
his dressing, for he had overslept a little, and the 'bus pass the 
corner at 9.15. he was a tall, thin man, dark-haired and dark-eyed, and 
in spite of the routine of the city, the count of coupons, and all 
the mechanical drudgery that had last for ten years, there still 
remain about him the curious hint of a wild grace, as if he had been 
born a creature of the antique wood, and had seen the fountain rising 
from the green moss and the grey rocks. 

the breakfast was laid in the room on the ground floor, the back room 
with the france window look on the garden, and before he sat down to 
his fry bacon he kiss his wife seriously and dutifully. she had 
brown hair and brown eyes, and though her lovely face was grave and 
quiet, one would have said that she might have await her husband under 
the old trees, and bath in the pool hollow out of the rocks. 

they had a good deal to talk over while the coffee was pour out and 
the bacon eaten, and darnell's egg brought in by the stupid, staring 
servant-girl of the dusty face. they had been married for a year, and 
they had got on excellently, rarely sitting silent for more than an 
hour, but for the past few week aunt marian's present had afford a 
subject for conversation which seem inexhaustible. mrs. darnell had 
been miss mary reynolds, the daughter of an auctioneer and estate agent 
in not hill, and aunt marian was her mother's sister, who was 
supposed rather to have lower herself by marry a coal merchant, in 
a small way, at turnham green. marian had felt the family attitude a 
good deal, and the reynolds were sorry for many things that had been 
said, when the coal merchant save money and took up land on building 
lease in the neighbourhood of crouch end, greatly to his advantage, as 
it appeared. nobody had thought that nixon could ever do very much; but 
he and his wife had been living for years in a beautiful house at 
barnet, with bow-windows, shrubs, and a paddock, and the two family 
saw but little of each other, for mr. reynolds was not very prosperous. 
of course, aunt marian and her husband had been ask to mary's wedding, 
but they had sent excuse with a nice little set of silver apostle 
spoons, and it was fear that nothing more was to be look for. 
however, on mary's birthday her aunt had written a most affectionate 
letter, enclose a cheque for a hundred pound from 'robert' and 
herself, and ever since the receipt of the money the darnell had 
discuss the question of its judicious disposal. mrs. darnell had 
wish to invest the whole sum in government securities, but mr. darnell 
had pointed out that the rate of interest was absurd low, and after a 
good deal of talk he had persuade his wife to put ninety pound of the 
money in a safe mine, which was pay five per cent. this was very 
well, but the remain ten pounds, which mrs. darnell had insist on 
reserving, gave rise to legend and discourse as interminable as the 
dispute of the schools. 

at first mr. darnell had propose that they should furnish the 'spare' 
room. there were four bedroom in the house: their own room, the small 
one for the servant, and two other overlook the garden, one of which 
had been use for store boxes, end of rope, and odd numbers of 'quiet 
days' and 'sunday evenings,' besides some worn suit belong to mr. 
darnell which had been careful wrap up and laid by, as he scarcely 
knew what to do with them. the other room was frankly waste and vacant, 
and one saturday afternoon, as he was coming home in the 'bus, and while 
he revolve that difficult question of the ten pounds, the unseemly 
empty of the spare room sudden came into his mind, and he glow 
with the idea that now, thanks to aunt marian, it could be furnished. he 
was busy with this delightful thought all the way home, but when he 
let himself in, he said nothing to his wife, since he felt that his idea 
must be matured. he told mrs. darnell that, have important business, 
he was oblige to go out again directly, but that he should be back 
without fail for tea at half-past six; and mary, on her side, was not 
sorry to be alone, as she was a little behindhand with the household 
books. the fact was, that darnell, full of the design of furnish the 
spare bedroom, wish to consult his friend wilson, who live at 
fulham, and had often given him judicious advice as to the lay out of 
money to the very best advantage. wilson was connected with the bordeaux 
wine trade, and darnell's only anxiety was lest he should not be at 
home. 

however, it was all right; darnell took a tram along the goldhawk road, 
and walk the rest of the way, and was delight to see wilson in the 
front garden of his house, busy amongst his flower-beds. 

'haven't seen you for an age,' he said cheerily, when he heard darnell's 
hand on the gate; 'come in. oh, i forgot,' he added, as darnell still 
fumble with the handle, and vain attempt to enter. 'of course you 
can't get in; i haven't shown it you.' 

it was a hot day in june, and wilson appear in a costume which he had 
put on in haste as soon as he arrive from the city. he wore a straw hat 
with a neat pugaree protect the back of his neck, and his dress was a 
norfolk jacket and knickers in heather mixture. 

'see,' he said, as he let darnell in; 'see the dodge. you don't _turn_ 
the handle at all. first of all push hard, and then pull. it's a trick 
of my own, and i shall have it patented. you see, it keeps undesirable 
character at a distance--such a great thing in the suburbs. i feel i 
can leave mrs. wilson alone now; and, formerly, you have no idea how she 
use to be pestered.' 

'but how about visitors?' said darnell. 'how do they get in?' 

'oh, we put them up to it. besides,' he said vaguely, 'there is sure to 
be somebody look out. mrs. wilson is nearly always at the window. 
she's out now; gone to call on some friends. the bennetts' at home day, 
i think it is. this is the first saturday, isn't it? you know j. w. 
bennett, don't you? ah, he's in the house; do very well, i believe. 
he put me on to a very good thing the other day.' 

'but, i say,' said wilson, as they turn and stroll towards the front 
door, 'what do you wear those black things for? you look hot. look at 
me. well, i've been gardening, you know, but i feel as cool as a 
cucumber. i dare say you don't know where to get these things? very few 
men do. where do you suppose i got 'em?' 

'in the west end, i suppose,' said darnell, wish to be polite. 

'yes, that's what everybody says. and it is a good cut. well, i'll tell 
you, but you needn't pass it on to everybody. i got the tip from 
jameson--you know him, "jim-jams," in the china trade, 39 eastbrook--and 
he said he didn't want everybody in the city to know about it. but just 
go to jennings, in old wall, and mention my name, and you'll be all 
right. and what d'you think they cost?' 

'i haven't a notion,' said darnell, who had never bought such a suit in 
his life. 

'well, have a guess.' 

darnell regard wilson gravely. 

the jacket hung about his body like a sack, the knickerbockers droop 
lamentable over his calves, and in prominent position the bloom of the 
heather seem about to fade and disappear. 

'three pounds, i suppose, at least,' he said at length. 

'well, i ask dench, in our place, the other day, and he guess four 
ten, and his father's got something to do with a big business in conduit 
street. but i only gave thirty-five and six. to measure? of course; look 
at the cut, man.' 

darnell was astonish at so low a price. 

'and, by the way,' wilson went on, point to his new brown boots, 'you 
know where to go for shoe-leather? oh, i thought everybody was up to 
that! there's only one place. "mr. bill," in gun street,--nine and 
six.' 

they were walking round and round the garden, and wilson pointed out the 
flower in the bed and borders. there were hardly any blossoms, but 
everything was neat arranged. 

'here are the tuberous-rooted glasgownias,' he said, showing a rigid row 
of stunt plants; 'those are squintaceæ; this is a new introduction, 
moldavia semperflorida andersonii; and this is prattsia.' 

'when do they come out?' said darnell. 

'most of them in the end of august or beginning of september,' said 
wilson briefly. he was slightly annoy with himself for have talk 
so much about his plants, since he saw that darnell care nothing for 
flowers; and, indeed, the visitor could hardly dissemble vague 
recollection that came to him; thought of an old, wild garden, full of 
odours, beneath grey walls, of the fragrance of the meadowsweet beside 
the brook. 

'i want to consult you about some furniture,' darnell said at last. 
'you know we've got a spare room, and i'm thinking of putt a few 
things into it. i haven't exactly made up my mind, but i thought you 
might advise me.' 

'come into my den,' said wilson. 'no; this way, by the back'; and he 
show darnell another ingenious arrangement at the side door whereby a 
violent high-toned bell was set peal in the house if one did but 
touch the latch. indeed, wilson handle it so brisk that the bell rang 
a wild alarm, and the servant, who was try on her mistress's things 
in the bedroom, jump madly to the window and then dance a hysterical 
dance. there was plaster found on the drawing-room table on sunday 
afternoon, and wilson wrote a letter to the 'fulham chronicle,' 
ascribe the phenomenon 'to some disturbance of a seismic nature.' 

for the moment he knew nothing of the great result of his contrivance, 
and solemn led the way towards the back of the house. here there was a 
patch of turf, beginning to look a little brown, with a background of 
shrubs. in the middle of the turf, a boy of nine or ten was standing all 
alone, with something of an air. 

'the eldest,' said wilson. 'havelock. well, lockie, what are ye do 
now? and where are your brother and sister?' 

the boy was not at all shy. indeed, he seem eager to explain the 
course of events. 

'i'm play at being gawd,' he said, with an engaging frankness. 'and 
i've sent fergu and janet to the bad place. that's in the shrubbery. 
and they're never to come out any more. and they're burning for ever and 
ever.' 

'what d'you think of that?' said wilson admiringly. 'not bad for a 
youngster of nine, is it? they think a lot of him at the sunday-school. 
but come into my den.' 

the den was an apartment project from the back of the house. it had 
been design as a back kitchen and washhouse, but wilson had drape the 
'copper' in art muslin and had board over the sink, so that it serve 
as a workman's bench. 

'snug, isn't it?' he said, as he pushed forward one of the two wicker 
chairs. 'i think out things here, you know; it's quiet. and what about 
this furnishing? do you want to do the thing on a grand scale?' 

'oh, not at all. quite the reverse. in fact, i don't know whether the 
sum at our disposal will be sufficient. you see the spare room is ten 
feet by twelve, with a western exposure, and i thought if we _could_ 
manage it, that it would seem more cheerful furnished. besides, it's 
pleasant to be able to ask a visitor; our aunt, mrs. nixon, for example. 
but she is accustomed to have everything very nice.' 

'and how much do you want to spend?' 

'well, i hardly think we should be justified in go much beyond ten 
pounds. that isn't enough, eh?' 

wilson got up and shut the door of the back kitchen impressively. 

'look here,' he said, 'i'm glad you came to me in the first place. now 
you'll just tell me where you thought of go yourself.' 

'well, i had thought of the hampstead road,' said darnell in a 
hesitate manner. 

'i just thought you'd say that. but i'll ask you, what is the good of 
go to those expensive shop in the west end? you don't get a better 
article for your money. you're merely pay for fashion.' 

'i've seen some nice things in samuel's, though. they get a brilliant 
polish on their goods in those superior shops. we went there when we 
were married.' 

'exactly, and paid ten per cent more than you need have paid. it's 
throw money away. and how much did you say you had to spend? ten 
pounds. well, i can tell you where to get a beautiful bedroom suite, in 
the very highest finish, for six pound ten. what d'you think of that? 
china included, mind you; and a square of carpet, brilliant colours, 
will only cost you fifteen and six. look here, go any saturday afternoon 
to dick's, in the seven sister road, mention my name, and ask for mr. 
johnston. the suite's in ash, "elizabethan" they call it. six pound ten, 
including the china, with one of their "orient" carpets, nine by nine, 
for fifteen and six. dick's.' 

wilson spoke with some eloquence on the subject of furnishing. he 
pointed out that the times were changed, and that the old heavy style 
was quite out of date. 

'you know,' he said, 'it isn't like it was in the old days, when people 
use to buy things to last hundred of years. why, just before the wife 
and i were married, an uncle of mine die up in the north and left me 
his furniture. i was thinking of furnish at the time, and i thought 
the things might come in handy; but i assure you there wasn't a single 
article that i care to give house-room to. all dingy, old mahogany; big 
bookcase and bureaus, and claw-legged chair and tables. as i said to 
the wife (as she was soon afterwards), "we don't exactly want to set up 
a chamber of horrors, do we?" so i sold off the lot for what i could 
get. i must confess i like a cheerful room.' 

darnell said he had heard that artist like the old-fashioned 
furniture. 

'oh, i dare say. the "unclean cult of the sunflower," eh? you saw that 
piece in the "daily post"? i hate all that rot myself. it isn't healthy, 
you know, and i don't believe the english people will stand it. but 
talk of curiosities, i've got something here that's worth a bit of 
money.' 

he dive into some dusty receptacle in a corner of the room, and show 
darnell a small, worm-eaten bible, wanting the first five chapter of 
genesis and the last leaf of the apocalypse. it bore the date of 1753. 

'it's my belief that's worth a lot,' said wilson. 'look at the 
worm-holes. and you see it's "imperfect," as they call it. you've 
notice that some of the most valuable books are "imperfect" at the 
sales?' 

the interview came to an end soon after, and darnell went home to his 
tea. he thought seriously of taking wilson's advice, and after tea he 
told mary of his idea and of what wilson had said about dick's. 

mary was a good deal taken by the plan when she had heard all the 
details. the price struck her as very moderate. they were sitting one 
on each side of the grate (which was conceal by a pretty cardboard 
screen, paint with landscapes), and she rest her cheek on her hand, 
and her beautiful dark eyes seem to dream and behold strange visions. 
in reality she was thinking of darnell's plan. 

'it would be very nice in some ways,' she said at last. 'but we must 
talk it over. what i am afraid of is that it will come to much more than 
ten pound in the long run. there are so many things to be considered. 
there's the bed. it would look shabby if we got a common bed without 
brass mounts. then the bedding, the mattress, and blankets, and sheets, 
and counterpane would all cost something.' 

she dream again, calculating the cost of all the necessaries, and 
darnell stare anxiously; reckoning with her, and wonder what her 
conclusion would be. for a moment the delicate colouring of her face, 
the grace of her form, and the brown hair, droop over her ear and 
cluster in little curl about her neck, seem to hint at a language 
which he had not yet learned; but she spoke again. 

'the bedding would come to a great deal, i am afraid. even if dick's are 
considerably cheap than boon's or samuel's. and, my dear, we must have 
some ornament on the mantelpiece. i saw some very nice vase at 
eleven-three the other day at wilkin and dodd's. we should want six at 
least, and there ought to be a centre-piece. you see how it mount up.' 

darnell was silent. he saw that his wife was sum up against his 
scheme, and though he had set his heart on it, he could not resist her 
arguments. 

'it would be near twelve pound than ten,' she said. 

'the floor would have to be stain round the carpet (nine by nine, you 
said?), and we should want a piece of linoleum to go under the 
washstand. and the wall would look very bare without any pictures.' 

'i thought about the pictures,' said darnell; and he spoke quite 
eagerly. he felt that here, at least, he was unassailable. 'you know 
there's the "derby day" and the "railway station," ready framed, 
standing in the corner of the box-room already. they're a bit 
old-fashioned, perhaps, but that doesn't matter in a bedroom. and 
couldn't we use some photographs? i saw a very neat frame in natural oak 
in the city, to hold half a dozen, for one and six. we might put in your 
father, and your brother james, and aunt marian, and your grandmother, 
in her widow's cap--and any of the other in the album. and then there's 
that old family picture in the hair-trunk--that might do over the 
mantelpiece.' 

'you mean your great-grandfather in the gilt frame? but that's _very_ 
old-fashioned, isn't it? he looks so queer in his wig. i don't think it 
would quite go with the room, somehow.' 

darnell thought a moment. the portrait was a 'kitcat' of a young 
gentleman, brave dress in the fashion of 1750, and he very faint 
remember some old tale that his father had told him about this 
ancestor--tales of the wood and fields, of the deep sunken lanes, and 
the forgotten country in the west. 

'no,' he said, 'i suppose it is rather out of date. but i saw some very 
nice print in the city, frame and quite cheap.' 

'yes, but everything counts. well, we will talk it over, as you say. you 
know we must be careful.' 

the servant came in with the supper, a tin of biscuits, a glass of milk 
for the mistress, and a modest pint of beer for the master, with a 
little cheese and butter. afterwards edward smoke two pipes of 
honeydew, and they went quiet to bed; mary go first, and her 
husband following a quarter of an hour later, according to the ritual 
establish from the first days of their marriage. front and back door 
were locked, the gas was turn off at the meter, and when darnell got 
upstairs he found his wife already in bed, her face turn round on the 
pillow. 

she spoke soft to him as he came into the room. 

'it would be impossible to buy a presentable bed at anything under one 
pound eleven, and good sheet are dear, anywhere.' 

he slip off his clothes and slid gently into bed, putt out the 
candle on the table. the blind were all even and duly drawn, but it 
was a june night, and beyond the walls, beyond that desolate world and 
wilderness of grey shepherd's bush, a great golden moon had float up 
through magic film of cloud, above the hill, and the earth was fill 
with a wonderful light between red sunset lingering over the mountain 
and that marvellous glory that shone into the wood from the summit of 
the hill. darnell seem to see some reflection of that wizard 
bright in the room; the pale wall and the white bed and his wife's 
face lie amidst brown hair upon the pillow were illuminated, and 
listen he could almost hear the corncrake in the fields, the fern-owl 
sound his strange note from the quiet of the rugged place where the 
bracken grew, and, like the echo of a magic song, the melody of the 
nightingale that sang all night in the alder by the little brook. there 
was nothing that he could say, but he slow stole his arm under his 
wife's neck, and play with the ringlet of brown hair. she never 
moved, she lay there gently breathing, look up to the blank ceiling 
of the room with her beautiful eyes, thinking also, no doubt, thought 
that she could not utter, kiss her husband obedient when he ask 
her to do so, and he stammer and hesitate as he spoke. 

they were nearly asleep, indeed darnell was on the very eve of dreaming, 
when she said very softly-- 

'i am afraid, darling, that we could never afford it.' and he heard her 
words through the murmur of the water, dripping from the grey rock, and 
fall into the clear pool beneath. 

sunday morning was always an occasion of idleness. indeed, they would 
never have got breakfast if mrs. darnell, who had the instinct of the 
housewife, had not awoke and seen the bright sunshine, and felt that the 
house was too still. she lay quiet for five minutes, while her husband 
slept beside her, and listen intently, wait for the sound of alice 
stirring down below. a golden tube of sunlight shone through some 
opening in the venetian blinds, and it shone on the brown hair that lay 
about her head on the pillow, and she look steady into the room at 
the 'duchesse' toilet-table, the coloured ware of the washstand, and the 
two photogravure in oak frames, 'the meeting' and 'the parting,' that 
hung upon the wall. she was half dream as she listen for the 
servant's footsteps, and the faint shadow of a shade of a thought came 
over her, and she imagine dimly, for the quick moment of a dream, 
another world where rapture was wine, where one wander in a deep and 
happy valley, and the moon was always rising red above the trees. she 
was thinking of hampstead, which represent to her the vision of the 
world beyond the walls, and the thought of the heath led her away to 
bank holidays, and then to alice. there was not a sound in the house; it 
might have been midnight for the still if the drawl cry of the 
sunday paper had not sudden echo round the corner of edna road, and 
with it came the warning clank and shriek of the milkman with his pails. 

mrs. darnell sat up, and wide awake, listen more intently. the girl 
was evidently fast asleep, and must be roused, or all the work of the 
day would be out of joint, and she remember how edward hate any fuss 
or discussion about household matters, more especially on a sunday, 
after his long week's work in the city. she gave her husband an 
affectionate glance as he slept on, for she was very fond of him, and so 
she gently rose from the bed and went in her nightgown to call the maid. 

the servant's room was small and stuffy, the night had been very hot, 
and mrs. darnell pause for a moment at the door, wonder whether the 
girl on the bed was really the dusty-faced servant who bustle day by 
day about the house, or even the strange bedizene creature, dress 
in purple, with a shiny face, who would appear on the sunday afternoon, 
bring in an early tea, because it was her 'evening out.' alice's hair 
was black and her skin was pale, almost of the olive tinge, and she lay 
asleep, her head rest on one arm, remind mrs. darnell of a queer 
print of a 'tired bacchante' that she had seen long ago in a shop window 
in upper street, islington. and a cracked bell was ringing; that meant 
five minutes to eight, and nothing done. 

she touched the girl gently on the shoulder, and only smile when her 
eyes opened, and waking with a start, she got up in sudden confusion. 
mrs. darnell went back to her room and dress slow while her husband 
still slept, and it was only at the last moment, as she fasten her 
cherry-coloured bodice, that she rouse him, telling him that the bacon 
would be overdone unless he hurried over his dressing. 

over the breakfast they discuss the question of the spare room all 
over again. mrs. darnell still admitted that the plan of furnish it 
attract her, but she could not see how it could be done for the ten 
pounds, and as they were prudent people they did not care to encroach on 
their savings. edward was highly paid, have (with allowance for extra 
work in busy weeks) a hundred and forty pound a year, and mary had 
inherit from an old uncle, her godfather, three hundred pounds, which 
had been judicious laid out in mortgage at 4-1/2 per cent. their total 
income, then, count in aunt marian's present, was a hundred and 
fifty-eight pound a year, and they were clear of debt, since darnell 
had bought the furniture for the house out of money which he had save 
for five or six years before. in the first few years of his life in the 
city his income had, of course, been smaller, and at first he had live 
very freely, without a thought of lay by. the theatre and 
music-halls had attract him, and scarcely a week pass without his 
go (in the pit) to one or the other; and he had occasional bought 
photograph of actress who pleased him. these he had solemn burnt 
when he became engaged to mary; he remember the evening well; his 
heart had been so full of joy and wonder, and the landlady had 
complain bitter of the mess in the grate when he came home from the 
city the next night. still, the money was lost, as far as he could 
recollect, ten or twelve shillings; and it annoy him all the more to 
reflect that if he had put it by, it would have gone far towards the 
purchase of an 'orient' carpet in brilliant colours. then there had been 
other expenses of his youth: he had purchase threepenny and even 
fourpenny cigars, the latter rarely, but the former frequently, 
sometimes singly, and sometimes in bundle of twelve for half-a-crown. 
once a meerschaum pipe had haunt him for six weeks; the tobacconist 
had drawn it out of a drawer with some air of secrecy as he was buy a 
packet of 'lone star.' here was another useless expense, these 
american-manufactured tobaccos; his 'lone star,' 'long judge,' 'old 
hank,' 'sultry clime,' and the rest of them cost from a shilling to one 
and six the two-ounce packet; whereas now he got excellent loose 
honeydew for threepence halfpenny an ounce. but the crafty tradesman, 
who had marked him down as a buyer of expensive fancy goods, nod with 
his air of mystery, and, snap open the case, display the 
meerschaum before the dazzle eyes of darnell. the bowl was carve in 
the likeness of a female figure, showing the head and _torso_, and the 
mouthpiece was of the very best amber--only twelve and six, the man 
said, and the amber alone, he declared, was worth more than that. he 
explain that he felt some delicacy about showing the pipe to any but a 
regular customer, and was willing to take a little under cost price and 
'cut the loss.' darnell resist for the time, but the pipe trouble 
him, and at last he bought it. he was pleased to show it to the younger 
men in the office for a while, but it never smoke very well, and he 
gave it away just before his marriage, as from the nature of the carving 
it would have been impossible to use it in his wife's presence. once, 
while he was taking his holiday at hastings, he had purchase a malacca 
cane--a useless thing that had cost seven shillings--and he reflect 
with sorrow on the innumerable evenings on which he had reject his 
landlady's plain fry chop, and had gone out to _flaner_ among the 
italy restaurant in upper street, islington (he lodge in holloway), 
pamper himself with expensive delicacies: cutlet and green peas, 
braise beef with tomato sauce, fillet steak and chip potatoes, 
ending the banquet very often with a small wedge of gruyère, which cost 
twopence. one night, after receiving a rise in his salary, he had 
actually drunk a quarter-flask of chianti and had add the enormity 
of benedictine, coffee, and cigarette to an expenditure already 
disgraceful, and sixpence to the waiter made the bill amount to four 
shilling instead of the shilling that would have provided him with a 
wholesome and sufficient repast at home. oh, there were many other item 
in this account of extravagance, and darnell had often regret his way 
of life, thinking that if he had been more careful, five or six pound a 
year might have been add to their income. 

and the question of the spare room brought back these regrets in an 
exaggerate degree. he persuade himself that the extra five pound 
would have given a sufficient margin for the outlay that he desire to 
make; though this was, no doubt, a mistake on his part. but he saw 
quite clearly that, under the present conditions, there must be no 
levy made on the very small sum of money that they had saved. the rent 
of the house was thirty-five, and rate and tax add another ten 
pounds--nearly a quarter of their income for house-room. mary kept down 
the housekeeping bill to the very best of her ability, but meat was 
always dear, and she suspect the maid of cutting surreptitious slice 
from the joint and eat them in her bedroom with bread and treacle in 
the dead of night, for the girl had disorder and eccentric appetites. 
mr. darnell thought no more of restaurants, cheap or dear; he took his 
lunch with him to the city, and join his wife in the evening at high 
tea--chops, a bit of steak, or cold meat from the sunday's dinner. mrs. 
darnell ate bread and jam and drank a little milk in the middle of the 
day; but, with the utmost economy, the effort to live within their means 
and to save for future contingency was a very hard one. they had 
determined to do without change of air for at least three years, as the 
honeymoon at walton-on-the-naze had cost a good deal; and it was on this 
ground that they had, somewhat illogically, reserved the ten pounds, 
declare that as they were not to have any holiday they would spend the 
money on something useful. 

and it was this consideration of utility that was finally fatal to 
darnell's scheme. they had calculate and recalculate the expense of 
the bed and bedding, the linoleum, and the ornaments, and by a great 
deal of exertion the total expenditure had been made to assume the shape 
of 'something very little over ten pounds,' when mary said quite 
suddenly-- 

'but, after all, edward, we don't really _want_ to furnish the room at 
all. i mean it isn't necessary. and if we did so it might lead to no end 
of expense. people would hear of it and be sure to fish for invitations. 
you know we have relative in the country, and they would be almost 
certain, the mallings, at any rate, to give hints.' 

darnell saw the force of the argument and gave way. but he was bitter 
disappointed. 

'it would have been very nice, wouldn't it?' he said with a sigh. 

'never mind, dear,' said mary, who saw that he was a good deal cast 
down. 'we must think of some other plan that will be nice and useful 
too.' 

she often spoke to him in that tone of a kind mother, though she was by 
three years the younger. 

'and now,' she said, 'i must get ready for church. are you coming?' 

darnell said that he thought not. he usually accompany his wife to 
morning service, but that day he felt some bitter in his heart, and 
prefer to lounge under the shade of the big mulberry tree that stood 
in the middle of their patch of garden--relic of the spacious lawn that 
had once lain smooth and green and sweet, where the dismal street now 
swarm in a hopeless labyrinth. 

so mary went quiet and alone to church. st. paul's stood in a 
neighbouring street, and its gothic design would have interested a 
curious inquire into the history of a strange revival. obviously, 
mechanically, there was nothing amiss. the style chosen was 'geometrical 
decorated,' and the tracery of the window seem correct. the nave, the 
aisles, the spacious chancel, were reasonably proportioned; and, to be 
quite serious, the only feature obviously wrong was the substitute of 
a low 'chancel wall' with iron gate for the rood screen with the loft 
and rood. but this, it might plausible be contended, was merely an 
adaptation of the old idea to modern requirements, and it would have 
been quite difficult to explain why the whole building, from the mere 
mortar setting between the stone to the gothic gas standards, was a 
mysterious and elaborate blasphemy. the canticle were sung to joll in b 
flat, the chant were 'anglican,' and the sermon was the gospel for the 
day, amplify and render into the more modern and graceful english of 
the preacher. and mary came away. 

after their dinner (an excellent piece of australia mutton, bought in 
the 'world wide' stores, in hammersmith), they sat for some time in the 
garden, partly sheltered by the big mulberry tree from the observation 
of their neighbours. edward smoke his honeydew, and mary look at him 
with placid affection. 

'you never tell me about the men in your office,' she said at length. 
'some of them are nice fellows, aren't they?' 

'oh, yes, they're very decent. i must bring some of them round, one of 
these days.' 

he remember with a pang that it would be necessary to provide whisky. 
one couldn't ask the guest to drink table beer at tenpence the gallon. 

'who are they, though?' said mary. 'i think they might have given you a 
wedding present.' 

'well, i don't know. we never have gone in for that sort of thing. but 
they're very decent chaps. well, there's harvey; "sauce" they call him 
behind his back. he's mad on bicycling. he went in last year for the 
two mile amateur record. he'd have made it, too, if he could have got 
into better training. 

'then there's james, a sporting man. you wouldn't care for him. i always 
think he smell of the stable.' 

'how horrid!' said mrs. darnell, finding her husband a little frank, 
lower her eyes as she spoke. 

'dickenson might amuse you,' darnell went on. 'he's always got a joke. a 
terrible liar, though. when he tell a tale we never know how much to 
believe. he swore the other day he'd seen one of the governor buy 
cockle off a barrow near london bridge, and jones, who's just come, 
believe every word of it.' 

darnell laugh at the humorous recollection of the jest. 

'and that wasn't a bad yarn about salter's wife,' he went on. 'salter is 
the manager, you know. dickenson lives close by, in not hill, and he 
said one morning that he had seen mrs. salter, in the portobello road, 
in red stockings, dance to a piano organ.' 

'he's a little coarse, isn't he?' said mrs. darnell. 'i don't see much 
fun in that.' 

'well, you know, amongst men it's different. you might like wallis; he's 
a tremendous photographer. he often show us photo he's taken of his 
children--one, a little girl of three, in her bath. i ask him how he 
thought she'd like it when she was twenty-three.' 

mrs. darnell look down and made no answer. 

there was silence for some minutes while darnell smoke his pipe. 'i 
say, mary,' he said at length, 'what do you say to our taking a pay 
guest?' 

'a pay guest! i never thought of it. where should we put him?' 

'why, i was thinking of the spare room. the plan would obviate your 
objection, wouldn't it? lot of men in the city take them, and make 
money of it too. i dare say it would add ten pound a year to our 
income. redgrave, the cashier, find it worth his while to take a large 
house on purpose. they have a regular lawn for tennis and a 
billiard-room.' 

mary considered gravely, always with the dream in her eyes. 'i don't 
think we could manage it, edward,' she said; 'it would be inconvenient 
in many ways.' she hesitate for a moment. 'and i don't think i should 
care to have a young man in the house. it is so very small, and our 
accommodation, as you know, is so limited.' 

she blush slightly, and edward, a little disappointed as he was, 
look at her with a singular longing, as if he were a scholar 
confront with a doubtful hieroglyph, either wholly wonderful or 
altogether commonplace. next door children were play in the garden, 
play shrilly, laughing, crying, quarrelling, racing to and fro. 
sudden a clear, pleasant voice sound from an upper window. 

'enid! charles! come up to my room at once!' 

there was an instant sudden hush. the children's voice die away. 

'mrs. parker is supposed to keep her children in great order,' said 
mary. 'alice was telling me about it the other day. she had been talk 
to mrs. parker's servant. i listen to her without any remark, as i 
don't think it right to encourage servants' gossip; they always 
exaggerate everything. and i dare say children often require to be 
corrected.' 

the children were struck silent as if some ghastly terror had seize 
them. 

darnell fancy that he heard a queer sort of cry from the house, but 
could not be quite sure. he turn to the other side, where an elderly, 
ordinary man with a grey moustache was strolling up and down on the 
further side of his garden. he caught darnell's eye, and mrs. darnell 
look towards him at the same moment, he very polite raise his 
tweed cap. darnell was surprise to see his wife blush fiercely. 

'sayce and i often go into the city by the same 'bus,' he said, 'and as 
it happen we've sat next to each other two or three times lately. i 
believe he's a traveller for a leather firm in bermondsey. he struck me 
as a pleasant man. haven't they got rather a good-looking servant?' 

'alice has spoken to me about her--and the sayces,' said mrs. darnell. 
'i understand that they are not very well thought of in the 
neighbourhood. but i must go in and see whether the tea is ready. alice 
will be wanting to go out directly.' 

darnell look after his wife as she walk quick away. he only dim 
understood, but he could see the charm of her figure, the delight of the 
brown curl cluster about her neck, and he again felt that sense of 
the scholar confront by the hieroglyphic. he could not have express 
his emotion, but he wonder whether he would ever find the key, and 
something told him that before she could speak to him his own lip must 
be unclosed. she had gone into the house by the back kitchen door, 
leave it open, and he heard her speak to the girl about the water 
being 'really boiling.' he was amazed, almost indignant with himself; 
but the sound of the words came to his ear as strange, heart-piercing 
music, tone from another, wonderful sphere. and yet he was her husband, 
and they had been married nearly a year; and yet, whenever she spoke, he 
had to listen to the sense of what she said, constrain himself, lest 
he should believe she was a magic creature, knowing the secret of 
immeasurable delight. 

he look out through the leaves of the mulberry tree. mr. sayce had 
disappear from his view, but he saw the light-blue fume of the cigar 
that he was smoking floating slow across the shadow air. he was 
wonder at his wife's manner when sayce's name was mentioned, puzzle 
his head as to what could be amiss in the household of a most 
respectable personage, when his wife appear at the dining-room window 
and call him in to tea. she smile as he look up, and he rose 
hasty and walk in, wonder whether he were not a little 'queer,' 
so strange were the dim emotion and the dim impulse that rose 
within him. 

alice was all shining purple and strong scent, as she brought in the 
teapot and the jug of hot water. it seem that a visit to the kitchen 
had inspired mrs. darnell in her turn with a novel plan for dispose of 
the famous ten pounds. the range had always been a trouble to her, and 
when sometimes she went into the kitchen, and found, as she said, the 
fire 'roaring halfway up the chimney,' it was in vain that she reprove 
the maid on the ground of extravagance and waste of coal. alice was 
ready to admit the absurd of making up such an enormous fire merely 
to bake (they call it 'roast') a bit of beef or mutton, and to boil 
the potato and the cabbage; but she was able to show mrs. darnell that 
the fault lay in the defective contrivance of the range, in an oven 
which 'would not get hot.' even with a chop or a steak it was almost as 
bad; the heat seem to escape up the chimney or into the room, and mary 
had spoken several times to her husband on the shocking waste of coal, 
and the cheapest coal procure was never less than eighteen shilling 
the ton. mr. darnell had written to the landlord, a builder, who had 
reply in an illiterate but offensive communication, maintain the 
excellence of the stove and charge all the fault to the account of 
'your good lady,' which really imply that the darnell kept no 
servant, and that mrs. darnell did everything. the range, then, 
remained, a standing annoyance and expense. every morning, alice said, 
she had the greatest difficulty in get the fire to light at all, and 
once light it 'seemed as if it flee right up the chimney.' only a few 
nights before mrs. darnell had spoken seriously to her husband about it; 
she had got alice to weigh the coal expend in cooking a cottage pie, 
the dish of the evening, and deduct what remain in the scuttle 
after the pie was done, it appear that the wretched thing had consume 
nearly twice the proper quantity of fuel. 

'you remember what i said the other night about the range?' said mrs. 
darnell, as she pour out the tea and water the leaves. she thought 
the introduction a good one, for though her husband was a most amiable 
man, she guess that he had been just a little hurt by her decision 
against his furnish scheme. 

'the range?' said darnell. he pause as he help himself to the 
marmalade and considered for a moment. 'no, i don't recollect. what 
night was it?' 

'tuesday. don't you remember? you had "overtime," and didn't get home 
till quite late.' 

she pause for a moment, blush slightly; and then began to 
recapitulate the misdeed of the range, and the outrageous outlay of 
coal in the preparation of the cottage pie. 

'oh, i recollect now. that was the night i thought i heard the 
nightingale (people say there are nightingale in bedford park), and the 
sky was such a wonderful deep blue.' 

he remember how he had walk from uxbridge road station, where the 
green 'bus stopped, and in spite of the fume kiln under acton, a 
delicate odour of the wood and summer field was mysterious in the 
air, and he had fancy that he smelt the red wild roses, droop from 
the hedge. as he came to his gate he saw his wife standing in the 
doorway, with a light in her hand, and he threw his arms violent about 
her as she welcome him, and whisper something in her ear, kiss her 
scent hair. he had felt quite abash a moment afterwards, and he was 
afraid that he had frightened her by his nonsense; she seem tremble 
and confused. and then she had told him how they had weigh the coal. 

'yes, i remember now,' he said. 'it is a great nuisance, isn't it? i 
hate to throw away money like that.' 

'well, what do you think? suppose we bought a really good range with 
aunt's money? it would save us a lot, and i expect the things would 
taste much nicer.' 

darnell pass the marmalade, and confessed that the idea was brilliant. 

'it's much better than mine, mary,' he said quite frankly. 'i am so glad 
you thought of it. but we must talk it over; it doesn't do to buy in a 
hurry. there are so many makes.' 

each had seen range which look miraculous inventions; he in the 
neighbourhood of the city; she in oxford street and regent street, on 
visit to the dentist. they discuss the matter at tea, and afterwards 
they discuss it walking round and round the garden, in the sweet cool 
of the evening. 

'they say the "newcastle" will burn anything, coke even,' said mary. 

'but the "glow" got the gold medal at the paris exhibition,' said 
edward. 

'but what about the "eutopia" kitchener? have you seen it at work in 
oxford street?' said mary. 'they say their plan of ventilate the oven 
is quite unique.' 

'i was in fleet street the other day,' answer edward, 'and i was 
look at the "bliss" patent stoves. they burn less fuel than any in 
the market--so the maker declare.' 

he put his arm gently round her waist. she did not repel him; she 
whisper quite softly-- 

'i think mrs. parker is at her window,' and he drew his arm back slowly. 

'but we will talk it over,' he said. 'there is no hurry. i might call at 
some of the place near the city, and you might do the same thing in 
oxford street and regent street and piccadilly, and we could compare 
notes.' 

mary was quite pleased with her husband's good temper. it was so nice of 
him not to find fault with her plan; 'he's so good to me,' she thought, 
and that was what she often said to her brother, who did not care much 
for darnell. they sat down on the seat under the mulberry, close 
together, and she let darnell take her hand, and as she felt his shy, 
hesitate finger touch her in the shadow, she pressed them ever so 
softly, and as he fondle her hand, his breath was on her neck, and she 
heard his passionate, hesitate voice whisper, 'my dear, my dear,' as 
his lip touched her cheek. she tremble a little, and waited. darnell 
kiss her gently on the cheek and drew away his hand, and when he spoke 
he was almost breathless. 

'we had better go in now,' he said. 'there is a heavy dew, and you might 
catch cold.' 

a warm, scent gale came to them from beyond the walls. he long to 
ask her to stay out with him all night beneath the tree, that they might 
whisper to one another, that the scent of her hair might inebriate him, 
that he might feel her dress still brush against his ankles. but he 
could not find the words, and it was absurd, and she was so gentle that 
she would do whatever he asked, however foolish it might be, just 
because he ask her. he was not worthy to kiss her lips; he bent down 
and kiss her silk bodice, and again he felt that she trembled, and he 
was ashamed, fear that he had frightened her. 

they went slow into the house, side by side, and darnell lit the gas 
in the drawing-room, where they always sat on sunday evenings. mrs. 
darnell felt a little tired and lay down on the sofa, and darnell took 
the arm-chair opposite. for a while they were silent, and then darnell 
said suddenly-- 

'what's wrong with the sayces? you seem to think there was something a 
little strange about them. their maid looks quite quiet.' 

'oh, i don't know that one ought to pay any attention to servants' 
gossip. they're not always very truthful.' 

'it was alice told you, wasn't it?' 

'yes. she was speak to me the other day, when i was in the kitchen in 
the afternoon.' 

'but what was it?' 

'oh, i'd rather not tell you, edward. it's not pleasant. i scold alice 
for repeating it to me.' 

darnell got up and took a small, frail chair near the sofa. 

'tell me,' he said again, with an odd perversity. he did not really care 
to hear about the household next door, but he remember how his wife's 
cheek flushed in the afternoon, and now he was look at her eyes. 

'oh, i really couldn't tell you, dear. i should feel ashamed.' 

'but you're my wife.' 

'yes, but it doesn't make any difference. a woman doesn't like to talk 
about such things.' 

darnell bent his head down. his heart was beating; he put his ear to her 
mouth and said, 'whisper.' 

mary drew his head down still lower with her gentle hand, and her cheek 
burn as she whispered-- 

'alice say that--upstairs--they have only--one room furnished. the maid 
told her--herself.' 

with an unconscious gesture she pressed his head to her breast, and he 
in turn was bend her red lip to his own, when a violent jangle 
clamour through the silent house. they sat up, and mrs. darnell went 
hurried to the door. 

'that's alice,' she said. 'she is always in in time. it has only just 
struck ten.' 

darnell shiver with annoyance. his lips, he knew, had almost been 
opened. mary's pretty handkerchief, delicate scent from a little 
flagon that a school friend had given her, lay on the floor, and he 
picked it up, and kiss it, and hid it away. 

the question of the range occupy them all through june and far into 
july. mrs. darnell took every opportunity of go to the west end and 
investigate the capacity of the latest makes, grave view the new 
improvement and hearing what the shopmen had to say; while darnell, as 
he said, 'kept his eyes open' about the city. they accumulate quite a 
literature of the subject, bring away illustrate pamphlets, and in 
the evenings it was an amusement to look at the pictures. they view 
with reverence and interest the drawing of great range for hotel and 
public institutions, mighty contrivance furnish with a series of 
oven each for a different use, with wonderful apparatus for grilling, 
with battery of accessory which seem to invest the cook almost 
with the dignity of a chief engineer. but when, in one of the lists, 
they encounter the image of little toy 'cottage' ranges, for four 
pounds, and even for three pound ten, they grew scornful, on the 
strength of the eight or ten pound article which they meant to 
purchase--when the merit of the divers patent had been thorough 
thrash out. 

the 'raven' was for a long time mary's favourite. it promise the utmost 
economy with the highest efficiency, and many times they were on the 
point of give the order. but the 'glow' seem equally seductive, and 
it was only £8. 5s. as compare with £9. 7s. 6d., and though the 'raven' 
was supply to the royal kitchen, the 'glow' could show more fervent 
testimonial from continental potentates. 

it seem a debate without end, and it endure day after day till that 
morning, when darnell woke from the dream of the ancient wood, of the 
fountain rising into grey vapour beneath the heat of the sun. as he 
dressed, an idea struck him, and he brought it as a shock to the hurried 
breakfast, disturbed by the thought of the city 'bus which pass the 
corner of the street at 9.15. 

'i've got an improvement on your plan, mary,' he said, with triumph. 
'look at that,' and he flung a little book on the table. 

he laughed. 'it beat your notion all to fits. after all, the great 
expense is the coal. it's not the stove--at least that's not the real 
mischief. it's the coal is so dear. and here you are. look at those oil 
stoves. they don't burn any coal, but the cheapest fuel in the 
world--oil; and for two pound ten you can get a range that will do 
everything you want.' 

'give me the book,' said mary, 'and we will talk it over in the evening, 
when you come home. must you be going?' 

darnell cast an anxious glance at the clock. 

'good-bye,' and they kiss each other seriously and dutifully, and 
mary's eyes made darnell think of those lonely water-pools, hidden in 
the shadow of the ancient woods. 

so, day after day, he live in the grey phantasmal world, akin to death, 
that has, somehow, with most of us, made good its claim to be call 
life. to darnell the true life would have seem madness, and when, now 
and again, the shadow and vague image reflect from its splendour 
fell across his path, he was afraid, and took refuge in what he would 
have call the sane 'reality' of common and usual incident and 
interests. his absurd was, perhaps, the more evident, inasmuch as 
'reality' for him was a matter of kitchen ranges, of saving a few 
shillings; but in truth the folly would have been greater if it had been 
concerned with racing stables, steam yachts, and the spend of many 
thousand pounds. 

but so went forth darnell, day by day, strange mistake death for 
life, madness for sanity, and purposeless and wandering phantom for 
true beings. he was sincerely of opinion that he was a city clerk, 
living in shepherd's bush--having forgotten the mystery and the 
far-shining glory of the kingdom which was his by legitimate 
inheritance. 


ii 

all day long a fierce and heavy heat had brood over the city, and as 
darnell near home he saw the mist lie on all the damp lowlands, 
wreathe in coil about bedford park to the south, and mount to the 
west, so that the tower of acton church loom out of a grey lake. the 
grass in the square and on the lawn which he overlook as the 'bus 
lumber weary along was burnt to the colour of dust. shepherd's bush 
green was a wretched desert, trample brown, border with monotonous 
poplars, whose leaves hung motionless in air that was still, hot smoke. 
the foot passenger struggle weary along the pavements, and the reek 
of the summer's end mingle with the breath of the brickfield made 
darnell gasp, as if he were inhale the poison of some foul sick-room. 

he made but a slight inroad into the cold mutton that adorn the 
tea-table, and confessed that he felt rather 'done up' by the weather 
and the day's work. 

'i have had a try day, too,' said mary. 'alice has been very queer 
and troublesome all day, and i have had to speak to her quite seriously. 
you know i think her sunday evenings out have a rather unsettle 
influence on the girl. but what is one to do?' 

'has she got a young man?' 

'of course: a grocer's assistant from the goldhawk road--wilkin's, you 
know. i try them when we settled here, but they were not very 
satisfactory.' 

'what do they do with themselves all the evening? they have from five to 
ten, haven't they?' 

'yes; five, or sometimes half-past, when the water won't boil. well, i 
believe they go for walk usually. once or twice he has taken her to the 
city temple, and the sunday before last they walk up and down oxford 
street, and then sat in the park. but it seem that last sunday they 
went to tea with his mother at putney. i should like to tell the old 
woman what i really think of her.' 

'why? what happened? was she nasty to the girl?' 

'no; that's just it. before this, she has been very unpleasant on 
several occasions. when the young man first took alice to see her--that 
was in march--the girl came away crying; she told me so herself. indeed, 
she said she never want to see old mrs. murry again; and i told alice 
that, if she had not exaggerate things, i could hardly blame her for 
feeling like that.' 

'why? what did she cry for?' 

'well, it seem that the old lady--she lives in quite a small cottage in 
some putney back street--was so stately that she would hardly speak. she 
had borrow a little girl from some neighbour's family, and had manage 
to dress her up to imitate a servant, and alice said nothing could be 
silly than to see that mite opening the door, with her black dress and 
her white cap and apron, and she hardly able to turn the handle, as 
alice said. george (that's the young man's name) had told alice that it 
was a little bit of a house; but he said the kitchen was comfortable, 
though very plain and old-fashioned. but, instead of go straight to 
the back, and sitting by a big fire on the old settle that they had 
brought up from the country, that child ask for their name (did you 
ever hear such nonsense?) and show them into a little poky parlour, 
where old mrs. murry was sitting "like a duchess," by a fireplace full 
of coloured paper, and the room as cold as ice. and she was so grand 
that she would hardly speak to alice.' 

'that must have been very unpleasant.' 

'oh, the poor girl had a dreadful time. she began with: "very pleased to 
make your acquaintance, miss dill. i know so very few person in 
service." alice imitate her mince way of talking, but i can't do it. 
and then she went on to talk about her family, how they had farm their 
own land for five hundred years--such stuff! george had told alice all 
about it: they had had an old cottage with a good strip of garden and 
two field somewhere in essex, and that old woman talk almost as if 
they had been country gentry, and boast about the rector, dr. 
somebody, coming to see them so often, and of squire somebody else 
always look them up, as if they didn't visit them out of kindness. 
alice told me it was as much as she could do to keep from laugh in 
mrs. murry's face, her young man have told her all about the place, 
and how small it was, and how the squire had been so kind about buy 
it when old murry die and george was a little boy, and his mother not 
able to keep things going. however, that silly old woman "laid it on 
thick," as you say, and the young man got more and more uncomfortable, 
especially when she went on to speak about marry in one's own class, 
and how unhappy she had known young men to be who had married beneath 
them, give some very pointed looks at alice as she talked. and then 
such an amuse thing happened: alice had notice george look about 
him in a puzzle sort of way, as if he couldn't make out something or 
other, and at last he burst out and ask his mother if she had been 
buy up the neighbours' ornaments, as he remember the two green 
cut-glass vase on the mantelpiece at mrs. ellis's, and the wax flower 
at miss turvey's. he was go on, but his mother scowl at him, and 
upset some books, which he had to pick up; but alice quite understood 
she had been borrowing things from her neighbours, just as she had 
borrow the little girl, so as to look grander. and then they had 
tea--water bewitched, alice call it--and very thin bread and butter, 
and rubbishy foreign pastry from the switzerland shop in the high street--all 
sour froth and rancid fat, alice declares. and then mrs. murry began 
boast again about her family, and snub alice and talk at her, 
till the girl came away quite furious, and very unhappy, too. i don't 
wonder at it, do you?' 

'it doesn't sound very enjoyable, certainly,' said darnell, look 
dreamy at his wife. he had not been attend very careful to the 
subject-matter of her story, but he love to hear a voice that was 
incantation in his ears, tone that summon before him the vision of a 
magic world. 

'and has the young man's mother always been like this?' he said after a 
long pause, desire that the music should continue. 

'always, till quite lately, till last sunday in fact. of course alice 
spoke to george murry at once, and said, like a sensible girl, that she 
didn't think it ever answer for a married couple to live with the 
man's mother, "especially," she went on, "as i can see your mother 
hasn't taken much of a fancy to me." he told her, in the usual style, it 
was only his mother's way, that she didn't really mean anything, and so 
on; but alice kept away for a long time, and rather hinted, i think, 
that it might come to have to choose between her and his mother. and 
so affair went on all through the spring and summer, and then, just 
before the august bank holiday, george spoke to alice again about it, 
and told her how sorry the thought of any unpleasant made him, and 
how he want his mother and her to get on with each other, and how she 
was only a bit old-fashioned and queer in her ways, and had spoken very 
nicely to him about her when there was nobody by. so the long and the 
short of it was that alice said she might come with them on the monday, 
when they had settled to go to hampton court--the girl was always 
talk about hampton court, and wanting to see it. you remember what a 
beautiful day it was, don't you?' 

'let me see,' said darnell dreamily. 'oh yes, of course--i sat out under 
the mulberry tree all day, and we had our meal there: it was quite a 
picnic. the caterpillar were a nuisance, but i enjoy the day very 
much.' his ear were charmed, ravish with the grave, supernal melody, 
as of antique song, rather of the first made world in which all speech 
was descant, and all words were sacrament of might, speak not to the 
mind but to the soul. he lay back in his chair, and said-- 

'well, what happen to them?' 

'my dear, would you believe it; but that wretched old woman behave 
worse than ever. they met as had been arranged, at kew bridge, and got 
places, with a good deal of difficulty, in one of those char-à-banc 
things, and alice thought she was go to enjoy herself tremendously. 
nothing of the kind. they had hardly said "good morning," when old mrs. 
murry began to talk about kew gardens, and how beautiful it must be 
there, and how much more convenient it was than hampton, and no expense 
at all; just the trouble of walking over the bridge. then she went on 
to say, as they were wait for the char-à-banc, that she had always 
heard there was nothing to see at hampton, except a lot of nasty, grimy 
old pictures, and some of them not fit for any decent woman, let alone 
girl, to look at, and she wonder why the queen allow such things to 
be shown, putt all kind of notions into girls' head that were light 
enough already; and as she said that she look at alice so 
nastily--horrid old thing--that, as she told me afterwards, alice would 
have slap her face if she hadn't been an elderly woman, and george's 
mother. then she talk about kew again, saying how wonderful the 
hot-houses were, with palm and all sort of wonderful things, and a 
lily as big as a parlour table, and the view over the river. george was 
very good, alice told me. he was quite taken aback at first, as the old 
woman had promise faithfully to be as nice as ever she could be; but 
then he said, gently but firmly, "well, mother, we must go to kew some 
other day, as alice has set her heart on hampton for to-day, and i want 
to see it myself!" all mrs. murry did was to snort, and look at the girl 
like vinegar, and just then the char-à-banc came up, and they had to 
scramble for their seats. mrs. murry grumble to herself in an 
indistinct sort of voice all the way to hampton court. alice couldn't 
very well make out what she said, but now and then she seem to hear 
bit of sentences, like: _pity to grow old, if son grow bold_; and 
_honour thy father and mother_; and _lie on the shelf, said the 
housewife to the old shoe, and the wicked son to his mother_; and _i 
gave you milk and you give me the go-by_. alice thought they must be 
proverbs (except the commandment, of course), as george was always 
saying how old-fashioned his mother is; but she say there were so many 
of them, and all pointed at her and george, that she think now mrs. 
murry must have made them up as they drove along. she say it would be 
just like her to do it, being old-fashioned, and ill-natured too, and 
fuller of talk than a butcher on saturday night. well, they got to 
hampton at last, and alice thought the place would please her, perhaps, 
and they might have some enjoyment. but she did nothing but grumble, and 
out loud too, so that people look at them, and a woman said, so that 
they could hear, "ah well, they'll be old themselves some day," which 
made alice very angry, for, as she said, they weren't do anything. 
when they show her the chestnut avenue in bushey park, she said it was 
so long and straight that it made her quite dull to look at it, and she 
thought the deer (you know how pretty they are, really) look thin and 
miserable, as if they would be all the better for a good feed of 
hog-wash, with plenty of meal in it. she said she knew they weren't 
happy by the look in their eyes, which seem to tell her that their 
keeper beat them. it was the same with everything; she said she 
remember market-gardens in hammersmith and gunnersbury that had a 
better show of flowers, and when they took her to the place where the 
water is, under the trees, she burst out with its being rather hard to 
tramp her off her leg to show her a common canal, with not so much as a 
barge on it to liven it up a bit. she went on like that the whole day, 
and alice told me she was only too thankful to get home and get rid of 
her. wasn't it wretched for the girl?' 

'it must have been, indeed. but what happen last sunday?' 

'that's the most extraordinary thing of all. i notice that alice was 
rather queer in her manner this morning; she was a long time washing 
up the breakfast things, and she answer me quite sharp when i call 
to her to ask when she would be ready to help me with the wash; and when 
i went into the kitchen to see about something, i notice that she was 
go about her work in a sulky sort of way. so i ask her what was the 
matter, and then it all came out. i could scarcely believe my own ear 
when she mumble out something about mrs. murry thinking she could do 
very much better for herself; but i ask her one question after another 
till i had it all out of her. it just show one how foolish and 
empty-headed these girl are. i told her she was no better than a 
weather-cock. if you will believe me, that horrid old woman was quite 
another person when alice went to see her the other night. why, i can't 
think, but so she was. she told the girl how pretty she was; what a neat 
figure she had; how well she walked; and how she'd known many a girl not 
half so clever or well-looking earn her twenty-five or thirty pound 
a year, and with good families. she seem to have gone into all sort of 
details, and made elaborate calculation as to what she would be able to 
save, "with decent folks, who don't screw, and pinch, and lock up 
everything in the house," and then she went off into a lot of 
hypocrite nonsense about how fond she was of alice, and how she 
could go to her grave in peace, knowing how happy her dear george would 
be with such a good wife, and about her savings from good wages helping 
to set up a little home, ending up with "and, if you take an old woman's 
advice, deary, it won't be long before you hear the marriage bells."' 

'i see,' said darnell; 'and the upshot of it all is, i suppose, that the 
girl is thorough dissatisfied?' 

'yes, she is so young and silly. i talk to her, and remind her of 
how nasty old mrs. murry had been, and told her that she might change 
her place and change for the worse. i think i have persuade her to 
think it over quietly, at all events. do you know what it is, edward? i 
have an idea. i believe that wicked old woman is try to get alice to 
leave us, that she may tell her son how changeable she is; and i suppose 
she would make up some of her stupid old proverbs: "a changeable wife, a 
troublesome life," or some nonsense of the kind. horrid old thing!' 

'well, well,' said darnell, 'i hope she won't go, for your sake. it 
would be such a bother for you, hunting for a fresh servant.' 

he refill his pipe and smoke placidly, refresh somewhat after the 
empty and the burden of the day. the france window was wide open, 
and now at last there came a breath of quicken air, distill by the 
night from such tree as still wore green in that arid valley. the song 
to which darnell had listen in rapture, and now the breeze, which even 
in that dry, grim suburb still bore the word of the woodland, had 
summon the dream to his eyes, and he meditate over matter that his 
lip could not express. 

'she must, indeed, be a villainous old woman,' he said at length. 

'old mrs. murry? of course she is; the mischievous old thing! try to 
take the girl from a comfortable place where she is happy.' 

'yes; and not to like hampton court! that show how bad she must be, 
more than anything.' 

'it is beautiful, isn't it?' 

'i shall never forget the first time i saw it. it was soon after i went 
into the city; the first year. i had my holiday in july, and i was 
get such a small salary that i couldn't think of go away to the 
seaside, or anything like that. i remember one of the other men want 
me to come with him on a walking tour in kent. i should have like that, 
but the money wouldn't run to it. and do you know what i did? i live in 
great college street then, and the first day i was off, i stay in bed 
till past dinner-time, and lounge about in an arm-chair with a pipe all 
the afternoon. i had got a new kind of tobacco--one and four for the 
two-ounce packet--much dear than i could afford to smoke, and i was 
enjoy it immensely. it was awfully hot, and when i shut the window 
and drew down the red blind it grew hotter; at five o'clock the room was 
like an oven. but i was so pleased at not have to go into the city, 
that i didn't mind anything, and now and again i read bit from a queer 
old book that had belong to my poor dad. i couldn't make out what a 
lot of it meant, but it fitted in somehow, and i read and smoke till 
tea-time. then i went out for a walk, thinking i should be better for a 
little fresh air before i went to bed; and i went wandering away, not 
much notice where i was going, turning here and there as the fancy 
took me. i must have gone mile and miles, and a good many of them round 
and round, as they say they do in australia if they lose their way in 
the bush; and i am sure i couldn't have gone exactly the same way all 
over again for any money. anyhow, i was still in the street when the 
twilight came on, and the lamp-lighters were trot round from one 
lamp to another. it was a wonderful night: i wish you had been there, my 
dear.' 

'i was quite a little girl then.' 

'yes, i suppose you were. well, it was a wonderful night. i remember, i 
was walking in a little street of little grey house all alike, with 
stucco coping and stucco door-posts; there were brass plate on a lot 
of the doors, and one had "maker of shell boxes" on it, and i was quite 
pleased, as i had often wonder where those box and things that you 
buy at the seaside came from. a few children were play about in the 
road with some rubbish or other, and men were singing in a small 
public-house at the corner, and i happen to look up, and i notice 
what a wonderful colour the sky had turned. i have seen it since, but i 
don't think it has ever been quite what it was that night, a dark blue, 
glowing like a violet, just as they say the sky looks in foreign 
countries. i don't know why, but the sky or something made me feel quite 
queer; everything seem change in a way i couldn't understand. i 
remember, i told an old gentleman i knew then--a friend of my poor 
father's, he's been dead for five years, if not more--about how i felt, 
and he look at me and said something about fairyland; i don't know 
what he meant, and i dare say i didn't explain myself properly. but, do 
you know, for a moment or two i felt as if that little back street was 
beautiful, and the noise of the children and the men in the public-house 
seem to fit in with the sky and become part of it. you know that old 
saying about "treading on air" when one is glad! well, i really felt 
like that as i walked, not exactly like air, you know, but as if the 
pavement was velvet or some very soft carpet. and then--i suppose it was 
all my fancy--the air seem to smell sweet, like the incense in 
catholic churches, and my breath came queer and catchy, as it do when 
one get very excited about anything. i felt altogether stranger than 
i've ever felt before or since.' 

darnell stop sudden and look up at his wife. she was watch him 
with part lips, with eager, wonder eyes. 

'i hope i'm not tire you, dear, with all this story about nothing. you 
have had a worry day with that stupid girl; hadn't you better go to 
bed?' 

'oh, no, please, edward. i'm not a bit tired now. i love to hear you 
talk like that. please go on.' 

'well, after i had walk a bit further, that queer sort of feeling 
seem to fade away. i said a bit further, and i really thought i had 
been walking about five minutes, but i had look at my watch just 
before i got into that little street, and when i look at it again it 
was eleven o'clock. i must have done about eight miles. i could scarcely 
believe my own eyes, and i thought my watch must have gone mad; but i 
found out afterwards it was perfectly right. i couldn't make it out, and 
i can't now; i assure you the time pass as if i walk up one side of 
edna road and down the other. but there i was, right in the open 
country, with a cool wind blow on me from a wood, and the air full of 
soft rustling sounds, and note of bird from the bushes, and the 
singing noise of a little brook that ran under the road. i was standing 
on the bridge when i took out my watch and struck a wax light to see the 
time; and it came upon me sudden what a strange evening it had been. 
it was all so different, you see, to what i had been do all my life, 
particularly for the year before, and it almost seem as if i couldn't 
be the man who had been go into the city every day in the morning and 
coming back from it every evening after writing a lot of uninterest 
letters. it was like being pitch all of a sudden from one world into 
another. well, i found my way back somehow or other, and as i went along 
i made up my mind how i'd spend my holiday. i said to myself, "i'll have 
a walking tour as well as ferrars, only mine is to be a tour of london 
and its environs," and i had got it all settled when i let myself into 
the house about four o'clock in the morning, and the sun was shining, 
and the street almost as still as the wood at midnight!' 

'i think that was a capital idea of yours. did you have your tour? did 
you buy a map of london?' 

'i had the tour all right. i didn't buy a map; that would have spoilt 
it, somehow; to see everything plot out, and named, and measured. 
what i want was to feel that i was go where nobody had been before. 
that's nonsense, isn't it? as if there could be any such place in 
london, or england either, for the matter of that.' 

'i know what you mean; you want to feel as if you were go on a sort 
of voyage of discovery. isn't that it?' 

'exactly, that's what i was try to tell you. besides, i didn't want 
to buy a map. i made a map.' 

'how do you mean? did you make a map out of your head?' 

'i'll tell you about it afterwards. but do you really want to hear about 
my grand tour?' 

'of course i do; it must have been delightful. i call it a most original 
idea.' 

'well, i was quite full of it, and what you said just now about a voyage 
of discovery remind me of how i felt then. when i was a boy i was 
awfully fond of reading of great travellers--i suppose all boys are--and 
of sailor who were driven out of their course and found themselves in 
latitudes where no ship had ever sail before, and of people who 
discover wonderful city in strange countries; and all the second day 
of my holiday i was feeling just as i use to when i read these books. 
i didn't get up till pretty late. i was tired to death after all those 
mile i had walked; but when i had finished my breakfast and fill my 
pipe, i had a grand time of it. it was such nonsense, you know; as if 
there could be anything strange or wonderful in london.' 

'why shouldn't there be?' 

'well, i don't know; but i have thought afterwards what a silly lad i 
must have been. anyhow, i had a great day of it, plan what i would 
do, half making-believe--just like a kid--that i didn't know where i 
might find myself, or what might happen to me. and i was enormously 
pleased to think it was all my secret, that nobody else knew anything 
about it, and that, whatever i might see, i would keep to myself. i had 
always felt like that about the books. of course, i love reading them, 
but it seem to me that, if i had been a discoverer, i would have kept 
my discovery a secret. if i had been columbus, and, if it could 
possibly have been managed, i would have found america all by myself, 
and never have said a word about it to anybody. fancy! how beautiful it 
would be to be walking about in one's own town, and talk to people, 
and all the while to have the thought that one knew of a great world 
beyond the seas, that nobody else dream of. i should have love that! 

'and that is exactly what i felt about the tour i was go to make. i 
made up my mind that nobody should know; and so, from that day to this, 
nobody has heard a word of it.' 

'but you are go to tell me?' 

'you are different. but i don't think even you will hear everything; not 
because i won't, but because i can't tell many of the things i saw.' 

'things you saw? then you really did see wonderful, strange things in 
london?' 

'well, i did and i didn't. everything, or pretty nearly everything, that 
i saw is standing still, and hundred of thousand of people have look 
at the same sights--there were many place that the fellow in the 
office knew quite well, i found out afterwards. and then i read a book 
call "london and its surroundings." but (i don't know how it is) 
neither the men at the office nor the writer of the book seem to have 
seen the things that i did. that's why i stop reading the book; it 
seem to take the life, the real heart, out of everything, making it as 
dry and stupid as the stuff bird in a museum. 

'i thought about what i was go to do all that day, and went to bed 
early, so as to be fresh. i knew wonderful little about london, 
really; though, except for an odd week now and then, i had spent all my 
life in town. of course i knew the main streets--the strand, regent 
street, oxford street, and so on--and i knew the way to the school i 
use to go to when i was a boy, and the way into the city. but i had 
just kept to a few tracks, as they say the sheep do on the mountains; 
and that made it all the easy for me to imagine that i was go to 
discover a new world.' 

darnell pause in the stream of his talk. he look keen at his wife 
to see if he were weary her, but her eyes gaze at him with unabated 
interest--one would have almost said that they were the eyes of one who 
long and half expect to be initiate into the mysteries, who knew 
not what great wonder was to be revealed. she sat with her back to the 
open window, frame in the sweet dusk of the night, as if a painter had 
made a curtain of heavy velvet behind her; and the work that she had 
been do had fallen to the floor. she support her head with her two 
hand placed on each side of her brow, and her eyes were as the well in 
the wood of which darnell dream in the night-time and in the day. 

'and all the strange tale i had ever heard were in my head that 
morning,' he went on, as if continue the thought that had fill his 
mind while his lip were silent. 'i had gone to bed early, as i told 
you, to get a thorough rest, and i had set my alarum clock to wake me 
at three, so that i might set out at an hour that was quite strange for 
the beginning of a journey. there was a hush in the world when i awoke, 
before the clock had rung to arouse me, and then a bird began to sing 
and twitter in the elm tree that grew in the next garden, and i look 
out of the window, and everything was still, and the morning air 
breathe in pure and sweet, as i had never known it before. my room was 
at the back of the house, and most of the garden had tree in them, and 
beyond these tree i could see the back of the house of the next 
street rising like the wall of an old city; and as i look the sun 
rose, and the great light came in at my window, and the day began. 

'and i found that when i was once out of the street just about me that 
i knew, some of the queer feeling that had come to me two days before 
came back again. it was not nearly so strong, the street no long 
smelt of incense, but still there was enough of it to show me what a 
strange world i pass by. there were things that one may see again and 
again in many london streets: a vine or a fig tree on a wall, a lark 
singing in a cage, a curious shrub blossom in a garden, an odd shape 
of a roof, or a balcony with an uncommon-looking trellis-work in iron. 
there's scarcely a street, perhaps, where you won't see one or other of 
such things as these; but that morning they rose to my eyes in a new 
light, as if i had on the magic spectacles in the fairy tale, and just 
like the man in the fairy tale, i went on and on in the new light. i 
remember go through wild land on a high place; there were pools of 
water shining in the sun, and great white house in the middle of dark, 
rock pines, and then on the turn of the height i came to a little 
lane that went aside from the main road, a lane that led to a wood, and 
in the lane was a little old shadow house, with a bell turret in the 
roof, and a porch of trellis-work all dim and fade into the colour of 
the sea; and in the garden there were grow tall, white lilies, just 
as we saw them that day we went to look at the old pictures; they were 
shining like silver, and they fill the air with their sweet scent. it 
was from near that house i saw the valley and high place far away in 
the sun. so, as i say, i went "on and on," by wood and fields, till i 
came to a little town on the top of a hill, a town full of old house 
bowing to the ground beneath their years, and the morning was so still 
that the blue smoke rose up straight into the sky from all the 
roof-tops, so still that i heard far down in the valley the song of a 
boy who was singing an old song through the street as he went to 
school, and as i pass through the awakening town, beneath the old, 
grave houses, the church bell began to ring. 

'it was soon after i had left this town behind me that i found the 
strange road. i saw it branch off from the dusty high road, and it 
look so green that i turn aside into it, and soon i felt as if i had 
really come into a new country. i don't know whether it was one of the 
road the old roman made that my father use to tell me about; but it 
was cover with deep, soft turf, and the great tall hedge on each side 
look as if they had not been touched for a hundred years; they had 
grown so broad and high and wild that they met overhead, and i could 
only get glimpse here and there of the country through which i was 
passing, as one pass in a dream. the strange road led me on and on, 
up and down hill; sometimes the rose bush had grown so thick that i 
could scarcely make my way between them, and sometimes the road 
broaden out into a green, and in one valley a brook, span by an old 
wooden bridge, ran across it. i was tired, and i found a soft and shady 
place beneath an ash tree, where i must have slept for many hours, for 
when i woke up it was late in the afternoon. so i went on again, and at 
last the green road came out into the highway, and i look up and saw 
another town on a high place with a great church in the middle of it, 
and when i went up to it there was a great organ sound from within, 
and the choir was singing.' 

there was a rapture in darnell's voice as he spoke, that made his story 
well-nigh swell into a song, and he drew a long breath as the words 
ended, fill with the thought of that far-off summer day, when some 
enchantment had informed all common things, transmute them into a 
great sacrament, cause earthly works to glow with the fire and the 
glory of the everlasting light. 

and some splendour of that light shone on the face of mary as she sat 
still against the sweet gloom of the night, her dark hair making her 
face more radiant. she was silent for a little while, and then she 
spoke-- 

'oh, my dear, why have you wait so long to tell me these wonderful 
things? i think it is beautiful. please go on.' 

'i have always been afraid it was all nonsense,' said darnell. 'and i 
don't know how to explain what i feel. i didn't think i could say so 
much as i have to-night.' 

'and did you find it the same day after day?' 

'all through the tour? yes, i think every journey was a success. of 
course, i didn't go so far afield every day; i was too tired. often i 
rest all day long, and went out in the evening, after the lamp were 
lit, and then only for a mile or two. i would roam about old, dim 
squares, and hear the wind from the hill whisper in the trees; and 
when i knew i was within call of some great glittering street, i was 
sunk in the silence of ways where i was almost the only passenger, and 
the lamp were so few and faint that they seem to give out shadow 
instead of light. and i would walk slowly, to and fro, perhaps for an 
hour at a time, in such dark streets, and all the time i felt what i 
told you about its being my secret--that the shadow, and the dim lights, 
and the cool of the evening, and tree that were like dark low cloud 
were all mine, and mine alone, that i was living in a world that nobody 
else knew of, into which no one could enter. 

'i remember one night i had gone farther. it was somewhere in the far 
west, where there are orchard and gardens, and great broad lawn that 
slope down to tree by the river. a great red moon rose that night 
through mists of sunset, and thin, filmy clouds, and i wander by a 
road that pass through the orchards, till i came to a little hill, 
with the moon showing above it glowing like a great rose. then i saw 
figures pass between me and the moon, one by one, in a long line, each 
bent double, with great pack upon their shoulders. one of them was 
singing, and then in the middle of the song i heard a horrible shrill 
laugh, in the thin cracked voice of a very old woman, and they 
disappear into the shadow of the trees. i suppose they were people 
go to work, or coming from work in the gardens; but how like it was 
to a nightmare! 

'i can't tell you about hampton; i should never finish talking. i was 
there one evening, not long before they closed the gates, and there were 
very few people about. but the grey-red, silent, echo courts, and the 
flower fall into dreamland as the night came on, and the dark yew 
and shadowy-looking statues, and the far, still stretch of water 
beneath the avenues; and all melting into a blue mist, all being hidden 
from one's eyes, slowly, surely, as if veil were dropped, one by one, 
on a great ceremony! oh! my dear, what could it mean? far away, across 
the river, i heard a soft bell ring three times, and three times, and 
again three times, and i turn away, and my eyes were full of tears. 

'i didn't know what it was when i came to it; i only found out 
afterwards that it must have been hampton court. one of the men in the 
office told me he had taken an a. b. c. girl there, and they had great 
fun. they got into the maze and couldn't get out again, and then they 
went on the river and were nearly drowned. he told me there were some 
spicy pictures in the galleries; his girl shriek with laughter, so he 
said.' 

mary quite disregard this interlude. 

'but you told me you had made a map. what was it like?' 

'i'll show it you some day, if you want to see it. i marked down all the 
place i had gone to, and made signs--things like queer letters--to 
remind me of what i had seen. nobody but myself could understand it. i 
want to draw pictures, but i never learnt how to draw, so when i try 
nothing was like what i want it to be. i try to draw a picture of 
that town on the hill that i came to on the evening of the first day; i 
want to make a steep hill with house on top, and in the middle, but 
high above them, the great church, all spire and pinnacles, and above 
it, in the air, a cup with ray coming from it. but it wasn't a success. 
i made a very strange sign for hampton court, and gave it a name that i 
made up out of my head.' 

the darnell avoid one another's eyes as they sat at breakfast the 
next morning. the air had lighten in the night, for rain had fallen at 
dawn; and there was a bright blue sky, with vast white cloud rolling 
across it from the south-west, and a fresh and joyous wind blew in at 
the open window; the mists had vanished. and with the mists there seem 
to have vanish also the sense of strange things that had possessed 
mary and her husband the night before; and as they look out into the 
clear light they could scarcely believe that the one had spoken and the 
other had listen a few hour before to history very far remove from 
the usual current of their thought and of their lives. they glance 
shy at one another, and spoke of common things, of the question 
whether alice would be corrupt by the insidious mrs. murry, or whether 
mrs. darnell would be able to persuade the girl that the old woman must 
be actuate by the worst motives. 

'and i think, if i were you,' said darnell, as he went out, 'i should 
step over to the stores and complain of their meat. that last piece of 
beef was very far from being up to the mark--full of sinew.' 


iii 

it might have been different in the evening, and darnell had mature a 
plan by which he hope to gain much. he intended to ask his wife if she 
would mind have only one gas, and that a good deal lowered, on the 
pretext that his eyes were tired with work; he thought many things might 
happen if the room were dim lit, and the window opened, so that they 
could sit and watch the night, and listen to the rustling murmur of the 
tree on the lawn. but his plan were made in vain, for when he got to 
the garden gate his wife, in tears, came forth to meet him. 

'oh, edward,' she began, 'such a dreadful thing has happened! i never 
like him much, but i didn't think he would ever do such awful things.' 

'what do you mean? who are you talk about? what has happened? is it 
alice's young man?' 

'no, no. but come in, dear. i can see that woman opposite watch us: 
she's always on the look out.' 

'now, what is it?' said darnell, as they sat down to tea. 'tell me, 
quick! you've quite frightened me.' 

'i don't know how to begin, or where to start. aunt marian has thought 
that there was something queer for weeks. and then she found--oh, well, 
the long and short of it is that uncle robert has been carry on 
dreadfully with some horrid girl, and aunt has found out everything!' 

'lord! you don't say so! the old rascal! why, he must be near seventy 
than sixty!' 

'he's just sixty-five; and the money he has given her----' 

the first shock of surprise over, darnell turn resolute to his 
mince. 

'we'll have it all out after tea,' he said; 'i am not go to have my 
meal spoilt by that old fool of a nixon. fill up my cup, will you, 
dear?' 

'excellent mince this,' he went on, calmly. 'a little lemon juice and a 
bit of ham in it? i thought there was something extra. alice all right 
to-day? that's good. i expect she's get over all that nonsense.' 

he went on calm chatter in a manner that astonish mrs. darnell, 
who felt that by the fall of uncle robert the natural order had been 
inverted, and had scarcely touched food since the intelligence had 
arrive by the second post. she had start out to keep the appointment 
her aunt had made early in the morning, and had spent most of the day in 
a first-class waiting-room at victoria station, where she had heard all 
the story. 

'now,' said darnell, when the table had been cleared, 'tell us all about 
it. how long has it been go on?' 

'aunt think now, from little things she remembers, that it must have 
been go on for a year at least. she say there has been a horrid kind 
of mystery about uncle's behaviour for a long time, and her nerves were 
quite shaken, as she thought he must be involved with anarchists, or 
something dreadful of the sort.' 

'what on earth made her think that?' 

'well, you see, once or twice when she was out walking with her husband, 
she has been startle by whistles, which seem to follow them 
everywhere. you know there are some nice country walk at barnet, and 
one in particular, in the field near totteridge, that uncle and aunt 
rather made a point of go to on fine sunday evenings. of course, this 
was not the first thing she noticed, but, at the time, it made a great 
impression on her mind; she could hardly get a wink of sleep for week 
and weeks.' 

'whistling?' said darnell. 'i don't quite understand. why should she be 
frightened by whistling?' 

'i'll tell you. the first time it happen was one sunday in last may. 
aunt had a fancy they were being follow a sunday or two before, but 
she didn't see or hear anything, except a sort of crackling noise in the 
hedge. but this particular sunday they had hardly got through the stile 
into the fields, when she heard a peculiar kind of low whistle. she took 
no notice, thinking it was no concern of hers or her husband's, but as 
they went on she heard it again, and then again, and it follow them 
the whole walk, and it made her so uncomfortable, because she didn't 
know where it was coming from or who was do it, or why. then, just as 
they got out of the field into the lane, uncle said he felt quite 
faint, and he thought he would try a little brandy at the "turpin's 
head," a small public-house there is there. and she look at him and 
saw his face was quite purple--more like apoplexy, as she says, than 
faint fits, which make people look a sort of greenish-white. but she 
said nothing, and thought perhaps uncle had a peculiar way of faint 
of his own, as he always was a man to have his own way of do 
everything. so she just wait in the road, and he went ahead and 
slip into the public, and aunt say she thought she saw a little 
figure rise out of the dusk and slip in after him, but she couldn't be 
sure. and when uncle came out he look red instead of purple, and said 
he felt much better; and so they went home quiet together, and nothing 
more was said. you see, uncle had said nothing about the whistling, and 
aunt had been so frightened that she didn't dare speak, for fear they 
might be both shot. 

'she wasn't thinking anything more about it, when two sunday afterwards 
the very same thing happen just as it had before. this time aunt 
pluck up a spirit, and ask uncle what it could be. and what do you 
think he said? "birds, my dear, birds." of course aunt said to him that 
no bird that ever flew with wings made a noise like that: sly, and low, 
with pause in between; and then he said that many rare sort of bird 
live in north middlesex and hertfordshire. "nonsense, robert," said 
aunt, "how can you talk so, considering it has follow us all the way, 
for a mile or more?" and then uncle told her that some bird were so 
attach to man that they would follow one about for mile sometimes; he 
said he had just been reading about a bird like that in a book of 
travels. and do you know that when they got home he actually show her 
a piece in the "hertfordshire naturalist" which they took in to oblige a 
friend of theirs, all about rare bird found in the neighbourhood, all 
the most outlandish names, aunt says, that she had never heard or 
thought of, and uncle had the impudence to say that it must have been a 
purple sandpiper, which, the paper said, had "a low shrill note, 
constant repeated." and then he took down a book of siberian travels 
from the bookcase and show her a page which told how a man was 
follow by a bird all day long through a forest. and that's what aunt 
marian say vex her more than anything almost; to think that he should 
be so artful and ready with those books, twist them to his own wicked 
ends. but, at the time, when she was out walking, she simply couldn't 
make out what he meant by talk about bird in that random, silly sort 
of way, so unlike him, and they went on, that horrible whistle 
following them, she look straight ahead and walking fast, really 
feeling more huffy and put out than frightened. and when they got to the 
next stile, she got over and turn round, and "lo and behold," as she 
says, there was no uncle robert to be seen! she felt herself go quite 
white with alarm, thinking of that whistle, and making sure he'd been 
spirited away or snatch in some way or another, and she had just 
scream out "robert" like a mad woman, when he came quite slow round 
the corner, as cool as a cucumber, holding something in his hand. he 
said there were some flower he could never pass, and when aunt saw that 
he had got a dandelion torn up by the roots, she felt as if her head 
were go round.' 

mary's story was sudden interrupted. for ten minutes darnell had been 
writhe in his chair, suffering torture in his anxiety to avoid 
wound his wife's feelings, but the episode of the dandelion was too 
much for him, and he burst into a long, wild shriek of laughter, 
aggravate by suppression into the semblance of a red indian's 
war-whoop. alice, who was washing-up in the scullery, drop some three 
shillings' worth of china, and the neighbour ran out into their garden 
wonder if it were murder. mary gaze reproachful at her husband. 

'how can you be so unfeeling, edward?' she said, at length, when 
darnell had pass into the feeble of exhaustion. 'if you had seen 
the tear rolling down poor aunt marian's cheek as she told me, i don't 
think you would have laughed. i didn't think you were so hard-hearted.' 

'my dear mary,' said darnell, faintly, through sob and catching of the 
breath, 'i am awfully sorry. i know it's very sad, really, and i'm not 
unfeeling; but it is such an odd tale, now, isn't it? the sandpiper, you 
know, and then the dandelion!' 

his face twitch and he ground his teeth together. mary look grave 
at him for a moment, and then she put her hand to her face, and darnell 
could see that she also shook with merriment. 

'i am as bad as you,' she said, at last. 'i never thought of it in that 
way. i'm glad i didn't, or i should have laugh in aunt marian's face, 
and i wouldn't have done that for the world. poor old thing; she cry 
as if her heart would break. i met her at victoria, as she ask me, and 
we had some soup at a confectioner's. i could scarcely touch it; her 
tear kept drop into the plate all the time; and then we went to the 
waiting-room at the station, and she cry there terribly.' 

'well,' said darnell, 'what happen next? i won't laugh any more.' 

'no, we mustn't; it's much too horrible for a joke. well, of course aunt 
went home and wonder and wonder what could be the matter, and try 
to think it out, but, as she says, she could make nothing of it. she 
began to be afraid that uncle's brain was give way through overwork, 
as he had stop in the city (as he said) up to all hour lately, and 
he had to go to yorkshire (wicked old story-teller!), about some very 
tiresome business connected with his leases. but then she reflect that 
however queer he might be getting, even his queer couldn't make 
whistle in the air, though, as she said, he was always a wonderful man. 
so she had to give that up; and then she wonder if there were anything 
the matter with her, as she had read about people who heard noise when 
there was really nothing at all. but that wouldn't do either, because 
though it might account for the whistling, it wouldn't account for the 
dandelion or the sandpiper, or for faint fit that turn purple, or 
any of uncle's queerness. so aunt said she could think of nothing but to 
read the bible every day from the beginning, and by the time she got 
into chronicle she felt rather better, especially as nothing had 
happen for three or four sundays. she notice uncle seem 
absent-minded, and not as nice to her as he might be, but she put that 
down to too much work, as he never came home before the last train, and 
had a hansom twice all the way, get there between three and four in 
the morning. still, she felt it was no good bother her head over what 
couldn't be made out or explain anyway, and she was just settle 
down, when one sunday evening it began all over again, and worse things 
happened. the whistle follow them just as it did before, and poor 
aunt set her teeth and said nothing to uncle, as she knew he would only 
tell her stories, and they were walking on, not saying a word, when 
something made her look back, and there was a horrible boy with red 
hair, peep through the hedge just behind, and grinning. she said it 
was a dreadful face, with something unnatural about it, as if it had 
been a dwarf, and before she had time to have a good look, it pop 
back like lightning, and aunt all but faint away.' 

'a red-headed _boy_?' said darnell. 'i thought----what an extraordinary 
story this is. i've never heard of anything so queer. who was the boy?' 

'you will know in good time,' said mrs. darnell. 'it _is_ very strange, 
isn't it?' 

'strange!' darnell ruminate for a while. 

'i know what i think, mary,' he said at length. 'i don't believe a word 
of it. i believe your aunt is go mad, or has gone mad, and that she 
has delusions. the whole thing sound to me like the invention of a 
lunatic.' 

'you are quite wrong. every word is true, and if you will let me go on, 
you will understand how it all happened.' 

'very good, go ahead.' 

'let me see, where was i? oh, i know, aunt saw the boy grin in the 
hedge. yes, well, she was dreadfully frightened for a minute or two; 
there was something so queer about the face, but then she pluck up a 
spirit and said to herself, "after all, better a boy with red hair than 
a big man with a gun," and she made up her mind to watch uncle robert 
closely, as she could see by his look he knew all about it; he seem as 
if he were thinking hard and puzzle over something, as if he didn't 
know what to do next, and his mouth kept opening and shutting, like a 
fish's. so she kept her face straight, and didn't say a word, and when 
he said something to her about the fine sunset, she took no notice. 
"don't you hear what i say, marian?" he said, speak quite crossly, 
and bellow as if it were to somebody in the next field. so aunt said 
she was very sorry, but her cold made her so deaf, she couldn't hear 
much. she notice uncle look quite pleased, and relieved too, and she 
knew he thought she hadn't heard the whistling. sudden uncle pretended 
to see a beautiful spray of honeysuckle high up in the hedge, and he 
said he must get it for aunt, only she must go on ahead, as it made him 
nervous to be watched. she said she would, but she just step aside 
behind a bush where there was a sort of cover in the hedge, and found 
she could see him quite well, though she scratch her face terribly 
with poke it into a rose bush. and in a minute or two out came the boy 
from behind the hedge, and she saw uncle and him talking, and she knew 
it was the same boy, as it wasn't dark enough to hide his flaming red 
head. and uncle put out his hand as if to catch him, but he just dart 
into the bush and vanished. aunt never said a word at the time, but 
that night when they got home she charged uncle with what she'd seen and 
ask him what it all meant. he was quite taken aback at first, and 
stammer and stutter and said a spy wasn't his notion of a good wife, 
but at last he made her swear secrecy, and told her that he was a very 
high freemason, and that the boy was an emissary of the order who 
brought him message of the greatest importance. but aunt didn't believe 
a word of it, as an uncle of hers was a mason, and he never behave like 
that. it was then she began to be afraid that it was really anarchists, 
or something of the kind, and every time the bell rang she thought that 
uncle had been found out, and the police had come for him.' 

'what nonsense! as if a man with house property would be an anarchist.' 

'well, she could see there must be some horrible secret, and she didn't 
know what else to think. and then she began to have the things through 
the post.' 

'things through the post! what do you mean by that?' 

'all sort of things; bit of broken bottle-glass, packed careful as 
if it were jewellery; parcel that unroll and unroll worse than 
china boxes, and then had "cat" in large letters when you came to the 
middle; old artificial teeth, a cake of red paint, and at last 
cockroaches.' 

'cockroaches by post! stuff and nonsense; your aunt's mad.' 

'edward, she show me the box; it was made to hold cigarettes, and 
there were three dead cockroach inside. and when she found a box of 
exactly the same kind, half-full of cigarettes, in uncle's great-coat 
pocket, then her head began to turn again.' 

darnell groaned, and stir uneasy in his chair, feeling that the 
tale of aunt marian's domestic trouble was putt on the semblance of 
an evil dream. 

'anything else?' he asked. 

'my dear, i haven't repeated half the things poor aunt told me this 
afternoon. there was the night she thought she saw a ghost in the 
shrubbery. she was anxious about some chicken that were just due to 
hatch out, so she went out after dark with some egg and bread-crumbs, in 
case they might be out. and just before her she saw a figure gliding by 
the rhododendrons. it look like a short, slim man dress as they 
use to be hundred of years ago; she saw the sword by his side, and 
the feather in his cap. she thought she should have died, she said, and 
though it was gone in a minute, and she try to make out it was all her 
fancy, she faint when she got into the house. uncle was at home that 
night, and when she came to and told him he ran out, and stay out for 
half-an-hour or more, and then came in and said he could find nothing; 
and the next minute aunt heard that low whistle just outside the window, 
and uncle ran out again.' 

'my dear mary, do let us come to the point. what on earth do it all 
lead to?' 

'haven't you guessed? why, of course it was that girl all the time.' 

'girl? i thought you said it was a boy with a red head?' 

'don't you see? she's an actress, and she dress up. she won't leave 
uncle alone. it wasn't enough that he was with her nearly every evening 
in the week, but she must be after him on sunday too. aunt found a 
letter the horrid thing had written, and so it has all come out. enid 
vivian she call herself, though i don't suppose she has any right to 
one name or the other. and the question is, what is to be done?' 

'let us talk of that again. i'll have a pipe, and then we'll go to bed.' 

they were almost asleep when mary said suddenly-- 

'doesn't it seem queer, edward? last night you were telling me such 
beautiful things, and to-night i have been talk about that 
disgraceful old man and his goings on.' 

'i don't know,' answer darnell, dreamily. 'on the wall of that great 
church upon the hill i saw all kind of strange grin monsters, 
carve in stone.' 

the misdemeanour of mr. robert nixon brought in their train 
consequence strange beyond imagination. it was not that they continue 
to develop on the somewhat fantastic lines of these first adventure 
which mrs. darnell had related; indeed, when 'aunt marian' came over to 
shepherd's bush, one sunday afternoon, darnell wonder how he had had 
the heart to laugh at the misfortune of a broken-hearted woman. 

he had never seen his wife's aunt before, and he was strange surprise 
when alice show her into the garden where they were sitting on the 
warm and misty sunday in september. to him, save during these latter 
days, she had always been associate with idea of splendour and 
success: his wife had always mention the nixon with a tinge of 
reverence; he had heard, many times, the epic of mr. nixon's struggle 
and of his slow but triumphant rise. mary had told the story as she had 
received it from her parents, beginning with the flight to london from 
some small, dull, and unprosperous town in the flattest of the midlands, 
long ago, when a young man from the country had great chance of 
fortune. robert nixon's father had been a grocer in the high street, and 
in after days the successful coal merchant and builder love to tell of 
that dull provincial life, and while he glorify his own victories, he 
gave his hearer to understand that he came of a race which had also 
known how to achieve. that had been long ago, he would explain: in the 
days when that rare citizen who desire to go to london or to york was 
forced to rise in the dead of night, and make his way, somehow or other, 
by ten mile of quagmirish, wandering lane to the great north road, 
there to meet the 'lightning' coach, a vehicle which stood to all the 
countryside as the visible and tangible embodiment of tremendous 
speed--'and indeed,' as nixon would add, 'it was always up to time, 
which is more than can be said of the dunham branch line nowadays!' it 
was in this ancient dunham that the nixon had wage successful trade 
for perhaps a hundred years, in a shop with bulge bay window look 
on the market-place. there was no competition, and the townsfolk, and 
well-to-do farmers, the clergy and the country families, look upon the 
house of nixon as an institution fixed as the town hall (which stood on 
roman pillars) and the parish church. but the change came: the railway 
crept near and nearer, the farmer and the country gentry became less 
well-to-do; the tanning, which was the local industry, suffer from a 
great business which had been establish in a large town, some twenty 
mile away, and the profit of the nixon grew less and less. hence the 
hegira of robert, and he would dilate on the poorness of his beginnings, 
how he saved, by little and little, from his sorry wage of city clerk, 
and how he and a fellow clerk, 'who had come into a hundred pounds,' saw 
an opening in the coal trade--and fill it. it was at this stage of 
robert's fortunes, still far from magnificent, that miss marian reynolds 
had encounter him, she being on a visit to friends in gunnersbury. 
afterwards, victory follow victory; nixon's wharf became a landmark to 
bargemen; his power stretch abroad, his dusky fleet went outwards to 
the sea, and inward by all the far reach of canals. lime, cement, and 
brick were add to his merchandise, and at last he hit upon the great 
stroke--that extensive taking up of land in the north of london. nixon 
himself ascribe this _coup_ to native sagacity, and the possession of 
capital; and there were also obscure rumour to the effect that some one 
or other had been 'done' in the course of the transaction. however that 
might be, the nixon grew wealthy to excess, and mary had often told her 
husband of the state in which they dwelt, of their liveried servants, of 
the glory of their drawing-room, of their broad lawn, shadow by a 
splendid and ancient cedar. and so darnell had somehow been led into 
conceive the lady of this demesne as a personage of no small pomp. he 
saw her, tall, of dignified port and presence, inclining, it might be, 
to some measure of obesity, such a measure as was not unbefitt in an 
elderly lady of position, who live well and live at ease. he even 
imagine a slight ruddy of complexion, which went very well with 
hair that was beginning to turn grey, and when he heard the door-bell 
ring, as he sat under the mulberry on the sunday afternoon, he bent 
forward to catch sight of this stately figure, clad, of course, in the 
richest, blackest silk, girt about with heavy chain of gold. 

he start with amaze when he saw the strange presence that follow 
the servant into the garden. mrs. nixon was a little, thin old woman, 
who bent as she feeble trot after alice; her eyes were on the ground, 
and she did not lift them when the darnell rose to greet her. she 
glance to the right, uneasily, as she shook hand with darnell, to the 
left when mary kiss her, and when she was placed on the garden seat 
with a cushion at her back, she look away at the back of the house in 
the next street. she was dress in black, it was true, but even darnell 
could see that her gown was old and shabby, that the fur trimming of her 
cape and the fur boa which was twist about her neck were dingy and 
disconsolate, and had all the melancholy air which fur wear when it is 
seen in a second-hand clothes-shop in a back street. and her 
gloves--they were black kid, wrinkle with much wear, fade to a bluish 
hue at the finger-tips, which show sign of painful mending. her hair, 
plastered over her forehead, look dull and colourless, though some 
greasy matter had evidently been use with a view of produce a 
becoming gloss, and on it perch an antique bonnet, adorn with black 
pendant that rattle paralytic one against the other. 

and there was nothing in mrs. nixon's face to correspond with the 
imaginary picture that darnell had made of her. she was sallow, 
wrinkled, pinched; her nose ran to a sharp point, and her red-rimmed 
eyes were a queer water-grey, that seem to shrink alike from the light 
and from encounter with the eyes of others. as she sat beside his wife 
on the green garden-seat, darnell, who occupy a wicker-chair brought 
out from the drawing-room, could not help feeling that this shadowy and 
evasive figure, mutter reply to mary's polite questions, was almost 
impossible remote from his conception of the rich and powerful aunt, 
who could give away a hundred pound as a mere birthday gift. she would 
say little at first; yes, she was feeling rather tired, it had been so 
hot all the way, and she had been afraid to put on lighter things as 
one never knew at this time of year what it might be like in the 
evenings; there were apt to be cold mists when the sun went down, and 
she didn't care to risk bronchitis. 

'i thought i should never get here,' she went on, raise her voice to 
an odd querulous pipe. 'i'd no notion it was such an out-of-the-way 
place, it's so many years since i was in this neighbourhood.' 

she wipe her eyes, no doubt thinking of the early days at turnham 
green, when she married nixon; and when the pocket-handkerchief had done 
its office she replace it in a shabby black bag which she clutch 
rather than carried. darnell noticed, as he watch her, that the bag 
seem full, almost to bursting, and he speculate idle as to the nature 
of its contents: correspondence, perhaps, he thought, further proof of 
uncle robert's treacherous and wicked dealings. he grew quite 
uncomfortable, as he sat and saw her glancing all the while furtive 
away from his wife and himself, and presently he got up and stroll 
away to the other end of the garden, where he lit his pipe and walk to 
and fro on the gravel walk, still astound at the gulf between the real 
and the imagine woman. 

presently he heard a hiss whisper, and he saw mrs. nixon's head 
incline to his wife's. mary rose and came towards him. 

'would you mind sitting in the drawing-room, edward?' she murmured. 
'aunt say she can't bring herself to discuss such a delicate matter 
before you. i dare say it's quite natural.' 

'very well, but i don't think i'll go into the drawing-room. i feel as 
if a walk would do me good. you mustn't be frightened if i am a little 
late,' he said; 'if i don't get back before your aunt goes, say good-bye 
to her for me.' 

he stroll into the main road, where the tram were hum to and fro. 
he was still confuse and perplexed, and he try to account for a 
certain relief he felt in remove himself from the presence of mrs. 
nixon. he told himself that her grief at her husband's ruffianly conduct 
was worthy of all pitiful respect, but at the same time, to his shame, 
he had felt a certain physical aversion from her as she sat in his 
garden in her dingy black, dab her red-rimmed eyes with a damp 
pocket-handkerchief. he had been to the zoo when he was a lad, and he 
still remember how he had shrunk with horror at the sight of certain 
reptile slow crawl over one another in their slimy pond. but he 
was enrage at the similarity between the two sensations, and he walk 
brisk on that level and monotonous road, look about him at the 
unhandsome spectacle of suburban london keeping sunday. 

there was something in the tinge of antiquity which still exist in 
acton that soothe his mind and drew it away from those unpleasant 
contemplations, and when at last he had penetrate rampart after rampart 
of brick, and heard no more the harsh shriek and laughter of the people 
who were enjoy themselves, he found a way into a little sheltered 
field, and sat down in peace beneath a tree, whence he could look out on 
a pleasant valley. the sun sank down beneath the hills, the cloud 
change into the likeness of blossom rose-gardens; and he still sat 
there in the gathering dark till a cool breeze blew upon him, and 
he rose with a sigh, and turn back to the brick rampart and the 
glimmer streets, and the noisy idle saunter to and fro in the 
procession of their dismal festival. but he was murmur to himself 
some words that seem a magic song, and it was with uplift heart that 
he let himself into his house. 

mrs. nixon had gone an hour and a half before his return, mary told him. 
darnell sigh with relief, and he and his wife stroll out into the 
garden and sat down side by side. 

they kept silence for a time, and at last mary spoke, not without a 
nervous tremor in her voice. 

'i must tell you, edward,' she began, 'that aunt has made a proposal 
which you ought to hear. i think we should consider it.' 

'a proposal? but how about the whole affair? is it still go on?' 

'oh, yes! she told me all about it. uncle is quite unrepentant. it seem 
he has taken a flat somewhere in town for that woman, and furnish it 
in the most costly manner. he simply laugh at aunt's reproaches, and 
say he means to have some fun at last. you saw how broken she was?' 

'yes; very sad. but won't he give her any money? wasn't she very badly 
dress for a woman in her position?' 

'aunt has no end of beautiful things, but i fancy she likes to hoard 
them; she has a horror of spoil her dresses. it isn't for want of 
money, i assure you, as uncle settled a very large sum on her two years 
ago, when he was everything that could be desire as a husband. and that 
bring me to what i want to say. aunt would like to live with us. she 
would pay very liberally. what do you say?' 

'would like to live with us?' exclaim darnell, and his pipe drop 
from his hand on to the grass. he was stupefy by the thought of aunt 
marian as a boarder, and sat staring vacant before him, wonder what 
new monster the night would next produce. 

'i knew you wouldn't much like the idea,' his wife went on. 'but i do 
think, dearest, that we ought not to refuse without very serious 
consideration. i am afraid you did not take to poor aunt very much.' 

darnell shook his head dumbly. 

'i thought you didn't; she was so upset, poor thing, and you didn't see 
her at her best. she is really so good. but listen to me, dear. do you 
think we have the right to refuse her offer? i told you she has money of 
her own, and i am sure she would be dreadfully offend if we said we 
wouldn't have her. and what would become of me if anything happen to 
you? you know we have very little saved.' 

darnell groaned. 

'it seem to me,' he said, 'that it would spoil everything. we are so 
happy, mary dear, by ourselves. of course i am extremely sorry for your 
aunt. i think she is very much to be pitied. but when it come to have 
her always here----' 

'i know, dear. don't think i am look forward to the prospect; you 
know i don't want anybody but you. still, we ought to think of the 
future, and besides we shall be able to live so very much better. i 
shall be able to give you all sort of nice things that i know you ought 
to have after all that hard work in the city. our income would be 
doubled.' 

'do you mean she would pay us £150 a year?' 

'certainly. and she would pay for the spare room being furnished, and 
any extra she might want. she told me, specially, that if a friend or 
two came now and again to see her, she would gladly bear the cost of a 
fire in the drawing-room, and give something towards the gas bill, with 
a few shilling for the girl for any additional trouble. we should 
certainly be more than twice as well off as we are now. you see, edward, 
dear, it's not the sort of offer we are likely to have again. besides, 
we must think of the future, as i said. do you know aunt took a great 
fancy to you?' 

he shudder and said nothing, and his wife went on with her argument. 

'and, you see, it isn't as if we should see so very much of her. she 
will have her breakfast in bed, and she told me she would often go up to 
her room in the evening directly after dinner. i thought that very nice 
and considerate. she quite understand that we shouldn't like to have a 
third person always with us. don't you think, edward, that, considering 
everything, we ought to say we will have her?' 

'oh, i suppose so,' he groaned. 'as you say, it's a very good offer, 
financially, and i am afraid it would be very imprudent to refuse. but i 
don't like the notion, i confess.' 

'i am so glad you agree with me, dear. depend upon it, it won't be half 
so bad as you think. and putt our own advantage on one side, we shall 
really be do poor aunt a very great kindness. poor old dear, she 
cry bitter after you were gone; she said she had made up her mind 
not to stay any long in uncle robert's house, and she didn't know 
where to go, or what would become of her, if we refuse to take her in. 
she quite broke down.' 

'well, well; we will try it for a year, anyhow. it may be as you say; we 
shan't find it quite so bad as it seem now. shall we go in?' 

he stoop for his pipe, which lay as it had fallen, on the grass. he 
could not find it, and lit a wax match which show him the pipe, and 
close beside it, under the seat, something that look like a page torn 
from a book. he wonder what it could be, and picked it up. 

the gas was lit in the drawing-room, and mrs. darnell, who was arrange 
some notepaper, wish to write at once to mrs. nixon, cordially 
accept her proposal, when she was startle by an exclamation from her 
husband. 

'what is the matter?' she said, startle by the tone of his voice. 'you 
haven't hurt yourself?' 

'look at this,' he replied, hand her a small leaflet; 'i found it 
under the garden seat just now.' 

mary glance with bewilder at her husband and read as follows:-- 

the new and chosen seed of abraham 

prophecy to be fulfill in the present year 

1. the sailing of a fleet of one hundred and forty and four vessel 
for tarshish and the isles. 

2. destruction of the power of the dog, including all the 
instrument of anti-abrahamic legislation. 

3. return of the fleet from tarshish, bearing with it the gold of 
arabia, destined to be the foundation of the new city of abraham. 

4. the search for the bride, and the bestow of the seal on the 
seventy and seven. 

5. the countenance of father to become luminous, but with a greater 
glory than the face of moses. 

6. the pope of rome to be stoned with stone in the valley call 
berek-zittor. 

7. father to be acknowledge by three great rulers. two great ruler 
will deny father, and will immediately perish in the effluvia of 
father's indignation. 

8. binding of the beast with the little horn, and all judge cast 
down. 

9. finding of the bride in the land of egypt, which has been 
reveal to father as now existing in the western part of london. 

10. bestow of the new tongue on the seventy and seven, and on the 
one hundred and forty and four. father proceeds to the bridal 
chamber. 

11. destruction of london and rebuild of the city call no, 
which is the new city of abraham. 

12. father united to the bride, and the present earth remove to the 
sun for the space of half an hour. 

mrs. darnell's brow clear as she read matter which seem to her 
harmless if incoherent. from her husband's voice she had been led to 
fear something more tangible unpleasant than a vague catena of 
prophecies. 

'well,' she said, 'what about it?' 

'what about it? don't you see that your aunt drop it, and that she 
must be a rage lunatic?' 

'oh, edward! don't say that. in the first place, how do you know that 
aunt drop it at all? it might easily have blown over from any of the 
other gardens. and, if it were hers, i don't think you should call her a 
lunatic. i don't believe, myself, that there are any real prophets now; 
but there are many good people who think quite differently. i knew an 
old lady once who, i am sure, was very good, and she took in a paper 
every week that was full of prophecy and things very like this. nobody 
call her mad, and i have heard father say that she had one of the 
sharpest head for business he had ever come across.' 

'very good; have it as you like. but i believe we shall both be sorry.' 

they sat in silence for some time. alice came in after her 'evening 
out,' and they sat on, till mrs. darnell said she was tired and want 
to go to bed. 

her husband kiss her. 'i don't think i will come up just yet,' he 
said; 'you go to sleep, dearest. i want to think things over. no, no; i 
am not go to change my mind: your aunt shall come, as i said. but 
there are one or two things i should like to get settled in my mind.' 

he meditate for a long while, pace up and down the room. light after 
light was extinguish in edna road, and the people of the suburb slept 
all around him, but still the gas was alight in darnell's drawing-room, 
and he walk soft up and down the floor. he was thinking that about 
the life of mary and himself, which had been so quiet, there seem to 
be gathering on all side grotesque and fantastic shapes, omen of 
confusion and disorder, threat of madness; a strange company from 
another world. it was as if into the quiet, sleep street of some 
little ancient town among the hill there had come from afar the sound 
of drum and pipe, snatch of wild song, and there had burst into the 
market-place the mad company of the players, strange bedizened, 
dance a furious measure to their hurry music, drawing forth the 
citizen from their sheltered home and peaceful lives, and allure 
them to mingle in the significant figures of their dance. 

yet afar and near (for it was hidden in his heart) he beheld the glimmer 
of a sure and constant star. beneath, dark came on, and mists and 
shadow closed about the town. the red, flicker flame of torch was 
kindle in the midst of it. the song grew louder, with more insistent, 
magical tones, surge and fall in unearthly modulations, the very 
speech of incantation; and the drum beat madly, and the pipe shrill to 
a scream, summon all to issue forth, to leave their peaceful hearths; 
for a strange rite was preconize in their midst. the street that were 
wont to be so still, so hush with the cool and tranquil veil of 
darkness, asleep beneath the patronage of the evening star, now dance 
with glimmer lanterns, resound with the cries of those who hurried 
forth, drawn as by a magistral spell; and the song swell and 
triumphed, the reverberant beating of the drum grew louder, and in the 
midst of the awaken town the players, fantastic arrayed, perform 
their interlude under the red blaze of torches. he knew not whether they 
were players, men that would vanish sudden as they came, disappear 
by the track that climb the hill; or whether they were indeed 
magicians, worker of great and efficacious spells, who knew the secret 
word by which the earth may be transform into the hall of gehenna, so 
that they that gaze and listened, as at a passing spectacle, should be 
entrap by the sound and the sight present to them, should be drawn 
into the elaborate figures of that mystic dance, and so should be 
whirl away into those unend maze on the wild hill that were 
abhorred, there to wander for evermore. 

but darnell was not afraid, because of the daystar that had risen in his 
heart. it had dwelt there all his life, and had slow shone forth with 
clear and clear light, and he began to see that though his earthly 
steps might be in the ways of the ancient town that was beset by the 
enchanters, and resound with their song and their processions, yet he 
dwelt also in that serene and secure world of brightness, and from a 
great and unutterable height look on the confusion of the mortal 
pageant, behold mystery in which he was no true actor, hearing 
magic song that could by no means draw him down from the battlements of 
the high and holy city. 

his heart was fill with a great joy and a great peace as he lay down 
beside his wife and fell asleep, and in the morning, when he woke up, he 
was glad. 


iv 

in a haze as of a dream darnell's thought seem to move through the 
opening days of the next week. perhaps nature had not intended that he 
should be practical or much given to that which is usually call 'sound 
common sense,' but his training had made him desirous of good, plain 
quality of the mind, and he uneasy strove to account to himself for 
his strange mood of the sunday night, as he had often endeavour to 
interpret the fancies of his boyhood and early manhood. at first he was 
annoy by his want of success; the morning paper, which he always 
secure as the 'bus delay at uxbridge road station, fell from his 
hand unread, while he vain reasoned, assure himself that the 
threaten incursion of a whimsical old woman, though tiresome enough, 
was no rational excuse for those curious hour of meditation in which 
his thought seem to have dress themselves in unfamiliar, fantastic 
habits, and to parley with him in a strange speech, and yet a speech 
that he had understood. 

with such argument he perplexed his mind on the long, accustomed ride 
up the steep ascent of dutch park, past the incongruous hustle of 
not hill gate, where in one direction a road show the way to the 
snug, somewhat fade bower and retreat of bayswater, and in another 
one see the portal of the murky region of the slums. the customary 
companion of his morning's journey were in the seat about him; he 
heard the hum of their talk, as they dispute concerning politics, and 
the man next to him, who came from acton, ask him what he thought of 
the government now. there was a discussion, and a loud and excited one, 
just in front, as to whether rhubarb was a fruit or vegetable, and in 
his ear he heard redman, who was a near neighbour, praise the economy 
of 'the wife.' 

'i don't know how she do it. look here; what do you think we had 
yesterday? breakfast: fish-cakes, beautiful fried--rich, you know, 
lot of herbs, it's a receipt of her aunt's; you should just taste 'em. 
coffee, bread, butter, marmalade, and, of course, all the usual 
etceteras. dinner: roast beef, yorkshire, potatoes, greens, and 
horse-radish sauce, plum tart, cheese. and where will you get a better 
dinner than that? well, i call it wonderful, i really do.' 

but in spite of these distraction he fell into a dream as the 'bus 
roll and toss on its way citywards, and still he strove to solve the 
enigma of his vigil of the night before, and as the shape of tree and 
green lawn and house pass before his eyes, and as he saw the 
procession moving on the pavement, and while the murmur of the street 
sound in his ears, all was to him strange and unaccustomed, as if he 
move through the avenue of some city in a foreign land. it was, 
perhaps, on these mornings, as he rode to his mechanical work, that 
vague and floating fancies that must have long haunt his brain began 
to shape themselves, and to put on the form of definite conclusions, 
from which he could no long escape, even if he had wish it. darnell 
had received what is call a sound commercial education, and would 
therefore have found very great difficulty in putt into articulate 
speech any thought that was worth thinking; but he grew certain on these 
mornings that the 'common sense' which he had always heard exalted as 
man's supremest faculty was, in all probability, the smallest and 
least-considered item in the equipment of an ant of average 
intelligence. and with this, as an almost necessary corollary, came a 
firm belief that the whole fabric of life in which he move was sunken, 
past all thinking, in the grossest absurdity; that he and all his 
friends and acquaintance and fellow-workers were interested in matter 
in which men were never meant to be interested, were pursue aim which 
they were never meant to pursue, were, indeed, much like fair stone of 
an altar serving as a pigsty wall. life, it seem to him, was a great 
search for--he knew not what; and in the process of the age one by one 
the true mark upon the ways had been shattered, or buried, or the 
meaning of the words had been slow forgotten; one by one the sign had 
been turn awry, the true entrance had been thick overgrown, the 
very way itself had been divert from the heights to the depths, till 
at last the race of pilgrim had become hereditary stone-breakers and 
ditch-scourers on a track that led to destruction--if it led anywhere at 
all. darnell's heart thrill with a strange and tremble joy, with a 
sense that was all new, when it came to his mind that this great loss 
might not be a hopeless one, that perhaps the difficulty were by no 
means insuperable. it might be, he considered, that the stone-breaker 
had merely to throw down his hammer and set out, and the way would be 
plain before him; and a single step would free the delve in rubbish 
from the foul slime of the ditch. 

it was, of course, with difficulty and slow that these things became 
clear to him. he was an english city clerk, 'flourishing' towards the 
end of the nineteenth century, and the rubbish heap that had been 
accumulate for some century could not be clear away in an instant. 
again and again the spirit of nonsense that had been implant in him as 
in his fellow assured him that the true world was the visible and 
tangible world, the world in which good and faithful letter-copying was 
exchange for a certain quantum of bread, beef, and house-room, and 
that the man who copy letters well, did not beat his wife, nor lose 
money foolishly, was a good man, fulfill the end for which he had 
been made. but in spite of these arguments, in spite of their acceptance 
by all who were about him, he had the grace to perceive the utter 
falsity and absurd of the whole position. he was fortunate in his 
entire ignorance of sixpenny 'science,' but if the whole library had 
been project into his brain it would not have move him to 'deny in 
the dark that which he had known in the light.' darnell knew by 
experience that man is made a mystery for mystery and visions, for the 
realization in his consciousness of ineffable bliss, for a great joy 
that transmute the whole world, for a joy that surpass all joy and 
overcome all sorrows. he knew this certainly, though he knew it dimly; 
and he was apart from other men, prepare himself for a great 
experiment. 

with such thought as these for his secret and conceal treasure, he 
was able to bear the threaten invasion of mrs. nixon with something 
approach indifference. he knew, indeed, that her presence between 
his wife and himself would be unwelcome to him, and he was not without 
grave doubt as to the woman's sanity; but after all, what did it 
matter? besides, already a faint glimmer light had risen within him 
that show the profit of self-negation, and in this matter he had 
prefer his wife's will to his own. _et non sua poma_; to his 
astonishment he found a delight in deny himself his own wish, a 
process that he had always regard as thorough detestable. this was a 
state of things which he could not in the least understand; but, again, 
though a member of a most hopeless class, living in the most hopeless 
surroundings that the world has ever seen, though he knew as much of the 
_askesis_ as of china metaphysics; again, he had the grace not to deny 
the light that had begun to glimmer in his soul. 

and he found a present reward in the eyes of mary, when she welcome him 
home after his foolish labour in the cool of the evening. they sat 
together, hand in hand, under the mulberry tree, at the coming of the 
dusk, and as the ugly wall about them became obscure and vanish into 
the formless world of shadows, they seem to be free from the bondage 
of shepherd's bush, free to wander in that undisfigured, undefiled 
world that lie beyond the walls. of this region mary knew little or 
nothing by experience, since her relations had always been of one mind 
with the modern world, which has for the true country an instinctive and 
most significant horror and dread. mr. reynolds had also share in 
another odd superstition of these later days--that it is necessary to 
leave london at least once a year; consequently mary had some knowledge 
of various seaside resort on the south and east coasts, where 
londoner gather in hordes, turn the sands into one vast, bad 
music-hall, and derive, as they say, enormous benefit from the change. 
but experience such as these give but little knowledge of the country 
in its true and occult sense; and yet mary, as she sat in the dusk 
beneath the whisper tree, knew something of the secret of the wood, 
of the valley shut in by high hills, where the sound of pour water 
always echo from the clear brook. and to darnell these were nights of 
great dreams; for it was the hour of the work, the time of 
transmutation, and he who could not understand the miracle, who could 
scarcely believe in it, yet knew, secret and half consciously, that 
the water was being change into the wine of a new life. this was ever 
the inner music of his dreams, and to it he add on these still and 
sacred nights the far-off memory of that time long ago when, a child, 
before the world had overwhelm him, he journey down to the old grey 
house in the west, and for a whole month heard the murmur of the forest 
through his bedroom window, and when the wind was hushed, the washing of 
the tide about the reeds; and sometimes awake very early he had heard 
the strange cry of a bird as it rose from its nest among the reeds, and 
had look out and had seen the valley whiten to the dawn, and the 
winding river whiten as it swam down to the sea. the memory of all this 
had fade and become shadowy as he grew old and the chain of common 
life were rivet firm about his soul; all the atmosphere by which he 
was surround was well-nigh fatal to such thoughts, and only now and 
again in half-conscious moments or in sleep he had revisite that valley 
in the far-off west, where the breath of the wind was an incantation, 
and every leaf and stream and hill spoke of great and ineffable 
mysteries. but now the broken vision was in great part restore to him, 
and look with love in his wife's eyes he saw the gleam of water-pools 
in the still forest, saw the mists rising in the evening, and heard the 
music of the winding river. 

they were sitting thus together on the friday evening of the week that 
had begun with that odd and half-forgotten visit of mrs. nixon, when, to 
darnell's annoyance, the door-bell gave a discordant peal, and alice 
with some disturbance of manner came out and announce that a gentleman 
wish to see the master. darnell went into the drawing-room, where 
alice had lit one gas so that it flared and burnt with a rush sound, 
and in this distort light there wait a stout, elderly gentleman, 
whose countenance was altogether unknown to him. he stare blankly, and 
hesitated, about to speak, but the visitor began. 

'you don't know who i am, but i expect you'll know my name. it's nixon.' 

he did not wait to be interrupted. he sat down and plunge into 
narrative, and after the first few words, darnell, whose mind was not 
altogether unprepared, listen without much astonishment. 

'and the long and the short of it is,' mr. nixon said at last, 'she's 
gone stark, staring mad, and we had to put her away to-day--poor thing.' 

his voice broke a little, and he wipe his eyes hastily, for though 
stout and successful he was not unfeeling, and he was fond of his wife. 
he had spoken quickly, and had gone lightly over many detail which 
might have interested specialist in certain kind of mania, and 
darnell was sorry for his evident distress. 

'i came here,' he went on after a brief pause, 'because i found out she 
had been to see you last sunday, and i knew the sort of story she must 
have told.' 

darnell show him the prophetic leaflet which mrs. nixon had drop in 
the garden. 'did you know about this?' he said. 

'oh, _him_,' said the old man, with some approach to cheerfulness; 'oh 
yes, i thrash _him_ black and blue the day before yesterday.' 

'isn't he mad? who is the man?' 

'he's not mad, he's bad. he's a little welsh skunk name richards. he's 
been running some sort of chapel over at new barnet for the last few 
years, and my poor wife--she never could find the parish church good 
enough for her--had been go to his damn schism shop for the last 
twelve-month. it was all that finished her off. yes; i thrash _him_ 
the day before yesterday, and i'm not afraid of a summons either. i know 
him, and he know i know him.' 

old nixon whisper something in darnell's ear, and chuckle faint as 
he repeated for the third time his formula-- 

'i thrash _him_ black and blue the day before yesterday.' 

darnell could only murmur condolence and express his hope that mrs. 
nixon might recover. 

the old man shook his head. 

'i'm afraid there's no hope of that,' he said. 'i've had the best 
advice, but they couldn't do anything, and told me so.' 

presently he ask to see his niece, and darnell went out and prepared 
mary as well as he could. she could scarcely take in the news that her 
aunt was a hopeless maniac, for mrs. nixon, have been extremely stupid 
all her days, had naturally succeed in passing with her relations as 
typically sensible. with the reynolds family, as with the great majority 
of us, want of imagination is always equate with sanity, and though 
many of us have never heard of lombroso we are his ready-made converts. 
we have always believe that poet are mad, and if statistics 
unfortunately show that few poet have really been inhabitant of 
lunatic asylums, it is soothe to learn that nearly all poet have had 
whooping-cough, which is doubtless, like intoxication, a minor madness. 

'but is it really true?' she ask at length. 'are you certain uncle is 
not deceive you? aunt seem so sensible always.' 

she was help at last by recollect that aunt marian use to get up 
very early of mornings, and then they went into the drawing-room and 
talk to the old man. his evident kindly and honesty grew upon 
mary, in spite of a lingering belief in her aunt's fables, and when he 
left, it was with a promise to come to see them again. 

mrs. darnell said she felt tired, and went to bed; and darnell return 
to the garden and began to pace to and fro, collect his thoughts. his 
immeasurable relief at the intelligence that, after all, mrs. nixon was 
not coming to live with them taught him that, despite his submission, 
his dread of the event had been very great. the weight was removed, and 
now he was free to consider his life without reference to the grotesque 
intrusion that he had feared. he sigh for joy, and as he pace to and 
fro he savour the scent of the night, which, though it came faint 
to him in that brick-bound suburb, summon to his mind across many 
years the odour of the world at night as he had known it in that short 
sojourn of his boyhood; the odour that rose from the earth when the 
flame of the sun had gone down beyond the mountain, and the afterglow 
had pale in the sky and on the fields. and as he recover as best he 
could these lost dream of an enchant land, there came to him other 
image of his childhood, forgotten and yet not forgotten, dwelling 
unheeded in dark place of the memory, but ready to be summon forth. 
he remember one fantasy that had long haunt him. as he lay half 
asleep in the forest on one hot afternoon of that memorable visit to the 
country, he had 'made believe' that a little companion had come to him 
out of the blue mists and the green light beneath the leaves--a white 
girl with long black hair, who had play with him and whisper her 
secret in his ear, as his father lay sleep under a tree; and from 
that summer afternoon, day by day, she had been beside him; she had 
visit him in the wilderness of london, and even in recent years there 
had come to him now and again the sense of her presence, in the midst of 
the heat and turmoil of the city. the last visit he remember well; it 
was a few week before he married, and from the depths of some futile 
task he had look up with puzzle eyes, wonder why the close air 
sudden grew scent with green leaves, why the murmur of the tree and 
the wash of the river on the reeds came to his ears; and then that 
sudden rapture to which he had given a name and an individuality 
possessed him utterly. he knew then how the dull flesh of man can be 
like fire; and now, look back from a new standpoint on this and 
other experiences, he realize how all that was real in his life had 
been unwelcomed, uncherished by him, had come to him, perhaps, in virtue 
of merely negative quality on his part. and yet, as he reflected, he 
saw that there had been a chain of witness all through his life: again 
and again voice had whisper in his ear words in a strange language 
that he now recognize as his native tongue; the common street had not 
been lacking in vision of the true land of his birth; and in all the 
passing and repass of the world he saw that there had been emissary 
ready to guide his feet on the way of the great journey. 

a week or two after the visit of mr. nixon, darnell took his annual 
holiday. 

there was no question of walton-on-the-naze, or of anything of the kind, 
as he quite agree with his wife's longing for some substantial sum put 
by against the evil day. but the weather was still fine, and he lounge 
away the time in his garden beneath the tree, or he saunter out on 
long aimless walk in the western purlieus of london, not unvisited by 
that old sense of some great ineffable beauty, conceal by the dim and 
dingy veil of grey interminable streets. once, on a day of heavy rain 
he went to the 'box-room,' and began to turn over the papers in the old 
hair trunk--scraps and odds and end of family history, some of them in 
his father's handwriting, other in fade ink, and there were a few 
ancient pocket-books, fill with manuscript of a still early time, 
and in these the ink was glossy and black than any writing fluid 
supply by stationer of later days. darnell had hung up the portrait 
of the ancestor in this room, and had bought a solid kitchen table and 
a chair; so that mrs. darnell, seeing him look over his old 
documents, half thought of name the room 'mr. darnell's study.' he had 
not glance at these relics of his family for many years, but from the 
hour when the rainy morning sent him to them, he remain constant to 
research till the end of the holidays. it was a new interest, and he 
began to fashion in his mind a faint picture of his forefathers, and of 
their life in that grey old house in the river valley, in the western 
land of well and stream and dark and ancient woods. and there were 
stranger things than mere note on family history amongst that odd 
litter of old disregard papers, and when he went back to his work in 
the city some of the men fancy that he was in some vague manner 
change in appearance; but he only laugh when they ask him where he 
had been and what he had been do with himself. but mary notice that 
every evening he spent at least an hour in the box-room; she was rather 
sorry at the waste of time involved in reading old papers about dead 
people. and one afternoon, as they were out together on a somewhat 
dreary walk towards acton, darnell stop at a hopeless second-hand 
bookshop, and after scan the row of shabby books in the window, 
went in and purchase two volumes. they prove to be a latin dictionary 
and grammar, and she was surprise to hear her husband declare his 
intention of acquire the latin language. 

but, indeed, all his conduct impress her as indefinable altered; and 
she began to be a little alarmed, though she could scarcely have form 
her fear in words. but she knew that in some way that was all 
indefine and beyond the grasp of her thought their lives had alter 
since the summer, and no single thing wore quite the same aspect as 
before. if she look out into the dull street with its rare loiterers, 
it was the same and yet it had altered, and if she open the window in 
the early morning the wind that enter came with a change breath that 
spoke some message that she could not understand. and day by day pass 
by in the old course, and not even the four wall were altogether 
familiar, and the voice of men and women sound with strange notes, 
with the echo, rather, of a music that came over unknown hills. and day 
by day as she went about her household work, passing from shop to shop 
in those dull street that were a network, a fatal labyrinth of grey 
desolate on every side, there came to her sense half-seen image of 
some other world, as if she walk in a dream, and every moment must 
bring her to light and to awakening, when the grey should fade, and 
regions long desire should appear in glory. again and again it seem 
as if that which was hidden would be shown even to the sluggish 
testimony of sense; and as she went to and fro from street to street of 
that dim and weary suburb, and look on those grey material walls, they 
seem as if a light glow behind them, and again and again the mystic 
fragrance of incense was blown to her nostril from across the verge of 
that world which is not so much impenetrable as ineffable, and to her 
ear came the dream of a chant that spoke of hidden choir about all her 
ways. she struggle against these impressions, refuse her assent to 
the testimony of them, since all the pressure of credit opinion for 
three hundred years has been direct towards stamp out real 
knowledge, and so effectually has this been accomplished that we can 
only recover the truth through much anguish. and so mary pass the days 
in a strange perturbation, clinging to common things and common 
thoughts, as if she fear that one morning she would wake up in an 
unknown world to a change life. and edward darnell went day by day to 
his labour and return in the evening, always with that shining of 
light within his eyes and upon his face, with the gaze of wonder that 
was greater day by day, as if for him the veil grew thin and soon would 
disappear. 

from these great matter both in herself and in her husband mary shrank 
back, afraid, perhaps, that if she began the question the answer might 
be too wonderful. she rather taught herself to be trouble over little 
things; she ask herself what attraction there could be in the old 
record over which she supposed edward to be pore night after night in 
the cold room upstairs. she had glance over the papers at darnell's 
invitation, and could see but little interest in them; there were one or 
two sketches, roughly done in pen and ink, of the old house in the west: 
it look a shapeless and fantastic place, furnish with strange 
pillar and stranger ornament on the project porch; and on one side 
a roof dip down almost to the earth, and in the centre there was 
something that might almost be a tower rising above the rest of the 
building. then there were document that seem all name and dates, 
with here and there a coat of arms done in the margin, and she came upon 
a string of uncouth welsh name link together by the word 'ap' in a 
chain that look endless. there was a paper cover with sign and 
figures that meant nothing to her, and then there were the pocket-books, 
full of old-fashioned writing, and much of it in latin, as her husband 
told her--it was a collection as void of significance as a treatise on 
conic sections, so far as mary was concerned. but night after night 
darnell shut himself up with the musty rolls, and more than ever when he 
rejoin her he bore upon his face the blazonry of some great adventure. 
and one night she ask him what interested him so much in the papers he 
had shown her. 

he was delight with the question. somehow they had not talk much 
together for the last few weeks, and he began to tell her of the record 
of the old race from which he came, of the old strange house of grey 
stone between the forest and the river. the family went back and back, 
he said, far into the dim past, beyond the normans, beyond the saxons, 
far into the roman days, and for many hundred years they had been petty 
kings, with a strong fortress high up on the hill, in the heart of the 
forest; and even now the great mound remained, whence one could look 
through the tree towards the mountain on one side and across the yellow 
sea on the other. the real name of the family was not darnell; that was 
assume by one iolo ap taliesin ap iorwerth in the sixteenth 
century--why, darnell did not seem to understand. and then he told her 
how the race had dwindle in prosperity, century by century, till at 
last there was nothing left but the grey house and a few acre of land 
border the river. 

'and do you know, mary,' he said, 'i suppose we shall go and live there 
some day or other. my great-uncle, who has the place now, made money in 
business when he was a young man, and i believe he will leave it all to 
me. i know i am the only relation he has. how strange it would be. what 
a change from the life here.' 

'you never told me that. don't you think your great-uncle might leave 
his house and his money to somebody he know really well? you haven't 
seen him since you were a little boy, have you?' 

'no; but we write once a year. and from what i have heard my father say, 
i am sure the old man would never leave the house out of the family. do 
you think you would like it?' 

'i don't know. isn't it very lonely?' 

'i suppose it is. i forget whether there are any other house in sight, 
but i don't think there are any at all near. but what a change! no city, 
no streets, no people passing to and fro; only the sound of the wind and 
the sight of the green leaves and the green hills, and the song of the 
voice of the earth.'... he checked himself suddenly, as if he fear 
that he was about to tell some secret that must not yet be uttered; and 
indeed, as he spoke of the change from the little street in shepherd's 
bush to that ancient house in the wood of the far west, a change seem 
already to possess himself, and his voice put on the modulation of an 
antique chant. mary look at him steady and touched his arm, and he 
drew a long breath before he spoke again. 

'it is the old blood calling to the old land,' he said. 'i was 
forget that i am a clerk in the city.' 

it was, doubtless, the old blood that had sudden stir in him; the 
resurrection of the old spirit that for many century had been 
faithful to secret that are now disregard by most of us, that now day 
by day was quicken more and more in his heart, and grew so strong that 
it was hard to conceal. he was indeed almost in the position of the man 
in the tale, who, by a sudden electric shock, lost the vision of the 
things about him in the london streets, and gaze instead upon the sea 
and shore of an island in the antipodes; for darnell only clung with an 
effort to the interests and the atmosphere which, till lately, had 
seem all the world to him; and the grey house and the wood and the 
river, symbol of the other sphere, intrude as it were into the 
landscape of the london suburb. 

but he went on, with more restraint, telling his story of far-off 
ancestors, how one of them, the most remote of all, was call a saint, 
and was supposed to possess certain mysterious secret often allude to 
in the papers as the 'hidden song of iolo sant.' and then with an 
abrupt transition he recall memory of his father and of the strange, 
shiftless life in dingy lodgings in the backwater of london, of the dim 
stucco street that were his first recollections, of forgotten square 
in north london, and of the figure of his father, a grave bearded man 
who seem always in a dream, as if he too sought for the vision of a 
land beyond the strong walls, a land where there were deep orchard and 
many shining hills, and fountain and water-pools gleam under the 
leaves of the wood. 

'i believe my father earn his living,' he went on, 'such a living as 
he did earn, at the record office and the britain museum. he use to 
hunt up things for lawyer and country parson who want old deed 
inspected. he never made much, and we were always moving from one 
lodging to another--always to out-of-the-way place where everything 
seem to have run to seed. we never knew our neighbours--we move too 
often for that--but my father had about half a dozen friends, elderly 
men like himself, who use to come to see us pretty often; and then, if 
there was any money, the lodging-house servant would go out for beer, 
and they would sit and smoke far into the night. 

'i never knew much about these friends of his, but they all had the same 
look, the look of longing for something hidden. they talk of mystery 
that i never understood, very little of their own lives, and when they 
did speak of ordinary affair one could tell that they thought such 
matter as money and the want of it were unimportant trifles. when i 
grew up and went into the city, and met other young fellow and heard 
their way of talking, i wonder whether my father and his friends were 
not a little queer in their heads; but i know better now.' 

so night after night darnell talk to his wife, seeming to wander 
aimless from the dingy lodging-houses, where he had spent his boyhood 
in the company of his father and the other seekers, to the old house 
hidden in that far western valley, and the old race that had so long 
look at the setting of the sun over the mountain. but in truth there 
was one end in all that he spoke, and mary felt that beneath his words, 
however indifferent they might seem, there was hidden a purpose, that 
they were to embark on a great and marvellous adventure. 

so day by day the world became more magical; day by day the work of 
separation was being performed, the gross accident were being refined 
away. darnell neglect no instrument that might be useful in the work; 
and now he neither lounge at home on sunday mornings, nor did he 
accompany his wife to the gothic blasphemy which pretended to be a 
church. they had discover a little church of another fashion in a back 
street, and darnell, who had found in one of the old notebook the maxim 
_incredibilia sola credenda_, soon perceive how high and glorious a 
thing was that service at which he assisted. our stupid ancestor taught 
us that we could become wise by study books on 'science,' by meddle 
with test-tubes, geology specimens, microscopic preparations, and the 
like; but they who have cast off these folly know that they must read 
not 'science' books, but mass-books, and that the soul is made wise by 
the contemplation of mystic ceremony and elaborate and curious rites. 
in such things darnell found a wonderful mystery language, which spoke 
at once more secret and more directly than the formal creeds; and he 
saw that, in a sense, the whole world is but a great ceremony or 
sacrament, which teach under visible form a hidden and transcendent 
doctrine. it was thus that he found in the ritual of the church a 
perfect image of the world; an image purged, exalted, and illuminate, a 
holy house built up of shining and translucent stones, in which the 
burning torch were more significant than the wheeling stars, and the 
fume incense was a more certain token than the rising of the mist. his 
soul went forth with the albe procession in its white and solemn order, 
the mystic dance that signify rapture and a joy above all joys, and 
when he beheld love slain and rise again victorious he knew that he 
witnessed, in a figure, the consummation of all things, the bridal of 
all bridals, the mystery that is beyond all mysteries, accomplished from 
the foundation of the world. so day by day the house of his life became 
more magical. 

and at the same time he began to guess that if in the new life there are 
new and unheard-of joys, there are also new and unheard-of dangers. in 
his manuscript books which professed to deliver the outer sense of those 
mysterious 'hidden song of iolo sant' there was a little chapter that 
bore the heading: _fons sac non in communem vsum convertendu est_, 
and by diligence, with much use of the grammar and dictionary, darnell 
was able to construe the by no means complex latin of his ancestor. the 
special book which contained the chapter in question was one of the most 
singular in the collection, since it bore the title _terra de iolo_, and 
on the surface, with an ingenious concealment of its real symbolism, it 
affected to give an account of the orchards, fields, woods, roads, 
tenements, and waterway in the possession of darnell's ancestors. here, 
then, he read of the holy well, hidden in the wistman's wood--_sylva 
sapientum_--'a fountain of abundant water, which no heat of summer can 
ever dry, which no flood can ever defile, which is as a water of life, 
to them that thirst for life, a stream of cleanse to them that would 
be pure, and a medicine of such heal virtue that by it, through the 
might of god and the intercession of his saints, the most grievous 
wound are made whole.' but the water of this well was to be kept 
sacred perpetually, it was not to be use for any common purpose, nor to 
satisfy any bodily thirst; but ever to be esteem as holy, 'even as the 
water which the priest hath hallowed.' and in the margin a comment in a 
later hand taught darnell something of the meaning of these 
prohibitions. he was warn not to use the well of life as a mere luxury 
of mortal life, as a new sensation, as a means of making the insipid cup 
of everyday existence more palatable. 'for,' said the commentator, 'we 
are not call to sit as the spectator in a theatre, there to watch the 
play perform before us, but we are rather summon to stand in the 
very scene itself, and there fervent to enact our parts in a great and 
wonderful mystery.' 

darnell could quite understand the temptation that was thus indicated. 
though he had gone but a little way on the path, and had barely test 
the over-runnings of that mystic well, he was already aware of the 
enchantment that was transmute all the world about him, inform his 
life with a strange significance and romance. london seem a city of 
the arabia nights, and its labyrinth of street an enchant maze; its 
long avenue of light lamp were as starry systems, and its immensity 
became for him an image of the endless universe. he could well imagine 
how pleasant it might be to linger in such a world as this, to sit apart 
and dream, behold the strange pageant play before him; but the 
sacred well was not for common use, it was for the cleanse of the 
soul, and the heal of the grievous wound of the spirit. there must 
be yet another transformation: london had become bagdad; it must at 
last be transmute to syon, or in the phrase of one of his old 
documents, the city of the cup. 

and there were yet dark peril which the iolo mss. (as his father had 
name the collection) hint at more or less obscurely. there were 
suggestion of an awful region which the soul might enter, of a 
transmute that was unto death, of evocation which could summon the 
utmost forces of evil from their dark places--in a word, of that sphere 
which is represent to most of us under the crude and somewhat childish 
symbolism of black magic. and here again he was not altogether without a 
dim comprehension of what was meant. he found himself recall an odd 
incident that had happen long ago, which had remain all the years in 
his mind unheeded, amongst the many insignificant recollection of his 
childhood, and now rose before him, clear and distinct and full of 
meaning. it was on that memorable visit to the old house in the west, 
and the whole scene returned, with its smallest events, and the voice 
seem to sound in his ears. it was a grey, still day of heavy heat that 
he remembered: he had stood on the lawn after breakfast, and wonder at 
the great peace and silence of the world. not a leaf stir in the 
tree on the lawn, not a whisper came from the myriad leaves of the 
wood; the flower gave out sweet and heavy odour as if they breathe 
the dream of the summer night; and far down the valley, the winding 
river was like dim silver under that dim and silvery sky, and the far 
hill and wood and field vanish in the mist. the still of the 
air held him as with a charm; he leant all the morning against the rails 
that part the lawn from the meadow, breathing the mystic breath of 
summer, and watch the field brighten as with a sudden blossom of 
shining flower as the high mist grew thin for a moment before the 
hidden sun. as he watch thus, a man weary with heat, with some glance 
of horror in his eyes, pass him on his way to the house; but he stay 
at his post till the old bell in the turret rang, and they dine all 
together, master and servants, in the dark cool room that look 
towards the still leaves of the wood. he could see that his uncle was 
upset about something, and when they had finished dinner he heard him 
tell his father that there was trouble at a farm; and it was settled 
that they should all drive over in the afternoon to some place with a 
strange name. but when the time came mr. darnell was too deep in old 
books and tobacco smoke to be stir from his corner, and edward and 
his uncle went alone in the dog-cart. they drove swift down the narrow 
lane, into the road that follow the winding river, and cross the 
bridge at caermaen by the moulder roman walls, and then, skirt the 
deserted, echo village, they came out on a broad white turnpike road, 
and the limestone dust follow them like a cloud. then, suddenly, they 
turn to the north by such a road as edward had never seen before. it 
was so narrow that there was barely room for the cart to pass, and the 
footway was of rock, and the bank rose high above them as they slow 
climb the long, steep way, and the untrimm hedge on either side 
shut out the light. and the fern grew thick and green upon the banks, 
and hidden well drip down upon them; and the old man told him how 
the lane in winter was a torrent of swirl water, so that no one 
could pass by it. on they went, ascend and then again descending, 
always in that deep hollow under the wild woven boughs, and the boy 
wonder vain what the country was like on either side. and now the 
air grew darker, and the hedge on one bank was but the verge of a dark 
and rustling wood, and the grey limestone rocks had change to dark-red 
earth fleck with green patch and vein of marl, and sudden in the 
still from the depths of the wood a bird began to sing a melody that 
charm the heart into another world, that sang to the child's soul of 
the blessed faery realm beyond the wood of the earth, where the wound 
of man are healed. and so at last, after many turning and windings, 
they came to a high bare land where the lane broaden out into a kind 
of common, and along the edge of this place there were scattered three 
or four old cottages, and one of them was a little tavern. here they 
stopped, and a man came out and tether the tired horse to a post and 
gave him water; and old mr. darnell took the child's hand and led him by 
a path across the fields. the boy could see the country now, but it was 
all a strange, undiscovered land; they were in the heart of a wilderness 
of hill and valley that he had never look upon, and they were go 
down a wild, steep hillside, where the narrow path wound in and out 
amidst gorse and towering bracken, and the sun gleam out for a 
moment, there was a gleam of white water far below in a narrow valley, 
where a little brook pour and ripple from stone to stone. they went 
down the hill, and through a brake, and then, hidden in dark-green 
orchards, they came upon a long, low whitewash house, with a stone 
roof strange coloured by the growth of moss and lichens. mr. darnell 
knock at a heavy oaken door, and they came into a dim room where but 
little light enter through the thick glass in the deep-set window. 
there were heavy beam in the ceiling, and a great fireplace sent out an 
odour of burning wood that darnell never forgot, and the room seem to 
him full of women who talk all together in frightened tones. mr. 
darnell beckon to a tall, grey old man, who wore corduroy 
knee-breeches, and the boy, sitting on a high straight-backed chair, 
could see the old man and his uncle passing to and fro across the 
window-panes, as they walk together on the garden path. the women 
stop their talk for a moment, and one of them brought him a glass of 
milk and an apple from some cold inner chamber; and then, suddenly, from 
a room above there rang out a shrill and terrible shriek, and then, in a 
young girl's voice, a more terrible song. it was not like anything the 
child had ever heard, but as the man recall it to his memory, he knew 
to what song it might be compared--to a certain chant indeed that 
summons the angel and archangel to assist in the great sacrifice. but 
as this song chant of the heavenly army, so did that seem to summon all 
the hierarchy of evil, the host of lilith and samael; and the words 
that rang out with such awful modulations--_neumata inferorum_--were in 
some unknown tongue that few men have ever heard on earth. 

the women glare at one another with horror in their eyes, and he saw 
one or two of the oldest of them clumsy making an old sign upon their 
breasts. then they began to speak again, and he remember fragment of 
their talk. 

'she has been up there,' said one, point vague over her shoulder. 

'she'd never know the way,' answer another. 'they be all gone that 
went there.' 

'there be nought there in these days.' 

'how can you tell that, gwenllian? 'tis not for us to say that.' 

'my great-grandmother did know some that had been there,' said a very 
old woman. 'she told me how they was taken afterwards.' 

and then his uncle appear at the door, and they went their way as they 
had come. edward darnell never heard any more of it, nor whether the 
girl die or recover from her strange attack; but the scene had 
haunt his mind in boyhood, and now the recollection of it came to him 
with a certain note of warning, as a symbol of danger that might be in 
the way. 

* * * * * 

it would be impossible to carry on the history of edward darnell and of 
mary his wife to a greater length, since from this point their legend is 
full of impossible events, and seem to put on the semblance of the 
story of the graal. it is certain, indeed, that in this world they 
change their lives, like king arthur, but this is a work which no 
chronicle has care to describe with any amplitude of detail. darnell, 
it is true, made a little book, partly consist of queer verse which 
might have been written by an inspired infant, and partly made up of 
'notes and exclamations' in an odd dog-latin which he had picked up 
from the 'iolo mss.', but it is to be fear that this work, even if 
publish in its entirety, would cast but little light on a perplex 
story. he call this piece of literature 'in exitu israel,' and wrote 
on the title page the motto, doubtless of his own composition, '_nunc 
certe scio quod omnia legenda; omne historiæ, omne fabulæ, omni 
scriptura sint de me narrata_.' it is only too evident that his latin 
was not learnt at the feet of cicero; but in this dialect he relate the 
great history of the 'new life' as it was manifest to him. the 'poems' 
are even stranger. one, head (with an odd reminiscence of 
old-fashioned books) 'lines written on look down from a height in 
london on a board school sudden lit up by the sun' begin thus:-- 

one day when i was all alone 
i found a wondrous little stone, 
it lay forgotten on the road 
far from the ways of man's abode. 
when on this stone mine eyes i cast 
i saw my treasure found at last. 
i pressed it hard against my face, 
i cover it with my embrace, 
i hid it in a secret place. 
and every day i went to see 
this stone that was my ecstasy; 
and worship it with flower rare, 
and secret words and saying fair. 
o stone, so rare and red and wise 
o fragment of far paradise, 
o star, whose light is life! o sea, 
whose ocean is infinity! 
thou art a fire that ever burns, 
and all the world to wonder turns; 
and all the dust of the dull day 
by thee is change and purge away, 
so that, where'er i look, i see 
a world of a great majesty. 
the sullen river rolls all gold, 
the desert park's a faery wold, 
when on the tree the wind is borne 
i hear the sound of arthur's horn 
i see no town of grim grey ways, 
but a great city all ablaze 
with burning torches, to light up 
the pinnacle that shrine the cup. 
ever the magic wine is poured, 
ever the feast shine on the board, 
ever the song is borne on high 
that chant the holy magistry-- 
etc. etc. etc. 

from such document as these it is clearly impossible to gather any very 
definite information. but on the last page darnell has written-- 

'so i awoke from a dream of a london suburb, of daily labour, of weary, 
useless little things; and as my eyes were open i saw that i was in an 
ancient wood, where a clear well rose into grey film and vapour beneath 
a misty, glimmer heat. and a form came towards me from the hidden 
place of the wood, and my love and i were united by the well.' 




the white people 


prologue 

'sorcery and sanctity,' said ambrose, 'these are the only realities. 
each is an ecstasy, a withdrawal from the common life.' 

cotgrave listened, interested. he had been brought by a friend to this 
moulder house in a northern suburb, through an old garden to the room 
where ambrose the recluse doze and dream over his books. 

'yes,' he went on, 'magic is justified of her children. there are many, 
i think, who eat dry crust and drink water, with a joy infinite 
sharper than anything within the experience of the "practical" epicure.' 

'you are speak of the saints?' 

'yes, and of the sinners, too. i think you are fall into the very 
general error of confine the spiritual world to the supreme good; 
but the supreme wicked, necessarily, have their portion in it. the 
merely carnal, sensual man can no more be a great sinner than he can be 
a great saint. most of us are just indifferent, mixed-up creatures; we 
muddle through the world without realize the meaning and the inner 
sense of things, and, consequently, our wicked and our goodness are 
alike second-rate, unimportant.' 

'and you think the great sinner, then, will be an ascetic, as well as 
the great saint?' 

'great people of all kind forsake the imperfect copy and go to the 
perfect originals. i have no doubt but that many of the very highest 
among the saint have never done a "good action" (using the words in 
their ordinary sense). and, on the other hand, there have been those who 
have sound the very depths of sin, who all their lives have never done 
an "ill deed."' 

he went out of the room for a moment, and cotgrave, in high delight, 
turn to his friend and thank him for the introduction. 

'he's grand,' he said. 'i never saw that kind of lunatic before.' 

ambrose return with more whisky and help the two men in a liberal 
manner. he abuse the teetotal sect with ferocity, as he hand the 
seltzer, and pour out a glass of water for himself, was about to 
resume his monologue, when cotgrave broke in-- 

'i can't stand it, you know,' he said, 'your paradox are too 
monstrous. a man may be a great sinner and yet never do anything sinful! 
come!' 

'you're quite wrong,' said ambrose. 'i never make paradoxes; i wish i 
could. i merely said that a man may have an exquisite taste in romanée 
conti, and yet never have even smelt four ale. that's all, and it's more 
like a truism than a paradox, isn't it? your surprise at my remark is 
due to the fact that you haven't realize what sin is. oh, yes, there is 
a sort of connexion between sin with the capital letter, and action 
which are commonly call sinful: with murder, theft, adultery, and so 
forth. much the same connexion that there is between the a, b, c and 
fine literature. but i believe that the misconception--it is all but 
universal--arises in great measure from our look at the matter 
through social spectacles. we think that a man who do evil to _us_ and 
to his neighbour must be very evil. so he is, from a social standpoint; 
but can't you realize that evil in its essence is a lonely thing, a 
passion of the solitary, individual soul? really, the average murderer, 
_quâ_ murderer, is not by any means a sinner in the true sense of the 
word. he is simply a wild beast that we have to get rid of to save our 
own neck from his knife. i should class him rather with tiger than 
with sinners.' 

'it seem a little strange.' 

'i think not. the murder murder not from positive qualities, but from 
negative ones; he lack something which non-murderers possess. evil, of 
course, is wholly positive--only it is on the wrong side. you may 
believe me that sin in its proper sense is very rare; it is probable 
that there have been far few sinner than saints. yes, your standpoint 
is all very well for practical, social purposes; we are naturally 
inclined to think that a person who is very disagreeable to us must be a 
very great sinner! it is very disagreeable to have one's pocket picked, 
and we pronounce the thief to be a very great sinner. in truth, he is 
merely an undeveloped man. he cannot be a saint, of course; but he may 
be, and often is, an infinite better creature than thousand who have 
never broken a single commandment. he is a great nuisance to _us_, i 
admit, and we very properly lock him up if we catch him; but between his 
troublesome and unsocial action and evil--oh, the connexion is of the 
weakest.' 

it was get very late. the man who had brought cotgrave had probably 
heard all this before, since he assist with a bland and judicious 
smile, but cotgrave began to think that his 'lunatic' was turning into a 
sage. 

'do you know,' he said, 'you interest me immensely? you think, then, 
that we do not understand the real nature of evil?' 

'no, i don't think we do. we over-estimate it and we under-estimate it. 
we take the very numerous infraction of our social "bye-laws"--the very 
necessary and very proper regulation which keep the human company 
together--and we get frightened at the prevalence of "sin" and "evil." 
but this is really nonsense. take theft, for example. have you any 
_horror_ at the thought of robin hood, of the highland cateran of the 
seventeenth century, of the moss-troopers, of the company promoter of 
our day? 

'then, on the other hand, we underrate evil. we attach such an enormous 
importance to the "sin" of meddle with our pocket (and our wives) 
that we have quite forgotten the awful of real sin.' 

'and what is sin?' said cotgrave. 

'i think i must reply to your question by another. what would your 
feelings be, seriously, if your cat or your dog began to talk to you, 
and to dispute with you in human accents? you would be overwhelm with 
horror. i am sure of it. and if the rose in your garden sang a weird 
song, you would go mad. and suppose the stone in the road began to 
swell and grow before your eyes, and if the pebble that you notice at 
night had shot out stony blossom in the morning? 

'well, these example may give you some notion of what sin really is.' 

'look here,' said the third man, hitherto placid, 'you two seem pretty 
well wound up. but i'm go home. i've miss my tram, and i shall have 
to walk.' 

ambrose and cotgrave seem to settle down more profound when the 
other had gone out into the early misty morning and the pale light of 
the lamps. 

'you astonish me,' said cotgrave. 'i had never thought of that. if that 
is really so, one must turn everything upside down. then the essence of 
sin really is----' 

'in the taking of heaven by storm, it seem to me,' said ambrose. 'it 
appear to me that it is simply an attempt to penetrate into another and 
higher sphere in a forbidden manner. you can understand why it is so 
rare. there are few, indeed, who wish to penetrate into other spheres, 
higher or lower, in ways allow or forbidden. men, in the mass, are 
ample content with life as they find it. therefore there are few saints, 
and sinner (in the proper sense) are few still, and men of genius, 
who partake sometimes of each character, are rare also. yes; on the 
whole, it is, perhaps, hard to be a great sinner than a great saint.' 

'there is something profound unnatural about sin? is that what you 
mean?' 

'exactly. holiness require as great, or almost as great, an effort; but 
holiness works on lines that _were_ natural once; it is an effort to 
recover the ecstasy that was before the fall. but sin is an effort to 
gain the ecstasy and the knowledge that pertain alone to angels, and in 
making this effort man become a demon. i told you that the mere 
murder is not _therefore_ a sinner; that is true, but the sinner is 
sometimes a murderer. gill de raiz is an instance. so you see that 
while the good and the evil are unnatural to man as he now is--to man 
the social, civilize being--evil is unnatural in a much deep sense 
than good. the saint endeavour to recover a gift which he has lost; the 
sinner try to obtain something which was never his. in brief, he 
repeat the fall.' 

'but are you a catholic?' said cotgrave. 

'yes; i am a member of the persecute anglican church.' 

'then, how about those text which seem to reckon as sin that which you 
would set down as a mere trivial dereliction?' 

'yes; but in one place the word "sorcerers" come in the same sentence, 
doesn't it? that seem to me to give the key-note. consider: can you 
imagine for a moment that a false statement which save an innocent 
man's life is a sin? no; very good, then, it is not the mere liar who is 
exclude by those words; it is, above all, the "sorcerers" who use the 
material life, who use the failing incidental to material life as 
instrument to obtain their infinite wicked ends. and let me tell you 
this: our higher senses are so blunted, we are so drench with 
materialism, that we should probably fail to recognize real wicked 
if we encounter it.' 

'but shouldn't we experience a certain horror--a terror such as you 
hint we would experience if a rose tree sang--in the mere presence of 
an evil man?' 

'we should if we were natural: children and women feel this horror you 
speak of, even animal experience it. but with most of us convention and 
civilization and education have blind and deafen and obscure the 
natural reason. no, sometimes we may recognize evil by its hatred of the 
good--one doesn't need much penetration to guess at the influence which 
dictated, quite unconsciously, the "blackwood" review of keats--but this 
is purely incidental; and, as a rule, i suspect that the hierarch of 
tophet pass quite unnoticed, or, perhaps, in certain cases, as good but 
mistaken men.' 

'but you use the word "unconscious" just now, of keats' reviewers. is 
wicked ever unconscious?' 

'always. it must be so. it is like holiness and genius in this as in 
other points; it is a certain rapture or ecstasy of the soul; a 
transcendent effort to surpass the ordinary bounds. so, surpassing 
these, it surpass also the understanding, the faculty that take note 
of that which come before it. no, a man may be infinite and horrible 
wicked and never suspect it. but i tell you, evil in this, its certain 
and true sense, is rare, and i think it is grow rarer.' 

'i am try to get hold of it all,' said cotgrave. 'from what you say, 
i gather that the true evil differ generic from that which we call 
evil?' 

'quite so. there is, no doubt, an analogy between the two; a resemblance 
such as enable us to use, quite legitimately, such terms as the "foot 
of the mountain" and the "leg of the table." and, sometimes, of course, 
the two speak, as it were, in the same language. the rough miner, or 
"puddler," the untrained, undeveloped "tiger-man," heated by a quart or 
two above his usual measure, come home and kicks his irritate and 
injudicious wife to death. he is a murderer. and gill de raiz was a 
murderer. but you see the gulf that separate the two? the "word," if i 
may so speak, is accidental the same in each case, but the "meaning" 
is utterly different. it is flagrant "hobson jobson" to confuse the two, 
or rather, it is as if one supposed that juggernaut and the argonaut 
had something to do etymology with one another. and no doubt the 
same weak likeness, or analogy, runs between all the "social" sin and 
the real spiritual sins, and in some cases, perhaps, the lesser may be 
"schoolmasters" to lead one on to the greater--from the shadow to the 
reality. if you are anything of a theologian, you will see the 
importance of all this.' 

'i am sorry to say,' remark cotgrave, 'that i have devoted very little 
of my time to theology. indeed, i have often wonder on what grounds 
theologian have claim the title of science of science for their 
favourite study; since the "theological" books i have look into have 
always seem to me to be concerned with feeble and obvious pieties, or 
with the kings of israel and judah. i do not care to hear about those 
kings.' 

ambrose grinned. 

'we must try to avoid theology discussion,' he said. 'i perceive that 
you would be a bitter disputant. but perhaps the "dates of the kings" 
have as much to do with theology as the hobnail of the murderous 
puddle with evil.' 

'then, to return to our main subject, you think that sin is an esoteric, 
occult thing?' 

'yes. it is the infernal miracle as holiness is the supernal. now and 
then it is raise to such a pitch that we entire fail to suspect its 
existence; it is like the note of the great pedal pipes of the organ, 
which is so deep that we cannot hear it. in other case it may lead to 
the lunatic asylum, or to still stranger issues. but you must never 
confuse it with mere social misdoing. remember how the apostle, speak 
of the "other side," distinguish between "charitable" action and 
charity. and as one may give all one's goods to the poor, and yet lack 
charity; so, remember, one may avoid every crime and yet be a sinner.' 

'your psychology is very strange to me,' said cotgrave, 'but i confess i 
like it, and i suppose that one might fairly deduce from your premiss 
the conclusion that the real sinner might very possibly strike the 
observer as a harmless personage enough?' 

'certainly; because the true evil has nothing to do with social life or 
social laws, or if it has, only incidentally and accidentally. it is a 
lonely passion of the soul--or a passion of the lonely soul--whichever 
you like. if, by chance, we understand it, and grasp its full 
significance, then, indeed, it will fill us with horror and with awe. 
but this emotion is widely distinguished from the fear and the disgust 
with which we regard the ordinary criminal, since this latter is largely 
or entire found on the regard which we have for our own skin or 
purses. we hate a murderer, because we know that we should hate to be 
murdered, or to have any one that we like murdered. so, on the "other 
side," we venerate the saints, but we don't "like" them as we like our 
friends. can you persuade yourself that you would have "enjoyed" st. 
paul's company? do you think that you and i would have "got on" with sir 
galahad? 

'so with the sinners, as with the saints. if you met a very evil man, 
and recognize his evil; he would, no doubt, fill you with horror and 
awe; but there is no reason why you should "dislike" him. on the 
contrary, it is quite possible that if you could succeed in putt the 
sin out of your mind you might find the sinner capital company, and in a 
little while you might have to reason yourself back into horror. still, 
how awful it is. if the rose and the lily sudden sang on this 
coming morning; if the furniture began to move in procession, as in de 
maupassant's tale!' 

'i am glad you have come back to that comparison,' said cotgrave, 
'because i want to ask you what it is that correspond in humanity to 
these imaginary feat of inanimate things. in a word--what is sin? you 
have given me, i know, an abstract definition, but i should like a 
concrete example.' 

'i told you it was very rare,' said ambrose, who appear willing to 
avoid the give of a direct answer. 'the materialism of the age, which 
has done a good deal to suppress sanctity, has done perhaps more to 
suppress evil. we find the earth so very comfortable that we have no 
inclination either for ascent or descents. it would seem as if the 
scholar who decided to "specialize" in tophet, would be reduce to 
purely antiquarian researches. no palæontologist could show you a _live_ 
pterodactyl.' 

'and yet you, i think, have "specialized," and i believe that your 
research have descended to our modern times.' 

'you are really interested, i see. well, i confess, that i have dabble 
a little, and if you like i can show you something that bear on the 
very curious subject we have been discussing.' 

ambrose took a candle and went away to a far, dim corner of the room. 
cotgrave saw him open a venerable bureau that stood there, and from some 
secret recess he drew out a parcel, and came back to the window where 
they had been sitting. 

ambrose undid a wrapping of paper, and produce a green pocket-book. 

'you will take care of it?' he said. 'don't leave it lie about. it is 
one of the choice pieces in my collection, and i should be very sorry 
if it were lost.' 

he fondle the fade binding. 

'i knew the girl who wrote this,' he said. 'when you read it, you will 
see how it illustrate the talk we have had to-night. there is a sequel, 
too, but i won't talk of that.' 

'there was an odd article in one of the review some month ago,' he 
began again, with the air of a man who change the subject. 'it was 
written by a doctor--dr. coryn, i think, was the name. he say that a 
lady, watch her little girl play at the drawing-room window, 
sudden saw the heavy sash give way and fall on the child's fingers. 
the lady fainted, i think, but at any rate the doctor was summoned, and 
when he had dress the child's wound and maim finger he was 
summon to the mother. she was groan with pain, and it was found 
that three finger of her hand, corresponding with those that had been 
injure on the child's hand, were swollen and inflamed, and later, in 
the doctor's language, purulent slough set in.' 

ambrose still handle delicate the green volume. 

'well, here it is,' he said at last, parting with difficulty, it seemed, 
from his treasure. 

'you will bring it back as soon as you have read it,' he said, as they 
went out into the hall, into the old garden, faint with the odour of 
white lilies. 

there was a broad red band in the east as cotgrave turn to go, and 
from the high ground where he stood he saw that awful spectacle of 
london in a dream. 


the green book 

the morocco binding of the book was faded, and the colour had grown 
faint, but there were no stain nor bruise nor mark of usage. the book 
look as if it had been bought 'on a visit to london' some seventy or 
eighty years ago, and had somehow been forgotten and suffer to lie 
away out of sight. there was an old, delicate, lingering odour about it, 
such an odour as sometimes haunt an ancient piece of furniture for a 
century or more. the end-papers, inside the binding, were oddly 
decorate with coloured pattern and fade gold. it look small, but 
the paper was fine, and there were many leaves, close cover with 
minute, painful form characters. 

i found this book (the manuscript began) in a drawer in the old bureau 
that stand on the landing. it was a very rainy day and i could not go 
out, so in the afternoon i got a candle and rummage in the bureau. 
nearly all the drawers were full of old dresses, but one of the small 
one look empty, and i found this book hidden right at the back. i 
want a book like this, so i took it to write in. it is full of 
secrets. i have a great many other books of secret i have written, 
hidden in a safe place, and i am go to write here many of the old 
secret and some new ones; but there are some i shall not put down at 
all. i must not write down the real name of the days and month which i 
found out a year ago, nor the way to make the aklo letters, or the chian 
language, or the great beautiful circles, nor the mao games, nor the 
chief songs. i may write something about all these things but not the 
way to do them, for peculiar reasons. and i must not say who the nymph 
are, or the dôls, or jeelo, or what voola mean. all these are most 
secret secrets, and i am glad when i remember what they are, and how 
many wonderful language i know, but there are some things that i call 
the secret of the secret of the secret that i dare not think of 
unless i am quite alone, and then i shut my eyes, and put my hand over 
them and whisper the word, and the alala comes. i only do this at night 
in my room or in certain wood that i know, but i must not describe 
them, as they are secret woods. then there are the ceremonies, which are 
all of them important, but some are more delightful than others--there 
are the white ceremonies, and the green ceremonies, and the scarlet 
ceremonies. the scarlet ceremony are the best, but there is only one 
place where they can be perform properly, though there is a very nice 
imitation which i have done in other places. besides these, i have the 
dances, and the comedy, and i have done the comedy sometimes when the 
other were looking, and they didn't understand anything about it. i 
was very little when i first knew about these things. 

when i was very small, and mother was alive, i can remember remember 
things before that, only it has all got confused. but i remember when i 
was five or six i heard them talk about me when they thought i was 
not noticing. they were saying how queer i was a year or two before, and 
how nurse had call my mother to come and listen to me talk all to 
myself, and i was saying words that nobody could understand. i was 
speak the xu language, but i only remember a very few of the words, 
as it was about the little white face that use to look at me when i 
was lie in my cradle. they use to talk to me, and i learnt their 
language and talk to them in it about some great white place where 
they lived, where the tree and the grass were all white, and there were 
white hill as high up as the moon, and a cold wind. i have often 
dream of it afterwards, but the face went away when i was very 
little. but a wonderful thing happen when i was about five. my nurse 
was carry me on her shoulder; there was a field of yellow corn, and 
we went through it, it was very hot. then we came to a path through a 
wood, and a tall man came after us, and went with us till we came to a 
place where there was a deep pool, and it was very dark and shady. nurse 
put me down on the soft moss under a tree, and she said: 'she can't get 
to the pond now.' so they left me there, and i sat quite still and 
watched, and out of the water and out of the wood came two wonderful 
white people, and they began to play and dance and sing. they were a 
kind of creamy white like the old ivory figure in the drawing-room; one 
was a beautiful lady with kind dark eyes, and a grave face, and long 
black hair, and she smile such a strange sad smile at the other, who 
laugh and came to her. they play together, and dance round and 
round the pool, and they sang a song till i fell asleep. nurse woke me 
up when she came back, and she was look something like the lady had 
looked, so i told her all about it, and ask her why she look like 
that. at first she cried, and then she look very frightened, and 
turn quite pale. she put me down on the grass and stare at me, and i 
could see she was shake all over. then she said i had been dreaming, 
but i knew i hadn't. then she made me promise not to say a word about it 
to anybody, and if i did i should be thrown into the black pit. i was 
not frightened at all, though nurse was, and i never forgot about it, 
because when i shut my eyes and it was quite quiet, and i was all alone, 
i could see them again, very faint and far away, but very splendid; and 
little bit of the song they sang came into my head, but i couldn't sing 
it. 

i was thirteen, nearly fourteen, when i had a very singular adventure, 
so strange that the day on which it happen is always call the white 
day. my mother had been dead for more than a year, and in the morning i 
had lessons, but they let me go out for walk in the afternoon. and this 
afternoon i walk a new way, and a little brook led me into a new 
country, but i tore my frock get through some of the difficult 
places, as the way was through many bushes, and beneath the low branch 
of trees, and up thorny thicket on the hills, and by dark wood full of 
creep thorns. and it was a long, long way. it seem as if i was 
go on for ever and ever, and i had to creep by a place like a tunnel 
where a brook must have been, but all the water had dry up, and the 
floor was rocky, and the bush had grown overhead till they met, so 
that it was quite dark. and i went on and on through that dark place; it 
was a long, long way. and i came to a hill that i never saw before. i 
was in a dismal thicket full of black twist bough that tore me as i 
went through them, and i cry out because i was smart all over, and 
then i found that i was climbing, and i went up and up a long way, till 
at last the thicket stop and i came out crying just under the top of 
a big bare place, where there were ugly grey stone lie all about on 
the grass, and here and there a little twisted, stunt tree came out 
from under a stone, like a snake. and i went up, right to the top, a 
long way. i never saw such big ugly stone before; they came out of the 
earth some of them, and some look as if they had been roll to where 
they were, and they went on and on as far as i could see, a long, long 
way. i look out from them and saw the country, but it was strange. it 
was winter time, and there were black terrible wood hanging from the 
hill all round; it was like seeing a large room hung with black 
curtains, and the shape of the tree seem quite different from any i 
had ever seen before. i was afraid. then beyond the wood there were 
other hill round in a great ring, but i had never seen any of them; it 
all look black, and everything had a voor over it. it was all so still 
and silent, and the sky was heavy and grey and sad, like a wicked 
voorish dome in deep dendo. i went on into the dreadful rocks. there 
were hundred and hundred of them. some were like horrid-grinning men; 
i could see their face as if they would jump at me out of the stone, 
and catch hold of me, and drag me with them back into the rock, so that 
i should always be there. and there were other rocks that were like 
animals, creeping, horrible animals, putt out their tongues, and 
other were like words that i could not say, and other like dead people 
lie on the grass. i went on among them, though they frightened me, and 
my heart was full of wicked song that they put into it; and i want to 
make face and twist myself about in the way they did, and i went on and 
on a long way till at last i like the rocks, and they didn't frighten 
me any more. i sang the song i thought of; song full of words that 
must not be spoken or written down. then i made face like the face on 
the rocks, and i twist myself about like the twist ones, and i lay 
down flat on the ground like the dead ones, and i went up to one that 
was grinning, and put my arms round him and hug him. and so i went on 
and on through the rocks till i came to a round mound in the middle of 
them. it was higher than a mound, it was nearly as high as our house, 
and it was like a great basin turn upside down, all smooth and round 
and green, with one stone, like a post, stick up at the top. i 
climb up the sides, but they were so steep i had to stop or i should 
have roll all the way down again, and i should have knock against 
the stone at the bottom, and perhaps been killed. but i want to get 
up to the very top of the big round mound, so i lay down flat on my 
face, and took hold of the grass with my hand and drew myself up, bit 
by bit, till i was at the top. then i sat down on the stone in the 
middle, and look all round about. i felt i had come such a long, long 
way, just as if i were a hundred mile from home, or in some other 
country, or in one of the strange place i had read about in the 'tales 
of the genie' and the 'arabian nights,' or as if i had gone across the 
sea, far away, for years and i had found another world that nobody had 
ever seen or heard of before, or as if i had somehow flown through the 
sky and fallen on one of the stars i had read about where everything is 
dead and cold and grey, and there is no air, and the wind doesn't blow. 
i sat on the stone and look all round and down and round about me. it 
was just as if i was sitting on a tower in the middle of a great empty 
town, because i could see nothing all around but the grey rocks on the 
ground. i couldn't make out their shape any more, but i could see them 
on and on for a long way, and i look at them, and they seem as if 
they had been arrange into patterns, and shapes, and figures. i knew 
they couldn't be, because i had seen a lot of them coming right out of 
the earth, join to the deep rocks below, so i look again, but still 
i saw nothing but circles, and small circle inside big ones, and 
pyramids, and domes, and spires, and they seem all to go round and 
round the place where i was sitting, and the more i looked, the more i 
saw great big ring of rocks, get big and bigger, and i stare so 
long that it felt as if they were all moving and turning, like a great 
wheel, and i was turning, too, in the middle. i got quite dizzy and 
queer in the head, and everything began to be hazy and not clear, and i 
saw little sparks of blue light, and the stone look as if they were 
spring and dance and twist as they went round and round and 
round. i was frightened again, and i cry out loud, and jump up from 
the stone i was sitting on, and fell down. when i got up i was so glad 
they all look still, and i sat down on the top and slid down the 
mound, and went on again. i dance as i went in the peculiar way the 
rocks had dance when i got giddy, and i was so glad i could do it quite 
well, and i dance and dance along, and sang extraordinary song that 
came into my head. at last i came to the edge of that great flat hill, 
and there were no more rocks, and the way went again through a dark 
thicket in a hollow. it was just as bad as the other one i went through 
climb up, but i didn't mind this one, because i was so glad i had 
seen those singular dance and could imitate them. i went down, creep 
through the bushes, and a tall nettle stung me on my leg, and made me 
burn, but i didn't mind it, and i tingle with the bough and the 
thorns, but i only laugh and sang. then i got out of the thicket into 
a close valley, a little secret place like a dark passage that nobody 
ever know of, because it was so narrow and deep and the wood were so 
thick round it. there is a steep bank with tree hanging over it, and 
there the fern keep green all through the winter, when they are dead 
and brown upon the hill, and the fern there have a sweet, rich smell 
like what ooze out of fir trees. there was a little stream of water 
running down this valley, so small that i could easily step across it. i 
drank the water with my hand, and it taste like bright, yellow wine, 
and it sparkle and bubble as it ran down over beautiful red and yellow 
and green stones, so that it seem alive and all colours at once. i 
drank it, and i drank more with my hand, but i couldn't drink enough, 
so i lay down and bent my head and suck the water up with my lips. it 
taste much better, drink it that way, and a ripple would come up to 
my mouth and give me a kiss, and i laughed, and drank again, and 
pretended there was a nymph, like the one in the old picture at home, 
who live in the water and was kiss me. so i bent low down to the 
water, and put my lip soft to it, and whisper to the nymph that i 
would come again. i felt sure it could not be common water, i was so 
glad when i got up and went on; and i dance again and went up and up 
the valley, under hanging hills. and when i came to the top, the ground 
rose up in front of me, tall and steep as a wall, and there was nothing 
but the green wall and the sky. i thought of 'for ever and for ever, 
world without end, amen'; and i thought i must have really found the end 
of the world, because it was like the end of everything, as if there 
could be nothing at all beyond, except the kingdom of voor, where the 
light go when it is put out, and the water go when the sun take it 
away. i began to think of all the long, long way i had journeyed, how i 
had found a brook and follow it, and follow it on, and gone through 
bush and thorny thickets, and dark wood full of creep thorns. then 
i had crept up a tunnel under trees, and climb a thicket, and seen all 
the grey rocks, and sat in the middle of them when they turn round, 
and then i had gone on through the grey rocks and come down the hill 
through the sting thicket and up the dark valley, all a long, long 
way. i wonder how i should get home again, if i could ever find the 
way, and if my home was there any more, or if it were turn and 
everybody in it into grey rocks, as in the 'arabian nights.' so i sat 
down on the grass and thought what i should do next. i was tired, and my 
feet were hot with walking, and as i look about i saw there was a 
wonderful well just under the high, steep wall of grass. all the ground 
round it was cover with bright, green, dripping moss; there was every 
kind of moss there, moss like beautiful little ferns, and like palm and 
fir trees, and it was all green as jewellery, and drops of water hung on 
it like diamonds. and in the middle was the great well, deep and shining 
and beautiful, so clear that it look as if i could touch the red sand 
at the bottom, but it was far below. i stood by it and look in, as if 
i were look in a glass. at the bottom of the well, in the middle of 
it, the red grain of sand were moving and stirring all the time, and i 
saw how the water bubble up, but at the top it was quite smooth, and 
full and brimming. it was a great well, large like a bath, and with the 
shining, glittering green moss about it, it look like a great white 
jewel, with green jewel all round. my feet were so hot and tired that i 
took off my boots and stockings, and let my feet down into the water, 
and the water was soft and cold, and when i got up i wasn't tired any 
more, and i felt i must go on, farther and farther, and see what was on 
the other side of the wall. i climb up it very slowly, go sideways 
all the time, and when i got to the top and look over, i was in the 
queerest country i had seen, stranger even than the hill of the grey 
rocks. it look as if earth-children had been play there with their 
spades, as it was all hill and hollows, and castle and wall made of 
earth and cover with grass. there were two mound like big beehives, 
round and great and solemn, and then hollow basins, and then a steep 
mount wall like the one i saw once by the seaside where the big gun 
and the soldier were. i nearly fell into one of the round hollows, it 
went away from under my feet so suddenly, and i ran fast down the side 
and stood at the bottom and look up. it was strange and solemn to look 
up. there was nothing but the grey, heavy sky and the side of the 
hollow; everything else had gone away, and the hollow was the whole 
world, and i thought that at night it must be full of ghost and moving 
shadow and pale things when the moon shone down to the bottom at the 
dead of the night, and the wind wail up above. it was so strange and 
solemn and lonely, like a hollow temple of dead heathen gods. it 
remind me of a tale my nurse had told me when i was quite little; it 
was the same nurse that took me into the wood where i saw the beautiful 
white people. and i remember how nurse had told me the story one 
winter night, when the wind was beating the tree against the wall, and 
crying and moan in the nursery chimney. she said there was, somewhere 
or other, a hollow pit, just like the one i was standing in, everybody 
was afraid to go into it or near it, it was such a bad place. but once 
upon a time there was a poor girl who said she would go into the hollow 
pit, and everybody try to stop her, but she would go. and she went 
down into the pit and came back laughing, and said there was nothing 
there at all, except green grass and red stones, and white stone and 
yellow flowers. and soon after people saw she had most beautiful emerald 
earrings, and they ask how she got them, as she and her mother were 
quite poor. but she laughed, and said her earring were not made of 
emerald at all, but only of green grass. then, one day, she wore on her 
breast the reddest ruby that any one had ever seen, and it was as big as 
a hen's egg, and glow and sparkle like a hot burning coal of fire. 
and they ask how she got it, as she and her mother were quite poor. 
but she laughed, and said it was not a ruby at all, but only a red 
stone. then one day she wore round her neck the loveliest necklace that 
any one had ever seen, much fine than the queen's finest, and it was 
made of great bright diamonds, hundred of them, and they shone like all 
the stars on a night in june. so they ask her how she got it, as she 
and her mother were quite poor. but she laughed, and said they were not 
diamond at all, but only white stones. and one day she went to the 
court, and she wore on her head a crown of pure angel-gold, so nurse 
said, and it shone like the sun, and it was much more splendid than the 
crown the king was wearing himself, and in her ear she wore the 
emeralds, and the big ruby was the brooch on her breast, and the great 
diamond necklace was sparkle on her neck. and the king and queen 
thought she was some great princess from a long way off, and got down 
from their throne and went to meet her, but somebody told the king and 
queen who she was, and that she was quite poor. so the king ask why 
she wore a gold crown, and how she got it, as she and her mother were so 
poor. and she laughed, and said it wasn't a gold crown at all, but only 
some yellow flower she had put in her hair. and the king thought it was 
very strange, and said she should stay at the court, and they would see 
what would happen next. and she was so lovely that everybody said that 
her eyes were green than the emeralds, that her lip were red than 
the ruby, that her skin was white than the diamonds, and that her hair 
was bright than the golden crown. so the king's son said he would 
marry her, and the king said he might. and the bishop married them, and 
there was a great supper, and afterwards the king's son went to his 
wife's room. but just when he had his hand on the door, he saw a tall, 
black man, with a dreadful face, standing in front of the door, and a 
voice said-- 

venture not upon your life, 
this is mine own wedded wife. 

then the king's son fell down on the ground in a fit. and they came and 
try to get into the room, but they couldn't, and they hack at the 
door with hatchets, but the wood had turn hard as iron, and at last 
everybody ran away, they were so frightened at the scream and 
laugh and shriek and crying that came out of the room. but next 
day they went in, and found there was nothing in the room but thick 
black smoke, because the black man had come and taken her away. and on 
the bed there were two knot of fade grass and a red stone, and some 
white stones, and some fade yellow flowers. i remember this tale of 
nurse's while i was standing at the bottom of the deep hollow; it was so 
strange and solitary there, and i felt afraid. i could not see any 
stone or flowers, but i was afraid of bring them away without 
knowing, and i thought i would do a charm that came into my head to 
keep the black man away. so i stood right in the very middle of the 
hollow, and i made sure that i had none of those things on me, and then 
i walk round the place, and touched my eyes, and my lips, and my hair 
in a peculiar manner, and whisper some queer words that nurse taught 
me to keep bad things away. then i felt safe and climb up out of the 
hollow, and went on through all those mound and hollow and walls, till 
i came to the end, which was high above all the rest, and i could see 
that all the different shape of the earth were arrange in patterns, 
something like the grey rocks, only the pattern was different. it was 
get late, and the air was indistinct, but it look from where i was 
standing something like two great figures of people lie on the grass. 
and i went on, and at last i found a certain wood, which is too secret 
to be described, and nobody know of the passage into it, which i found 
out in a very curious manner, by seeing some little animal run into the 
wood through it. so i went after the animal by a very narrow dark way, 
under thorn and bushes, and it was almost dark when i came to a kind of 
open place in the middle. and there i saw the most wonderful sight i 
have ever seen, but it was only for a minute, as i ran away directly, 
and crept out of the wood by the passage i had come by, and ran and ran 
as fast as ever i could, because i was afraid, what i had seen was so 
wonderful and so strange and beautiful. but i want to get home and 
think of it, and i did not know what might not happen if i stay by the 
wood. i was hot all over and trembling, and my heart was beating, and 
strange cries that i could not help came from me as i ran from the 
wood. i was glad that a great white moon came up from over a round hill 
and show me the way, so i went back through the mound and hollow and 
down the close valley, and up through the thicket over the place of the 
grey rocks, and so at last i got home again. my father was busy in his 
study, and the servant had not told about my not coming home, though 
they were frightened, and wonder what they ought to do, so i told them 
i had lost my way, but i did not let them find out the real way i had 
been. i went to bed and lay awake all through the night, thinking of 
what i had seen. when i came out of the narrow way, and it look all 
shining, though the air was dark, it seem so certain, and all the way 
home i was quite sure that i had seen it, and i want to be alone in my 
room, and be glad over it all to myself, and shut my eyes and pretend it 
was there, and do all the things i would have done if i had not been so 
afraid. but when i shut my eyes the sight would not come, and i began to 
think about my adventure all over again, and i remember how dusky and 
queer it was at the end, and i was afraid it must be all a mistake, 
because it seem impossible it could happen. it seem like one of 
nurse's tales, which i didn't really believe in, though i was frightened 
at the bottom of the hollow; and the story she told me when i was 
little came back into my head, and i wonder whether it was really 
there what i thought i had seen, or whether any of her tale could have 
happen a long time ago. it was so queer; i lay awake there in my room 
at the back of the house, and the moon was shining on the other side 
towards the river, so the bright light did not fall upon the wall. and 
the house was quite still. i had heard my father come upstairs, and just 
after the clock struck twelve, and after the house was still and empty, 
as if there was nobody alive in it. and though it was all dark and 
indistinct in my room, a pale glimmer kind of light shone in through 
the white blind, and once i got up and look out, and there was a great 
black shadow of the house covering the garden, look like a prison 
where men are hanged; and then beyond it was all white; and the wood 
shone white with black gulf between the trees. it was still and clear, 
and there were no cloud on the sky. i want to think of what i had 
seen but i couldn't, and i began to think of all the tale that nurse 
had told me so long ago that i thought i had forgotten, but they all 
came back, and mixed up with the thicket and the grey rocks and the 
hollow in the earth and the secret wood, till i hardly knew what was 
new and what was old, or whether it was not all dreaming. and then i 
remember that hot summer afternoon, so long ago, when nurse left me by 
myself in the shade, and the white people came out of the water and out 
of the wood, and played, and danced, and sang, and i began to fancy that 
nurse told me about something like it before i saw them, only i couldn't 
recollect exactly what she told me. then i wonder whether she had been 
the white lady, as i remember she was just as white and beautiful, and 
had the same dark eyes and black hair; and sometimes she smile and 
look like the lady had looked, when she was telling me some of her 
stories, beginning with 'once on a time,' or 'in the time of the 
fairies.' but i thought she couldn't be the lady, as she seem to have 
gone a different way into the wood, and i didn't think the man who came 
after us could be the other, or i couldn't have seen that wonderful 
secret in the secret wood. i thought of the moon: but it was afterwards 
when i was in the middle of the wild land, where the earth was made into 
the shape of great figures, and it was all walls, and mysterious 
hollows, and smooth round mounds, that i saw the great white moon come 
up over a round hill. i was wonder about all these things, till at 
last i got quite frightened, because i was afraid something had happen 
to me, and i remember nurse's tale of the poor girl who went into the 
hollow pit, and was carry away at last by the black man. i knew i had 
gone into a hollow pit too, and perhaps it was the same, and i had done 
something dreadful. so i did the charm over again, and touched my eyes 
and my lip and my hair in a peculiar manner, and said the old words 
from the fairy language, so that i might be sure i had not been carry 
away. i try again to see the secret wood, and to creep up the passage 
and see what i had seen there, but somehow i couldn't, and i kept on 
thinking of nurse's stories. there was one i remember about a young 
man who once upon a time went hunting, and all the day he and his hound 
hunt everywhere, and they cross the river and went into all the 
woods, and went round the marshes, but they couldn't find anything at 
all, and they hunt all day till the sun sank down and began to set 
behind the mountain. and the young man was angry because he couldn't 
find anything, and he was go to turn back, when just as the sun 
touched the mountain, he saw come out of a brake in front of him a 
beautiful white stag. and he cheer to his hounds, but they whine and 
would not follow, and he cheer to his horse, but it shiver and stood 
stock still, and the young man jump off the horse and left the hound 
and began to follow the white stag all alone. and soon it was quite 
dark, and the sky was black, without a single star shining in it, and 
the stag went away into the darkness. and though the man had brought his 
gun with him he never shot at the stag, because he want to catch it, 
and he was afraid he would lose it in the night. but he never lost it 
once, though the sky was so black and the air was so dark, and the stag 
went on and on till the young man didn't know a bit where he was. and 
they went through enormous wood where the air was full of whisper and 
a pale, dead light came out from the rotten trunks that were lie on 
the ground, and just as the man thought he had lost the stag, he would 
see it all white and shining in front of him, and he would run fast to 
catch it, but the stag always ran faster, so he did not catch it. and 
they went through the enormous woods, and they swam across rivers, and 
they wade through black marsh where the ground bubbled, and the air 
was full of will-o'-the-wisps, and the stag flee away down into rocky 
narrow valleys, where the air was like the smell of a vault, and the man 
went after it. and they went over the great mountain and the man heard 
the wind come down from the sky, and the stag went on and the man went 
after. at last the sun rose and the young man found he was in a country 
that he had never seen before; it was a beautiful valley with a bright 
stream running through it, and a great, big round hill in the middle. 
and the stag went down the valley, towards the hill, and it seem to 
be get tired and went slow and slower, and though the man was 
tired, too, he began to run faster, and he was sure he would catch the 
stag at last. but just as they got to the bottom of the hill, and the 
man stretch out his hand to catch the stag, it vanish into the 
earth, and the man began to cry; he was so sorry that he had lost it 
after all his long hunting. but as he was crying he saw there was a door 
in the hill, just in front of him, and he went in, and it was quite 
dark, but he went on, as he thought he would find the white stag. and 
all of a sudden it got light, and there was the sky, and the sun 
shining, and bird singing in the trees, and there was a beautiful 
fountain. and by the fountain a lovely lady was sitting, who was the 
queen of the fairies, and she told the man that she had change herself 
into a stag to bring him there because she love him so much. then she 
brought out a great gold cup, cover with jewels, from her fairy 
palace, and she offer him wine in the cup to drink. and he drank, and 
the more he drank the more he long to drink, because the wine was 
enchanted. so he kiss the lovely lady, and she became his wife, and he 
stay all that day and all that night in the hill where she lived, and 
when he woke he found he was lie on the ground, close to where he had 
seen the stag first, and his horse was there and his hound were there 
waiting, and he look up, and the sun sank behind the mountain. and he 
went home and live a long time, but he would never kiss any other lady 
because he had kiss the queen of the fairies, and he would never drink 
common wine any more, because he had drunk enchant wine. and sometimes 
nurse told me tale that she had heard from her great-grandmother, who 
was very old, and live in a cottage on the mountain all alone, and most 
of these tale were about a hill where people use to meet at night long 
ago, and they use to play all sort of strange games and do queer 
things that nurse told me of, but i couldn't understand, and now, she 
said, everybody but her great-grandmother had forgotten all about it, 
and nobody knew where the hill was, not even her great-grandmother. but 
she told me one very strange story about the hill, and i tremble when i 
remember it. she said that people always went there in summer, when it 
was very hot, and they had to dance a good deal. it would be all dark at 
first, and there were tree there, which made it much darker, and people 
would come, one by one, from all directions, by a secret path which 
nobody else knew, and two person would keep the gate, and every one as 
they came up had to give a very curious sign, which nurse show me as 
well as she could, but she said she couldn't show me properly. and all 
kind of people would come; there would be gentle folks and village 
folks, and some old people and boys and girls, and quite small children, 
who sat and watched. and it would all be dark as they came in, except in 
one corner where some one was burning something that smelt strong and 
sweet, and made them laugh, and there one would see a glaring of coals, 
and the smoke mount up red. so they would all come in, and when the 
last had come there was no door any more, so that no one else could get 
in, even if they knew there was anything beyond. and once a gentleman 
who was a stranger and had ridden a long way, lost his path at night, 
and his horse took him into the very middle of the wild country, where 
everything was upside down, and there were dreadful marsh and great 
stone everywhere, and hole underfoot, and the tree look like 
gibbet-posts, because they had great black arms that stretch out 
across the way. and this strange gentleman was very frightened, and his 
horse began to shiver all over, and at last it stop and wouldn't go 
any farther, and the gentleman got down and try to lead the horse, but 
it wouldn't move, and it was all cover with a sweat, like death. so 
the gentleman went on all alone, go farther and farther into the wild 
country, till at last he came to a dark place, where he heard shouting 
and singing and crying, like nothing he had ever heard before. it all 
sound quite close to him, but he couldn't get in, and so he began to 
call, and while he was calling, something came behind him, and in a 
minute his mouth and arms and leg were all bound up, and he fell into a 
swoon. and when he came to himself, he was lie by the roadside, just 
where he had first lost his way, under a blasted oak with a black trunk, 
and his horse was tie beside him. so he rode on to the town and told 
the people there what had happened, and some of them were amazed; but 
other knew. so when once everybody had come, there was no door at all 
for anybody else to pass in by. and when they were all inside, round in 
a ring, touching each other, some one began to sing in the darkness, and 
some one else would make a noise like thunder with a thing they had on 
purpose, and on still nights people would hear the thundering noise far, 
far away beyond the wild land, and some of them, who thought they knew 
what it was, use to make a sign on their breast when they woke up in 
their bed at dead of night and heard that terrible deep noise, like 
thunder on the mountains. and the noise and the singing would go on and 
on for a long time, and the people who were in a ring sway a little to 
and fro; and the song was in an old, old language that nobody know now, 
and the tune was queer. nurse said her great-grandmother had known some 
one who remember a little of it, when she was quite a little girl, and 
nurse try to sing some of it to me, and it was so strange a tune that 
i turn all cold and my flesh crept as if i had put my hand on 
something dead. sometimes it was a man that sang and sometimes it was a 
woman, and sometimes the one who sang it did it so well that two or 
three of the people who were there fell to the ground shriek and 
tear with their hands. the singing went on, and the people in the 
ring kept sway to and fro for a long time, and at last the moon would 
rise over a place they call the tole deol, and came up and show them 
swinging and sway from side to side, with the sweet thick smoke 
curling up from the burning coals, and floating in circle all around 
them. then they had their supper. a boy and a girl brought it to them; 
the boy carry a great cup of wine, and the girl carry a cake of 
bread, and they pass the bread and the wine round and round, but they 
taste quite different from common bread and common wine, and change 
everybody that taste them. then they all rose up and danced, and secret 
things were brought out of some hiding place, and they play 
extraordinary games, and dance round and round and round in the 
moonlight, and sometimes people would sudden disappear and never be 
heard of afterwards, and nobody knew what had happen to them. and 
they drank more of that curious wine, and they made image and 
worship them, and nurse show me how the image were made one day 
when we were out for a walk, and we pass by a place where there was a 
lot of wet clay. so nurse ask me if i would like to know what those 
things were like that they made on the hill, and i said yes. then she 
ask me if i would promise never to tell a living soul a word about it, 
and if i did i was to be thrown into the black pit with the dead people, 
and i said i wouldn't tell anybody, and she said the same thing again 
and again, and i promised. so she took my wooden spade and dug a big 
lump of clay and put it in my tin bucket, and told me to say if any one 
met us that i was go to make pie when i went home. then we went on a 
little way till we came to a little brake grow right down into the 
road, and nurse stopped, and look up the road and down it, and then 
peep through the hedge into the field on the other side, and then she 
said, 'quick!' and we ran into the brake, and crept in and out among the 
bush till we had gone a good way from the road. then we sat down under 
a bush, and i want so much to know what nurse was go to make with 
the clay, but before she would begin she made me promise again not to 
say a word about it, and she went again and peep through the bush on 
every side, though the lane was so small and deep that hardly anybody 
ever went there. so we sat down, and nurse took the clay out of the 
bucket, and began to knead it with her hands, and do queer things with 
it, and turn it about. and she hid it under a big dock-leaf for a minute 
or two and then she brought it out again, and then she stood up and sat 
down, and walk round the clay in a peculiar manner, and all the time 
she was soft singing a sort of rhyme, and her face got very red. then 
she sat down again, and took the clay in her hand and began to shape it 
into a doll, but not like the doll i have at home, and she made the 
queerest doll i had ever seen, all out of the wet clay, and hid it under 
a bush to get dry and hard, and all the time she was making it she was 
singing these rhyme to herself, and her face got red and redder. so 
we left the doll there, hidden away in the bush where nobody would 
ever find it. and a few days later we went the same walk, and when we 
came to that narrow, dark part of the lane where the brake runs down to 
the bank, nurse made me promise all over again, and she look about, 
just as she had done before, and we crept into the bush till we got to 
the green place where the little clay man was hidden. i remember it all 
so well, though i was only eight, and it is eight years ago now as i am 
writing it down, but the sky was a deep violet blue, and in the middle 
of the brake where we were sitting there was a great elder tree cover 
with blossoms, and on the other side there was a clump of meadowsweet, 
and when i think of that day the smell of the meadowsweet and elder 
blossom seem to fill the room, and if i shut my eyes i can see the 
glaring blue sky, with little cloud very white floating across it, and 
nurse who went away long ago sitting opposite me and look like the 
beautiful white lady in the wood. so we sat down and nurse took out the 
clay doll from the secret place where she had hidden it, and she said we 
must 'pay our respects,' and she would show me what to do, and i must 
watch her all the time. so she did all sort of queer things with the 
little clay man, and i notice she was all stream with perspiration, 
though we had walk so slowly, and then she told me to 'pay my 
respects,' and i did everything she did because i like her, and it was 
such an odd game. and she said that if one love very much, the clay man 
was very good, if one did certain things with it, and if one hate very 
much, it was just as good, only one had to do different things, and we 
play with it a long time, and pretended all sort of things. nurse 
said her great-grandmother had told her all about these images, but what 
we did was no harm at all, only a game. but she told me a story about 
these image that frightened me very much, and that was what i 
remember that night when i was lie awake in my room in the pale, 
empty darkness, thinking of what i had seen and the secret wood. nurse 
said there was once a young lady of the high gentry, who live in a 
great castle. and she was so beautiful that all the gentlemen want to 
marry her, because she was the loveliest lady that anybody had ever 
seen, and she was kind to everybody, and everybody thought she was very 
good. but though she was polite to all the gentlemen who wish to marry 
her, she put them off, and said she couldn't make up her mind, and she 
wasn't sure she want to marry anybody at all. and her father, who was 
a very great lord, was angry, though he was so fond of her, and he ask 
her why she wouldn't choose a bachelor out of all the handsome young men 
who came to the castle. but she only said she didn't love any of them 
very much, and she must wait, and if they pester her, she said she 
would go and be a nun in a nunnery. so all the gentlemen said they 
would go away and wait for a year and a day, and when a year and a day 
were gone, they would come back again and ask her to say which one she 
would marry. so the day was appoint and they all went away; and the 
lady had promise that in a year and a day it would be her wedding day 
with one of them. but the truth was, that she was the queen of the 
people who dance on the hill on summer nights, and on the proper nights 
she would lock the door of her room, and she and her maid would steal 
out of the castle by a secret passage that only they knew of, and go 
away up to the hill in the wild land. and she knew more of the secret 
things than any one else, and more than any one knew before or after, 
because she would not tell anybody the most secret secrets. she knew how 
to do all the awful things, how to destroy young men, and how to put a 
curse on people, and other things that i could not understand. and her 
real name was the lady avelin, but the dance people call her cassap, 
which meant somebody very wise, in the old language. and she was white 
than any of them and taller, and her eyes shone in the dark like burning 
rubies; and she could sing song that none of the other could sing, and 
when she sang they all fell down on their face and worship her. and 
she could do what they call shib-show, which was a very wonderful 
enchantment. she would tell the great lord, her father, that she want 
to go into the wood to gather flowers, so he let her go, and she and 
her maid went into the wood where nobody came, and the maid would keep 
watch. then the lady would lie down under the tree and begin to sing a 
particular song, and she stretch out her arms, and from every part of 
the wood great serpent would come, hiss and gliding in and out among 
the trees, and shoot out their forked tongue as they crawl up to 
the lady. and they all came to her, and twist round her, round her 
body, and her arms, and her neck, till she was cover with writhe 
serpents, and there was only her head to be seen. and she whisper to 
them, and she sang to them, and they writhe round and round, fast and 
faster, till she told them to go. and they all went away directly, back 
to their holes, and on the lady's breast there would be a most curious, 
beautiful stone, shaped something like an egg, and coloured dark blue 
and yellow, and red, and green, marked like a serpent's scales. it was 
call a glame stone, and with it one could do all sort of wonderful 
things, and nurse said her great-grandmother had seen a glame stone with 
her own eyes, and it was for all the world shiny and scaly like a snake. 
and the lady could do a lot of other things as well, but she was quite 
fixed that she would not be married. and there were a great many 
gentlemen who want to marry her, but there were five of them who were 
chief, and their name were sir simon, sir john, sir oliver, sir 
richard, and sir rowland. all the other believe she spoke the truth, 
and that she would choose one of them to be her man when a year and a 
day was done; it was only sir simon, who was very crafty, who thought 
she was deceive them all, and he vow he would watch and try if he 
could find out anything. and though he was very wise he was very young, 
and he had a smooth, soft face like a girl's, and he pretended, as the 
rest did, that he would not come to the castle for a year and a day, and 
he said he was go away beyond the sea to foreign parts. but he 
really only went a very little way, and came back dress like a servant 
girl, and so he got a place in the castle to wash the dishes. and he 
wait and watched, and he listen and said nothing, and he hid in dark 
places, and woke up at night and look out, and he heard things and he 
saw things that he thought were very strange. and he was so sly that he 
told the girl that wait on the lady that he was really a young man, 
and that he had dress up as a girl because he love her so very much 
and want to be in the same house with her, and the girl was so pleased 
that she told him many things, and he was more than ever certain that 
the lady avelin was deceive him and the others. and he was so clever, 
and told the servant so many lies, that one night he manage to hide in 
the lady avelin's room behind the curtains. and he stay quite still 
and never moved, and at last the lady came. and she bent down under the 
bed, and raise up a stone, and there was a hollow place underneath, and 
out of it she took a waxen image, just like the clay one that i and 
nurse had made in the brake. and all the time her eyes were burning like 
rubies. and she took the little wax doll up in her arms and held it to 
her breast, and she whisper and she murmured, and she took it up and 
she laid it down again, and she held it high, and she held it low, and 
she laid it down again. and she said, 'happy is he that begat the 
bishop, that ordered the clerk, that married the man, that had the wife, 
that fashion the hive, that harbour the bee, that gather the wax 
that my own true love was made of.' and she brought out of an aumbry a 
great golden bowl, and she brought out of a closet a great jar of wine, 
and she pour some of the wine into the bowl, and she laid her mannikin 
very gently in the wine, and wash it in the wine all over. then she 
went to a cupboard and took a small round cake and laid it on the 
image's mouth, and then she bore it soft and cover it up. and sir 
simon, who was watch all the time, though he was terribly frightened, 
saw the lady bend down and stretch out her arms and whisper and sing, 
and then sir simon saw beside her a handsome young man, who kiss her 
on the lips. and they drank wine out of the golden bowl together, and 
they ate the cake together. but when the sun rose there was only the 
little wax doll, and the lady hid it again under the bed in the hollow 
place. so sir simon knew quite well what the lady was, and he wait and 
he watched, till the time she had said was nearly over, and in a week 
the year and a day would be done. and one night, when he was watch 
behind the curtains in her room, he saw her making more wax dolls. and 
she made five, and hid them away. and the next night she took one out, 
and held it up, and fill the golden bowl with water, and took the doll 
by the neck and held it under the water. then she said-- 

sir dickon, sir dickon, your day is done, 
you shall be drown in the water wan. 

and the next day news came to the castle that sir richard had been 
drown at the ford. and at night she took another doll and tie a 
violet cord round its neck and hung it up on a nail. then she said-- 

sir rowland, your life has end its span, 
high on a tree i see you hang. 

and the next day news came to the castle that sir rowland had been 
hang by robber in the wood. and at night she took another doll, and 
drove her bodkin right into its heart. then she said-- 

sir noll, sir noll, so cease your life, 
your heart piercèd with the knife. 

and the next day news came to the castle that sir olive had fought in a 
tavern, and a stranger had stab him to the heart. and at night she 
took another doll, and held it to a fire of charcoal till it was melted. 
then she said-- 

sir john, return, and turn to clay, 
in fire of fever you waste away. 

and the next day news came to the castle that sir john had die in a 
burning fever. so then sir simon went out of the castle and mount his 
horse and rode away to the bishop and told him everything. and the 
bishop sent his men, and they took the lady avelin, and everything she 
had done was found out. so on the day after the year and a day, when she 
was to have been married, they carry her through the town in her 
smock, and they tie her to a great stake in the market-place, and 
burn her alive before the bishop with her wax image hung round her 
neck. and people said the wax man scream in the burning of the flames. 
and i thought of this story again and again as i was lie awake in my 
bed, and i seem to see the lady avelin in the market-place, with the 
yellow flame eat up her beautiful white body. and i thought of it so 
much that i seem to get into the story myself, and i fancy i was the 
lady, and that they were coming to take me to be burnt with fire, with 
all the people in the town look at me. and i wonder whether she 
cared, after all the strange things she had done, and whether it hurt 
very much to be burn at the stake. i try again and again to forget 
nurse's stories, and to remember the secret i had seen that afternoon, 
and what was in the secret wood, but i could only see the dark and a 
glimmer in the dark, and then it went away, and i only saw myself 
running, and then a great moon came up white over a dark round hill. 
then all the old story came back again, and the queer rhyme that 
nurse use to sing to me; and there was one beginning 'halsy cumsy helen 
musty,' that she use to sing very soft when she want me to go to 
sleep. and i began to sing it to myself inside of my head, and i went to 
sleep. 

the next morning i was very tired and sleepy, and could hardly do my 
lessons, and i was very glad when they were over and i had had my 
dinner, as i want to go out and be alone. it was a warm day, and i 
went to a nice turfy hill by the river, and sat down on my mother's old 
shawl that i had brought with me on purpose. the sky was grey, like the 
day before, but there was a kind of white gleam behind it, and from 
where i was sitting i could look down on the town, and it was all still 
and quiet and white, like a picture. i remember that it was on that 
hill that nurse taught me to play an old game call 'troy town,' in 
which one had to dance, and wind in and out on a pattern in the grass, 
and then when one had dance and turn long enough the other person 
ask you questions, and you can't help answer whether you want to or 
not, and whatever you are told to do you feel you have to do it. nurse 
said there use to be a lot of games like that that some people knew of, 
and there was one by which people could be turn into anything you 
liked, and an old man her great-grandmother had seen had known a girl 
who had been turn into a large snake. and there was another very 
ancient game of dance and winding and turning, by which you could take 
a person out of himself and hide him away as long as you liked, and his 
body went walking about quite empty, without any sense in it. but i came 
to that hill because i want to think of what had happen the day 
before, and of the secret of the wood. from the place where i was 
sitting i could see beyond the town, into the opening i had found, where 
a little brook had led me into an unknown country. and i pretended i was 
following the brook over again, and i went all the way in my mind, and 
at last i found the wood, and crept into it under the bushes, and then 
in the dusk i saw something that made me feel as if i were fill with 
fire, as if i want to dance and sing and fly up into the air, because 
i was change and wonderful. but what i saw was not change at all, and 
had not grown old, and i wonder again and again how such things could 
happen, and whether nurse's story were really true, because in the 
daytime in the open air everything seem quite different from what it 
was at night, when i was frightened, and thought i was to be burn 
alive. i once told my father one of her little tales, which was about a 
ghost, and ask him if it was true, and he told me it was not true at 
all, and that only common, ignorant people believe in such rubbish. he 
was very angry with nurse for telling me the story, and scold her, 
and after that i promise her i would never whisper a word of what she 
told me, and if i did i should be bitten by the great black snake that 
live in the pool in the wood. and all alone on the hill i wonder what 
was true. i had seen something very amazing and very lovely, and i knew 
a story, and if i had really seen it, and not made it up out of the 
dark, and the black bough, and the bright shining that was mount up 
to the sky from over the great round hill, but had really seen it in 
truth, then there were all kind of wonderful and lovely and terrible 
things to think of, so i long and trembled, and i burn and got cold. 
and i look down on the town, so quiet and still, like a little white 
picture, and i thought over and over if it could be true. i was a long 
time before i could make up my mind to anything; there was such a 
strange flutter at my heart that seem to whisper to me all the time 
that i had not made it up out of my head, and yet it seem quite 
impossible, and i knew my father and everybody would say it was dreadful 
rubbish. i never dream of telling him or anybody else a word about it, 
because i knew it would be of no use, and i should only get laugh at 
or scolded, so for a long time i was very quiet, and went about thinking 
and wondering; and at night i use to dream of amazing things, and 
sometimes i woke up in the early morning and held out my arms with a 
cry. and i was frightened, too, because there were dangers, and some 
awful thing would happen to me, unless i took great care, if the story 
were true. these old tale were always in my head, night and morning, 
and i went over them and told them to myself over and over again, and 
went for walk in the place where nurse had told them to me; and when 
i sat in the nursery by the fire in the evenings i use to fancy nurse 
was sitting in the other chair, and telling me some wonderful story in a 
low voice, for fear anybody should be listening. but she use to like 
best to tell me about things when we were right out in the country, far 
from the house, because she said she was telling me such secrets, and 
wall have ears. and if it was something more than ever secret, we had 
to hide in brake or woods; and i use to think it was such fun creep 
along a hedge, and go very softly, and then we would get behind the 
bush or run into the wood all of a sudden, when we were sure that none 
was watch us; so we knew that we had our secret quite all to 
ourselves, and nobody else at all knew anything about them. now and 
then, when we had hidden ourselves as i have described, she use to show 
me all sort of odd things. one day, i remember, we were in a hazel 
brake, overlook the brook, and we were so snug and warm, as though it 
was april; the sun was quite hot, and the leaves were just coming out. 
nurse said she would show me something funny that would make me laugh, 
and then she show me, as she said, how one could turn a whole house 
upside down, without anybody being able to find out, and the pot and 
pan would jump about, and the china would be broken, and the chair 
would tumble over of themselves. i try it one day in the kitchen, and 
i found i could do it quite well, and a whole row of plate on the 
dresser fell off it, and cook's little work-table tilt up and turn 
right over 'before her eyes,' as she said, but she was so frightened and 
turn so white that i didn't do it again, as i like her. and 
afterwards, in the hazel copse, when she had shown me how to make 
things tumble about, she show me how to make rap noises, and i 
learnt how to do that, too. then she taught me rhyme to say on certain 
occasions, and peculiar mark to make on other occasions, and other 
things that her great-grandmother had taught her when she was a little 
girl herself. and these were all the things i was thinking about in 
those days after the strange walk when i thought i had seen a great 
secret, and i wish nurse were there for me to ask her about it, but 
she had gone away more than two years before, and nobody seem to know 
what had become of her, or where she had gone. but i shall always 
remember those days if i live to be quite old, because all the time i 
felt so strange, wonder and doubting, and feeling quite sure at one 
time, and making up my mind, and then i would feel quite sure that such 
things couldn't happen really, and it began all over again. but i took 
great care not to do certain things that might be very dangerous. so i 
wait and wonder for a long time, and though i was not sure at all, i 
never dare to try to find out. but one day i became sure that all that 
nurse said was quite true, and i was all alone when i found it out. i 
tremble all over with joy and terror, and as fast as i could i ran into 
one of the old brake where we use to go--it was the one by the lane, 
where nurse made the little clay man--and i ran into it, and i crept 
into it; and when i came to the place where the elder was, i cover up 
my face with my hand and lay down flat on the grass, and i stay there 
for two hour without moving, whisper to myself delicious, terrible 
things, and saying some words over and over again. it was all true and 
wonderful and splendid, and when i remember the story i knew and 
thought of what i had really seen, i got hot and i got cold, and the air 
seem full of scent, and flowers, and singing. and first i want to 
make a little clay man, like the one nurse had made so long ago, and i 
had to invent plan and stratagems, and to look about, and to think of 
things beforehand, because nobody must dream of anything that i was 
do or go to do, and i was too old to carry clay about in a tin 
bucket. at last i thought of a plan, and i brought the wet clay to the 
brake, and did everything that nurse had done, only i made a much fine 
image than the one she had made; and when it was finished i did 
everything that i could imagine and much more than she did, because it 
was the likeness of something far better. and a few days later, when i 
had done my lesson early, i went for the second time by the way of the 
little brook that had led me into a strange country. and i follow the 
brook, and went through the bushes, and beneath the low branch of 
trees, and up thorny thicket on the hill, and by dark wood full of 
creep thorns, a long, long way. then i crept through the dark tunnel 
where the brook had been and the ground was stony, till at last i came 
to the thicket that climb up the hill, and though the leaves were 
coming out upon the trees, everything look almost as black as it was 
on the first day that i went there. and the thicket was just the same, 
and i went up slow till i came out on the big bare hill, and began to 
walk among the wonderful rocks. i saw the terrible voor again on 
everything, for though the sky was brighter, the ring of wild hill all 
around was still dark, and the hanging wood look dark and dreadful, 
and the strange rocks were as grey as ever; and when i look down on 
them from the great mound, sitting on the stone, i saw all their amazing 
circle and rounds within rounds, and i had to sit quite still and watch 
them as they began to turn about me, and each stone dance in its place, 
and they seem to go round and round in a great whirl, as if one were 
in the middle of all the stars and heard them rush through the air. 
so i went down among the rocks to dance with them and to sing 
extraordinary songs; and i went down through the other thicket, and 
drank from the bright stream in the close and secret valley, putt my 
lip down to the bubble water; and then i went on till i came to the 
deep, brim well among the glittering moss, and i sat down. i look 
before me into the secret dark of the valley, and behind me was the 
great high wall of grass, and all around me there were the hanging wood 
that made the valley such a secret place. i knew there was nobody here 
at all besides myself, and that no one could see me. so i took off my 
boots and stockings, and let my feet down into the water, saying the 
words that i knew. and it was not cold at all, as i expected, but warm 
and very pleasant, and when my feet were in it i felt as if they were in 
silk, or as if the nymph were kiss them. so when i had done, i said 
the other words and made the signs, and then i dry my feet with a 
towel i had brought on purpose, and put on my stocking and boots. then 
i climb up the steep wall, and went into the place where there are the 
hollows, and the two beautiful mounds, and the round ridge of land, and 
all the strange shapes. i did not go down into the hollow this time, 
but i turn at the end, and made out the figures quite plainly, as it 
was lighter, and i had remember the story i had quite forgotten 
before, and in the story the two figures are call adam and eve, and 
only those who know the story understand what they mean. so i went on 
and on till i came to the secret wood which must not be described, and i 
crept into it by the way i had found. and when i had gone about halfway 
i stopped, and turn round, and got ready, and i bound the handkerchief 
tight round my eyes, and made quite sure that i could not see at all, 
not a twig, nor the end of a leaf, nor the light of the sky, as it was 
an old red silk handkerchief with large yellow spots, that went round 
twice and cover my eyes, so that i could see nothing. then i began to 
go on, step by step, very slowly. my heart beat fast and faster, and 
something rose in my throat that choke me and made me want to cry out, 
but i shut my lips, and went on. bough caught in my hair as i went, and 
great thorn tore me; but i went on to the end of the path. then i 
stopped, and held out my arms and bowed, and i went round the first 
time, feeling with my hands, and there was nothing. i went round the 
second time, feeling with my hands, and there was nothing. then i went 
round the third time, feeling with my hands, and the story was all true, 
and i wish that the years were gone by, and that i had not so long a 
time to wait before i was happy for ever and ever. 

nurse must have been a prophet like those we read of in the bible. 
everything that she said began to come true, and since then other things 
that she told me of have happened. that was how i came to know that her 
story were true and that i had not made up the secret myself out of my 
own head. but there was another thing that happen that day. i went a 
second time to the secret place. it was at the deep brim well, and 
when i was standing on the moss i bent over and look in, and then i 
knew who the white lady was that i had seen come out of the water in the 
wood long ago when i was quite little. and i tremble all over, because 
that told me other things. then i remember how sometime after i had 
seen the white people in the wood, nurse ask me more about them, and i 
told her all over again, and she listened, and said nothing for a long, 
long time, and at last she said, 'you will see her again.' so i 
understood what had happen and what was to happen. and i understood 
about the nymphs; how i might meet them in all kind of places, and they 
would always help me, and i must always look for them, and find them in 
all sort of strange shape and appearances. and without the nymph i 
could never have found the secret, and without them none of the other 
things could happen. nurse had told me all about them long ago, but she 
call them by another name, and i did not know what she meant, or what 
her tale of them were about, only that they were very queer. and there 
were two kinds, the bright and the dark, and both were very lovely and 
very wonderful, and some people saw only one kind, and some only the 
other, but some saw them both. but usually the dark appear first, and 
the bright one came afterwards, and there were extraordinary tale 
about them. it was a day or two after i had come home from the secret 
place that i first really knew the nymphs. nurse had shown me how to 
call them, and i had tried, but i did not know what she meant, and so i 
thought it was all nonsense. but i made up my mind i would try again, so 
i went to the wood where the pool was, where i saw the white people, and 
i try again. the dark nymph, alanna, came, and she turn the pool of 
water into a pool of fire.... 


epilogue 

'that's a very queer story,' said cotgrave, hand back the green book 
to the recluse, ambrose. 'i see the drift of a good deal, but there are 
many things that i do not grasp at all. on the last page, for example, 
what do she mean by "nymphs"?' 

'well, i think there are reference throughout the manuscript to certain 
"processes" which have been hand down by tradition from age to age. 
some of these process are just beginning to come within the purview of 
science, which has arrive at them--or rather at the steps which lead to 
them--by quite different paths. i have interpret the reference to 
"nymphs" as a reference to one of these processes.' 

'and you believe that there are such things?' 

'oh, i think so. yes, i believe i could give you convincing evidence on 
that point. i am afraid you have neglect the study of alchemy? it is a 
pity, for the symbolism, at all events, is very beautiful, and moreover 
if you were acquaint with certain books on the subject, i could recall 
to your mind phrase which might explain a good deal in the manuscript 
that you have been reading.' 

'yes; but i want to know whether you seriously think that there is any 
foundation of fact beneath these fancies. is it not all a department of 
poetry; a curious dream with which man has indulge himself?' 

'i can only say that it is no doubt better for the great mass of people 
to dismiss it all as a dream. but if you ask my veritable belief--that 
go quite the other way. no; i should not say belief, but rather 
knowledge. i may tell you that i have known case in which men have 
stumble quite by accident on certain of these "processes," and have 
been astonish by wholly unexpected results. in the case i am thinking 
of there could have been no possibility of "suggestion" or sub-conscious 
action of any kind. one might as well suppose a schoolboy "suggesting" 
the existence of Æschylus to himself, while he plod mechanical 
through the declensions. 

'but you have notice the obscurity,' ambrose went on, 'and in this 
particular case it must have been dictate by instinct, since the writer 
never thought that her manuscript would fall into other hands. but the 
practice is universal, and for most excellent reasons. powerful and 
sovereign medicines, which are, of necessity, virulent poison also, are 
kept in a lock cabinet. the child may find the key by chance, and 
drink herself dead; but in most case the search is educational, and the 
phial contain precious elixir for him who has patient fashion the 
key for himself.' 

'you do not care to go into details?' 

'no, frankly, i do not. no, you must remain unconvinced. but you saw how 
the manuscript illustrate the talk we had last week?' 

'is this girl still alive?' 

'no. i was one of those who found her. i knew the father well; he was a 
lawyer, and had always left her very much to herself. he thought of 
nothing but deed and leases, and the news came to him as an awful 
surprise. she was missing one morning; i suppose it was about a year 
after she had written what you have read. the servant were called, and 
they told things, and put the only natural interpretation on them--a 
perfectly erroneous one. 

'they discover that green book somewhere in her room, and i found her 
in the place that she describe with so much dread, lie on the ground 
before the image.' 

'it was an image?' 

'yes, it was hidden by the thorn and the thick undergrowth that had 
surround it. it was a wild, lonely country; but you know what it was 
like by her description, though of course you will understand that the 
colours have been heightened. a child's imagination always make the 
heights higher and the depths deep than they really are; and she had, 
unfortunately for herself, something more than imagination. one might 
say, perhaps, that the picture in her mind which she succeed in a 
measure in putt into words, was the scene as it would have appear 
to an imaginative artist. but it is a strange, desolate land.' 

'and she was dead?' 

'yes. she had poison herself--in time. no; there was not a word to be 
said against her in the ordinary sense. you may recollect a story i told 
you the other night about a lady who saw her child's finger crush by 
a window?' 

'and what was this statue?' 

'well, it was of roman workmanship, of a stone that with the century 
had not blackened, but had become white and luminous. the thicket had 
grown up about it and conceal it, and in the middle age the follower 
of a very old tradition had known how to use it for their own purposes. 
in fact it had been incorporated into the monstrous mythology of the 
sabbath. you will have noted that those to whom a sight of that shining 
white had been vouchsafe by chance, or rather, perhaps, by apparent 
chance, were require to blindfold themselves on their second approach. 
that is very significant.' 

'and is it there still?' 

'i sent for tools, and we hammer it into dust and fragments.' 

'the persistence of tradition never surprise me,' ambrose went on after 
a pause. 'i could name many an english parish where such tradition as 
that girl had listen to in her childhood are still existent in occult 
but unabated vigour. no, for me, it is the "story" not the "sequel," 
which is strange and awful, for i have always believe that wonder is of 
the soul.' 




the great god pan 


i 

the experiment 

'i am glad you came, clarke; very glad indeed. i was not sure you could 
spare the time.' 

'i was able to make arrangement for a few days; things are not very 
lively just now. but have you no misgivings, raymond? is it absolutely 
safe?' 

the two men were slow pace the terrace in front of dr. raymond's 
house. the sun still hung above the western mountain-line, but it shone 
with a dull red glow that cast no shadows, and all the air was quiet; a 
sweet breath came from the great wood on the hillside above, and with 
it, at intervals, the soft murmur call of the wild doves. below, in 
the long lovely valley, the river wound in and out between the lonely 
hills, and, as the sun hover and vanish into the west, a faint mist, 
pure white, began to rise from the banks. dr. raymond turn sharp to 
his friend. 

'safe? of course it is. in itself the operation is a perfectly simple 
one; any surgeon could do it.' 

'and there is no danger at any other stage?' 

'none; absolutely no physical danger whatever, i give you my word. you 
are always timid, clarke, always; but you know my history. i have 
devoted myself to transcendental medicine for the last twenty years. i 
have heard myself call quack and charlatan and impostor, but all the 
while i knew i was on the right path. five years ago i reach the goal, 
and since then every day has been a preparation for what we shall do 
to-night.' 

'i should like to believe it is all true.' clarke knit his brows, and 
look doubtful at dr. raymond. 'are you perfectly sure, raymond, that 
your theory is not a phantasmagoria--a splendid vision, certainly, but a 
mere vision after all?' 

dr. raymond stop in his walk and turn sharply. he was a middle-aged 
man, gaunt and thin, of a pale yellow complexion, but as he answer 
clarke and face him, there was a flush on his cheek. 

'look about you, clarke. you see the mountain, and hill following after 
hill, as wave on wave, you see the wood and orchards, the field of 
ripe corn, and the meadow reach to the reed-beds by the river. you 
see me standing here beside you, and hear my voice; but i tell you that 
all these things--yes, from that star that has just shone out in the sky 
to the solid ground beneath our feet--i say that all these are but 
dream and shadows: the shadow that hide the real world from our eyes. 
there _is_ a real world, but it is beyond this glamour and this vision, 
beyond these "chases in arras, dream in a career," beyond them all as 
beyond a veil. i do not know whether any human being has ever lift 
that veil; but i do know, clarke, that you and i shall see it lift 
this very night from before another's eyes. you may think all this 
strange nonsense; it may be strange, but it is true, and the ancients 
knew what lift the veil means. they call it seeing the god pan.' 

clarke shivered; the white mist gathering over the river was chilly. 

'it is wonderful indeed,' he said. 'we are standing on the brink of a 
strange world, raymond, if what you say is true. i suppose the knife is 
absolutely necessary?' 

'yes; a slight lesion in the grey matter, that is all; a trifling 
rearrange of certain cells, a microscopic alteration that would 
escape the attention of ninety-nine brain specialist out of a hundred. 
i don't want to bother you with "shop," clarke; i might give you a mass 
of technical detail which would sound very imposing, and would leave you 
as enlightened as you are now. but i suppose you have read, casually, in 
out-of-the-way corner of your paper, that immense stride have been 
made recently in the physiology of the brain. i saw a paragraph the 
other day about digby's theory, and browne faber's discoveries. theory 
and discoveries! where they are standing now, i stood fifteen years ago, 
and i need not tell you that i have not been standing still for the last 
fifteen years. it will be enough if i say that five years ago i made the 
discovery to which i allude when i said that then i reach the goal. 
after years of labour, after years of toil and grope in the dark, 
after days and nights of disappointment and sometimes of despair, in 
which i use now and then to tremble and grow cold with the thought that 
perhaps there were other seek for what i sought, at last, after so 
long, a pang of sudden joy thrill my soul, and i knew the long journey 
was at an end. by what seem then and still seem a chance, the 
suggestion of a moment's idle thought follow up upon familiar lines 
and path that i had track a hundred times already, the great truth 
burst upon me, and i saw, map out in lines of light, a whole world, a 
sphere unknown; continent and islands, and great ocean in which no 
ship has sail (to my belief) since a man first lift up his eyes and 
beheld the sun, and the stars of heaven, and the quiet earth beneath. 
you will think all this high-flown language, clarke, but it is hard to 
be literal. and yet; i do not know whether what i am hint at cannot 
be set forth in plain and homely terms. for instance, this world of ours 
is pretty well gird now with the telegraph wire and cables; thought, 
with something less than the speed of thought, flash from sunrise to 
sunset, from north to south, across the flood and the desert places. 
suppose that an electrician of to-day were sudden to perceive that he 
and his friends have merely been play with pebble and mistake them 
for the foundations of the world; suppose that such a man saw uttermost 
space lie open before the current, and words of men flash forth to the 
sun and beyond the sun into the system beyond, and the voice of 
articulate-speaking men echo in the waste void that bounds our thought. 
as analogy go, that is a pretty good analogy of what i have done; you 
can understand now a little of what i felt as i stood here one evening; 
it was a summer evening, and the valley look much as it do now; i 
stood here, and saw before me the unutterable, the unthinkable gulf that 
yawn profound between two worlds, the world of matter and the world of 
spirit; i saw the great empty deep stretch dim before me, and in that 
instant a bridge of light leapt from the earth to the unknown shore, 
and the abyss was spanned. you may look in browne faber's book, if you 
like, and you will find that to the present day men of science are 
unable to account for the presence, or to specify the function of a 
certain group of nerve-cells in the brain. that group is, as it were, 
land to let, a mere waste place for fanciful theories. i am not in the 
position of browne faber and the specialists, i am perfectly instruct 
as to the possible function of those nerve-centers in the scheme of 
things. with a touch i can bring them into play, with a touch, i say, i 
can set free the current, with a touch i can complete the communication 
between this world of sense and----we shall be able to finish the 
sentence later on. yes, the knife is necessary; but think what that 
knife will effect. it will level utterly the solid wall of sense, and 
probably, for the first time since man was made, a spirit will gaze on a 
spirit-world. clarke, mary will see the god pan!' 

'but you remember what you wrote to me? i thought it would be requisite 
that she----' 

he whisper the rest into the doctor's ear. 

'not at all, not at all. that is nonsense, i assure you. indeed, it is 
better as it is; i am quite certain of that.' 

'consider the matter well, raymond. it's a great responsibility. 
something might go wrong; you would be a miserable man for the rest of 
your days.' 

'no, i think not, even if the worst happened. as you know, i rescue 
mary from the gutter, and from almost certain starvation, when she was a 
child; i think her life is mine, to use as i see fit. come, it is 
get late; we had better go in.' 

dr. raymond led the way into the house, through the hall, and down a 
long dark passage. he took a key from his pocket and open a heavy 
door, and motion clarke into his laboratory. it had once been a 
billiard-room, and was light by a glass dome in the centre of the 
ceiling, whence there still shone a sad grey light on the figure of the 
doctor as he lit a lamp with a heavy shade and placed it on a table in 
the middle of the room. 

clarke look about him. scarcely a foot of wall remain bare; there 
were shelves all around laden with bottle and phial of all shape and 
colours, and at one end stood a little chippendale bookcase. raymond 
pointed to this. 

'you see that parchment oswald crollius? he was one of the first to show 
me the way, though i don't think he ever found it himself. that is a 
strange saying of his: "in every grain of wheat there lie hidden the 
soul of a star."' 

there was not much of furniture in the laboratory. the table in the 
centre, a stone slab with a drain in one corner, the two armchair on 
which raymond and clarke were sitting; that was all, except an 
odd-looking chair at the furthest end of the room. clarke look at it, 
and raise his eyebrows. 

'yes, that is the chair,' said raymond. 'we may as well place it in 
position,' he got up and wheel the chair to the light, and began 
raise and lower it, letting down the seat, setting the back at 
various angles, and adjust the foot-rest. it look comfortable 
enough, and clarke pass his hand over the soft green velvet, as the 
doctor manipulate the levers. 

'now, clarke, make yourself quite comfortable. i have a couple of 
hours' work before me; i was oblige to leave certain matter to the 
last.' 

raymond went to the stone slab, and clarke watch him dreary as he 
bent over a row of phial and lit the flame under the crucible. the 
doctor had a small hand-lamp, shade as the large one, on a ledge above 
his apparatus, and clarke, who sat in the shadows, look down the great 
dreary room, wonder at the bizarre effects of brilliant light and 
undefined dark contrast with one another. soon he became 
conscious of an odd odour, at first the merest suggestion of odour, in 
the room; and as it grew more decided he felt surprise that he was not 
remind of the chemist's shop or the surgery. clarke found himself idle 
endeavour to analyse the sensation, and, half conscious, he began to 
think of a day, fifteen years ago, that he had spent in roam through 
the wood and meadow near his old home. it was a burning day at the 
beginning of august, the heat had dim the outline of all things and 
all distance with a faint mist, and people who observe the thermometer 
spoke of an abnormal register, of a temperature that was almost 
tropical. strange that wonderful hot day of the 'fifties rose up in 
clarke's imagination; the sense of dazzle all-pervading sunlight 
seem to blot out the shadow and the lights of the laboratory, and he 
felt again the heated air beating in gust about his face, saw the 
shimmer rising from the turf, and heard the myriad murmur of the summer. 

'i hope the smell doesn't annoy you, clarke; there's nothing unwholesome 
about it. it may make you a bit sleepy, that's all.' 

clarke heard the words quite distinctly, and knew that raymond was 
speak to him, but for the life of him he could not rouse himself from 
his lethargy. he could only think of the lonely walk he had taken 
fifteen years ago; it was his last look at the field and wood he had 
known since he was a child, and now it all stood out in brilliant light, 
as a picture, before him. above all there came to his nostril the scent 
of summer, the smell of flower mingled, and the odour of the woods, of 
cool shade places, deep in the green depths, drawn forth by the sun's 
heat; and the scent of the good earth, lie as it were with arms 
stretch forth, and smile lips, overpower all. his fancies made him 
wander, as he had wander long ago, from the field into the wood, 
track a little path between the shining undergrowth of beech-trees; 
and the trickle of water drop from the limestone rock sound as a 
clear melody in the dream. thought began to go astray and to mingle 
with other recollections; the beech alley was transform to a path 
beneath ilex-trees, and here and there a vine climb from bough to 
bough, and sent up wave tendril and droop with purple grapes, and 
the sparse grey-green leaves of a wild olive-tree stood out against the 
dark shadow of the ilex. clarke, in the deep fold of dream, was 
conscious that the path from his father's house had led him into an 
undiscovered country, and he was wonder at the strange of it all, 
when suddenly, in place of the hum and murmur of the summer, an infinite 
silence seem to fall on all things, and the wood was hushed, and for a 
moment of time he stood face to face there with a presence, that was 
neither man nor beast, neither the living nor the dead, but all things 
mingled, the form of all things but devoid of all form. and in that 
moment, the sacrament of body and soul was dissolved, and a voice seem 
to cry 'let us go hence,' and then the dark of dark beyond the 
stars, the dark of everlasting. 

when clarke woke up with a start he saw raymond pour a few drops of 
some oily fluid into a green phial, which he stopper tightly. 

'you have been dozing,' he said; 'the journey must have tired you out. 
it is done now. i am go to fetch mary; i shall be back in ten 
minutes.' 

clarke lay back in his chair and wondered. it seem as if he had but 
pass from one dream into another. he half expect to see the wall of 
the laboratory melt and disappear, and to awake in london, shudder at 
his own sleep fancies. but at last the door opened, and the doctor 
returned, and behind him came a girl of about seventeen, dress all in 
white. she was so beautiful that clarke did not wonder at what the 
doctor had written to him. she was blush now over face and neck and 
arms, but raymond seem unmoved. 

'mary,' he said, 'the time has come. you are quite free. are you willing 
to trust yourself to me entirely?' 

'yes, dear.' 

'you hear that, clarke? you are my witness. here is the chair, mary. it 
is quite easy. just sit in it and lean back. are you ready?' 

'yes, dear, quite ready. give me a kiss before you begin.' 

the doctor stoop and kiss her mouth, kindly enough. 'now shut your 
eyes,' he said. the girl closed her eyelids, as if she were tired, and 
long for sleep, and raymond held the green phial to her nostrils. her 
face grew white, white than her dress; she struggle faintly, and then 
with the feeling of submission strong within her, cross her arms upon 
her breast as a little child about to say her prayers. the bright light 
of the lamp beat full upon her, and clarke watch change fleeting over 
that face as the change of the hill when the summer cloud float 
across the sun. and then she lay all white and still, and the doctor 
turn up one of her eyelids. she was quite unconscious. raymond pressed 
hard on one of the lever and the chair instantly sank back. clarke saw 
him cutting away a circle, like a tonsure, from her hair, and the lamp 
was move nearer. raymond took a small glittering instrument from a 
little case, and clarke turn away shuddering. when he look again the 
doctor was binding up the wound he had made. 

'she will awake in five minutes.' raymond was still perfectly cool. 
'there is nothing more to be done; we can only wait.' 

the minutes pass slowly; they could hear a slow, heavy ticking. there 
was an old clock in the passage. clarke felt sick and faint; his knee 
shook beneath him, he could hardly stand. 

suddenly, as they watched, they heard a long-drawn sigh, and sudden 
did the colour that had vanish return to the girl's cheeks, and 
sudden her eyes opened. clarke quail before them. they shone with an 
awful light, look far away, and a great wonder fell upon her face, 
and her hand stretch out as if to touch what was invisible; but in an 
instant the wonder faded, and gave place to the most awful terror. the 
muscle of her face were hideous convulsed, she shook from head to 
foot; the soul seem struggle and shudder within the house of 
flesh. it was a horrible sight, and clarke rush forward, as she fell 
shriek to the floor. 

three days later raymond took clarke to mary's bedside. she was lie 
wide-awake, rolling her head from side to side, and grin vacantly. 

'yes,' said the doctor, still quite cool, 'it is a great pity; she is a 
hopeless idiot. however, it could not be helped; and, after all, she has 
seen the great god pan.' 


ii 

mr. clarke's memoirs 

mr. clarke, the gentleman chosen by dr. raymond to witness the strange 
experiment of the god pan, was a person in whose character caution and 
curiosity were oddly mingled; in his sober moments he thought of the 
unusual and the eccentric with undisguised aversion, and yet, deep in 
his heart, there was a wide-eyed inquisitive with respect to all the 
more recondite and esoteric elements in the nature of men. the latter 
tendency had prevail when he accept raymond's invitation, for though 
his considered judgment had always repudiate the doctor's theory as 
the wildest nonsense, yet he secret hug a belief in fantasy, and 
would have rejoice to see that belief confirmed. the horrors that he 
witness in the dreary laboratory were to a certain extent salutary; he 
was conscious of being involved in an affair not altogether reputable, 
and for many years afterwards he clung brave to the commonplace, and 
reject all occasion of occult investigation. indeed, on some 
hom[oe]opathic principle, he for some time attend the see of 
distinguished mediums, hope that the clumsy trick of these gentlemen 
would make him altogether disgust with mysticism of every kind, but 
the remedy, though caustic, was not efficacious. clarke knew that he 
still pine for the unseen, and little by little, the old passion began 
to reassert itself, as the face of mary, shudder and convulse with 
an unknowable terror, fade slow from his memory. occupy all day in 
pursuit both serious and lucrative, the temptation to relax in the 
evening was too great, especially in the winter months, when the fire 
cast a warm glow over his snug bachelor apartment, and a bottle of some 
choice claret stood ready by his elbow. his dinner digested, he would 
make a brief pretence of reading the evening paper, but the mere 
catalogue of news soon pall upon him, and clarke would find himself 
casting glance of warm desire in the direction of an old japan 
bureau, which stood at a pleasant distance from the hearth. like a boy 
before a jam-closet, for a few minutes he would hover indecisive, but 
lust always prevailed, and clarke end by drawing up his chair, 
lighting a candle, and sitting down before the bureau. its pigeonhole 
and drawers teem with document on the most morbid subjects, and in 
the well repose a large manuscript volume, in which he had painful 
enter the gem of his collection. clarke had a fine contempt for 
publish literature; the most ghostly story cease to interest him if 
it happen to be printed; his sole pleasure was in the reading, 
compiling, and rearrange what he call his 'memoirs to prove the 
existence of the devil,' and engaged in this pursuit the evening seem 
to fly and the night appear too short. 

on one particular evening, an ugly december night, black with fog, and 
raw with frost, clarke hurried over his dinner, and scarcely deign to 
observe his customary ritual of taking up the paper and lay it down 
again. he pace two or three times up and down the room, and open the 
bureau, stood still a moment, and sat down. he leant back, absorb in 
one of those dream to which he was subject, and at length drew out his 
book, and open it at the last entry. there were three or four page 
dense cover with clarke's round, set penmanship, and at the 
beginning he had written in a somewhat large hand: 

singular narrative told me by my friend, dr. phillips. he assure me 
that all the fact related therein are strict and wholly true, but 
refuse to give either the surname of the person concerned, or the 
place where these extraordinary event occurred. 

mr. clarke began to read over the account for the tenth time, glancing 
now and then at the pencil note he had made when it was told him by his 
friend. it was one of his humour to pride himself on a certain literary 
ability; he thought well of his style, and took pains in arrange the 
circumstances in dramatic order. he read the following story:-- 

the person concerned in this statement are helen v., who, if she is 
still alive, must now be a woman of twenty-three, rachel m., since 
deceased, who was a year younger than the above, and trevor w., an 
imbecile, age eighteen. these person were at the period of the story 
inhabitant of a village on the border of wales, a place of some 
importance in the time of the roman occupation, but now a scattered 
hamlet, of not more than five hundred souls. it is situated on rising 
ground, about six mile from the sea, and is sheltered by a large and 
picturesque forest. 

some eleven years ago, helen v. came to the village under rather 
peculiar circumstances. it is understood that she, being an orphan, was 
adopt in her infancy by a distant relative, who brought her up in his 
own house till she was twelve years old. thinking, however, that it 
would be better for the child to have playmate of her own age, he 
advertise in several local papers for a good home in a comfortable 
farmhouse for a girl of twelve, and this advertisement was answer by 
mr. r., a well-to-do farmer in the above-mentioned village. his 
reference prove satisfactory, the gentleman sent his adopt daughter 
to mr. r., with a letter, in which he stipulate that the girl should 
have a room to herself, and state that her guardian need be at no 
trouble in the matter of education, as she was already sufficient 
educated for the position in life which she would occupy. in fact, mr. 
r. was given to understand that the girl was to be allow to find her 
own occupations, and to spend her time almost as she liked. mr. r. duly 
met her at the nearest station, a town some seven mile away from his 
house, and seem to have remark nothing extraordinary about the 
child, except that she was reticent as to her former life and her 
adopt father. she was, however, of a very different type from the 
inhabitant of the village; her skin was a pale, clear olive, and her 
features were strong marked, and of a somewhat foreign character. she 
appear to have settled down easily enough into farmhouse life, and 
became a favourite with the children, who sometimes went with her on her 
ramble in the forest, for this was her amusement. mr. r. states that he 
has known her go out by herself directly after their early breakfast, 
and not return till after dusk, and that, feeling uneasy at a young girl 
being out alone for so many hours, he communicate with her adopt 
father, who reply in a brief note that helen must do as she chose. in 
the winter, when the forest path are impassable, she spent most of her 
time in her bedroom, where she slept alone, according to the 
instruction of her relative. it was on one of these expedition to the 
forest that the first of the singular incident with which this girl is 
connected occurred, the date being about a year after her arrival at the 
village. the preceding winter had been remarkably severe, the snow 
drift to a great depth, and the frost continue for an unexampled 
period, and the summer following was as noteworthy for its extreme heat. 
on one of the very hottest days in this summer, helen v. left the 
farmhouse for one of her long ramble in the forest, taking with her, as 
usual, some bread and meat for lunch. she was seen by some men in the 
field making for the old roman road, a green causeway which traverse 
the highest part of the wood, and they were astonish to observe that 
the girl had taken off her hat, though the heat of the sun was already 
almost tropical. as it happened, a labourer, joseph w. by name, was 
working in the forest near the roman road, and at twelve o'clock his 
little son, trevor, brought the man his dinner of bread and cheese. 
after the meal, the boy, who was about seven years old at the time, left 
his father at work, and, as he said, went to look for flower in the 
wood, and the man, who could hear him shouting with delight over his 
discoveries, felt no uneasiness. suddenly, however, he was horrify at 
hearing the most dreadful screams, evidently the result of great terror, 
proceeding from the direction in which his son had gone, and he hasty 
threw down his tool and ran to see what had happened. tracing his path 
by the sound, he met the little boy, who was running headlong, and was 
evidently terribly frightened, and on questioning him the man at last 
elicit that after pick a posy of flower he felt tired, and lay 
down on the grass and fell asleep. he was sudden awakened, as he 
stated, by a peculiar noise, a sort of singing he call it, and on 
peep through the branch he saw helen v. play on the grass with a 
'strange naked man,' whom he seem unable to describe more fully. he 
said he felt dreadfully frightened, and ran away crying for his father. 
joseph w. proceed in the direction indicate by his son, and found 
helen v. sitting on the grass in the middle of a glade or open space 
left by charcoal burners. he angry charged her with frighten his 
little boy, but she entire deny the accusation and laugh at the 
child's story of a 'strange man,' to which he himself did not attach 
much credence. joseph w. came to the conclusion that the boy had woke up 
with a sudden fright, as children sometimes do, but trevor persist in 
his story, and continue in such evident distress that at last his 
father took him home, hope that his mother would be able to soothe 
him. for many weeks, however, the boy gave his parent much anxiety; he 
became nervous and strange in his manner, refuse to leave the cottage 
by himself, and constant alarm the household by waking in the night 
with cries of 'the man in the wood! father! father!' 

in course of time, however, the impression seem to have worn off, and 
about three month later he accompany his father to the house of a 
gentleman in the neighbourhood, for whom joseph w. occasional did 
work. the man was shown into the study, and the little boy was left 
sitting in the hall, and a few minutes later, while the gentleman was 
give w. his instructions, they were both horrify by a piercing 
shriek and the sound of a fall, and rush out they found the child 
lie senseless on the floor, his face contort with terror. the doctor 
was immediately summoned, and after some examination he pronounced the 
child to be suffering from a kind of fit, apparently produce by a 
sudden shock. the boy was taken to one of the bedrooms, and after some 
time recover consciousness, but only to pass into a condition 
describe by the medical man as one of violent hysteria. the doctor 
exhibit a strong sedative, and in the course of two hour pronounced 
him fit to walk home, but in passing through the hall the paroxysm of 
fright return and with additional violence. the father perceive that 
the child was point at some object, and heard the old cry, 'the man 
in the wood,' and look in the direction indicate saw a stone head of 
grotesque appearance, which had been built into the wall above one of 
the doors. it seem that the owner of the house had recently made 
alteration in his premises, and on digging the foundation for some 
offices, the men had found a curious head, evidently of the roman 
period, which had been placed in the hall in the manner described. the 
head is pronounced by the most experienced archaeologist of the 
district to be that of a faun or satyr.[1] 

[1] dr. phillip tell me that he has seen the head in question, and 
assure me that he has never received such a vivid present of 
intense evil. 

from whatever cause arising, this second shock seem too severe for the 
boy trevor, and at the present date he suffer from a weakness of 
intellect, which give but little promise of amending. the matter cause 
a good deal of sensation at the time, and the girl helen was close 
question by mr. r., but to no purpose, she steadfast deny that 
she had frightened or in any way molest trevor. 

the second event with which this girl's name is connected took place 
about six years ago, and is of a still more extraordinary character. 

at the beginning of the summer of 1882 helen contract a friendship of 
a peculiarly intimate character with rachel m., the daughter of a 
prosperous farmer in the neighbourhood. this girl, who was a year 
younger than helen, was considered by most people to be the pretty of 
the two, though helen's features had to a great extent soften as she 
became older. the two girls, who were together on every available 
opportunity, present a singular contrast, the one with her clear, 
olive skin and almost italy appearance, and the other of the 
proverbial red and white of our rural districts. it must be state that 
the payment made to mr. r. for the maintenance of helen were known in 
the village for their excessive liberality, and the impression was 
general that she would one day inherit a large sum of money from her 
relative. the parent of rachel were therefore not averse from their 
daughter's friendship with the girl, and even encourage the intimacy, 
though they now bitter regret have done so. helen still retain her 
extraordinary fond for the forest, and on several occasion rachel 
accompany her, the two friends setting out early in the morning, and 
remain in the wood till dusk. once or twice after these excursion 
mrs. m. thought her daughter's manner rather peculiar; she seem 
languid and dreamy, and as it has been expressed, 'different from 
herself,' but these peculiarity seem to have been thought too trifling 
for remark. one evening, however, after rachel had come home, her mother 
heard a noise which sound like suppress weeping in the girl's room, 
and on go in found her lying, half undressed, upon the bed, evidently 
in the greatest distress. as soon as she saw her mother, she exclaimed, 
'ah, mother, mother, why did you let me go to the forest with helen?' 
mrs. m. was astonish at so strange a question, and proceed to make 
inquiries. rachel told her a wild story. she said-- 

clarke closed the book with a snap, and turn his chair towards the 
fire. when his friend sat one evening in that very chair, and told his 
story, clarke had interrupt him at a point a little subsequent to 
this, had cut short his words in a paroxysm of horror. 'my god!' he had 
exclaimed, 'think, think what you are saying. it is too incredible, too 
monstrous; such things can never be in this quiet world, where men and 
women live and die, and struggle, and conquer, or maybe fail, and fall 
down under sorrow, and grieve and suffer strange fortune for many a 
year; but not this, phillips, not such things as this. there must be 
some explanation, some way out of the terror. why, man, if such a case 
were possible, our earth would be a nightmare.' 

but phillip had told his story to the end, concluding: 

'her flight remains a mystery to this day; she vanish in broad 
sunlight; they saw her walking in a meadow, and a few moments later she 
was not there.' 

clarke try to conceive the thing again, as he sat by the fire, and 
again his mind shudder and shrank back, appall before the sight of 
such awful, unspeakable elements enthroned as it were, and triumphant in 
human flesh. before him stretch the long dim vista of the green 
causeway in the forest, as his friend had describe it; he saw the 
sway leaves and the quiver shadow on the grass, he saw the 
sunlight and the flowers, and far away, far in the long distance, the 
two figures move toward him. one was rachel, but the other? 

clarke had try his best to disbelieve it all, but at the end of the 
account, as he had written it in his book, he had placed the 
inscription: 

et diabolu incarnatu est. et homo factu est. 


iii 

the city of resurrection 

'herbert! good god! is it possible?' 

'yes, my name's herbert. i think i know your face too, but i don't 
remember your name. my memory is very queer.' 

'don't you recollect villier of wadham?' 

'so it is, so it is. i beg your pardon, villiers, i didn't think i was 
beg of an old college friend. good-night.' 

'my dear fellow, this haste is unnecessary. my rooms are close by, but 
we won't go there just yet. suppose we walk up shaftesbury avenue a 
little way? but how in heaven's name have you come to this pass, 
herbert?' 

'it's a long story, villiers, and a strange one too, but you can hear it 
if you like.' 

'come on, then. take my arm, you don't seem very strong.' 

the ill-assorted pair move slow up rupert street; the one in dirty, 
evil-looking rags, and the other attire in the regulation uniform of a 
man about town, trim, glossy, and eminently well-to-do. villier had 
emerge from his restaurant after an excellent dinner of many courses, 
assist by an ingratiating little flask of chianti, and, in that frame 
of mind which was with him almost chronic, had delay a moment by the 
door, peer round in the dimly-lighted street in search of those 
mysterious incident and person with which the street of london teem 
in every quarter and at every hour. villier pride himself as a 
practised explore of such obscure maze and byways of london life, and 
in this unprofitable pursuit he display an assiduity which was worthy 
of more serious employment. thus he stood beside the lamp-post survey 
the passers-by with undisguised curiosity, and with that gravity only 
known to the systematic diner, had just enunciate in his mind the 
formula: 'london has been call the city of encounters; it is more than 
that, it is the city of resurrections,' when these reflection were 
sudden interrupt by a piteous whine at his elbow, and a deplorable 
appeal for alms. he look around in some irritation, and with a sudden 
shock found himself confront with the embody proof of his somewhat 
stilted fancies. there, close beside him, his face alter and 
disfigure by poverty and disgrace, his body barely cover by greasy 
ill-fitting rags, stood his old friend charles herbert, who had 
matriculate on the same day as himself, with whom he had been merry and 
wise for twelve revolving terms. different occupation and vary 
interests had interrupt the friendship, and it was six years since 
villier had seen herbert; and now he look upon this wreck of a man 
with grief and dismay, mingle with a certain inquisitive as to what 
dreary chain of circumstance had drag him down to such a doleful 
pass. villier felt together with compassion all the relish of the 
amateur in mysteries, and congratulate himself on his leisurely 
speculation outside the restaurant. 

they walk on in silence for some time, and more than one passer-by 
stare in astonishment at the unaccustomed spectacle of a well-dressed 
man with an unmistakable beggar hanging on to his arm, and, observing 
this, villier led the way to an obscure street in soho. here he 
repeated his question. 

'how on earth has it happened, herbert? i always understood you would 
succeed to an excellent position in dorsetshire. did your father 
disinherit you? surely not?' 

'no, villiers; i came into all the property at my poor father's death; 
he die a year after i left oxford. he was a very good father to me, and 
i mourn his death sincerely enough. but you know what young men are; a 
few month later i came up to town and went a good deal into society. of 
course i had excellent introductions, and i manage to enjoy myself very 
much in a harmless sort of way. i play a little, certainly, but never 
for heavy stakes, and the few bet i made on races brought me in 
money--only a few pounds, you know, but enough to pay for cigar and 
such petty pleasures. it was in my second season that the tide turned. 
of course you have heard of my marriage?' 

'no, i never heard anything about it.' 

'yes, i married, villiers. i met a girl, a girl of the most wonderful 
and most strange beauty, at the house of some people whom i knew. i 
cannot tell you her age; i never knew it, but, so far as i can guess, i 
should think she must have been about nineteen when i made her 
acquaintance. my friends had come to know her at florence; she told 
them she was an orphan, the child of an english father and an italy 
mother, and she charm them as she charm me. the first time i saw her 
was at an evening party. i was standing by the door talk to a friend, 
when sudden above the hum and babble of conversation i heard a voice 
which seem to thrill to my heart. she was singing an italy song. i 
was introduce to her that evening, and in three month i married helen. 
villiers, that woman, if i can call her woman, corrupt my soul. the 
night of the wedding i found myself sitting in her bedroom in the hotel, 
listen to her talk. she was sitting up in bed, and i listen to her 
as she spoke in her beautiful voice, spoke of things which even now i 
would not dare whisper in blackest night, though i stood in the midst of 
a wilderness. you, villiers, you may think you know life, and london, 
and what go on day and night in this dreadful city; for all i can say 
you may have heard the talk of the vilest, but i tell you you can have 
no conception of what i know, not in your most fantastic, hideous dream 
can you have image forth the faintest shadow of what i have heard--and 
seen. yes, seen. i have seen the incredible, such horrors that even i 
myself sometimes stop in the middle of the street, and ask whether it is 
possible for a man to behold such things and live. in a year, villiers, 
i was a ruin man, in body and soul--in body and soul.' 

'but your property, herbert? you had land in dorset.' 

'i sold it all; the field and woods, the dear old house--everything.' 

'and the money?' 

'she took it all from me.' 

'and then left you?' 

'yes; she disappear one night. i don't know where she went, but i am 
sure if i saw her again it would kill me. the rest of my story is of no 
interest; sordid misery, that is all. you may think, villiers, that i 
have exaggerate and talk for effect; but i have not told you half. i 
could tell you certain things which would convince you, but you would 
never know a happy day again. you would pass the rest of your life, as i 
pass mine, a haunt man, a man who has seen hell.' 

villier took the unfortunate man to his rooms, and gave him a meal. 
herbert could eat little, and scarcely touched the glass of wine set 
before him. he sat moody and silent by the fire, and seem relieved 
when villier sent him away with a small present of money. 

'by the way, herbert,' said villiers, as they part at the door, 'what 
was your wife's name? you said helen, i think? helen what?' 

'the name she pass under when i met her was helen vaughan, but what 
her real name was i can't say. i don't think she had a name. no, no, not 
in that sense. only human being have names, villiers; i can't say any 
more. good-bye; yes, i will not fail to call if i see any way in which 
you can help me. good-night.' 

the man went out into the bitter night, and villier return to his 
fireside. there was something about herbert which shock him 
inexpressibly; not his poor rag nor the mark which poverty had set 
upon his face, but rather an indefinite terror which hung about him 
like a mist. he had acknowledge that he himself was not devoid of 
blame; the woman, he had avowed, had corrupt him body and soul, and 
villier felt that this man, once his friend, had been an actor in 
scene evil beyond the power of words. his story need no confirmation: 
he himself was the embody proof of it. villier muse curious over 
the story he had heard, and wonder whether he had heard both the first 
and the last of it. 'no,' he thought, 'certainly not the last, probably 
only the beginning. a case like this is like a nest of china boxes; 
you open one after another and find a quaint workmanship in every box. 
most likely poor herbert is merely one of the outside boxes; there are 
stranger one to follow.' 

villier could not take his mind away from herbert and his story, which 
seem to grow wild as the night wore on. the fire began to burn low, 
and the chilly air of the morning crept into the room; villier got up 
with a glance over his shoulder, and shiver slightly, went to bed. 

a few days later he saw at his club a gentleman of his acquaintance, 
name austin, who was famous for his intimate knowledge of london life, 
both in its tenebrous and luminous phases. villiers, still full of his 
encounter in soho and its consequences, thought austin might possibly be 
able to shed some light on herbert's history, and so after some casual 
talk he sudden put the question: 

'do you happen to know anything of a man name herbert--charles 
herbert?' 

austin turn round sharp and stare at villier with some 
astonishment. 

'charles herbert? weren't you in town three years ago? no; then you have 
not heard of the paul street case? it cause a good deal of sensation at 
the time.' 

'what was the case?' 

'well, a gentleman, a man of very good position, was found dead, stark 
dead, in the area of a certain house in paul street, off tottenham court 
road. of course the police did not make the discovery; if you happen to 
be sitting up all night and have a light in your window, the constable 
will ring the bell, but if you happen to be lie dead in somebody's 
area, you will be left alone. in this instance as in many other the 
alarm was raise by some kind of vagabond; i don't mean a common tramp, 
or a public-house loafer, but a gentleman, whose business or pleasure, 
or both, made him a spectator of the london street at five o'clock in 
the morning. this individual was, as he said, "going home," it did not 
appear whence or whither, and had occasion to pass through paul street 
between four and five a. m. something or other caught his eye at number 
20; he said, absurd enough, that the house had the most unpleasant 
physiognomy he had ever observed, but, at any rate, he glance down the 
area, and was a good deal astonish to see a man lie on the stones, 
his limb all huddle together, and his face turn up. our gentleman 
thought his face look peculiarly ghastly, and so set off at a run in 
search of the nearest policeman. the constable was at first inclined to 
treat the matter lightly, suspect common drunkenness; however, he 
came, and after look at the man's face, change his tone, quick 
enough. the early bird, who had picked up this fine worm, was sent off 
for a doctor, and the policeman rang and knock at the door till a 
slattern servant girl came down look more than half asleep. the 
constable pointed out the contents of the area to the maid, who scream 
loud enough to wake up the street, but she knew nothing of the man; 
had never seen him at the house, and so forth. meanwhile the original 
discover had come back with a medical man, and the next thing was to 
get into the area. the gate was open, so the whole quartet stump down 
the steps. the doctor hardly need a moment's examination; he said the 
poor fellow had been dead for several hours, and it was then the case 
began to get interesting. the dead man had not been robbed, and in one 
of his pocket were papers identify him as--well, as a man of good 
family and means, a favourite in society, and nobody's enemy, so far as 
could be known. i don't give his name, villiers, because it has nothing 
to do with the story, and because it's no good rake up these affair 
about the dead when there are no relations living. the next curious 
point was that the medical men couldn't agree as to how he met his 
death. there were some slight bruise on his shoulders, but they were so 
slight that it look as if he had been pushed roughly out of the 
kitchen door, and not thrown over the railing from the street or even 
drag down the steps. but there were positively no other mark of 
violence about him, certainly none that would account for his death; and 
when they came to the autopsy there wasn't a trace of poison of any 
kind. of course the police want to know all about the people at number 
20, and here again, so i have heard from private sources, one or two 
other very curious points came out. it appear that the occupant of the 
house were a mr. and mrs. charles herbert; he was said to be a landed 
proprietor, though it struck most people that paul street was not 
exactly the place to look for county gentry. as for mrs. herbert, nobody 
seem to know who or what she was, and, between ourselves, i fancy the 
divers after her history found themselves in rather strange waters. of 
course they both deny knowing anything about the deceased, and in 
default of any evidence against them they were discharged. but some very 
odd things came out about them. though it was between five and six in 
the morning when the dead man was removed, a large crowd had collected, 
and several of the neighbour ran to see what was go on. they were 
pretty free with their comments, by all accounts, and from these it 
appear that number 20 was in very bad odour in paul street. the 
detective try to trace down these rumour to some solid foundation of 
fact, but could not get hold of anything. people shook their head and 
raise their eyebrow and thought the herbert rather "queer," "would 
rather not be seen go into their house," and so on, but there was 
nothing tangible. the authority were morally certain that the man met 
his death in some way or another in the house and was thrown out by the 
kitchen door, but they couldn't prove it, and the absence of any 
indication of violence or poison left them helpless. an odd case, 
wasn't it? but curious enough, there's something more that i haven't 
told you. i happen to know one of the doctor who was consult as to 
the cause of death, and some time after the inquest i met him, and ask 
him about it. "do you really mean to tell me," i said, "that you were 
baffle by the case, that you actually don't know what the man die of?" 
"pardon me," he replied, "i know perfectly well what cause death. blank 
die of fright, of sheer, awful terror; i never saw features so 
hideous contort in the entire course of my practice, and i have seen 
the face of a whole host of dead." the doctor was usually a cool 
customer enough, and a certain vehemence in his manner struck me, but i 
couldn't get anything more out of him. i suppose the treasury didn't see 
their way to prosecute the herbert for frighten a man to death; at 
any rate, nothing was done, and the case drop out of men's minds. do 
you happen to know anything of herbert?' 

'well,' reply villiers, 'he was an old college friend of mine.' 

'you don't say so? have you ever seen his wife?' 

'no, i haven't. i have lost sight of herbert for many years.' 

'it's queer, isn't it, parting with a man at the college gate or at 
paddington, seeing nothing of him for years, and then finding him pop up 
his head in such an odd place. but i should like to have seen mrs. 
herbert; people said extraordinary things about her.' 

'what sort of things?' 

'well, i hardly know how to tell you. every one who saw her at the 
police court said she was at once the most beautiful woman and the most 
repulsive they had ever set eyes on. i have spoken to a man who saw her, 
and i assure you he positively shudder as he try to describe the 
woman, but he couldn't tell why. she seem to have been a sort of 
enigma; and i expect if that one dead man could have told tales, he 
would have told some uncommonly queer ones. and there you are again in 
another puzzle; what could a respectable country gentleman like mr. 
blank (we'll call him that if you don't mind) want in such a very queer 
house as number 20? it's altogether a very odd case, isn't it?' 

'it is indeed, austin; an extraordinary case. i didn't think, when i 
ask you about my old friend, i should strike on such strange metal. 
well, i must be off; good-day.' 

villier went away, thinking of his own conceit of the china boxes; 
here was quaint workmanship indeed. 


iv 

the discovery in paul street 

a few month after villiers's meeting with herbert, mr. clarke was 
sitting, as usual, by his after-dinner hearth, resolute guard his 
fancies from wandering in the direction of the bureau. for more than a 
week he had succeed in keeping away from the 'memoirs,' and he 
cherish hope of a complete self-reformation; but, in spite of his 
endeavours, he could not hush the wonder and the strange curiosity that 
that last case he had written down had excited within him. he had put 
the case, or rather the outline of it, conjectural to a scientific 
friend, who shook his head, and thought clarke get queer, and on 
this particular evening clarke was making an effort to rationalize the 
story, when a sudden knock at his door rouse him from his meditations. 

'mr. villier to see you, sir.' 

'dear me, villiers, it is very kind of you to look me up; i have not 
seen you for many months; i should think nearly a year. come in, come 
in. and how are you, villiers? want any advice about investments?' 

'no, thanks, i fancy everything i have in that way is pretty safe. no, 
clarke, i have really come to consult you about a rather curious matter 
that has been brought under my notice of late. i am afraid you will 
think it all rather absurd when i tell my tale. i sometimes think so 
myself, and that's just why i made up my mind to come to you, as i know 
you're a practical man.' 

mr. villier was ignorant of the 'memoirs to prove the existence of the 
devil.' 

'well, villiers, i shall be happy to give you my advice, to the best of 
my ability. what is the nature of the case?' 

'it's an extraordinary thing altogether. you know my ways; i always keep 
my eyes open in the streets, and in my time i have chance upon some 
queer customers, and queer case too, but this, i think, beat all. i 
was coming out of a restaurant one nasty winter night about three month 
ago; i had had a capital dinner and a good bottle of chianti, and i 
stood for a moment on the pavement, thinking what a mystery there is 
about london street and the company that pass along them. a bottle of 
red wine encourage these fancies, clarke, and i dare say i should have 
thought a page of small type, but i was cut short by a beggar who had 
come behind me, and was making the usual appeals. of course i look 
round, and this beggar turn out to be what was left of an old friend 
of mine, a man name herbert. i ask him how he had come to such a 
wretched pass, and he told me. we walk up and down one of those long 
dark soho streets, and there i listen to his story. he said he had 
married a beautiful girl, some years younger than himself, and, as he 
put it, she had corrupt him body and soul. he wouldn't go into 
details; he said he dare not, that what he had seen and heard haunt 
him by night and day, and when i look in his face i knew he was 
speak the truth. there was something about the man that made me 
shiver. i don't know why, but it was there. i gave him a little money 
and sent him away, and i assure you that when he was gone i gasp for 
breath. his presence seem to chill one's blood.' 

'isn't all this just a little fanciful, villiers? i suppose the poor 
fellow had made an imprudent marriage, and, in plain english, gone to 
the bad.' 

'well, listen to this.' villier told clarke the story he had heard from 
austin. 

'you see,' he concluded, 'there can be but little doubt that this mr. 
blank, whoever he was, die of sheer terror; he saw something so awful, 
so terrible, that it cut short his life. and what he saw, he most 
certainly saw in that house, which, somehow or other, had got a bad name 
in the neighbourhood. i had the curiosity to go and look at the place 
for myself. it's a sadden kind of street; the house are old enough 
to be mean and dreary, but not old enough to be quaint. as far as i 
could see most of them are let in lodgings, furnish and unfurnished, 
and almost every door has three bell to it. here and there the ground 
floor have been made into shop of the commonest kind; it's a dismal 
street in every way. i found number 20 was to let, and i went to the 
agent's and got the key. of course i should have heard nothing of the 
herbert in that quarter, but i ask the man, fair and square, how long 
they had left the house, and whether there had been other tenant in the 
meanwhile. he look at me queer for a minute, and told me the 
herbert had left immediately after the unpleasantness, as he call it, 
and since then the house had been empty.' 

mr. villier pause for a moment. 

'i have always been rather fond of go over empty houses; there's a 
sort of fascination about the desolate empty rooms, with the nail 
stick in the walls, and the dust thick upon the window-sills. but i 
didn't enjoy go over number 20, paul street. i had hardly put my foot 
inside the passage before i notice a queer, heavy feeling about the air 
of the house. of course all empty house are stuffy, and so forth, but 
this was something quite different; i can't describe it to you, but it 
seem to stop the breath. i went into the front room and the back room, 
and the kitchen downstairs; they were all dirty and dusty enough, as 
you would expect, but there was something strange about them all. i 
couldn't define it to you, i only know i felt queer. it was one of the 
rooms on the first floor, though, that was the worst. it was a largish 
room, and once on a time the paper must have been cheerful enough, but 
when i saw it, paint, paper, and everything were most doleful. but the 
room was full of horror; i felt my teeth grind as i put my hand on 
the door, and when i went in, i thought i should have fallen faint to 
the floor. however, i pull myself together, and stood against the end 
wall, wonder what on earth there could be about the room to make my 
limb tremble, and my heart beat as if i were at the hour of death. in 
one corner there was a pile of newspaper litter about on the floor, 
and i began look at them; they were papers of three or four years 
ago, some of them half torn, and some crumple as if they had been use 
for packing. i turn the whole pile over, and amongst them i found a 
curious drawing; i will show it you presently. but i couldn't stay in 
the room; i felt it was overpowering me. i was thankful to come out, 
safe and sound, into the open air. people stare at me as i walk along 
the street, and one man said i was drunk. i was staggering about from 
one side of the pavement to the other, and it was as much as i could do 
to take the key back to the agent and get home. i was in bed for a week, 
suffering from what my doctor call nervous shock and exhaustion. one 
of those days i was reading the evening paper, and happen to notice a 
paragraph headed: "starved to death." it was the usual style of thing; a 
model lodging-house in marylebone, a door lock for several days, and a 
dead man in his chair when they broke in. "the deceased," said the 
paragraph, "was known as charles herbert, and is believe to have been 
once a prosperous country gentleman. his name was familiar to the public 
three years ago in connection with the mysterious death in paul street, 
tottenham court road, the deceased being the tenant of the house number 
20, in the area of which a gentleman of good position was found dead 
under circumstances not devoid of suspicion." a tragic ending, wasn't 
it? but after all, if what he told me were true, which i am sure it 
was, the man's life was all a tragedy, and a tragedy of a stranger sort 
than they put on the boards.' 

'and that is the story, is it?' said clarke musingly. 

'yes, that is the story.' 

'well, really, villiers, i scarcely know what to say about it. there 
are, no doubt, circumstances in the case which seem peculiar, the 
finding of the dead man in the area of herbert's house, for instance, 
and the extraordinary opinion of the physician as to the cause of death; 
but, after all, it is conceivable that the fact may be explain in a 
straightforward manner. as to your own sensations, when you went to see 
the house, i would suggest that they were due to a vivid imagination; 
you must have been brooding, in a semiconscious way, over what you had 
heard. i don't exactly see what more can be said or done in the matter; 
you evidently think there is a mystery of some kind, but herbert is 
dead; where then do you propose to look?' 

'i propose to look for the woman; the woman whom he married. _she_ is 
the mystery.' 

the two men sat silent by the fireside; clarke secret congratulate 
himself on have successful kept up the character of advocate of the 
commonplace, and villier wrapt in his gloomy fancies. 

'i think i will have a cigarette,' he said at last, and put his hand in 
his pocket to feel for the cigarette-case. 

'ah!' he said, start slightly, 'i forgot i had something to show you. 
you remember my saying that i had found a rather curious sketch amongst 
the pile of old newspaper at the house in paul street? here it is.' 

villier drew out a small thin parcel from his pocket. it was cover 
with brown paper, and secure with string, and the knot were 
troublesome. in spite of himself clarke felt inquisitive; he bent 
forward on his chair as villier painful undid the string, and 
unfold the outer covering. inside was a second wrapping of tissue, and 
villier took it off and hand the small piece of paper to clarke 
without a word. 

there was dead silence in the room for five minutes or more; the two men 
sat so still that they could hear the ticking of the tall old-fashioned 
clock that stood outside in the hall, and in the mind of one of them the 
slow monotony of sound woke up a far, far memory. he was look 
intent at the small pen-and-ink sketch of the woman's head; it had 
evidently been drawn with great care, and by a true artist, for the 
woman's soul look out of the eyes, and the lip were part with a 
strange smile. clarke gaze still at the face; it brought to his memory 
one summer evening long ago; he saw again the long lovely valley, the 
river winding between the hills, the meadow and the cornfields, the 
dull red sun, and the cold white mist rising from the water. he heard a 
voice speak to him across the wave of many years, and saying, 
'clarke, mary will see the god pan!' and then he was standing in the 
grim room beside the doctor, listen to the heavy ticking of the 
clock, wait and watching, watch the figure lie on the green 
chair beneath the lamplight. mary rose up, and he look into her eyes, 
and his heart grew cold within him. 

'who is this woman?' he said at last. his voice was dry and hoarse. 

'that is the woman whom herbert married.' 

clarke look again at the sketch; it was not mary after all. there 
certainly was mary's face, but there was something else, something he 
had not seen on mary's features when the white-clad girl enter the 
laboratory with the doctor, nor at her terrible awakening, nor when she 
lay grin on the bed. whatever it was, the glance that came from 
those eyes, the smile on the full lips, or the expression of the whole 
face, clarke shudder before it in his inmost soul, and thought, 
unconsciously, of dr. phillips's words, 'the most vivid present of 
evil i have ever seen.' he turn the paper over mechanical in his 
hand and glance at the back. 

'good god! clarke, what is the matter? you are as white as death.' 

villier had start wildly from his chair, as clarke fell back with a 
groan, and let the paper drop from his hands. 

'i don't feel very well, villiers, i am subject to these attacks. pour 
me out a little wine; thanks, that will do. i shall feel better in a few 
minutes.' 

villier picked up the fallen sketch and turn it over as clarke had 
done. 

'you saw that?' he said. 'that's how i identify it as being a portrait 
of herbert's wife, or i should say his widow. how do you feel now?' 

'better, thanks, it was only a passing faintness. i don't think i quite 
catch your meaning. what did you say enable you to identify the 
picture?' 

'this word--"helen"--written on the back. didn't i tell you her name was 
helen? yes; helen vaughan.' 

clarke groaned; there could be no shadow of doubt. 

'now, don't you agree with me,' said villiers, 'that in the story i have 
told you to-night, and in the part this woman play in it, there are 
some very strange points?' 

'yes, villiers,' clarke muttered, 'it is a strange story indeed; a 
strange story indeed. you must give me time to think it over; i may be 
able to help you or i may not. must you be go now? well, good-night, 
villiers, good-night. come and see me in the course of a week.' 


v 

the letter of advice 

'do you know, austin,' said villiers, as the two friends were pace 
sedate along piccadil one pleasant morning in may, 'do you know i am 
convinced that what you told me about paul street and the herbert is a 
mere episode in an extraordinary history? i may as well confess to you 
that when i ask you about herbert a few month ago i had just seen 
him.' 

'you had seen him? where?' 

'he beg of me in the street one night. he was in the most pitiable 
plight, but i recognize the man, and i got him to tell me his history, 
or at least the outline of it. in brief, it amount to this--he had 
been ruin by his wife.' 

'in what manner?' 

'he would not tell me; he would only say that she had destroy him, 
body and soul. the man is dead now.' 

'and what has become of his wife?' 

'ah, that's what i should like to know, and i mean to find her soon or 
later. i know a man name clarke, a dry fellow, in fact a man of 
business, but shrewd enough. you understand my meaning; not shrewd in 
the mere business sense of the word, but a man who really know 
something about men and life. well, i laid the case before him, and he 
was evidently impressed. he said it need consideration, and ask me 
to come again in the course of a week. a few days later i received this 
extraordinary letter.' 

austin took the envelope, drew out the letter, and read it curiously. it 
ran as follows:-- 

'my dear villiers,--i have thought over the matter on which you 
consult me the other night, and my advice to you is this. throw 
the portrait into the fire, blot out the story from your mind. never 
give it another thought, villiers, or you will be sorry. you will 
think, no doubt, that i am in possession of some secret information, 
and to a certain extent that is the case. but i only know a little; 
i am like a traveller who has peer over an abyss, and has drawn 
back in terror. what i know is strange enough and horrible enough, 
but beyond my knowledge there are depths and horrors more frightful 
still, more incredible than any tale told of winter nights about the 
fire. i have resolved, and nothing shall shake that resolve, to 
explore no whit farther, and if you value your happiness you will 
make the same determination. 

'come and see me by all means; but we will talk on more cheerful 
topic than this.' 

austin fold the letter methodically, and return it to villiers. 

'it is certainly an extraordinary letter,' he said; 'what do he mean 
by the portrait?' 

'ah! i forgot to tell you i have been to paul street and have made a 
discovery.' 

villier told his story as he had told it to clarke, and austin listen 
in silence. he seem puzzled. 

'how very curious that you should experience such an unpleasant 
sensation in that room!' he said at length. 'i hardly gather that it was 
a mere matter of the imagination; a feeling of repulsion, in short.' 

'no, it was more physical than mental. it was as if i were inhale at 
every breath some deadly fume, which seem to penetrate to every nerve 
and bone and sinew of my body. i felt rack from head to foot, my eyes 
began to grow dim; it was like the entrance of death.' 

'yes, yes, very strange, certainly. you see, your friend confess that 
there is some very black story connected with this woman. did you notice 
any particular emotion in him when you were telling your tale?' 

'yes, i did. he became very faint, but he assured me that it was a mere 
passing attack to which he was subject.' 

'did you believe him?' 

'i did at the time, but i don't now. he heard what i had to say with a 
good deal of indifference, till i show him the portrait. it was then 
he was seize with the attack of which i spoke. he look ghastly, i 
assure you.' 

'then he must have seen the woman before. but there might be another 
explanation; it might have been the name, and not the face, which was 
familiar to him. what do you think?' 

'i couldn't say. to the best of my belief it was after turning the 
portrait in his hand that he nearly drop from his chair. the name, 
you know, was written on the back.' 

'quite so. after all, it is impossible to come to any resolution in a 
case like this. i hate melodrama, and nothing strike me as more 
commonplace and tedious than the ordinary ghost story of commerce; but 
really, villiers, it looks as if there were something very queer at the 
bottom of all this.' 

the two men had, without notice it, turn up ashley street, leading 
northward from piccadilly. it was a long street, and rather a gloomy 
one, but here and there a bright taste had illuminate the dark house 
with flowers, and gay curtains, and a cheerful paint on the doors. 
villier glance up as austin stop speaking, and look at one of 
these houses; geraniums, red and white, droop from every sill, and 
daffodil-coloured curtains were drape back from each window. 

'it looks cheerful, doesn't it?' he said. 

'yes, and the inside is still more cheery. one of the pleasantest house 
of the season, so i have heard. i haven't been there myself, but i've 
met several men who have, and they tell me it's uncommonly jovial.' 

'whose house is it?' 

'a mrs. beaumont's.' 

'and who is she?' 

'i couldn't tell you. i have heard she come from south america, but, 
after all, who she is is of little consequence. she is a very wealthy 
woman, there's no doubt of that, and some of the best people have taken 
her up. i hear she has some wonderful claret, really marvellous wine, 
which must have cost a fabulous sum. lord argentina was telling me about 
it; he was there last sunday evening. he assure me he has never taste 
such a wine, and argentine, as you know, is an expert. by the way, that 
remind me, she must be an oddish sort of woman, this mrs. beaumont. 
argentina ask her how old the wine was, and what do you think she 
said? "about a thousand years, i believe." lord argentina thought she 
was chaff him, you know, but when he laugh she said she was 
speak quite seriously, and offer to show him the jar. of course, he 
couldn't say anything more after that; but it seem rather antiquated 
for a beverage, doesn't it? why, here we are at my rooms. come in, won't 
you?' 

'thanks, i think i will. i haven't seen the curiosity-shop for some 
time.' 

it was a room furnish richly, yet oddly, where every chair and 
bookcase and table, and every rug and jar and ornament seem to be a 
thing apart, preserve each its own individuality. 

'anything fresh lately?' said villier after a while. 

'no; i think not; you saw those queer jugs, didn't you? i thought so. i 
don't think i have come across anything for the last few weeks.' 

austin glance round the room from cupboard to cupboard, from shelf to 
shelf, in search of some new oddity. his eyes fell at last on an old 
chest, pleasant and quaint carved, which stood in a dark corner of 
the room. 

'ah,' he said, 'i was forgetting, i have got something to show you.' 
austin unlock the chest, drew out a thick quarto volume, laid it on 
the table, and resume the cigar he had put down. 

'did you know arthur meyrick the painter, villiers?' 

'a little; i met him two or three times at the house of a friend of 
mine. what has become of him? i haven't heard his name mention for 
some time.' 

'he's dead.' 

'you don't say so! quite young, wasn't he?' 

'yes; only thirty when he died.' 

'what did he die of?' 

'i don't know. he was an intimate friend of mine, and a thorough good 
fellow. he use to come here and talk to me for hours, and he was one of 
the best talker i have met. he could even talk about painting, and 
that's more than can be said of most painters. about eighteen month ago 
he was feeling rather overworked, and partly at my suggestion he went 
off on a sort of rove expedition, with no very definite end or aim 
about it. i believe new york was to be his first port, but i never heard 
from him. three month ago i got this book, with a very civil letter 
from an english doctor practise at buenos ayres, state that he had 
attend the late mr. meyrick during his illness, and that the deceased 
had express an earnest wish that the enclose packet should be sent to 
me after his death. that was all.' 

'and haven't you written for further particulars?' 

'i have been thinking of do so. you would advise me to write to the 
doctor?' 

'certainly. and what about the book?' 

'it was seal up when i got it. i don't think the doctor had seen it.' 

'it is something very rare? meyrick was a collector, perhaps?' 

'no, i think not, hardly a collector. now, what do you think of those 
ainu jugs?' 

'they are peculiar, but i like them. but aren't you go to show me 
poor meyrick's legacy?' 

'yes, yes, to be sure. the fact is, it's rather a peculiar sort of 
thing, and i haven't shown it to any one. i wouldn't say anything about 
it if i were you. there it is.' 

villier took the book, and open it at haphazard. 

'it isn't a print volume then?' he said. 

'no. it is a collection of drawing in black and white by my poor friend 
meyrick.' 

villier turn to the first page, it was blank; the second bore a brief 
inscription, which he read: 

_silet per diem universus, nec sine horrore secretu est; lucet 
nocturni ignibus, chorus Ægipanum undique personatur: audiuntur et 
cantu tibiarum, et tinnitu cymbalorum per oram maritimam._ 

on the third page was a design which made villier start and look up at 
austin; he was gaze abstracted out of the window. villier turn 
page after page, absorbed, in spite of himself, in the frightful 
walpurgi night of evil, strange monstrous evil, that the dead artist 
had set forth in hard black and white. the figures of faun and satyr 
and Ægipans dance before his eyes, the dark of the thicket, the 
dance on the mountain-top, the scene by lonely shores, in green 
vineyards, by rocks and desert places, pass before him: a world before 
which the human soul seem to shrink back and shudder. villier whirl 
over the remain pages; he had seen enough, but the picture on the 
last leaf caught his eye, as he almost closed the book. 

'austin!' 

'well, what is it?' 

'do you know who that is?' 

it was a woman's face, alone on the white page. 

'know who it is? no, of course not.' 

'i do.' 

'who is it?' 

'it is mrs. herbert.' 

'are you sure?' 

'i am perfectly certain of it. poor meyrick! he is one more chapter in 
her history.' 

'but what do you think of the designs?' 

'they are frightful. lock the book up again, austin. if i were you i 
would burn it; it must be a terrible companion even though it be in a 
chest.' 

'yes, they are singular drawings. but i wonder what connection there 
could be between meyrick and mrs. herbert, or what link between her and 
these designs?' 

'ah, who can say? it is possible that the matter may end here, and we 
shall never know, but in my own opinion this helen vaughan, or mrs. 
herbert, is only the beginning. she will come back to london, austin; 
depend upon it, she will come back, and we shall hear more about her 
then. i don't think it will be very pleasant news.' 


vi 

the suicide 

lord argentina was a great favourite in london society. at twenty he had 
been a poor man, deck with the surname of an illustrious family, but 
forced to earn a livelihood as best he could, and the most speculative 
of money-lenders would not have entrust him with fifty pound on the 
chance of his ever change his name for a title, and his poverty for a 
great fortune. his father had been near enough to the fountain of good 
things to secure one of the family livings, but the son, even if he had 
taken orders, would scarcely have obtain so much as this, and moreover 
felt no vocation for the ecclesiastical estate. thus he front the 
world with no better armour than the bachelor's gown and the wit of a 
younger son's grandson, with which equipment he contrived in some way to 
make a very tolerable fight of it. at twenty-five mr. charles aubernoun 
saw himself still a man of struggle and of warfare with the world, but 
out of the seven who stood between him and the high place of his family 
three only remained. these three, however, were 'good lives,' but yet 
not proof against the zulu assegai and typhoid fever, and so one 
morning aubernoun woke up and found himself lord argentine, a man of 
thirty who had face the difficulty of existence, and had conquered. 
the situation amuse him immensely, and he resolve that riches should 
be as pleasant to him as poverty had always been. argentine, after some 
little consideration, came to the conclusion that dining, regard as a 
fine art, was perhaps the most amuse pursuit open to fallen humanity, 
and thus his dinner became famous in london, and an invitation to his 
table a thing covetous desired. after ten years of lordship and 
dinner argentina still decline to be jaded, still persist in 
enjoy life, and by a kind of infection had become recognize as the 
cause of joy in others, in short, as the best of company. his sudden and 
tragic death therefore cause a wide and deep sensation. people could 
scarce believe it, even though the newspaper was before their eyes, and 
the cry of 'mysterious death of a nobleman' came ring up from the 
street. but there stood the brief paragraph: 'lord argentina was found 
dead this morning by his valet under distressing circumstances. it is 
state that there can be no doubt that his lordship committed suicide, 
though no motive can be assign for the act. the deceased nobleman was 
widely known in society, and much like for his genial manner and 
sumptuous hospitality. he is succeed by,' etc., etc. 

by slow degree the detail came to light, but the case still remain a 
mystery. the chief witness at the inquest was the dead nobleman's valet, 
who said that the night before his death lord argentina had dine with a 
lady of good position, whose name was suppress in the newspaper 
reports. at about eleven o'clock lord argentina had returned, and 
informed his man that he should not require his service till the next 
morning. a little later the valet had occasion to cross the hall and was 
somewhat astonish to see his master quiet letting himself out at the 
front door. he had taken off his evening clothes, and was dress in a 
norfolk coat and knickerbockers, and wore a low brown hat. the valet had 
no reason to suppose that lord argentina had seen him, and though his 
master rarely kept late hours, thought little of the occurrence till the 
next morning, when he knock at the bedroom door at a quarter to nine 
as usual. he received no answer, and, after knock two or three 
times, enter the room, and saw lord argentine's body leaning forward 
at an angle from the bottom of the bed. he found that his master had 
tie a cord secure to one of the short bed-posts, and, after making a 
running noose and slip it round his neck, the unfortunate man must 
have resolute fallen forward, to die by slow strangulation. he was 
dress in the light suit in which the valet had seen him go out, and 
the doctor who was summon pronounced that life had been extinct for 
more than four hours. all papers, letters, and so forth seem in 
perfect order, and nothing was discover which pointed in the most 
remote way to any scandal either great or small. here the evidence 
ended; nothing more could be discovered. several person had been 
present at the dinner-party at which lord argentina had assisted, and to 
all these he seem in his usual genial spirits. the valet, indeed, said 
he thought his master appear a little excited when he came home, but 
he confessed that the alteration in his manner was very slight, hardly 
noticeable, indeed. it seem hopeless to seek for any clue, and the 
suggestion that lord argentina had been sudden attack by acute 
suicidal mania was generally accepted. 

it was otherwise, however, when within three weeks, three more 
gentlemen, one of them a nobleman, and the two other men of good 
position and ample means, perish miserably in almost precisely the 
same manner. lord swanleigh was found one morning in his dressing-room, 
hanging from a peg affix to the wall, and mr. collier-stuart and mr. 
herry had chosen to die as lord argentine. there was no explanation 
in either case; a few bald facts; a living man in the evening, and a 
dead body with a black swollen face in the morning. the police had been 
forced to confess themselves powerless to arrest or to explain the 
sordid murder of whitechapel; but before the horrible suicide of 
piccadil and mayfair they were dumb-foundered, for not even the mere 
ferocity which did duty as an explanation of the crime of the east end, 
could be of service in the west. each of these men who had resolve to 
die a torture shameful death was rich, prosperous, and to all 
appearances in love with the world, and not the acutest research could 
ferret out any shadow of a lurk motive in either case. there was a 
horror in the air, and men look at one another's face when they met, 
each wonder whether the other was to be the victim of the fifth 
nameless tragedy. journalist sought in vain in their scrap-books for 
material whereof to concoct reminiscent articles; and the morning paper 
was unfold in many a house with a feeling of awe; no man knew when or 
where the blow would next light. 

a short while after the last of these terrible events, austin came to 
see mr. villiers. he was curious to know whether villier had succeed 
in discover any fresh trace of mrs. herbert, either through clarke 
or by other sources, and he ask the question soon after he had sat 
down. 

'no,' said villiers, 'i wrote to clarke, but he remains obdurate, and i 
have try other channels, but without any result. i can't find out what 
became of helen vaughan after she left paul street, but i think she must 
have gone abroad. but to tell the truth, austin, i haven't paid very 
much attention to the matter for the last few weeks; i knew poor 
herry intimately, and his terrible death has been a great shock to me, 
a great shock.' 

'i can well believe it,' answer austin gravely; 'you know argentina 
was a friend of mine. if i remember rightly, we were speak of him 
that day you came to my rooms.' 

'yes; it was in connection with that house in ashley street, mrs. 
beaumont's house. you said something about argentine's dine there.' 

'quite so. of course you know it was there argentina dine the night 
before--before his death.' 

'no, i haven't heard that.' 

'oh, yes; the name was kept out of the papers to spare mrs. beaumont. 
argentina was a great favourite of hers, and it is said she was in a 
terrible state for some time after.' 

a curious look came over villiers's face; he seem undecided whether to 
speak or not. austin began again. 

'i never experienced such a feeling of horror as when i read the account 
of argentine's death. i didn't understand it at the time, and i don't 
now. i knew him well, and it completely pass my understanding for what 
possible cause he--or any of the other for the matter of that--could 
have resolve in cold blood to die in such an awful manner. you know how 
men babble away each other's character in london, you may be sure any 
bury scandal or hidden skeleton would have been brought to light in 
such a case as this; but nothing of the sort has taken place. as for the 
theory of mania, that is very well, of course, for the coroner's jury, 
but everybody know that it's all nonsense. suicidal mania is not 
small-pox.' 

austin relapse into gloomy silence. villier sat silent also, watch 
his friend. the expression of indecision still fleet across his face; 
he seem as if weigh his thought in the balance, and the 
consideration he was revolving left him still silent. austin try to 
shake off the remembrance of tragedy as hopeless and perplexed as the 
labyrinth of dædalus, and began to talk in an indifferent voice of the 
more pleasant incident and adventure of the season. 

'that mrs. beaumont,' he said, 'of whom we were speaking, is a great 
success; she has taken london almost by storm. i met her the other night 
at fulham's; she is really a remarkable woman.' 

'you have met mrs. beaumont?' 

'yes; she had quite a court around her. she would be call very 
handsome, i suppose, and yet there is something about her face which i 
didn't like. the features are exquisite, but the expression is strange. 
and all the time i was look at her, and afterwards, when i was go 
home, i had a curious feeling that that very expression was in some way 
or other familiar to me.' 

'you must have seen her in the row.' 

'no, i am sure i never set eyes on the woman before; it is that which 
make it puzzling. and to the best of my belief i have never seen 
anybody like her; what i felt was a kind of dim far-off memory, vague 
but persistent. the only sensation i can compare it to, is that odd 
feeling one sometimes has in a dream, when fantastic city and wondrous 
lands and phantom personage appear familiar and accustomed.' 

villier nod and glance aimless round the room, possibly in search 
of something on which to turn the conversation. his eyes fell on an old 
chest somewhat like that in which the artist's strange legacy lay hid 
beneath a gothic scutcheon. 

'have you written to the doctor about poor meyrick?' he asked. 

'yes; i wrote ask for full particulars as to his illness and death. i 
don't expect to have an answer for another three week or a month. i 
thought i might as well inquire whether meyrick knew an englishwoman 
name herbert, and if so, whether the doctor could give me any 
information about her. but it's very possible that meyrick fell in with 
her at new york, or mexico, or san francisco; i have no idea as to the 
extent or direction of his travels.' 

'yes, and it's very possible that the woman may have more than one 
name.' 

'exactly. i wish i had thought of ask you to lend me the portrait of 
her which you possess. i might have enclose it in my letter to dr. 
matthews.' 

'so you might; that never occur to me. we might send it now. hark! 
what are those boys calling?' 

while the two men had been talk together a confuse noise of shouting 
had been gradual grow louder. the noise rose from the eastward and 
swell down piccadilly, drawing near and nearer, a very torrent of 
sound; surge up street usually quiet, and making every window a frame 
for a face, curious or excited. the cries and voice came echo up 
the silent street where villier lived, grow more distinct as they 
advanced, and, as villier spoke, an answer rang up from the pavement: 

'the west end horrors; another awful suicide; full details!' 

austin rush down the stairs and bought a paper and read out the 
paragraph to villier as the uproar in the street rose and fell. the 
window was open and the air seem full of noise and terror. 

'another gentleman has fallen a victim to the terrible epidemic of 
suicide which for the last month has prevail in the west end. mr. 
sidney crashaw, of stoke house, fulham, and king's pomeroy, devon, was 
found, after a prolonged search, hanging from the branch of a tree in 
his garden at one o'clock to-day. the deceased gentleman dine last 
night at the carlton club and seem in his usual health and spirits. he 
left the club at about ten o'clock, and was seen walking leisurely up 
st. james's street a little later. subsequent to this his movements 
cannot be traced. on the discovery of the body medical aid was at once 
summoned, but life had evidently been long extinct. so far as is known, 
mr. crashaw had no trouble or anxiety of any kind. this painful suicide, 
it will be remembered, is the fifth of the kind in the last month. the 
authority at scotland yard are unable to suggest any explanation of 
these terrible occurrences.' 

austin put down the paper in mute horror. 

'i shall leave london to-morrow,' he said, 'it is a city of nightmares. 
how awful this is, villiers!' 

mr. villier was sitting by the window quiet look out into the 
street. he had listen to the newspaper report attentively, and the 
hint of indecision was no long on his face. 

'wait a moment, austin,' he replied, 'i have made up my mind to mention 
a little matter that occur last night. it is stated, i think, that 
crashaw was last seen alive in st. james's street shortly after ten?' 

'yes, i think so. i will look again. yes, you are quite right.' 

'quite so. well, i am in a position to contradict that statement at all 
events. crashaw was seen after that; considerably later indeed.' 

'how do you know?' 

'because i happen to see crashaw myself at about two o'clock this 
morning.' 

'you saw crashaw? you, villiers?' 

'yes, i saw him quite distinctly; indeed, there were but a few feet 
between us.' 

'where, in heaven's name, did you see him?' 

'not far from here. i saw him in ashley street. he was just leave a 
house.' 

'did you notice what house it was?' 

'yes. it was mrs. beaumont's.' 

'villiers! think what you are saying; there must be some mistake. how 
could crashaw be in mrs. beaumont's house at two o'clock in the morning? 
surely, surely, you must have been dreaming, villiers, you were always 
rather fanciful.' 

'no; i was wide awake enough. even if i had been dream as you say, 
what i saw would have rouse me effectually.' 

'what you saw? what did you see? was there anything strange about 
crashaw? but i can't believe it; it is impossible.' 

'well, if you like i will tell you what i saw, or if you please, what i 
think i saw, and you can judge for yourself.' 

'very good, villiers.' 

the noise and clamour of the street had die away, though now and then 
the sound of shouting still came from the distance, and the dull, leaden 
silence seem like the quiet after an earthquake or a storm. villier 
turn from the window and began speaking. 

'i was at a house near regent's park last night, and when i came away 
the fancy took me to walk home instead of taking a hansom. it was a 
clear pleasant night enough, and after a few minutes i had the street 
pretty much to myself. it's a curious thing, austin, to be alone in 
london at night, the gas-lamps stretch away in perspective, and the 
dead silence, and then perhaps the rush and clatter of a hansom on the 
stones, and the fire start up under the horse's hoofs. i walk along 
pretty briskly, for i was feeling a little tired of being out in the 
night, and as the clock were striking two i turn down ashley street, 
which, you know, is on my way. it was quiet than ever there, and the 
lamp were fewer; altogether, it look as dark and gloomy as a forest 
in winter. i had done about half the length of the street when i heard a 
door closed very softly, and naturally i look up to see who was abroad 
like myself at such an hour. as it happens, there is a street lamp close 
to the house in question, and i saw a man standing on the step. he had 
just shut the door and his face was towards me, and i recognize crashaw 
directly. i never knew him to speak to, but i had often seen him, and i 
am positive that i was not mistaken in my man. i look into his face 
for a moment, and then--i will confess the truth--i set off at a good 
run, and kept it up till i was within my own door.' 

'why?' 

'why? because it made my blood run cold to see that man's face. i could 
never have supposed that such an infernal medley of passion could have 
glare out of any human eyes; i almost faint as i looked. i knew i had 
look into the eyes of a lost soul, austin, the man's outward form 
remained, but all hell was within it. furious lust, and hate that was 
like fire, and the loss of all hope and horror that seem to shriek 
aloud to the night, though his teeth were shut; and the utter black 
of despair. i am sure he did not see me; he saw nothing that you or i 
can see, but he saw what i hope we never shall. i do not know when he 
died; i suppose in an hour, or perhaps two, but when i pass down 
ashley street and heard the close door, that man no long belong to 
this world; it was a devil's face i look upon.' 

there was an interval of silence in the room when villier cease 
speaking. the light was failing, and all the tumult of an hour ago was 
quite hushed. austin had bent his head at the close of the story, and 
his hand cover his eyes. 

'what can it mean?' he said at length. 

'who knows, austin, who knows? it's a black business, but i think we had 
better keep it to ourselves, for the present at any rate. i will see if 
i cannot learn anything about that house through private channel of 
information, and if i do light upon anything i will let you know.' 


vii 

the encounter in soho 

three week later austin received a note from villiers, ask him to 
call either that afternoon or the next. he chose the near date, and 
found villier sitting as usual by the window, apparently lost in 
meditation on the drowsy traffic of the street. there was a bamboo table 
by his side, a fantastic thing, enrich with gilding and queer paint 
scenes, and on it lay a little pile of papers arrange and docket as 
neat as anything in mr. clarke's office. 

'well, villiers, have you made any discovery in the last three weeks?' 

'i think so; i have here one or two memoranda which struck me as 
singular, and there is a statement to which i shall call your 
attention.' 

'and these document relate to mrs. beaumont? it was really crashaw whom 
you saw that night standing on the doorstep of the house in ashley 
street?' 

'as to that matter my belief remains unchanged, but neither my inquiry 
nor their result have any special relation to crashaw. but my 
investigate have had a strange issue. i have found out who mrs. 
beaumont is!' 

'who she is? in what way do you mean?' 

'i mean that you and i know her better under another name.' 

'what name is that?' 

'herbert.' 

'herbert!' austin repeated the word, daze with astonishment. 

'yes, mrs. herbert of paul street, helen vaughan of early adventure 
unknown to me. you had reason to recognize the expression of her face; 
when you go home look at the face in meyrick's book of horrors, and you 
will know the source of your recollection.' 

'and you have proof of this?' 

'yes, the best of proof; i have seen mrs. beaumont, or shall we say mrs. 
herbert?' 

'where did you see her?' 

'hardly in a place where you would expect to see a lady who lives in 
ashley street, piccadilly. i saw her enter a house in one of the 
meanest and most disreputable street in soho. in fact, i had made an 
appointment, though not with her, and she was precise both to time and 
place.' 

'all this seem very wonderful, but i cannot call it incredible. you 
must remember, villiers, that i have seen this woman, in the ordinary 
adventure of london society, talk and laughing, and sip her 
coffee in a commonplace drawing-room with commonplace people. but you 
know what you are saying.' 

'i do; i have not allow myself to be led by surmise or fancies. it 
was with no thought of finding helen vaughan that i search for mrs. 
beaumont in the dark waters of the life of london, but such has been the 
issue.' 

'you must have been in strange places, villiers.' 

'yes, i have been in very strange places. it would have been useless, 
you know, to go to ashley street, and ask mrs. beaumont to give me a 
short sketch of her previous history. no; assuming, as i had to assume, 
that her record was not of the cleanest, it would be pretty certain that 
at some previous time she must have move in circle not quite so 
refined as her present ones. if you see mud on the top of a stream, you 
may be sure that it was once at the bottom. i went to the bottom. i have 
always been fond of dive into queer street for my amusement, and i 
found my knowledge of that locality and its inhabitant very useful. it 
is, perhaps, needless to say that my friends had never heard the name of 
beaumont, and as i had never seen the lady, and was quite unable to 
describe her, i had to set to work in an indirect way. the people there 
know me; i have been able to do some of them a service now and again, so 
they made no difficulty about give their information; they were aware 
i had no communication direct or indirect with scotland yard. i had to 
cast out a good many lines, though, before i got what i wanted, and when 
i landed the fish i did not for a moment suppose it was my fish. but i 
listen to what i was told out of a constitutional liking for useless 
information, and i found myself in possession of a very curious story, 
though, as i imagined, not the story i was look for. it was to this 
effect. some five or six years ago, a woman name raymond sudden made 
her appearance in the neighbourhood to which i am referring. she was 
describe to me as being quite young, probably not more than seventeen 
or eighteen, very handsome, and look as if she came from the country. 
i should be wrong in saying that she found her level in go to this 
particular quarter, or associate with these people, for from what i 
was told, i should think the worst den in london far too good for her. 
the person from whom i got my information, as you may suppose, no great 
puritan, shudder and grew sick in telling me of the nameless infamy 
which were laid to her charge. after living there for a year, or perhaps 
a little more, she disappear as sudden as she came, and they saw 
nothing of her till about the time of the paul street case. at first she 
came to her old haunt only occasionally, then more frequently, and 
finally took up her abode there as before, and remain for six or eight 
months. it's of no use my go into detail as to the life that woman 
led; if you want particulars you can look at meyrick's legacy. those 
designs were not drawn from his imagination. she again disappeared, and 
the people of the place saw nothing of her till a few month ago. my 
informant told me that she had taken some rooms in a house which he 
pointed out, and these rooms she was in the habit of visiting two or 
three times a week and always at ten in the morning. i was led to expect 
that one of these visit would be paid on a certain day about a week 
ago, and i accordingly manage to be on the look-out in company with my 
cicerone at a quarter to ten, and the hour and the lady came with equal 
punctuality. my friend and i were standing under an archway, a little 
way back from the street, but she saw us, and gave me a glance that i 
shall be long in forgetting. that look was quite enough for me; i knew 
miss raymond to be mrs. herbert; as for mrs. beaumont she had quite gone 
out of my head. she went into the house, and i watch it till four 
o'clock, when she came out, and then i follow her. it was a long 
chase, and i had to be very careful to keep a long way in the 
background, and yet not lose sight of the woman. she took me down to 
the strand, and then to westminster, and then up st. james's street, and 
along piccadilly. i felt queerish when i saw her turn up ashley street; 
the thought that mrs. herbert was mrs. beaumont came into my mind, but 
it seem too improbable to be true. i wait at the corner, keeping my 
eye on her all the time, and i took particular care to note the house at 
which she stopped. it was the house with the gay curtains, the house of 
flowers, the house out of which crashaw came the night he hang himself 
in his garden. i was just go away with my discovery, when i saw an 
empty carriage come round and draw up in front of the house, and i came 
to the conclusion that mrs. herbert was go out for a drive, and i was 
right. i took a hansom and follow the carriage into the park. there, 
as it happened, i met a man i know, and we stood talk together a 
little distance from the carriage-way, to which i had my back. we had 
not been there for ten minutes when my friend took off his hat, and i 
glance round and saw the lady i had been following all day. "who is 
that?" i said, and his answer was, "mrs. beaumont; lives in ashley 
street." of course there could be no doubt after that. i don't know 
whether she saw me, but i don't think she did. i went home at once, and, 
on consideration, i thought that i had a sufficient good case with 
which to go to clarke.' 

'why to clarke?' 

'because i am sure that clarke is in possession of fact about this 
woman, fact of which i know nothing.' 

'well, what then?' 

mr. villier lean back in his chair and look reflective at austin 
for a moment before he answered: 

'my idea was that clarke and i should call on mrs. beaumont.' 

'you would never go into such a house as that? no, no, villiers, you 
cannot do it. besides, consider; what result ...' 

'i will tell you soon. but i was go to say that my information do 
not end here; it has been complete in an extraordinary manner. 

'look at this neat little packet of manuscript; it is paginated, you 
see, and i have indulge in the civil coquetry of a ribbon of red tape. 
it has almost a legal air, hasn't it? run your eye over it, austin. it 
is an account of the entertainment mrs. beaumont provided for her 
choice guests. the man who wrote this escape with his life, but i do 
not think he will live many years. the doctor tell him he must have 
sustain some severe shock to the nerves.' 

austin took the manuscript, but never read it. opening the neat page at 
haphazard his eye was caught by a word and a phrase that follow it; 
and, sick at heart, with white lip and a cold sweat pour like water 
from his temples, he flung the paper down. 

'take it away, villiers, never speak of this again. are you made of 
stone, man? why, the dread and horror of death itself, the thought of 
the man who stand in the keen morning air on the black platform, bound, 
the bell toll in his ears, and waits for the harsh rattle of the 
bolt, are as nothing compare to this. i will not read it; i should 
never sleep again.' 

'very good. i can fancy what you saw. yes; it is horrible enough; but 
after all, it is an old story, an old mystery play in our day, and in 
dim london street instead of amidst the vineyard and the olive 
gardens. we know what happen to those who chance to meet the great 
god pan, and those who are wise know that all symbol are symbol of 
something, not of nothing. it was, indeed, an exquisite symbol beneath 
which men long ago veiled their knowledge of the most awful, most secret 
forces which lie at the heart of all things; forces before which the 
soul of men must wither and die and blacken, as their body blacken 
under the electric current. such forces cannot be named, cannot be 
spoken, cannot be imagine except under a veil and a symbol, a symbol to 
the most of us appear a quaint, poetic fancy, to some a foolish tale. 
but you and i, at all events, have known something of the terror that 
may dwell in the secret place of life, manifest under human flesh; 
that which is without form taking to itself a form. oh, austin, how can 
it be? how is it that the very sunlight do not turn to black 
before this thing, the hard earth melt and boil beneath such a burden?' 

villier was pace up and down the room, and the bead of sweat stood 
out on his forehead. austin sat silent for a while, but villier saw him 
make a sign upon his breast. 

'i say again, villiers, you will surely never enter such a house as 
that? you would never pass out alive.' 

'yes, austin, i shall go out alive--i, and clarke with me.' 

'what do you mean? you cannot, you would not dare ...' 

'wait a moment. the air was very pleasant and fresh this morning; there 
was a breeze blowing, even through this dull street, and i thought i 
would take a walk. piccadil stretch before me a clear, bright vista, 
and the sun flash on the carriage and on the quiver leaves in the 
park. it was a joyous morning, and men and women look at the sky and 
smile as they went about their work or their pleasure, and the wind 
blew as blithe as upon the meadow and the scent gorse. but somehow 
or other i got out of the bustle and the gaiety, and found myself 
walking slow along a quiet, dull street, where there seem to be no 
sunshine and no air, and where the few foot-passengers loiter as they 
walked, and hung indecisive about corner and archways. i walk 
along, hardly knowing where i was go or what i did there, but feeling 
impelled, as one sometimes is, to explore still further, with a vague 
idea of reach some unknown goal. thus i forge up the street, note 
the small traffic of the milk-shop, and wonder at the incongruous 
medley of penny pipes, black tobacco, sweets, newspapers, and comic 
song which here and there jostle one another in the short compass of a 
single window. i think it was a cold shudder that sudden pass 
through me that first told me that i had found what i wanted. i look 
up from the pavement and stop before a dusty shop, above which the 
lettering had faded, where the red brick of two hundred years ago had 
grime to black; where the window had gather to themselves the fog 
and the dirt of winter innumerable. i saw what i required; but i think 
it was five minutes before i had steady myself and could walk in and 
ask for it in a cool voice and with a calm face. i think there must 
even then have been a tremor in my words, for the old man who came out 
from his back parlour, and fumble slow amongst his goods, look 
oddly at me as he tie the parcel. i paid what he asked, and stood 
leaning by the counter, with a strange reluctance to take up my goods 
and go. i ask about the business, and learnt that trade was bad and 
the profit cut down sadly; but then the street was not what it was 
before traffic had been diverted, but that was done forty years ago, 
"just before my father died," he said. i got away at last, and walk 
along sharply; it was a dismal street indeed, and i was glad to return 
to the bustle and the noise. would you like to see my purchase?' 

austin said nothing, but nod his head slightly; he still look white 
and sick. villier pull out a drawer in the bamboo table, and show 
austin a long coil of cord, hard and new; and at one end was a running 
noose. 

'it is the best hempen cord,' said villiers, 'just as it use to be made 
for the old trade, the man told me. not an inch of jute from end to 
end.' 

austin set his teeth hard, and stare at villiers, grow white as he 
looked. 

'you would not do it,' he murmur at last. 'you would not have blood on 
your hands. my god!' he exclaimed, with sudden vehemence, 'you cannot 
mean this, villiers, that you will make yourself a hangman?' 

'no. i shall offer a choice, and leave helen vaughan alone with this 
cord in a lock room for fifteen minutes. if when we go in it is not 
done, i shall call the nearest policeman. that is all.' 

'i must go now. i cannot stay here any longer; i cannot bear this. 
good-night.' 

'good-night, austin.' 

the door shut, but in a moment it was open again, and austin stood, 
white and ghastly, in the entrance. 

'i was forgetting,' he said, 'that i too have something to tell. i have 
received a letter from dr. harding of buenos ayres. he say that he 
attend meyrick for three week before his death.' 

'and do he say what carry him off in the prime of life? it was not 
fever?' 

'no, it was not fever. according to the doctor, it was an utter collapse 
of the whole system, probably cause by some severe shock. but he states 
that the patient would tell him nothing, and that he was consequently at 
some disadvantage in treat the case.' 

'is there anything more?' 

'yes. dr. harding end his letter by saying: "i think this is all the 
information i can give you about your poor friend. he had not been long 
in buenos ayres, and knew scarcely any one, with the exception of a 
person who did not bear the best of characters, and has since left--a 
mrs. vaughan."' 


viii 

the fragment 

[amongst the papers of the well-known physician, dr. robert 
matheson, of ashley street, piccadilly, who die suddenly, of 
apoplectic seizure, at the beginning of 1892, a leaf of manuscript 
paper was found, cover with pencil jottings. these note were in 
latin, much abbreviated, and had evidently been made in great haste. 
the ms. was only decipher with great difficulty, and some words 
have up to the present time evade all the effort of the expert 
employed. the date, 'xxv jul. 1888,' is written on the right-hand 
corner of the ms. the following is a translate of dr. matheson's 
manuscript.] 

'whether science would benefit by these brief note if they could be 
published, i do not know, but rather doubt. but certainly i shall never 
take the responsibility of publishing or divulge one word of what is 
here written, not only on account of my oath freely given to those two 
person who were present, but also because the detail are too 
abominable. it is probably that, upon mature consideration, and after 
weigh the good and evil, i shall one day destroy this paper, or at 
least leave it under seal to my friend d., trust in his discretion, 
to use it or to burn it, as he may think fit. 

'as was befitting, i did all that my knowledge suggest to make sure 
that i was suffering under no delusion. at first astounded, i could 
hardly think, but in a minute's time i was sure that my pulse was steady 
and regular, and that i was in my real and true senses. i then fixed my 
eyes quiet on what was before me. 

'though horror and revolting nausea rose up within me, and an odour of 
corruption choke my breath, i remain firm. i was then privileged or 
accursed, i dare not say which, to see that which was on the bed, lie 
there black like ink, transform before my eyes. the skin, and the 
flesh, and the muscles, and the bones, and the firm structure of the 
human body that i had thought to be unchangeable, and permanent as 
adamant, began to melt and dissolve. 

'i knew that the body may be separate into its elements by external 
agencies, but i should have refuse to believe what i saw. for here 
there was some internal force, of which i knew nothing, that cause 
dissolution and change. 

'here too was all the work by which man had been made repeated before my 
eyes. i saw the form waver from sex to sex, divide itself from itself, 
and then again reunited. then i saw the body descend to the beast 
whence it ascended, and that which was on the heights go down to the 
depths, even to the abyss of all being. the principle of life, which 
make organism, always remained, while the outward form changed. 

'the light within the room had turn to blackness, not the dark of 
night, in which object are seen dimly, for i could see clearly and 
without difficulty. but it was the negate of light; object were 
present to my eyes, if i may say so, without any medium, in such a 
manner that if there had been a prism in the room i should have seen no 
colours represent in it. 

'i watched, and at last i saw nothing but a substance as jelly. then the 
ladder was ascend again ... [_here the ms. is illegible_] ... for one 
instant i saw a form, shaped in dim before me, which i will not 
farther describe. but the symbol of this form may be seen in ancient 
sculptures, and in painting which survive beneath the lava, too foul 
to be spoken of ... as a horrible and unspeakable shape, neither man nor 
beast, was change into human form, there came finally death. 

'i who saw all this, not without great horror and loathing of soul, here 
write my name, declare all that i have set on this paper to be true. 

'robert matheson, med. dr.' 

* * * * * 

... such, raymond, is the story of what i know and what i have seen. the 
burden of it was too heavy for me to bear alone, and yet i could tell it 
to none but you. villiers, who was with me at the last, know nothing of 
that awful secret of the wood, of how what we both saw die, lay upon the 
smooth, sweet turf amidst the summer flowers, half in sun and half in 
shadow, and holding the girl rachel's hand, call and summon those 
companions, and shaped in solid form, upon the earth we tread on, the 
horror which we can but hint at, which we can only name under a figure. 
i would not tell villier of this, nor of that resemblance, which struck 
me as with a blow upon my heart, when i saw the portrait, which fill 
the cup of terror at the end. what this can mean i dare not guess. i 
know that what i saw perish was not mary, and yet in the last agony 
mary's eyes look into mine. whether there be any one who can show the 
last link in this chain of awful mystery, i do not know, but if there be 
any one who can do this, you, raymond, are the man. and if you know the 
secret, it rest with you to tell it or not, as you please. 

i am writing this letter to you immediately on my get back to town. 
i have been in the country for the last few days; perhaps you may be 
able to guess in what part. while the horror and wonder of london was at 
its height--for 'mrs. beaumont,' as i have told you, was well known in 
society--i wrote to my friend dr. phillips, give some brief outline, 
or rather hint, of what had happened, and ask him to tell me the name 
of the village where the event he had related to me occurred. he gave 
me the name, as he said with the less hesitation, because rachel's 
father and mother were dead, and the rest of the family had gone to a 
relative in the state of washington six month before. the parents, he 
said, had undoubted die of grief and horror cause by the terrible 
death of their daughter, and by what had gone before that death. on the 
evening of the day on which i received phillips's letter i was at 
caermaen, and standing beneath the moulder roman walls, white with 
the winter of seventeen hundred years, i look over the meadow where 
once had stood the old temple of the 'god of the deeps,' and saw a 
house gleam in the sunlight. it was the house where helen had lived. 
i stay at caermaen for several days. the people of the place, i found, 
knew little and had guess less. those whom i spoke to on the matter 
seem surprise that an antiquarian (as i professed myself to be) 
should trouble about a village tragedy, of which they gave a very 
commonplace version, and, as you may imagine, i told nothing of what i 
knew. most of my time was spent in the great wood that rise just above 
the village and climb the hillside, and go down to the river in the 
valley; such another long lovely valley, raymond, as that on which we 
look one summer night, walking to and fro before your house. for many 
an hour i stray through the maze of the forest, turning now to right 
and now to left, pace slow down long alley of undergrowth, shadowy 
and chill, even under the midday sun, and halting beneath great oaks; 
lie on the short turf of a clearing where the faint sweet scent of 
wild rose came to me on the wind and mixed with the heavy perfume of 
the elder, whose mingle odour is like the odour of the room of the 
dead, a vapour of incense and corruption. i stood at the edge of the 
wood, gaze at all the pomp and procession of the foxglove towering 
amidst the bracken and shining red in the broad sunshine, and beyond 
them into deep thicket of close undergrowth where spring boil up from 
the rock and nourish the water-weeds, dank and evil. but in all my 
wanderings i avoid one part of the wood; it was not till yesterday 
that i climb to the summit of the hill, and stood upon the ancient 
roman road that thread the highest ridge of the wood. here they had 
walked, helen and rachel, along this quiet causeway, upon the pavement 
of green turf, shut in on either side by high bank of red earth, and 
tall hedge of shining beech, and here i follow in their steps, 
look out, now and again, through parting in the boughs, and seeing 
on one side the sweep of the wood stretch far to right and left, and 
sink into the broad level, and beyond, the yellow sea, and the land 
over the sea. on the other side was the valley and the river and hill 
following hill as wave on wave, and wood and meadow, and cornfield, and 
white house gleaming, and a great wall of mountain, and far blue peak 
in the north. and so at last i came to the place. the track went up a 
gentle slope, and widen out into an open space with a wall of thick 
undergrowth around it, and then, narrow again, pass on into the 
distance and the faint blue mist of summer heat. and into this pleasant 
summer glade rachel pass a girl, and left it, who shall say what? i 
did not stay long there. 

in a small town near caermaen there is a museum, contain for the most 
part roman remains which have been found in the neighbourhood at various 
times. on the day after my arrival at caermaen i walk over to the 
town in question, and took the opportunity of inspect this museum. 
after i had seen most of the sculpture stones, the coffins, rings, 
coins, and fragment of tessellated pavement which the place contains, i 
was shown a small square pillar of white stone, which had been recently 
discover in the wood of which i have been speaking, and, as i found on 
inquiry, in that open space where the roman road broaden out. on one 
side of the pillar was an inscription, of which i took a note. some of 
the letters have been defaced, but i do not think there can be any doubt 
as to those which i supply. the inscription is as follows: 

devomnodent_i_ 
fla_v_ivssenilispossv_it_ 
propternvp_tias_ 
_qua_sviditsvbvmb_ra_ 

'to the great god noden (the god of the great deep or abyss) flaviu 
senili has erect this pillar on account of the marriage which he saw 
beneath the shade.' 

the custodian of the museum informed me that local antiquary were much 
puzzled, not by the inscription, or by any difficulty in translate it, 
but as to the circumstance or rite to which allusion is made. 

* * * * * 

... and now, my dear clarke, as to what you tell me about helen vaughan, 
whom you say you saw die under circumstances of the utmost and almost 
incredible horror. i was interested in your account, but a good deal, 
nay all, of what you told me i knew already. i can understand the 
strange likeness you remark both in the portrait and in the actual 
face; you have seen helen's mother. you remember that still summer night 
so many years ago, when i talk to you of the world beyond the shadows, 
and of the god pan. you remember mary. she was the mother of helen 
vaughan, who was born nine month after that night. 

mary never recover her reason. she lay, as you saw her, all the while 
upon her bed, and a few days after the child was born she died. i fancy 
that just at the last she knew me; i was standing by the bed, and the 
old look came into her eyes for a second, and then she shudder and 
groan and died. it was an ill work i did that night when you were 
present; i broke open the door of the house of life, without knowing or 
care what might pass forth or enter in. i recollect your telling me at 
the time, sharp enough, and rightly enough too, in one sense, that i 
had ruin the reason of a human being by a foolish experiment, base on 
an absurd theory. you did well to blame me, but my theory was not all 
absurdity. what i said mary would see, she saw, but i forgot that no 
human eyes could look on such a vision with impunity. and i forgot, as i 
have just said, that when the house of life is thus thrown open, there 
may enter in that for which we have no name, and human flesh may become 
the veil of a horror one dare not express. i play with energy which 
i did not understand, and you have seen the ending of it. helen vaughan 
did well to bind the cord about her neck and die, though the death was 
horrible. the blacken face, the hideous form upon the bed, change 
and melting before your eyes from woman to man, from man to beast, and 
from beast to worse than beast, all the strange horror that you 
witnessed, surprise me but little. what you say the doctor whom you 
sent for saw and shudder at i notice long ago; i knew what i had done 
the moment the child was born, and when it was scarcely five years old i 
surprise it, not once or twice but several times with a playmate, you 
may guess of what kind. it was for me a constant, an incarnate horror, 
and after a few years i felt i could bear it no longer, and i sent helen 
vaughan away. you know now what frightened the boy in the wood. the rest 
of the strange story, and all else that you tell me, as discover by 
your friend, i have contrived to learn from time to time, almost to the 
last chapter. and now helen is with her companions.... 




the inmost light 


i 

one evening in autumn, when the deformity of london were veiled in 
faint blue mist, and its vista and far-reaching street seem 
splendid, mr. charles salisbury was slow pace down rupert street, 
drawing near to his favourite restaurant by slow degrees. his eyes 
were downcast in study of the pavement, and thus it was that as he 
pass in at the narrow door a man who had come up from the lower end of 
the street jostle against him. 

'i beg your pardon--wasn't look where i was going. why, it's dyson!' 

'yes, quite so. how are you, salisbury?' 

'quite well. but where have you been, dyson? i don't think i can have 
seen you for the last five years?' 

'no; i dare say not. you remember i was get rather hard up when you 
came to my place at charlotte street?' 

'perfectly. i think i remember your telling me that you owe five weeks' 
rent, and that you had part with your watch for a comparatively small 
sum.' 

'my dear salisbury, your memory is admirable. yes, i was hard up. but 
the curious thing is that soon after you saw me i became hard up. my 
financial state was describe by a friend as "stone broke." i don't 
approve of slang, mind you, but such was my condition. but suppose we go 
in; there might be other people who would like to dine--it's a human 
weakness, salisbury.' 

'certainly; come along. i was wonder as i walk down whether the 
corner table were taken. it has a velvet back, you know.' 

'i know the spot; it's vacant. yes, as i was saying, i became even 
hard up.' 

'what did you do then?' ask salisbury, dispose of his hat, and 
settle down in the corner of the seat, with a glance of fond 
anticipation at the _menu_. 

'what did i do? why, i sat down and reflected. i had a good classical 
education, and a positive distaste for business of any kind: that was 
the capital with which i face the world. do you know, i have heard 
people describe olive as nasty! what lamentable philistinism! i have 
often thought, salisbury, that i could write genuine poetry under the 
influence of olive and red wine. let us have chianti; it may not be 
very good, but the flask are simply charming.' 

'it is pretty good here. we may as well have a big flask.' 

'very good. i reflected, then, on my want of prospects, and i determined 
to embark in literature.' 

'really; that was strange. you seem in pretty comfortable circumstances, 
though.' 

'though! what a satire upon a noble profession. i am afraid, salisbury, 
you haven't a proper idea of the dignity of an artist. you see me 
sitting at my desk--or at least you can see me if you care to call--with 
pen and ink, and simple nothingness before me, and if you come again in 
a few hour you will (in all probability) find a creation!' 

'yes, quite so. i had an idea that literature was not remunerative.' 

'you are mistaken; its rewards are great. i may mention, by the way, 
that shortly after you saw me i succeed to a small income. an uncle 
died, and prove unexpected generous.' 

'ah, i see. that must have been convenient.' 

'it was pleasant--undeniably pleasant. i have always considered it in 
the light of an endowment of my researches. i told you i was a man of 
letters; it would, perhaps, be more correct to describe myself as a man 
of science.' 

'dear me, dyson, you have really change very much in the last few 
years. i had a notion, don't you know, that you were a sort of idle 
about town, the kind of man one might meet on the north side of 
piccadil every day from may to july.' 

'exactly. i was even then form myself, though all unconsciously. you 
know my poor father could not afford to send me to the university. i 
use to grumble in my ignorance at not have complete my education. 
that was the folly of youth, salisbury; my university was piccadilly. 
there i began to study the great science which still occupy me.' 

'what science do you mean?' 

'the science of the great city; the physiology of london; literally and 
metaphysics the greatest subject that the mind of man can conceive. 
what an admirable _salmi_ this is; undoubted the final end of the 
pheasant. yet i feel sometimes positively overwhelm with the thought 
of the vastness and complexity of london. paris a man may get to 
understand thorough with a reasonable amount of study; but london is 
always a mystery. in paris you may say: "here live the actresses, here 
the bohemians, and the _ratés_"; but it is different in london. you may 
point out a street, correct enough, as the abode of washerwomen; but, 
in that second floor, a man may be study chaldee roots, and in the 
garret over the way a forgotten artist is die by inches.' 

'i see you are dyson, unchanged and unchangeable,' said salisbury, 
slow sip his chianti. 'i think you are misle by a too fervid 
imagination; the mystery of london exist only in your fancy. it seem 
to me a dull place enough. we seldom hear of a really artistic crime in 
london, whereas i believe paris abound in that sort of thing.' 

'give me some more wine. thanks. you are mistaken, my dear fellow, you 
are really mistaken. london has nothing to be ashamed of in the way of 
crime. where we fail is for want of homers, not agamemnons. _carent quia 
vate sacro_, you know.' 

'i recall the quotation. but i don't think i quite follow you.' 

'well, in plain language, we have no good writer in london who make a 
speciality of that kind of thing. our common reporter is a dull dog; 
every story that he has to tell is spoilt in the telling. his idea of 
horror and of what excite horror is so lamentable deficient. nothing 
will content the fellow but blood, vulgar red blood, and when he can get 
it he lay it on thick, and consider that he has produce a telling 
article. it's a poor notion. and, by some curious fatality, it is the 
most commonplace and brutal murder which always attract the most 
attention and get written up the most. for instance, i dare say that 
you never heard of the harlesden case?' 

'no; no, i don't remember anything about it.' 

'of course not. and yet the story is a curious one. i will tell it you 
over our coffee. harlesden, you know, or i expect you don't know, is 
quite on the out-quarters of london; something curious different from 
your fine old crust suburb like norwood or hampstead, different as 
each of these is from the other. hampstead, i mean, is where you look 
for the head of your great china house with his three acre of land and 
pine-houses, though of late there is the artistic substratum; while 
norwood is the home of the prosperous middle-class family who took the 
house "because it was near the palace," and sicken of the palace six 
month afterwards; but harlesden is a place of no character. it's too 
new to have any character as yet. there are the row of red house and 
the row of white house and the bright green venetians, and the 
blistering doorways, and the little backyard they call gardens, and a 
few feeble shops, and then, just as you think you're go to grasp the 
physiognomy of the settlement, it all melt away.' 

'how the dickens is that? the house don't tumble down before one's 
eyes, i suppose!' 

'well, no, not exactly that. but harlesden as an entity disappears. your 
street turn into a quiet lane, and your staring house into elm trees, 
and the back-gardens into green meadows. you pass instantly from town to 
country; there is no transition as in a small country town, no soft 
gradation of wide lawn and orchards, with house gradual becoming 
less dense, but a dead stop. i believe the people who live there mostly 
go into the city. i have seen once or twice a laden 'bus bound 
thitherwards. but however that may be, i can't conceive a greater 
lonely in a desert at midnight than there is there at midday. it is 
like a city of the dead; the street are glaring and desolate, and as 
you pass it sudden strike you that this too is part of london. well, 
a year or two ago there was a doctor living there; he had set up his 
brass plate and his red lamp at the very end of one of those shining 
streets, and from the back of the house, the field stretch away to 
the north. i don't know what his reason was in settle down in such an 
out-of-the-way place, perhaps dr. black, as we will call him, was a 
far-seeing man and look ahead. his relations, so it appear 
afterwards, had lost sight of him for many years and didn't even know he 
was a doctor, much less where he lived. however, there he was settled in 
harlesden, with some fragment of a practice, and an uncommonly pretty 
wife. people use to see them walking out together in the summer 
evenings soon after they came to harlesden, and, so far as could be 
observed, they seem a very affectionate couple. these walk went on 
through the autumn, and then ceased; but, of course, as the days grew 
dark and the weather cold, the lane near harlesden might be expect to 
lose many of their attractions. all through the winter nobody saw 
anything of mrs. black; the doctor use to reply to his patients' 
inquiry that she was a "little out of sorts, would be better, no 
doubt, in the spring." but the spring came, and the summer, and no mrs. 
black appeared, and at last people began to rumour and talk amongst 
themselves, and all sort of queer things were said at "high teas," 
which you may possibly have heard are the only form of entertainment 
known in such suburbs. dr. black began to surprise some very odd looks 
cast in his direction, and the practice, such as it was, fell off before 
his eyes. in short, when the neighbour whisper about the matter, they 
whisper that mrs. black was dead, and that the doctor had made away 
with her. but this wasn't the case; mrs. black was seen alive in june. 
it was a sunday afternoon, one of those few exquisite days that an 
english climate offers, and half london had stray out into the fields, 
north, south, east, and west to smell the scent of the white may, and to 
see if the wild rose were yet in blossom in the hedges. i had gone out 
myself early in the morning, and had had a long ramble, and somehow or 
other as i was steer homeward i found myself in this very harlesden 
we have been talk about. to be exact, i had a glass of beer in the 
"general gordon," the most flourish house in the neighbourhood, and 
as i was wandering rather aimless about, i saw an uncommonly tempt 
gap in a hedgerow, and resolve to explore the meadow beyond. soft grass 
is very grateful to the feet after the infernal grit strewn on suburban 
sidewalks, and after walking about for some time i thought i should like 
to sit down on a bank and have a smoke. while i was get out my 
pouch, i look up in the direction of the houses, and as i look i 
felt my breath caught back, and my teeth began to chatter, and the stick 
i had in one hand snap in two with the grip i gave it. it was as if i 
had had an electric current down my spine, and yet for some moment of 
time which seem long, but which must have been very short, i caught 
myself wonder what on earth was the matter. then i knew what had 
made my very heart shudder and my bone grind together in an agony. as i 
glance up i had look straight towards the last house in the row 
before me, and in an upper window of that house i had seen for some 
short fraction of a second a face. it was the face of a woman, and yet 
it was not human. you and i, salisbury, have heard in our time, as we 
sat in our seat in church in sober english fashion, of a lust that 
cannot be satiate and of a fire that is unquenchable, but few of us 
have any notion what these words mean. i hope you never may, for as i 
saw that face at the window, with the blue sky above me and the warm air 
play in gust about me, i knew i had look into another 
world--looked through the window of a commonplace, brand-new house, and 
seen hell open before me. when the first shock was over, i thought once 
or twice that i should have fainted; my face stream with a cold sweat, 
and my breath came and went in sobs, as if i had been half drowned. i 
manage to get up at last, and walk round to the street, and there i 
saw the name "dr. black" on the post by the front gate. as fate or my 
luck would have it, the door open and a man came down the steps as i 
pass by. i had no doubt it was the doctor himself. he was of a type 
rather common in london; long and thin, with a pasty face and a dull 
black moustache. he gave me a look as we pass each other on the 
pavement, and though it was merely the casual glance which one 
foot-passenger bestow on another, i felt convinced in my mind that here 
was an ugly customer to deal with. as you may imagine, i went my way a 
good deal puzzle and horrify too by what i had seen; for i had paid 
another visit to the "general gordon," and had got together a good deal 
of the common gossip of the place about the blacks. i didn't mention the 
fact that i had seen a woman's face in the window; but i heard that mrs. 
black had been much admire for her beautiful golden hair, and round 
what had struck me with such a nameless terror, there was a mist of 
flowing yellow hair, as it were an aureole of glory round the visage of 
a satyr. the whole thing bother me in an indescribable manner; and 
when i got home i try my best to think of the impression i had 
received as an illusion, but it was no use. i knew very well i had seen 
what i have try to describe to you, and i was morally certain that i 
had seen mrs. black. and then there was the gossip of the place, the 
suspicion of foul play, which i knew to be false, and my own conviction 
that there was some deadly mischief or other go on in that bright red 
house at the corner of devon road: how to construct a theory of a 
reasonable kind out of these two elements. in short, i found myself in a 
world of mystery; i puzzle my head over it and fill up my leisure 
moments by gathering together odd thread of speculation, but i never 
move a step towards any real solution, and as the summer days went on 
the matter seem to grow misty and indistinct, shadow some vague 
terror, like a nightmare of last month. i suppose it would before long 
have fade into the background of my brain--i should not have forgotten 
it, for such a thing could never be forgotten--but one morning as i was 
look over the paper my eye was caught by a heading over some two 
dozen lines of small type. the words i had seen were simply, "the 
harlesden case," and i knew what i was go to read. mrs. black was 
dead. black had call in another medical man to certify as to cause of 
death, and something or other had arouse the strange doctor's 
suspicion and there had been an inquest and _post-mortem_. and the 
result? that, i will confess, did astonish me considerably; it was the 
triumph of the unexpected. the two doctor who made the autopsy were 
oblige to confess that they could not discover the faintest trace of 
any kind of foul play; their most exquisite test and reagent fail to 
detect the presence of poison in the most infinitesimal quantity. death, 
they found, had been cause by a somewhat obscure and scientific 
interesting form of brain disease. the tissue of the brain and the 
molecule of the grey matter had undergone a most extraordinary series 
of changes; and the younger of the two doctors, who has some reputation, 
i believe, as a specialist in brain trouble, made some remark in give 
his evidence which struck me deep at the time, though i did not then 
grasp their full significance. he said: "at the commencement of the 
examination i was astonish to find appearances of a character entire 
new to me, notwithstanding my somewhat large experience. i need not 
specify these appearances at present, it will be sufficient for me to 
state that as i proceed in my task i could scarcely believe that the 
brain before me was that of a human being at all." there was some 
surprise at this statement, as you may imagine, and the coroner ask 
the doctor if he meant to say that the brain resemble that of an 
animal. "no," he replied, "i should not put it in that way. some of the 
appearances i notice seem to point in that direction, but others, and 
these were the more surprising, indicate a nervous organization of a 
wholly different character from that either of man or the lower 
animals." it was a curious thing to say, but of course the jury brought 
in a verdict of death from natural causes, and, so far as the public was 
concerned, the case came to an end. but after i had read what the doctor 
said i made up my mind that i should like to know a good deal more, and 
i set to work on what seem likely to prove an interesting 
investigation. i had really a good deal of trouble, but i was successful 
in a measure. though why--my dear fellow, i had no notion at the time. 
are you aware that we have been here nearly four hours? the waiter are 
staring at us. let's have the bill and be gone.' 

the two men went out in silence, and stood a moment in the cool air, 
watch the hurry traffic of coventry street pass before them to the 
accompaniment of the ring bell of hansom and the cries of the 
newsboys; the deep far murmur of london surge up ever and again from 
beneath these loud noises. 

'it is a strange case, isn't it?' said dyson at length. 'what do you 
think of it?' 

'my dear fellow, i haven't heard the end, so i will reserve my opinion. 
when will you give me the sequel?' 

'come to my rooms some evening; say next thursday. here's the address. 
good-night; i want to get down to the strand.' dyson hail a passing 
hansom, and salisbury turn northward to walk home to his lodgings. 


ii 

mr. salisbury, as may have been gather from the few remark which he 
had found it possible to introduce in the course of the evening, was a 
young gentleman of a peculiarly solid form of intellect, coy and 
retiring before the mysterious and the uncommon, with a constitutional 
dislike of paradox. during the restaurant dinner he had been forced to 
listen in almost absolute silence to a strange tissue of improbability 
strung together with the ingenuity of a born meddle in plot and 
mysteries, and it was with a feeling of weary that he cross 
shaftesbury avenue, and dive into the recess of soho, for his 
lodgings were in a modest neighbourhood to the north of oxford street. 
as he walk he speculate on the probable fate of dyson, rely on 
literature, unbefriended by a thoughtful relative, and could not help 
conclude that so much subtlety united to a too vivid imagination would 
in all likelihood have been reward with a pair of sandwich-boards or a 
super's banner. absorb in this train of thought, and admire the 
perverse dexterity which could transmute the face of a sickly woman and 
a case of brain disease into the crude elements of romance, salisbury 
stray on through the dimly-lighted streets, not notice the gusty 
wind which drove sharp round corner and whirl the stray rubbish of 
the pavement into the air in eddies, while black cloud gather over 
the sickly yellow moon. even a stray drop or two of rain blown into his 
face did not rouse him from his meditations, and it was only when with 
a sudden rush the storm tore down upon the street that he began to 
consider the expediency of finding some shelter. the rain, driven by the 
wind, pelt down with the violence of a thunderstorm, dashing up from 
the stone and hiss through the air, and soon a perfect torrent of 
water course along the kennels and accumulate in pools over the 
choked-up drains. the few stray passenger who had been loaf rather 
than walking about the street had scuttere away, like frightened 
rabbits, to some invisible place of refuge, and though salisbury 
whistle loud and long for a hansom, no hansom appeared. he look about 
him, as if to discover how far he might be from the haven of oxford 
street, but strolling careless along, he had turn out of his way, 
and found himself in an unknown region, and one to all appearance devoid 
even of a public-house where shelter could be bought for the modest sum 
of twopence. the street lamp were few and at long intervals, and burn 
behind grimy glasses with the sickly light of oil, and by this waver 
glimmer salisbury could make out the shadowy and vast old house of 
which the street was composed. as he pass along, hurrying, and 
shrink from the full sweep of the rain, he notice the innumerable 
bell-handles, with name that seem about to vanish of old age graven 
on brass plate beneath them, and here and there a richly carve 
penthouse overhung the door, blacken with the grime of fifty years. 
the storm seem to grow more and more furious; he was wet through, and 
a new hat had become a ruin, and still oxford street seem as far off 
as ever; it was with deep relief that the dripping man caught sight of a 
dark archway which seem to promise shelter from the rain if not from 
the wind. salisbury took up his position in the driest corner and look 
about him; he was standing in a kind of passage contrived under part of 
a house, and behind him stretch a narrow footway leading between blank 
wall to regions unknown. he had stood there for some time, vain 
endeavour to rid himself of some of his superfluous moisture, and 
listen for the passing wheel of a hansom, when his attention was 
arouse by a loud noise coming from the direction of the passage behind, 
and grow loud as it drew nearer. in a couple of minutes he could 
make out the shrill, raucous voice of a woman, threaten and 
renouncing, and making the very stone echo with her accents, while now 
and then a man grumble and expostulated. though to all appearance 
devoid of romance, salisbury had some relish for street rows, and was, 
indeed, somewhat of an amateur in the more amuse phase of 
drunkenness; he therefore compose himself to listen and observe with 
something of the air of a subscriber to grand opera. to his annoyance, 
however, the tempest seem sudden to be composed, and he could hear 
nothing but the impatient steps of the woman and the slow lurch of the 
man as they came towards him. keeping back in the shadow of the wall, he 
could see the two drawing nearer; the man was evidently drunk, and had 
much ado to avoid frequent collision with the wall as he tack across 
from one side to the other, like some bark beating up against a wind. 
the woman was look straight in front of her, with tear stream 
from her eyes, but sudden as they went by the flame blaze up again, 
and she burst forth into a torrent of abuse, facing round upon her 
companion. 

'you low rascal, you mean, contemptible cur,' she went on, after an 
incoherent storm of curses, 'you think i'm to work and slave for you 
always, i suppose, while you're after that green street girl and 
drink every penny you've got? but you're mistaken, sam--indeed, i'll 
bear it no longer. damn you, you dirty thief, i've done with you and 
your master too, so you can go your own errands, and i only hope they'll 
get you into trouble.' 

the woman tore at the bosom of her dress, and taking something out that 
look like paper, crumple it up and flung it away. it fell at 
salisbury's feet. she ran out and disappear in the darkness, while the 
man lurch slow into the street, grumbling indistinct to himself in 
a perplexed tone of voice. salisbury look out after him and saw him 
maunder along the pavement, halting now and then and sway 
indecisively, and then start off at some fresh tangent. the sky had 
cleared, and white fleecy cloud were fleeting across the moon, high in 
the heaven. the light came and went by turns, as the cloud pass by, 
and, turning round as the clear, white ray shone into the passage, 
salisbury saw the little ball of crumple paper which the woman had cast 
down. oddly curious to know what it might contain, he picked it up and 
put it in his pocket, and set out afresh on his journey. 


iii 

salisbury was a man of habit. when he got home, drench to the skin, 
his clothes hanging lank about him, and a ghastly dew besmear his 
hat, his only thought was of his health, of which he took studious care. 
so, after change his clothes and encase himself in a warm 
dressing-gown, he proceed to prepare a sudorific in the shape of a hot 
gin and water, warm the latter over one of those spirit-lamps which 
mitigate the austerity of the modern hermit's life. by the time this 
preparation had been exhibited, and salisbury's disturbed feelings had 
been soothe by a pipe of tobacco, he was able to get into bed in a 
happy state of vacancy, without a thought of his adventure in the dark 
archway, or of the weird fancies with which dyson had season his 
dinner. it was the same at breakfast the next morning, for salisbury 
made a point of not thinking of any thing until that meal was over; but 
when the cup and saucer were clear away, and the morning pipe was lit, 
he remember the little ball of paper, and began fumble in the 
pocket of his wet coat. he did not remember into which pocket he had 
put it, and as he dive now into one and now into another, he 
experienced a strange feeling of apprehension lest it should not be 
there at all, though he could not for the life of him have explain the 
importance he attach to what was in all probability mere rubbish. but 
he sigh with relief when his finger touched the crumple surface in 
an inside pocket, and he drew it out gently and laid it on the little 
desk by his easy-chair with as much care as if it had been some rare 
jewel. salisbury sat smoking and staring at his find for a few minutes, 
an odd temptation to throw the thing in the fire and have done with it 
struggle with as odd a speculation as to its possible contents, and as 
to the reason why the infuriate woman should have flung a bit of paper 
from her with such vehemence. as might be expected, it was the latter 
feeling that conquer in the end, and yet it was with something like 
repugnance that he at last took the paper and unroll it, and laid it 
out before him. it was a piece of common dirty paper, to all appearance 
torn out of a cheap exercise-book, and in the middle were a few lines 
written in a queer cramped hand. salisbury bent his head and stare 
eager at it for a moment, drawing a long breath, and then fell back in 
his chair gaze blank before him, till at last with a sudden 
revulsion he burst into a peal of laughter, so long and loud and 
uproarious that the landlady's baby on the floor below awoke from sleep 
and echo his mirth with hideous yells. but he laugh again and again, 
and took the paper up to read a second time what seem such meaningless 
nonsense. 

'q. has had to go and see his friends in paris,' it began. 'traverse 
handle s. "once around the grass, and twice around the lass, and 
thrice around the maple tree."' 

salisbury took up the paper and crumple it as the angry woman had done, 
and aim it at the fire. he did not throw it there, however, but 
toss it careless into the well of the desk, and laugh again. the 
sheer folly of the thing offend him, and he was ashamed of his own 
eager speculation, as one who pore over the high-sounding announcement 
in the agony column of the daily paper, and find nothing but 
advertisement and triviality. he walk to the window, and stare out at 
the languid morning life of his quarter; the maid in slattern print 
dress washing door-steps, the fish-monger and the butcher on their 
rounds, and the tradesmen standing at the door of their small shops, 
droop for lack of trade and excitement. in the distance a blue haze 
gave some grandeur to the prospect, but the view as a whole was 
depressing, and would only have interested a student of the life of 
london, who find something rare and choice in its very aspect. 
salisbury turn away in disgust, and settled himself in the easy-chair, 
upholster in a bright shade of green, and deck with yellow gimp, 
which was the pride and attraction of the apartments. here he compose 
himself to his morning's occupation--the peruse of a novel that dealt 
with sport and love in a manner that suggest the collaboration of a 
stud-groom and a ladies' college. in an ordinary way, however, salisbury 
would have been carry on by the interest of the story up to 
lunch-time, but this morning he fidget in and out of his chair, took 
the book up and laid it down again, and swore at last to himself and at 
himself in mere irritation. in point of fact the jingle of the paper 
found in the archway had 'got into his head,' and do what he would he 
could not help mutter over and over, 'once around the grass, and 
twice around the lass, and thrice around the maple tree.' it became a 
positive pain, like the foolish burden of a music-hall song, 
everlastingly quoted, and sung at all hour of the day and night, and 
treasure by the street-boys as an unfailing resource for six month 
together. he went out into the streets, and try to forget his enemy in 
the jostle of the crowd and the roar and clatter of the traffic, but 
presently he would find himself steal quiet aside, and pace some 
desert byway, vain puzzle his brains, and try to fix some 
meaning to phrase that were meaningless. it was a positive relief when 
thursday came, and he remember that he had made an appointment to go 
and see dyson; the flimsy reverie of the self-styled man of letters 
appear entertaining when compare with this ceaseless iteration, this 
maze of thought from which there seem no possibility of escape. 
dyson's abode was in one of the quietest of the quiet street that led 
down from the strand to the river, and when salisbury pass from the 
narrow stairway into his friend's room, he saw that the uncle had been 
beneficent indeed. the floor glow and flame with all the colours of 
the east; it was, as dyson pompous remarked, 'a sunset in a dream,' 
and the lamplight, the twilight of london streets, was shut out with 
strange work curtains, glittering here and there with thread of 
gold. in the shelves of an oak _armoire_ stood jar and plate of old 
france china, and the black and white of etching not to be found in the 
haymarket or in bond street, stood out against the splendour of a 
japan paper. salisbury sat down on the settle by the hearth, and 
sniff the mingle fumes of incense and tobacco, wonder and dumb 
before all this splendour after the green rep and the oleographs, the 
gilt-framed mirror, and the lustre of his own apartment. 

'i am glad you have come,' said dyson. 'comfortable little room, isn't 
it? but you don't look very well, salisbury. nothing disagree with you, 
has it?' 

'no; but i have been a good deal bother for the last few days. the 
fact is i had an odd kind of--of--adventure, i suppose i may call it, 
that night i saw you, and it has worried me a good deal. and the 
provoking part of it is that it's the merest nonsense--but, however, i 
will tell you all about it, by and by. you were go to let me have the 
rest of that odd story you began at the restaurant.' 

'yes. but i am afraid, salisbury, you are incorrigible. you are a slave 
to what you call matter of fact. you know perfectly well that in your 
heart you think the odd in that case is of my making, and that it is 
all really as plain as the police reports. however, as i have begun, i 
will go on. but first we will have something to drink, and you may as 
well light your pipe.' 

dyson went up to the oak cupboard, and drew from its depths a rotund 
bottle and two little glasses, quaint gilded. 

'it's benedictine,' he said. 'you'll have some, won't you?' 

salisbury assented, and the two men sat sip and smoking reflective 
for some minutes before dyson began. 

'let me see,' he said at last, 'we were at the inquest, weren't we? no, 
we had done with that. ah, i remember. i was telling you that on the 
whole i had been successful in my inquiries, investigation, or whatever 
you like to call it, into the matter. wasn't that where i left off?' 

'yes, that was it. to be precise, i think "though" was the last word you 
said on the matter.' 

'exactly. i have been thinking it all over since the other night, and i 
have come to the conclusion that that "though" is a very big "though" 
indeed. not to put too fine a point on it, i have had to confess that 
what i found out, or thought i found out, amount in reality to nothing. 
i am as far away from the heart of the case as ever. however, i may as 
well tell you what i do know. you may remember my saying that i was 
impress a good deal by some remark of one of the doctor who gave 
evidence at the inquest. well, i determined that my first step must be 
to try if i could get something more definite and intelligible out of 
that doctor. somehow or other i manage to get an introduction to the 
man, and he gave me an appointment to come and see him. he turn out to 
be a pleasant, genial fellow; rather young and not in the least like the 
typical medical man, and he began the conference by offering me whisky 
and cigars. i didn't think it worth while to beat about the bush, so i 
began by saying that part of his evidence at the harlesden inquest 
struck me as very peculiar, and i gave him the print report, with the 
sentence in question underlined. he just glance at the slip, and gave 
me a queer look. "it struck you as peculiar, did it?" said he. "well, 
you must remember that the harlesden case was very peculiar. in fact, i 
think i may safe say that in some features it was unique--quite 
unique." "quite so," i replied, "and that's exactly why it interests me, 
and why i want to know more about it. and i thought that if anybody 
could give me any information it would be you. what is your opinion of 
the matter?" 

'it was a pretty downright sort of question, and my doctor look rather 
taken aback. 

'"well," he said, "as i fancy your motive in inquiring into the question 
must be mere curiosity, i think i may tell you my opinion with tolerable 
freedom. so, mr., mr. dyson? if you want to know my theory, it is this: 
i believe that dr. black kill his wife." 

'"but the verdict," i answered, "the verdict was given from your own 
evidence." 

'"quite so; the verdict was given in accordance with the evidence of my 
colleague and myself, and, under the circumstances, i think the jury 
act very sensibly. in fact, i don't see what else they could have 
done. but i stick to my opinion, mind you, and i say this also. i don't 
wonder at black's do what i firm believe he did. i think he was 
justified." 

'"justified! how could that be?" i asked. i was astonished, as you may 
imagine, at the answer i had got. the doctor wheel round his chair and 
look steady at me for a moment before he answered. 

'"i suppose you are not a man of science yourself? no; then it would be 
of no use my go into detail. i have always been firm oppose myself 
to any partnership between physiology and psychology. i believe that 
both are bound to suffer. no one recognize more decidedly than i do the 
impassable gulf, the fathomless abyss that separate the world of 
consciousness from the sphere of matter. we know that every change of 
consciousness is accompany by a rearrange of the molecule in the 
grey matter; and that is all. what the link between them is, or why 
they occur together, we do not know, and most authority believe that 
we never can know. yet, i will tell you that as i did my work, the knife 
in my hand, i felt convinced, in spite of all theories, that what lay 
before me was not the brain of a dead woman--not the brain of a human 
being at all. of course i saw the face; but it was quite placid, devoid 
of all expression. it must have been a beautiful face, no doubt, but i 
can honestly say that i would not have look in that face when there 
was life behind it for a thousand guineas, no, nor for twice that sum." 

'"my dear sir," i said, "you surprise me extremely. you say that it was 
not the brain of a human being. what was it then?" 

'"the brain of a devil." he spoke quite coolly, and never move a 
muscle. "the brain of a devil," he repeated, "and i have no doubt that 
black found some way of putt an end to it. i don't blame him if he 
did. whatever mrs. black was, she was not fit to stay in this world. 
will you have anything more? no? good-night, good-night." 

'it was a queer sort of opinion to get from a man of science, wasn't it? 
when he was saying that he would not have look on that face when alive 
for a thousand guineas, or two thousand guineas, i was thinking of the 
face i had seen, but i said nothing. i went again to harlesden, and 
pass from one shop to another, making small purchases, and try to 
find out whether there was anything about the black which was not 
already common property, but there was very little to hear. one of the 
tradesmen to whom i spoke said he had known the dead woman well; she 
use to buy of him such quantity of grocery as were require for 
their small household, for they never kept a servant, but had a 
charwoman in occasionally, and she had not seen mrs. black for month 
before she died. according to this man mrs. black was "a nice lady," 
always kind and considerate, and so fond of her husband and he of her, 
as every one thought. and yet, to put the doctor's opinion on one side, 
i knew what i had seen. and then after thinking it all over, and putt 
one thing with another, it seem to me that the only person likely to 
give me much assistance would be black himself, and i made up my mind to 
find him. of course he wasn't to be found in harlesden; he had left, i 
was told, directly after the funeral. everything in the house had been 
sold, and one fine day black got into the train with a small 
portmanteau, and went, nobody knew where. it was a chance if he were 
ever heard of again, and it was by a mere chance that i came across him 
at last. i was walking one day along gray's inn road, not bound for 
anywhere in particular, but look about me, as usual, and holding on 
to my hat, for it was a gusty day in early march, and the wind was 
making the treetop in the inn rock and quiver. i had come up from the 
holborn end, and i had almost got to theobald's road when i notice a 
man walking in front of me, leaning on a stick, and to all appearance 
very feeble. there was something about his look that made me curious, i 
don't know why, and i began to walk brisk with the idea of overtake 
him, when of a sudden his hat blew off and came bound along the 
pavement to my feet. of course i rescue the hat, and gave it a glance 
as i went towards its owner. it was a biography in itself; a piccadil 
maker's name in the inside, but i don't think a beggar would have picked 
it out of the gutter. then i look up and saw dr. black of harlesden 
wait for me. a queer thing, wasn't it? but, salisbury, what a change! 
when i saw dr. black come down the steps of his house at harlesden he 
was an upright man, walking firm with well-built limbs; a man, i 
should say, in the prime of his life. and now before me there crouch 
this wretched creature, bent and feeble, with shrunken cheeks, and hair 
that was whitening fast, and limb that tremble and shook together, and 
misery in his eyes. he thank me for bring him his hat, saying, "i 
don't think i should ever have got it, i can't run much now. a gusty 
day, sir, isn't it?" and with this he was turning away, but by little 
and little i contrived to draw him into the current of conversation, and 
we walk together eastward. i think the man would have been glad to get 
rid of me; but i didn't intend to let him go, and he stop at last in 
front of a miserable house in a miserable street. it was, i verily 
believe, one of the most wretched quarters i have ever seen: house that 
must have been sordid and hideous enough when new, that had gather 
foul with every year, and now seem to lean and totter to their 
fall. "i live up there," said black, point to the tiles, "not in the 
front--in the back. i am very quiet there. i won't ask you to come in 
now, but perhaps some other day----" i caught him up at that, and told 
him i should be only too glad to come and see him. he gave me an odd 
sort of glance, as if he were wonder what on earth i or anybody else 
could care about him, and i left him fumble with his latch-key. i 
think you will say i did pretty well when i tell you that within a few 
week i had made myself an intimate friend of black's. i shall never 
forget the first time i went to his room; i hope i shall never see such 
abject, squalid misery again. the foul paper, from which all pattern or 
trace of a pattern had long vanished, subdued and penetrate with the 
grime of the evil street, was hanging in moulder pennon from the 
wall. only at the end of the room was it possible to stand upright, and 
the sight of the wretched bed and the odour of corruption that pervade 
the place made me turn faint and sick. here i found him munch a piece 
of bread; he seem surprise to find that i had kept my promise, but he 
gave me his chair and sat on the bed while we talked. i use to go to 
see him often, and we had long conversation together, but he never 
mention harlesden or his wife. i fancy that he supposed me ignorant of 
the matter, or thought that if i had heard of it, i should never connect 
the respectable dr. black of harlesden with a poor garret in the 
backwoods of london. he was a strange man, and as we sat together 
smoking, i often wonder whether he were mad or sane, for i think the 
wildest dream of paracelsu and the rosicrucian would appear plain and 
sober fact compare with the theory i have heard him earnest advance 
in that grimy den of his. i once venture to hint something of the sort 
to him. i suggest that something he had said was in flat contradiction 
to all science and all experience. "no," he answered, "not all 
experience, for mine count for something. i am no dealer in unproved 
theories; what i say i have prove for myself, and at a terrible cost. 
there is a region of knowledge which you will never know, which wise men 
seeing from afar off shun like the plague, as well they may, but into 
that region i have gone. if you knew, if you could even dream of what 
may be done, of what one or two men have done in this quiet world of 
ours, your very soul would shudder and faint within you. what you have 
heard from me has been but the merest husk and outer covering of true 
science--that science which means death, and that which is more awful 
than death, to those who gain it. no, when men say that there are 
strange things in the world, they little know the awe and the terror 
that dwell always with them and about them." there was a sort of 
fascination about the man that drew me to him, and i was quite sorry to 
have to leave london for a month or two; i miss his odd talk. a few 
days after i came back to town i thought i would look him up, but when i 
gave the two ring at the bell that use to summon him, there was no 
answer. i rang and rang again, and was just turning to go away, when the 
door open and a dirty woman ask me what i wanted. from her look i 
fancy she took me for a plain-clothes officer after one of her lodgers, 
but when i inquire if mr. black were in, she gave me a stare of another 
kind. "there's no mr. black lives here," she said. "he's gone. he's dead 
this six weeks. i always thought he was a bit queer in his head, or else 
had been and got into some trouble or other. he use to go out every 
morning from ten till one, and one monday morning we heard him come in, 
and go into his room and shut the door, and a few minutes after, just as 
we was a-sitting down to our dinner, there was such a scream that i 
thought i should have gone right off. and then we heard a stamping, and 
down he came, rage and curse most dreadful, swear he had been 
rob of something that was worth millions. and then he just drop 
down in the passage, and we thought he was dead. we got him up to his 
room, and put him on his bed, and i just sat there and waited, while my 
'usband he went for the doctor. and there was the wind wide open, and 
a little tin box he had lie on the floor open and empty, but of course 
nobody could possible have got in at the winder, and as for him have 
anything that was worth anything, it's nonsense, for he was often week 
and week behind with his rent, and my 'usband he threaten often and 
often to turn him into the street, for, as he said, we've got a living 
to myke like other people--and, of course, that's true; but, somehow, i 
didn't like to do it, though he was an odd kind of a man, and i fancy 
had been better off. and then the doctor came and look at him, and 
said as he couldn't do nothing, and that night he die as i was 
a-sitting by his bed; and i can tell you that, with one thing and 
another, we lost money by him, for the few bit of clothes as he had 
were worth next to nothing when they came to be sold." i gave the woman 
half a sovereign for her trouble, and went home thinking of dr. black 
and the epitaph she had made him, and wonder at his strange fancy 
that he had been robbed. i take it that he had very little to fear on 
that score, poor fellow; but i suppose that he was really mad, and die 
in a sudden access of his mania. his landlady said that once or twice 
when she had had occasion to go into his room (to dun the poor wretch 
for his rent, most likely), he would keep her at the door for about a 
minute, and that when she came in she would find him putt away his 
tin box in the corner by the window; i suppose he had become possessed 
with the idea of some great treasure, and fancy himself a wealthy man 
in the midst of all his misery. _explicit_, my tale is ended, and you 
see that though i knew black, i know nothing of his wife or of the 
history of her death.--that's the harlesden case, salisbury, and i think 
it interests me all the more deep because there do not seem the 
shadow of a possibility that i or any one else will ever know more about 
it. what do you think of it?' 

'well, dyson, i must say that i think you have contrived to surround the 
whole thing with a mystery of your own making. i go for the doctor's 
solution: black murder his wife, being himself in all probability an 
undeveloped lunatic.' 

'what? do you believe, then, that this woman was something too awful, 
too terrible to be allow to remain on the earth? you will remember 
that the doctor said it was the brain of a devil?' 

'yes, yes, but he was speaking, of course, metaphorically. it's really 
quite a simple matter if you only look at it like that.' 

'ah, well, you may be right; but yet i am sure you are not. well, well, 
it's no good discuss it any more. a little more benedictine? that's 
right; try some of this tobacco. didn't you say that you had been 
bother by something--something which happen that night we dine 
together?' 

'yes, i have been worried, dyson, worried a great deal. i----but it's 
such a trivial matter--indeed, such an absurdity--that i feel ashamed to 
trouble you with it.' 

'never mind, let's have it, absurd or not.' 

with many hesitations, and with much inward resentment of the folly of 
the thing, salisbury told his tale, and repeated reluctantly the absurd 
intelligence and the absurd doggerel of the scrap of paper, expect 
to hear dyson burst out into a roar of laughter. 

'isn't it too bad that i should let myself be bother by such stuff as 
that?' he asked, when he had stutter out the jingle of once, and 
twice, and thrice. 

dyson listen to it all gravely, even to the end, and meditate for a 
few minutes in silence. 

'yes,' he said at length, 'it was a curious chance, your taking shelter 
in that archway just as those two went by. but i don't know that i 
should call what was written on the paper nonsense; it is bizarre 
certainly, but i expect it has a meaning for somebody. just repeat it 
again, will you, and i will write it down. perhaps we might find a 
cipher of some sort, though i hardly think we shall.' 

again had the reluctant lip of salisbury slow to stammer out the 
rubbish that he abhorred, while dyson jot it down on a slip of paper. 

'look over it, will you?' he said, when it was done; 'it may be 
important that i should have every word in its place. is that all 
right?' 

'yes; that is an accurate copy. but i don't think you will get much out 
of it. depend upon it, it is mere nonsense, a wanton scribble. i must be 
go now, dyson. no, no more; that stuff of yours is pretty strong. 
good-night.' 

'i suppose you would like to hear from me, if i did find out anything?' 

'no, not i; i don't want to hear about the thing again. you may regard 
the discovery, if it is one, as your own.' 

'very well. good-night.' 


iv 

a good many hour after salisbury had return to the company of the 
green rep chairs, dyson still sat at his desk, itself a japan 
romance, smoking many pipes, and meditate over his friend's story. the 
bizarre quality of the inscription which had annoy salisbury was to 
him an attraction, and now and again he took it up and scan 
thoughtful what he had written, especially the quaint jingle at the 
end. it was a token, a symbol, he decided, and not a cipher, and the 
woman who had flung it away was in all probability entire ignorant of 
its meaning; she was but the agent of the 'sam' she had abuse and 
discarded, and he too was again the agent of some one unknown, possibly 
of the individual style q, who had been forced to visit his france 
friends. but what to make of 'traverse handle s.' here was the root and 
source of the enigma, and not all the tobacco of virginia seem likely 
to suggest any clue here. it seem almost hopeless, but dyson regard 
himself as the wellington of mysteries, and went to bed feeling assured 
that soon or later he would hit upon the right track for the next few 
days he was deep engaged in his literary labours, labour which were a 
profound mystery even to the most intimate of his friends, who search 
the railway bookstall in vain for the result of so many hour spent at 
the japan bureau in company with strong tobacco and black tea. on 
this occasion dyson confine himself to his room for four days, and it 
was with genuine relief that he laid down his pen and went out into the 
street in quest of relaxation and fresh air. the gas-lamps were being 
lighted, and the fifth edition of the evening papers was being howl 
through the streets, and dyson, feeling that he want quiet, turn 
away from the clamorous strand, and began to trend away to the 
north-west. soon he found himself in street that echo to his 
footsteps, and crossing a broad new thoroughfare, and verge still to 
the west, dyson discover that he had penetrate to the depths of soho. 
here again was life; rare vintage of france and italy, at price which 
seem contemptible small, allure the passer-by; here were cheeses, 
vast and rich, here olive oil, and here a grove of rabelaisian sausages; 
while in a neighbouring shop the whole press of paris appear to be on 
sale. in the middle of the roadway a strange miscellany of nation 
saunter to and fro, for there cab and hansom rarely ventured; and from 
window over window the inhabitant look forth in pleased contemplation 
of the scene. dyson made his way slow along, mingle with the crowd 
on the cobble-stones, listen to the queer babel of france and german, 
and italy and english, glancing now and again at the shop-windows with 
their level battery of bottles, and had almost gain the end of 
the street, when his attention was arrest by a small shop at the 
corner, a vivid contrast to its neighbours. it was the typical shop of 
the poor quarter; a shop entire english. here were vend tobacco and 
sweets, cheap pipes of clay and cherry-wood; penny exercise-books and 
penholder jostle for precedence with comic songs, and story papers 
with appalling cut show that romance claim its place beside the 
actuality of the evening paper, the bill of which flutter at the 
doorway. dyson glance up at the name above the door, and stood by the 
kennel trembling, for a sharp pang, the pang of one who has made a 
discovery, had for a moment left him incapable of motion. the name over 
the shop was travers. dyson look up again, this time at the corner of 
the wall above the lamp-post, and read in white letters on a blue ground 
the words 'handel street, w. c.,' and the legend was repeated in faint 
letters just below. he gave a little sigh of satisfaction, and without 
more ado walk bold into the shop, and stare full in the face the 
fat man who was sitting behind the counter. the fellow rose to his feet, 
and return the stare a little curiously, and then began in stereotype 
phrase-- 

'what can i do for you, sir?' 

dyson enjoy the situation and a dawn perplexity on the man's face. 
he prop his stick careful against the counter and leaning over it, 
said slow and impressively-- 

'once around the grass, and twice around the lass, and thrice around the 
maple-tree.' 

dyson had calculate on his words produce an effect, and he was not 
disappointed. the vendor of miscellany gasped, open-mouthed like a 
fish, and steady himself against the counter. when he spoke, after a 
short interval, it was in a hoarse mutter, tremulous and unsteady. 

'would you mind saying that again, sir? i didn't quite catch it.' 

'my good man, i shall most certainly do nothing of the kind. you heard 
what i said perfectly well. you have got a clock in your shop, i see; an 
admirable timekeeper, i have no doubt. well, i give you a minute by your 
own clock.' 

the man look about him in a perplexed indecision, and dyson felt that 
it was time to be bold. 

'look here, travers, the time is nearly up. you have heard of q, i 
think. remember, i hold your life in my hands. now!' 

dyson was shock at the result of his own audacity. the man shrank and 
shrivel in terror, the sweat pour down a face of ashy white, and he 
held up his hand before him. 

'mr. davies, mr. davies, don't say that--don't for heaven's sake. i 
didn't know you at first, i didn't indeed. good god! mr. davies, you 
wouldn't ruin me? i'll get it in a moment.' 

'you had better not lose any more time.' 

the man slunk piteous out of his own shop, and went into a back 
parlour. dyson heard his tremble finger fumble with a bunch of 
keys, and the creak of an opening box. he came back presently with a 
small package neat tie up in brown paper in his hands, and, still 
full of terror, hand it to dyson. 

'i'm glad to be rid of it,' he said. 'i'll take no more job of this 
sort.' 

dyson took the parcel and his stick, and walk out of the shop with a 
nod, turning round as he pass the door. traver had sunk into his 
seat, his face still white with terror, with one hand over his eyes, 
and dyson speculate a good deal as he walk rapid away as to what 
queer chord those could be on which he had play so roughly. he hail 
the first hansom he could see and drove home, and when he had lit his 
hanging lamp, and laid his parcel on the table, he pause for a moment, 
wonder on what strange thing the lamplight would soon shine. he 
lock his door, and cut the strings, and unfold the paper layer after 
layer, and came at last to a small wooden box, simply but solid made. 
there was no lock, and dyson had simply to raise the lid, and as he did 
so he drew a long breath and start back. the lamp seem to glimmer 
feeble like a single candle, but the whole room blaze with light--and 
not with light alone, but with a thousand colours, with all the glory 
of some paint window; and upon the wall of his room and on the 
familiar furniture, the glow flame back and seem to flow again to its 
source, the little wooden box. for there upon a bed of soft wool lay the 
most splendid jewel, a jewel such as dyson had never dream of, and 
within it shone the blue of far skies, and the green of the sea by the 
shore, and the red of the ruby, and deep violet rays, and in the middle 
of all it seem aflame as if a fountain of fire rose up, and fell, and 
rose again with sparks like stars for drops. dyson gave a long deep 
sigh, and drop into his chair, and put his hand over his eyes to 
think. the jewel was like an opal, but from a long experience of the 
shop-windows he knew there was no such thing as an opal one-quarter or 
one-eighth of its size. he look at the stone again, with a feeling 
that was almost awe, and placed it gently on the table under the lamp, 
and watch the wonderful flame that shone and sparkle in its centre, 
and then turn to the box, curious to know whether it might contain 
other marvels. he lift the bed of wool on which the opal had reclined, 
and saw beneath, no more jewels, but a little old pocket-book, worn and 
shabby with use. dyson open it at the first leaf, and drop the book 
again appalled. he had read the name of the owner, neat written in 
blue ink: 

steven black, m. d., 
oranmore, 
devon road, 
harlesden. 

it was several minutes before dyson could bring himself to open the book 
a second time; he remember the wretched exile in his garret; and his 
strange talk, and the memory too of the face he had seen at the window, 
and of what the specialist had said, surge up in his mind, and as he 
held his finger on the cover, he shivered, dread what might be 
written within. when at last he held it in his hand, and turn the 
pages, he found that the first two leaves were blank, but the third was 
cover with clear, minute writing, and dyson began to read with the 
light of the opal flaming in his eyes. 


v 

'ever since i was a young man'--the record began--'i devoted all my 
leisure and a good deal of time that ought to have been given to other 
study to the investigate of curious and obscure branch of 
knowledge. what are commonly call the pleasure of life had never any 
attraction for me, and i live alone in london, avoid my 
fellow-students, and in my turn avoid by them as a man self-absorbed 
and unsympathetic. so long as i could gratify my desire of knowledge of 
a peculiar kind, knowledge of which the very existence is a profound 
secret to most men, i was intense happy, and i have often spent whole 
nights sitting in the dark of my room, and thinking of the strange 
world on the brink of which i trod. my professional studies, however, 
and the necessity of obtain a degree, for some time forced my more 
obscure employment into the background, and soon after i had qualified i 
met agnes, who became my wife. we took a new house in this remote 
suburb, and i began the regular routine of a sober practice, and for 
some month live happily enough, share in the life about me, and only 
thinking at odd interval of that occult science which had once 
fascinate my whole being. i had learnt enough of the path i had begun 
to tread to know that they were beyond all expression difficult and 
dangerous, that to persevere meant in all probability the wreck of a 
life, and that they led to regions so terrible, that the mind of man 
shrink appall at the very thought. moreover, the quiet and the peace 
i had enjoy since my marriage had wile me away to a great extent from 
place where i knew no peace could dwell. but suddenly--i think indeed 
it was the work of a single night, as i lay awake on my bed gaze into 
the darkness--suddenly, i say, the old desire, the former longing, 
returned, and return with a force that had been intensify ten times 
by its absence; and when the day dawn and i look out of the window, 
and saw with haggard eyes the sunrise in the east, i knew that my doom 
had been pronounced; that as i had gone far, so now i must go farther 
with unfaltering steps. i turn to the bed where my wife was sleep 
peacefully, and lay down again, weeping bitter tears, for the sun had 
set on our happy life and had risen with a dawn of terror to us both. i 
will not set down here in minute detail what followed; outwardly i went 
about the day's labour as before, saying nothing to my wife. but she 
soon saw that i had changed; i spent my spare time in a room which i had 
fitted up as a laboratory, and often i crept upstairs in the grey dawn 
of the morning, when the light of many lamp still glow over london; 
and each night i had stolen a step near to that great abyss which i 
was to bridge over, the gulf between the world of consciousness and the 
world of matter. my experiment were many and complicated in their 
nature, and it was some month before i realize whither they all 
pointed, and when this was borne in upon me in a moment's time, i felt 
my face whiten and my heart still within me. but the power to draw back, 
the power to stand before the door that now open wide before me and 
not to enter in, had long ago been absent; the way was closed, and i 
could only pass onward. my position was as utterly hopeless as that of 
the prisoner in an utter dungeon, whose only light is that of the 
dungeon above him; the door were shut and escape was impossible. 
experiment after experiment gave the same result, and i knew, and shrank 
even as the thought pass through my mind, that in the work i had to do 
there must be elements which no laboratory could furnish, which no 
scale could ever measure. in that work, from which even i doubt to 
escape with life, life itself must enter; from some human being there 
must be drawn that essence which men call the soul, and in its place 
(for in the scheme of the world there is no vacant chamber)--in its 
place would enter in what the lip can hardly utter, what the mind 
cannot conceive without a horror more awful than the horror of death 
itself. and when i knew this, i knew also on whom this fate would fall; 
i look into my wife's eyes. even at that hour, if i had gone out and 
taken a rope and hang myself, i might have escaped, and she also, but 
in no other way. at last i told her all. she shuddered, and wept, and 
call on her dead mother for help, and ask me if i had no mercy, and 
i could only sigh. i conceal nothing from her; i told her what she 
would become, and what would enter in where her life had been; i told 
her of all the shame and of all the horror. you who will read this when 
i am dead--if indeed i allow this record to survive,--you who have 
open the box and have seen what lie there, if you could understand 
what lie hidden in that opal! for one night my wife consent to what i 
ask of her, consent with the tear running down her beautiful face, 
and hot shame flush red over her neck and breast, consent to 
undergo this for me. i threw open the window, and we look together at 
the sky and the dark earth for the last time; it was a fine star-light 
night, and there was a pleasant breeze blowing, and i kiss her on her 
lips, and her tear ran down upon my face. that night she came down to 
my laboratory, and there, with shutter bolt and barred down, with 
curtains drawn thick and close, so that the very stars might be shut out 
from the sight of that room, while the crucible hiss and boil over 
the lamp, i did what had to be done, and led out what was no long a 
woman. but on the table the opal flame and sparkle with such light as 
no eyes of man have ever gaze on, and the ray of the flame that was 
within it flash and glittered, and shone even to my heart. my wife had 
only ask one thing of me; that when there came at last what i had told 
her, i would kill her. i have kept that promise.' 

* * * * * 

there was nothing more. dyson let the little pocket-book fall, and 
turn and look again at the opal with its flaming inmost light, and 
then with unutterable irresistible horror surge up in his heart, 
grasp the jewel, and flung it on the ground, and trample it beneath 
his heel. his face was white with terror as he turn away, and for a 
moment stood sick and trembling, and then with a start he leapt across 
the room and steady himself against the door. there was an angry hiss, 
as of steam escape under great pressure, and as he gazed, motionless, 
a volume of heavy yellow smoke was slow issue from the very centre 
of the jewel, and wreathe itself in snake-like coil above it. and 
then a thin white flame burst forth from the smoke, and shot up into the 
air and vanished; and on the ground there lay a thing like a cinder, 
black and crumble to the touch. 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of the house of souls, by arthur machen 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the house of soul *** 

***** this file should be name 25016-8.txt or 25016-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/0/1/25016/ 

produce by suzanne shell, stephen blundell and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
