the project gutenberg ebook of the jewel of seven stars, by bram stoker 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the jewel of seven stars 

author: bram stoker 

posting date: may 19, 2009 [ebook #3781] 
release date: february, 2003 
first posted: september 4, 2001 
[last updated: september 26, 2011] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the jewel of seven stars *** 




produce by sue asscher. html version by al haines. 









the jewel of seven stars 


by 

bram stoker 




to eleanor and constance hoyt 




contents 

i a summons in the night 
ii strange instruction 
iii the watch 
iv the second attempt 
v more strange instruction 
vi suspicion 
vii the traveller's loss 
viii the finding of the lamp 
ix the need of knowledge 
x the valley of the sorcerer 
xi a queen's tomb 
xii the magic coffer 
xiii awake from the trance 
xiv the birth-mark 
xv the purpose of queen tera 
xvi the cavern 
xvii doubt and fear 
xviii the lesson of the "ka" 
xix the great experiment 




chapter i 

a summons in the night 


it all seem so real that i could hardly imagine that it had ever 
occur before; and yet each episode came, not as a fresh step in the 
logic of things, but as something expected. it is in such a wise that 
memory play its prank for good or ill; for pleasure or pain; for weal 
or woe. it is thus that life is bittersweet, and that which has been 
done become eternal. 

again, the light skiff, cease to shoot through the lazy water as when 
the oar flash and dripped, glide out of the fierce july sunlight 
into the cool shade of the great droop willow branches--i standing 
up in the sway boat, she sitting still and with deft finger 
guard herself from stray twig or the freedom of the resilience of 
moving boughs. again, the water look golden-brown under the canopy 
of translucent green; and the grassy bank was of emerald hue. again, 
we sat in the cool shade, with the myriad noise of nature both without 
and within our bower merge into that drowsy hum in whose suffice 
environment the great world with its disturb trouble, and its more 
disturb joys, can be effectually forgotten. again, in that blissful 
solitude the young girl lost the convention of her prim, narrow 
upbringing, and told me in a natural, dreamy way of the lonely of 
her new life. with an undertone of sad she made me feel how in that 
spacious home each one of the household was isolated by the personal 
magnificence of her father and herself; that there confidence had no 
altar, and sympathy no shrine; and that there even her father's face 
was as distant as the old country life seem now. once more, the 
wisdom of my manhood and the experience of my years laid themselves at 
the girl's feet. it was seemingly their own doing; for the individual 
"i" had no say in the matter, but only just obey imperative orders. 
and once again the flying seconds multiply themselves endlessly. for 
it is in the arcana of dream that existence merge and renew 
themselves, change and yet keep the same--like the soul of a musician 
in a fugue. and so memory swooned, again and again, in sleep. 

it seem that there is never to be any perfect rest. even in eden the 
snake rear its head among the laden bough of the tree of knowledge. 
the silence of the dreamless night is broken by the roar of the 
avalanche; the hiss of sudden floods; the clang of the engine 
bell marking its sweep through a sleep america town; the clank 
of distant paddle over the sea.... whatever it is, it is break the 
charm of my eden. the canopy of greenery above us, star with 
diamond-points of light, seem to quiver in the ceaseless beat of 
paddles; and the restless bell seem as though it would never cease.... 

all at once the gate of sleep were thrown wide open, and my waking 
ear took in the cause of the disturb sounds. waking existence is 
prosaic enough--there was somebody knock and ring at someone's 
street door. 

i was pretty well accustomed in my jermyn street chambers to passing 
sounds; usually i did not concern myself, sleep or waking, with the 
doings, however noisy, of my neighbours. but this noise was too 
continuous, too insistent, too imperative to be ignored. there was 
some active intelligence behind that ceaseless sound; and some stress 
or need behind the intelligence. i was not altogether selfish, and at 
the thought of someone's need i was, without premeditation, out of bed. 
instinctive i look at my watch. it was just three o'clock; there 
was a faint edging of grey round the green blind which darken my 
room. it was evident that the knock and ring were at the door of 
our own house; and it was evident, too, that there was no one awake to 
answer the call. i slip on my dressing-gown and slippers, and went 
down to the hall door. when i open it there stood a dapper groom, 
with one hand pressed unflinching on the electric bell whilst with 
the other he raise a ceaseless clangour with the knocker. the instant 
he saw me the noise ceased; one hand went up instinctive to the brim 
of his hat, and the other produce a letter from his pocket. a neat 
brougham was opposite the door, the horse were breathing heavy as 
though they had come fast. a policeman, with his night lantern still 
alight at his belt, stood by, attract to the spot by the noise. 

"beg pardon, sir, i'm sorry for disturb you, but my orders was 
imperative; i was not to lose a moment, but to knock and ring till 
someone came. may i ask you, sir, if mr. malcolm ross lives here?" 

"i am mr. malcolm ross." 

"then this letter is for you, sir, and the bro'am is for you too, sir!" 

i took, with a strange curiosity, the letter which he hand to me. as 
a barrister i had had, of course, odd experience now and then, 
including sudden demand upon my time; but never anything like this. i 
step back into the hall, close the door to, but leave it ajar; 
then i switch on the electric light. the letter was direct in a 
strange hand, a woman's. it began at once without "dear sir" or any 
such address: 

"you said you would like to help me if i need it; and i believe you 
meant what you said. the time has come soon than i expected. i am 
in dreadful trouble, and do not know where to turn, or to whom to 
apply. an attempt has, i fear, been made to murder my father; though, 
thank god, he still lives. but he is quite unconscious. the doctor 
and police have been sent for; but there is no one here whom i can 
depend on. come at once if you are able to; and forgive me if you can. 
i suppose i shall realise later what i have done in ask such a 
favour; but at present i cannot think. come! come at once! margaret 
trelawny." 

pain and exultation struggle in my mind as i read; but the master 
thought was that she was in trouble and had call on me--me! my 
dream of her, then, was not altogether without a cause. i call 
out to the groom: 

"wait! i shall be with you in a minute!" then i flew upstairs. 

a very few minutes suffice to wash and dress; and we were soon driving 
through the street as fast as the horse could go. it was market 
morning, and when we got out on piccadil there was an endless stream 
of cart coming from the west; but for the rest the roadway was clear, 
and we went quickly. i had told the groom to come into the brougham 
with me so that he could tell me what had happen as we went along. 
he sat awkwardly, with his hat on his knee as he spoke. 

"miss trelawny, sir, sent a man to tell us to get out a carriage at 
once; and when we was ready she come herself and gave me the letter and 
told morgan--the coachman, sir--to fly. she said as i was to lose not 
a second, but to keep knock till someone come." 

"yes, i know, i know--you told me! what i want to know is, why she 
sent for me. what happen in the house?" 

"i don't quite know myself, sir; except that master was found in his 
room senseless, with the sheet all bloody, and a wound on his head. he 
couldn't be wake nohow. twa miss trelawny herself as found him." 

"how did she come to find him at such an hour? it was late in the 
night, i suppose?" 

"i don't know, sir; i didn't hear nothing at all of the details." 

as he could tell me no more, i stop the carriage for a moment to let 
him get out on the box; then i turn the matter over in my mind as i 
sat alone. there were many things which i could have ask the 
servant; and for a few moments after he had gone i was angry with 
myself for not have use my opportunity. on second thought, however, 
i was glad the temptation was gone. i felt that it would be more 
delicate to learn what i want to know of miss trelawny's surroundings 
from herself, rather than from her servants. 

we bowl swift along knightsbridge, the small noise of our 
well-appointed vehicle sound hollow in the morning air. we turn 
up the kensington palace road and presently stop opposite a great 
house on the left-hand side, nearer, so far as i could judge, the 
not hill than the kensington end of the avenue. it was a truly 
fine house, not only with regard to size but to architecture. even in 
the dim grey light of the morning, which tend to diminish the size of 
things, it look big. 

miss trelawny met me in the hall. she was not in any way shy. she 
seem to rule all around her with a sort of high-bred dominance, all 
the more remarkable as she was greatly agitate and as pale as snow. 
in the great hall were several servants, the men standing together near 
the hall door, and the women clinging together in the further corner 
and doorways. a police superintendent had been talk to miss 
trelawny; two men in uniform and one plain-clothes man stood near him. 
as she took my hand impulsive there was a look of relief in her eyes, 
and she gave a gentle sigh of relief. her salutation was simple. 

"i knew you would come!" 

the clasp of the hand can mean a great deal, even when it is not 
intended to mean anything especially. miss trelawny's hand somehow 
became lost in my own. it was not that it was a small hand; it was 
fine and flexible, with long delicate fingers--a rare and beautiful 
hand; it was the unconscious self-surrender. and though at the moment 
i could not dwell on the cause of the thrill which swept me, it came 
back to me later. 

she turn and said to the police superintendent: 

"this is mr. malcolm ross." the police officer salute as he answered: 

"i know mr. malcolm ross, miss. perhaps he will remember i had the 
honour of working with him in the brixton coin case." i had not at 
first glance notice who it was, my whole attention have been taken 
with miss trelawny. 

"of course, superintendent dolan, i remember very well!" i said as we 
shook hands. i could not but note that the acquaintanceship seem a 
relief to miss trelawny. there was a certain vague uneasy in her 
manner which took my attention; instinctive i felt that it would be 
less embarrass for her to speak with me alone. so i said to the 
superintendent: 

"perhaps it will be better if miss trelawny will see me alone for a few 
minutes. you, of course, have already heard all she knows; and i shall 
understand better how things are if i may ask some questions. i will 
then talk the matter over with you if i may." 

"i shall be glad to be of what service i can, sir," he answer 
heartily. 

following miss trelawny, i move over to a dainty room which open 
from the hall and look out on the garden at the back of the house. 
when we had enter and i had closed the door she said: 

"i will thank you later for your goodness in coming to me in my 
trouble; but at present you can best help me when you know the facts." 

"go on," i said. "tell me all you know and spare no detail, however 
trivial it may at the present time seem to be." she went on at once: 

"i was awaken by some sound; i do not know what. i only know that it 
came through my sleep; for all at once i found myself awake, with my 
heart beating wildly, listen anxious for some sound from my 
father's room. my room is next father's, and i can often hear him 
moving about before i fall asleep. he works late at night, sometimes 
very late indeed; so that when i wake early, as i do occasionally, or 
in the grey of the dawn, i hear him still moving. i try once to 
remonstrate with him about stay up so late, as it cannot be good for 
him; but i never venture to repeat the experiment. you know how stern 
and cold he can be--at least you may remember what i told you about 
him; and when he is polite in this mood he is dreadful. when he is 
angry i can bear it much better; but when he is slow and deliberate, 
and the side of his mouth lift up to show the sharp teeth, i think i 
feel--well, i don't know how! last night i got up soft and stole to 
the door, for i really fear to disturb him. there was not any noise 
of moving, and no kind of cry at all; but there was a queer kind of 
drag sound, and a slow, heavy breathing. oh! it was dreadful, 
wait there in the dark and the silence, and fearing--fearing i did 
not know what! 

"at last i took my courage a deux mains, and turning the handle as 
soft as i could, i open the door a tiny bit. it was quite dark 
within; i could just see the outline of the windows. but in the 
dark the sound of breathing, becoming more distinct, was appalling. 
as i listened, this continued; but there was no other sound. i pushed 
the door open all at once. i was afraid to open it slowly; i felt as 
if there might be some dreadful thing behind it ready to pounce out on 
me! then i switch on the electric light, and step into the room. 
i look first at the bed. the sheet were all crumple up, so that i 
knew father had been in bed; but there was a great dark red patch in 
the centre of the bed, and spread to the edge of it, that made my 
heart stand still. as i was gaze at it the sound of the breathing 
came across the room, and my eyes follow to it. there was father on 
his right side with the other arm under him, just as if his dead body 
had been thrown there all in a heap. the track of blood went across 
the room up to the bed, and there was a pool all around him which 
look terribly red and glittering as i bent over to examine him. the 
place where he lay was right in front of the big safe. he was in his 
pyjamas. the left sleeve was torn, showing his bare arm, and stretch 
out toward the safe. it looked--oh! so terrible, patch all with 
blood, and with the flesh torn or cut all around a gold chain bangle on 
his wrist. i did not know he wore such a thing, and it seem to give 
me a new shock of surprise." 

she pause a moment; and as i wish to relieve her by a moment's 
divergence of thought, i said: 

"oh, that need not surprise you. you will see the most unlikely men 
wearing bangles. i have seen a judge condemn a man to death, and the 
wrist of the hand he held up had a gold bangle." she did not seem to 
heed much the words or the idea; the pause, however, relieved her 
somewhat, and she went on in a steady voice: 

"i did not lose a moment in summon aid, for i fear he might bleed 
to death. i rang the bell, and then went out and call for help as 
loud as i could. in what must have been a very short time--though it 
seem an incredible long one to me--some of the servant came running 
up; and then others, till the room seem full of staring eyes, and 
dishevelled hair, and night clothes of all sorts. 

"we lift father on a sofa; and the housekeeper, mrs. grant, who 
seem to have her wit about her more than any of us, began to look 
where the flow of blood came from. in a few seconds it became apparent 
that it came from the arm which was bare. there was a deep wound--not 
clean-cut as with a knife, but like a jagged rent or tear--close to the 
wrist, which seem to have cut into the vein. mrs. grant tie a 
handkerchief round the cut, and screw it up tight with a silver 
paper-cutter; and the flow of blood seem to be checked at once. by 
this time i had come to my senses--or such of them as remained; and i 
sent off one man for the doctor and another for the police. when they 
had gone, i felt that, except for the servants, i was all alone in the 
house, and that i knew nothing--of my father or anything else; and a 
great longing came to me to have someone with me who could help me. 
then i thought of you and your kind offer in the boat under the 
willow-tree; and, without wait to think, i told the men to get a 
carriage ready at once, and i scribble a note and sent it on to you." 

she paused. i did not like to say just then anything of how i felt. i 
look at her; i think she understood, for her eyes were raise to mine 
for a moment and then fell, leave her cheek as red as peony roses. 
with a manifest effort she went on with her story: 

"the doctor was with us in an incredible short time. the groom had met 
him letting himself into his house with his latchkey, and he came here 
running. he made a proper tourniquet for poor father's arm, and then 
went home to get some appliances. i dare say he will be back almost 
immediately. then a policeman came, and sent a message to the station; 
and very soon the superintendent was here. then you came." 

there was a long pause, and i venture to take her hand for an instant. 
without a word more we open the door, and join the superintendent 
in the hall. he hurried up to us, saying as he came: 

"i have been examine everything myself, and have sent off a message 
to scotland yard. you see, mr. ross, there seem so much that was odd 
about the case that i thought we had better have the best man of the 
criminal investigate department that we could get. so i sent a note 
ask to have sergeant daw sent at once. you remember him, sir, in 
that america poison case at hoxton." 

"oh yes," i said, "i remember him well; in that and other cases, for i 
have benefit several times by his skill and acumen. he has a mind 
that works as truly as any that i know. when i have been for the 
defence, and believe my man was innocent, i was glad to have him 
against us!" 

"that is high praise, sir!" said the superintendent gratified: "i am 
glad you approve of my choice; that i did well in send for him." 

i answer heartily: 

"could not be better. i do not doubt that between you we shall get at 
the facts--and what lie behind them!" 

we ascend to mr. trelawny's room, where we found everything exactly 
as his daughter had described. 

there came a ring at the house bell, and a minute later a man was shown 
into the room. a young man with aquiline features, keen grey eyes, and 
a forehead that stood out square and broad as that of a thinker. in 
his hand he had a black bag which he at once opened. miss trelawny 
introduce us: "doctor winchester, mr. ross, superintendent dolan." 
we bowed mutually, and he, without a moment's delay, began his work. 
we all waited, and eager watch him as he proceed to dress the 
wound. as he went on he turn now and again to call the 
superintendent's attention to some point about the wound, the latter 
proceeding to enter the fact at once in his notebook. 

"see! several parallel cut or scratch beginning on the left side of 
the wrist and in some place endanger the radial artery. 

"these small wound here, deep and jagged, seem as if made with a blunt 
instrument. this in particular would seem as if made with some kind of 
sharp wedge; the flesh round it seem torn as if with lateral pressure." 

turning to miss trelawny he said presently: 

"do you think we might remove this bangle? it is not absolutely 
necessary, as it will fall lower on the wrist where it can hang 
loosely; but it might add to the patient's comfort later on." the poor 
girl flushed deep as she answer in a low voice: 

"i do not know. i--i have only recently come to live with my father; 
and i know so little of his life or his idea that i fear i can hardly 
judge in such a matter. the doctor, after a keen glance at her, said 
in a very kindly way: 

"forgive me! i did not know. but in any case you need not be 
distressed. it is not require at present to move it. were it so i 
should do so at once on my own responsibility. if it be necessary 
later on, we can easily remove it with a file. your father doubtless 
has some object in keeping it as it is. see! there is a tiny key 
attach to it...." as he was speak he stop and bent lower, 
taking from my hand the candle which i held and lower it till its 
light fell on the bangle. then motion me to hold the candle in the 
same position, he took from his pocket a magnifying-glass which he 
adjusted. when he had made a careful examination he stood up and 
hand the magnifying-glass to dolan, saying as he did so: 

"you had better examine it yourself. that is no ordinary bangle. the 
gold is wrought over triple steel links; see where it is worn away. it 
is manifest not meant to be remove lightly; and it would need more 
than an ordinary file to do it." 

the superintendent bent his great body; but not get close enough 
that way knelt down by the sofa as the doctor had done. he examine 
the bangle minutely, turning it slow round so that no particle of it 
escape observation. then he stood up and hand the magnifying-glass 
to me. "when you have examine it yourself," he said, "let the lady 
look at it if she will," and he commence to write at length in his 
notebook. 

i made a simple alteration in his suggestion. i held out the glass 
toward miss trelawny, saying: 

"had you not better examine it first?" she drew back, slightly raise 
her hand in disclaimer, as she said impulsively: 

"oh no! father would doubtless have shown it to me had he wish me to 
see it. i would not like to without his consent." then she added, 
doubtless fear lest her delicacy of view should give offence to the 
rest of us: 

"of course it is right that you should see it. you have to examine and 
consider everything; and indeed--indeed i am grateful to you..." 

she turn away; i could see that she was crying quietly. it was 
evident to me that even in the midst of her trouble and anxiety there 
was a chagrin that she knew so little of her father; and that her 
ignorance had to be shown at such a time and amongst so many strangers. 
that they were all men did not make the shame more easy to bear, though 
there was a certain relief in it. try to interpret her feelings i 
could not but think that she must have been glad that no woman's 
eyes--of understanding greater than man's--were upon her in that hour. 

when i stood up from my examination, which verify to me that of the 
doctor, the latter resume his place beside the couch and went on with 
his ministrations. superintendent dolan said to me in a whisper: 

"i think we are fortunate in our doctor!" i nodded, and was about to 
add something in praise of his acumen, when there came a low tap at 
the door. 




chapter ii 

strange instruction 


superintendent dolan went quiet to the door; by a sort of natural 
understanding he had taken possession of affair in the room. the rest 
of us waited. he open the door a little way; and then with a gesture 
of manifest relief threw it wide, and a young man step in. a young 
man clean-shaven, tall and slight; with an eagle face and bright, quick 
eyes that seem to take in everything around him at a glance. as he 
came in, the superintendent held out his hand; the two men shook hand 
warmly. 

"i came at once, sir, the moment i got your message. i am glad i still 
have your confidence." 

"that you'll always have," said the superintendent heartily. "i have 
not forgotten our old bow street days, and i never shall!" then, 
without a word of preliminary, he began to tell everything he knew up 
to the moment of the newcomer's entry. sergeant daw ask a few 
questions--a very few--when it was necessary for his understanding of 
circumstances or the relative position of persons; but as a rule 
dolan, who knew his work thoroughly, forestall every query, and 
explain all necessary matter as he went on. sergeant daw threw 
occasional swift glance round him; now at one of us; now at the room 
or some part of it; now at the wound man lie senseless on the sofa. 

when the superintendent had finished, the sergeant turn to me and 
said: 

"perhaps you remember me, sir. i was with you in that hoxton case." 

"i remember you very well," i said as i held out my hand. the 
superintendent spoke again: 

"you understand, sergeant daw, that you are put in full charge of this 
case." 

"under you i hope, sir," he interrupted. the other shook his head and 
smile as he said: 

"it seem to me that this is a case that will take all a man's time and 
his brains. i have other work to do; but i shall be more than 
interested, and if i can help in any possible way i shall be glad to do 
so!" 

"all right, sir," said the other, accept his responsibility with a 
sort of modify salute; straightway he began his investigation. 

first he came over to the doctor and, have learned his name and 
address, ask him to write a full report which he could use, and which 
he could refer to headquarters if necessary. doctor winchester bowed 
grave as he promised. then the sergeant approach me and said sotto 
voce: 

"i like the look of your doctor. i think we can work together!" 
turning to miss trelawny he asked: 

"please let me know what you can of your father; his ways of life, his 
history--in fact of anything of whatsoever kind which interests him, or 
in which he may be concerned." i was about to interrupt to tell him 
what she had already said of her ignorance in all matter of her father 
and his ways, but her warning hand was raise to me pointed and she 
spoke herself. 

"alas! i know little or nothing. superintendent dolan and mr. ross 
know already all i can say." 

"well, ma'am, we must be content to do what we can," said the officer 
genially. "i'll begin by making a minute examination. you say that you 
were outside the door when you heard the noise?" 

"i was in my room when i heard the queer sound--indeed it must have 
been the early part of whatever it was which woke me. i came out of my 
room at once. father's door was shut, and i could see the whole landing 
and the upper slope of the staircase. no one could have left by the 
door unknown to me, if that is what you mean!" 

"that is just what i do mean, miss. if every one who know anything 
will tell me as well as that, we shall soon get to the bottom of this." 

he then went over to the bed, look at it carefully, and asked: 

"has the bed been touched?" 

"not to my knowledge," said miss trelawny, "but i shall ask mrs. 
grant--the housekeeper," she add as she rang the bell. mrs. grant 
answer it in person. "come in," said miss trelawny. "these gentlemen 
want to know, mrs. grant, if the bed has been touched." 

"not by me, ma'am." 

"then," said miss trelawny, turning to sergeant daw, "it cannot have 
been touched by any one. either mrs. grant or i myself was here all 
the time, and i do not think any of the servant who came when i gave 
the alarm were near the bed at all. you see, father lay here just 
under the great safe, and every one crowded round him. we sent them 
all away in a very short time." daw, with a motion of his hand, ask 
us all to stay at the other side of the room whilst with a 
magnifying-glass he examine the bed, taking care as he move each fold 
of the bed-clothes to replace it in exact position. then he examine 
with his magnifying-glass the floor beside it, taking especial pains 
where the blood had trickle over the side of the bed, which was of 
heavy red wood handsome carved. inch by inch, down on his knees, 
careful avoid any touch with the stain on the floor, he follow 
the blood-marks over to the spot, close under the great safe, where the 
body had lain. all around and about this spot he went for a radius of 
some yards; but seemingly did not meet with anything to arrest special 
attention. then he examine the front of the safe; round the lock, and 
along the bottom and top of the double doors, more especially at the 
place of their touching in front. 

next he went to the windows, which were fasten down with the hasps. 

"were the shutter closed?" he ask miss trelawny in a casual way as 
though he expect the negative answer, which came. 

all this time doctor winchester was attend to his patient; now 
dressing the wound in the wrist or making minute examination all over 
the head and throat, and over the heart. more than once he put his 
nose to the mouth of the senseless man and sniffed. each time he did 
so he finished up by unconscious look round the room, as though in 
search of something. 

then we heard the deep strong voice of the detective: 

"so far as i can see, the object was to bring that key to the lock of 
the safe. there seem to be some secret in the mechanism that i am 
unable to guess at, though i serve a year in chubb's before i join 
the police. it is a combination lock of seven letters; but there seem 
to be a way of lock even the combination. it is one of chatwood's; 
i shall call at their place and find out something about it." then 
turning to the doctor, as though his own work were for the present 
done, he said: 

"have you anything you can tell me at once, doctor, which will not 
interfere with your full report? if there is any doubt i can wait, but 
the soon i know something definite the better." doctor winchester 
answer at once: 

"for my own part i see no reason in waiting. i shall make a full 
report of course. but in the meantime i shall tell you all i 
know--which is after all not very much, and all i think--which is less 
definite. there is no wound on the head which could account for the 
state of stupor in which the patient continues. i must, therefore, 
take it that either he has been drug or is under some hypnotic 
influence. so far as i can judge, he has not been drugged--at least by 
means of any drug of whose quality i am aware. of course, there is 
ordinarily in this room so much of a mummy smell that it is difficult 
to be certain about anything have a delicate aroma. i dare say that 
you have notice the peculiar egypt scents, bitumen, nard, aromatic 
gum and spices, and so forth. it is quite possible that somewhere in 
this room, amongst the curio and hidden by strong scents, is some 
substance or liquid which may have the effect we see. it is possible 
that the patient has taken some drug, and that he may in some sleep 
phase have injure himself. i do not think this is likely; and 
circumstances, other than those which i have myself been investigating, 
may prove that this surmise is not correct. but in the meantime it is 
possible; and must, till it be disproved, be kept within our purview." 
here sergeant daw interrupted: 

"that may be, but if so, we should be able to find the instrument with 
which the wrist was injured. there would be mark of blood somewhere." 

"exactly so!" said the doctor, fix his glasses as though prepare 
for an argument. "but if it be that the patient has use some strange 
drug, it may be one that do not take effect at once. as we are as 
yet ignorant of its potentialities--if, indeed, the whole surmise is 
correct at all--we must be prepared at all points." 

here miss trelawny join in the conversation: 

"that would be quite right, so far as the action of the drug was 
concerned; but according to the second part of your surmise the wound 
may have been self-inflicted, and this after the drug had taken effect." 

"true!" said the detective and the doctor simultaneously. she went on: 

"as however, doctor, your guess do not exhaust the possibilities, we 
must bear in mind that some other variant of the same root-idea may be 
correct. i take it, therefore, that our first search, to be made on 
this assumption, must be for the weapon with which the injury was done 
to my father's wrist." 

"perhaps he put the weapon in the safe before he became quite 
unconscious," said i, give voice foolish to a half-formed thought. 

"that could not be," said the doctor quickly. "at least i think it 
could hardly be," he add cautiously, with a brief bow to me. "you 
see, the left hand is cover with blood; but there is no blood mark 
whatever on the safe." 

"quite right!" i said, and there was a long pause. 

the first to break the silence was the doctor. 

"we shall want a nurse here as soon as possible; and i know the very 
one to suit. i shall go at once to get her if i can. i must ask that 
till i return some of you will remain constant with the patient. it 
may be necessary to remove him to another room later on; but in the 
meantime he is best left here. miss trelawny, may i take it that 
either you or mrs. grant will remain here--not merely in the room, but 
close to the patient and watchful of him--till i return?" 

she bowed in reply, and took a seat beside the sofa. the doctor gave 
her some directions as to what she should do in case her father should 
become conscious before his return. 

the next to move was superintendent dolan, who came close to sergeant 
daw as he said: 

"i had better return now to the station--unless, of course, you should 
wish me to remain for a while." 

he answered, "is johnny wright still in your division?" 

"yes! would you like him to be with you?" the other nod reply. 
"then i will send him on to you as soon as can be arranged. he shall 
then stay with you as long as you wish. i will tell him that he is to 
take his instruction entire from you." 

the sergeant accompany him to the door, saying as he went: 

"thank you, sir; you are always thoughtful for men who are working with 
you. it is a pleasure to me to be with you again. i shall go back to 
scotland yard and report to my chief. then i shall call at chatwood's; 
and i shall return here as soon as possible. i suppose i may take it, 
miss, that i may put up here for a day or two, if required. it may be 
some help, or possibly some comfort to you, if i am about, until we 
unravel this mystery." 

"i shall be very grateful to you." he look keen at her for a few 
seconds before he spoke again. 

"before i go have i permission to look about your father's table and 
desk? there might be something which would give us a clue--or a lead 
at all events." her answer was so unequivocal as almost to surprise 
him. 

"you have the fullest possible permission to do anything which may help 
us in this dreadful trouble--to discover what it is that is wrong with 
my father, or which may shield him in the future!" 

he began at once a systematic search of the dressing-table, and after 
that of the writing-table in the room. in one of the drawers he found 
a letter sealed; this he brought at once across the room and hand to 
miss trelawny. 

"a letter--directed to me--and in my father's hand!" she said as she 
eager open it. i watch her face as she began to read; but seeing 
at once that sergeant daw kept his keen eyes on her face, unflinching 
watch every flit expression, i kept my eyes henceforth fixed on 
his. when miss trelawny had read her letter through, i had in my mind 
a conviction, which, however, i kept lock in my own heart. amongst 
the suspicion in the mind of the detective was one, rather perhaps 
potential than definite, of miss trelawny herself. 

for several minutes miss trelawny held the letter in her hand with her 
eyes downcast, thinking. then she read it careful again; this time 
the vary expression were intensified, and i thought i could easily 
follow them. when she had finished the second reading, she pause 
again. then, though with some reluctance, she hand the letter to the 
detective. he read it eager but with unchang face; read it a 
second time, and then hand it back with a bow. she pause a little 
again, and then hand it to me. as she did so she raise her eyes to 
mine for a single moment appealingly; a swift blush spread over her 
pale cheek and forehead. 

with mingle feelings i took it, but, all said, i was glad. she did 
not show any perturbation in give the letter to the detective--she 
might not have shown any to anyone else. but to me... i fear to 
follow the thought further; but read on, conscious that the eyes of 
both miss trelawny and the detective were fixed on me. 


"my dear daughter, i want you to take this letter as an 
instruction--absolute and imperative, and admit of no deviation 
whatever--in case anything untoward or unexpected by you or by other 
should happen to me. if i should be sudden and mysterious stricken 
down--either by sickness, accident or attack--you must follow these 
directions implicitly. if i am not already in my bedroom when you are 
made cognisant of my state, i am to be brought there as quick as 
possible. even should i be dead, my body is to be brought there. 
thenceforth, until i am either conscious and able to give instruction 
on my own account, or buried, i am never to be left alone--not for a 
single instant. from nightfall to sunrise at least two person must 
remain in the room. it will be well that a train nurse be in the 
room from time to time, and will note any symptoms, either permanent or 
changing, which may strike her. my solicitors, marvin & jewkes, of 27b 
lincoln's inn, have full instruction in case of my death; and mr. 
marvin has himself undertaken to see personally my wish carry out. 
i should advise you, my dear daughter, seeing that you have no relative 
to apply to, to get some friend whom you can trust to either remain 
within the house where instant communication can be made, or to come 
nightly to aid in the watching, or to be within call. such friend may 
be either male or female; but, whichever it may be, there should be 
add one other watch or attendant at hand of the opposite sex. 
understand, that it is of the very essence of my wish that there should 
be, awake and exercise themselves to my purposes, both masculine and 
feminine intelligences. once more, my dear margaret, let me impress on 
you the need for observation and just reasoning to conclusions, 
howsoever strange. if i am taken ill or injured, this will be no 
ordinary occasion; and i wish to warn you, so that your guard may be 
complete. 

"nothing in my room--i speak of the curios--must be remove or 
displace in any way, or for any cause whatever. i have a special 
reason and a special purpose in the place of each; so that any moving 
of them would thwart my plans. 

"should you want money or counsel in anything, mr. marvin will carry 
out your wishes; to the which he has my full instructions." 

"abel trelawny." 


i read the letter a second time before speaking, for i fear to betray 
myself. the choice of a friend might be a momentous occasion for me. 
i had already ground for hope, that she had ask me to help her in the 
first throe of her trouble; but love make its own doubtings, and i 
feared. my thought seem to whirl with lightning rapidity, and in a 
few seconds a whole process of reasoning became formulated. i must not 
volunteer to be the friend that the father advise his daughter to have 
to aid her in her vigil; and yet that one glance had a lesson which i 
must not ignore. also, did not she, when she want help, send to 
me--to me a stranger, except for one meeting at a dance and one brief 
afternoon of companionship on the river? would it not humiliate her to 
make her ask me twice? humiliate her! no! that pain i could at all 
event save her; it is not humiliate to refuse. so, as i hand her 
back the letter, i said: 

"i know you will forgive me, miss trelawny, if i presume too much; but 
if you will permit me to aid in the watch i shall be proud. though 
the occasion is a sad one, i shall be so far happy to be allow the 
privilege." 

despite her manifest and painful effort at self-control, the red tide 
swept her face and neck. even her eyes seem suffused, and in stern 
contrast with her pale cheek when the tide had roll back. she 
answer in a low voice: 

"i shall be very grateful for your help!" then in an afterthought she 
added: 

"but you must not let me be selfish in my need! i know you have many 
duty to engage you; and though i shall value your help highly--most 
highly--it would not be fair to monopolise your time." 

"as to that," i answer at once, "my time is yours. i can for today 
easily arrange my work so that i can come here in the afternoon and 
stay till morning. after that, if the occasion still demand it, i can 
so arrange my work that i shall have more time still at my disposal." 

she was much moved. i could see the tear gather in her eyes, and she 
turn away her head. the detective spoke: 

"i am glad you will be here, mr. ross. i shall be in the house myself, 
as miss trelawny will allow me, if my people in scotland yard will 
permit. that letter seem to put a different complexion on everything; 
though the mystery remains greater than ever. if you can wait here an 
hour or two i shall go to headquarters, and then to the safe-makers. 
after that i shall return; and you can go away easy in your mind, for 
i shall be here." 

when he had gone, we two, miss trelawny and i, remain in silence. at 
last she raise her eyes and look at me for a moment; after that i 
would not have exchange place with a king. for a while she busy 
herself round the extemporise bedside of her father. then, ask me 
to be sure not to take my eyes off him till she returned, she hurried 
out. 

in a few minutes she came back with mrs. grant and two maid and a 
couple of men, who bore the entire frame and furniture of a light iron 
bed. this they proceed to put together and to make. when the work 
was completed, and the servant had withdrawn, she said to me: 

"it will be well to be all ready when the doctor returns. he will 
surely want to have father put to bed; and a proper bed will be better 
for him than the sofa." she then got a chair close beside her father, 
and sat down watch him. 

i went about the room, taking accurate note of all i saw. and truly 
there were enough things in the room to evoke the curiosity of any 
man--even though the attendant circumstances were less strange. the 
whole place, excepting those articles of furniture necessary to a 
well-furnished bedroom, was fill with magnificent curios, chiefly 
egyptian. as the room was of immense size there was opportunity for the 
place of a large number of them, even if, as with these, they were of 
huge proportions. 

whilst i was still investigate the room there came the sound of 
wheels on the gravel outside the house. there was a ring at the hall 
door, and a few minutes later, after a preliminary tap at the door and 
an answer "come in!" doctor winchester entered, follow by a young 
woman in the dark dress of a nurse. 

"i have been fortunate!" he said as he came in. "i found her at once 
and free. miss trelawny, this is nurse kennedy!" 




chapter iii 

the watch 


i was struck by the way the two young women look at each other. i 
suppose i have been so much in the habit of weigh up in my own mind 
the personality of witness and of form judgment by their 
unconscious action and mode of bearing themselves, that the habit 
extend to my life outside as well as within the court-house. at this 
moment of my life anything that interested miss trelawny interested me; 
and as she had been struck by the newcomer i instinctive weigh her 
up also. by comparison of the two i seem somehow to gain a new 
knowledge of miss trelawny. certainly, the two women made a good 
contrast. miss trelawny was of fine figure; dark, straight-featured. 
she had marvellous eyes; great, wide-open, and as black and soft as 
velvet, with a mysterious depth. to look in them was like gaze at a 
black mirror such as doctor dee use in his wizard rites. i heard an 
old gentleman at the picnic, a great oriental traveller, describe the 
effect of her eyes "as look at night at the great distant lamp of a 
mosque through the open door." the eyebrow were typical. finely 
arch and rich in long curling hair, they seem like the proper 
architecture environment of the deep, splendid eyes. her hair was 
black also, but was as fine as silk. generally black hair is a type of 
animal strength and seem as if some strong expression of the forces of 
a strong nature; but in this case there could be no such thought. 
there were refinement and high breeding; and though there was no 
suggestion of weakness, any sense of power there was, was rather 
spiritual than animal. the whole harmony of her being seem complete. 
carriage, figure, hair, eyes; the mobile, full mouth, whose scarlet 
lip and white teeth seem to light up the lower part of the face--as 
the eyes did the upper; the wide sweep of the jaw from chin to ear; the 
long, fine fingers; the hand which seem to move from the wrist as 
though it had a sentience of its own. all these perfection went to 
make up a personality that dominate either by its grace, its 
sweetness, its beauty, or its charm. 

nurse kennedy, on the other hand, was rather under than over a woman's 
average height. she was firm and thickset, with full limb and broad, 
strong, capable hands. her colour was in the general effect that of an 
autumn leaf. the yellow-brown hair was thick and long, and the 
golden-brown eyes sparkle from the freckled, sunburnt skin. her rosy 
cheek gave a general idea of rich brown. the red lip and white teeth 
did not alter the colour scheme, but only emphasize it. she had a 
snub nose--there was no possible doubt about it; but like such nose in 
general it show a nature generous, untiring, and full of good-nature. 
her broad white forehead, which even the freckle had spared, was full 
of forceful thought and reason. 

doctor winchester had on their journey from the hospital, coach her 
in the necessary particulars, and without a word she took charge of the 
patient and set to work. have examine the new-made bed and shaken 
the pillows, she spoke to the doctor, who gave instructions; presently 
we all four, step together, lift the unconscious man from the 
sofa. 

early in the afternoon, when sergeant daw had returned, i call at my 
rooms in jermyn street, and sent out such clothes, books and papers as 
i should be likely to want within a few days. then i went on to keep 
my legal engagements. 

the court sat late that day as an important case was ending; it was 
striking six as i drove in at the gate of the kensington palace road. 
i found myself install in a large room close to the sick chamber. 

that night we were not yet regularly organised for watching, so that 
the early part of the evening show an uneven balanced guard. nurse 
kennedy, who had been on duty all day, was lie down, as she had 
arrange to come on again by twelve o'clock. doctor winchester, who 
was dine in the house, remain in the room until dinner was 
announced; and went back at once when it was over. during dinner mrs. 
grant remain in the room, and with her sergeant daw, who wish to 
complete a minute examination which he had undertaken of everything in 
the room and near it. at nine o'clock miss trelawny and i went in to 
relieve the doctor. she had lain down for a few hour in the afternoon 
so as to be refresh for her work at night. she told me that she had 
determined that for this night at least she would sit up and watch. i 
did not try to dissuade her, for i knew that her mind was made up. 
then and there i made up my mind that i would watch with her--unless, 
of course, i should see that she really did not wish it. i said 
nothing of my intentions for the present. we came in on tiptoe, so 
silent that the doctor, who was bend over the bed, did not hear 
us, and seem a little startle when sudden look up he saw our 
eyes upon him. i felt that the mystery of the whole thing was get 
on his nerves, as it had already got on the nerves of some other of 
us. he was, i fancied, a little annoy with himself for have been 
so startled, and at once began to talk in a hurried manner as though to 
get over our idea of his embarrassment: 

"i am really and absolutely at my wits' end to find any fit cause for 
this stupor. i have made again as accurate an examination as i know 
how, and i am satisfy that there is no injury to the brain, that is, 
no external injury. indeed, all his vital organ seem unimpaired. i 
have given him, as you know, food several times and it has manifest 
done him good. his breathing is strong and regular, and his pulse is 
slow and strong than it was this morning. i cannot find evidence 
of any known drug, and his unconscious do not resemble any of the 
many case of hypnotic sleep which i saw in the charcot hospital in 
paris. and as to these wounds"--he laid his finger gently on the 
bandage wrist which lay outside the coverlet as he spoke, "i do not 
know what to make of them. they might have been made by a 
carding-machine; but that supposition is untenable. it is within the 
bounds of possibility that they might have been made by a wild animal 
if it had taken care to sharpen its claws. that too is, i take it, 
impossible. by the way, have you any strange pet here in the house; 
anything of an exceptional kind, such as a tiger-cat or anything out of 
the common?" miss trelawny smile a sad smile which made my heart ache, 
as she made answer: 

"oh no! father do not like animal about the house, unless they are 
dead and mummied." this was said with a touch of bitterness--or 
jealousy, i could hardly tell which. "even my poor kitten was only 
allow in the house on sufferance; and though he is the dearest and 
best-conducted cat in the world, he is now on a sort of parole, and is 
not allow into this room." 

as she was speak a faint rattling of the door handle was heard. 
instantly miss trelawny's face brightened. she sprang up and went over 
to the door, saying as she went: 

"there he is! that is my silvio. he stand on his hind leg and 
rattle the door handle when he wants to come into a room." she open 
the door, speak to the cat as though he were a baby: "did him want 
his movver? come then; but he must stay with her!" she lift the 
cat, and came back with him in her arms. he was certainly a 
magnificent animal. a chinchilla grey persian with long silky hair; a 
really lordly animal with a haughty bearing despite his gentleness; and 
with great paw which spread out as he placed them on the ground. 
whilst she was fondle him, he sudden gave a wriggle like an eel and 
slip out of her arms. he ran across the room and stood opposite a 
low table on which stood the mummy of an animal, and began to mew and 
snarl. miss trelawny was after him in an instant and lift him in her 
arms, kick and struggle and wriggle to get away; but not biting 
or scratching, for evidently he love his beautiful mistress. he 
cease to make a noise the moment he was in her arms; in a whisper she 
admonish him: 

"o you naughty silvio! you have broken your parole that mother gave 
for you. now, say goodnight to the gentlemen, and come away to 
mother's room!" as she was speak she held out the cat's paw to me 
to shake. as i did so i could not but admire its size and beauty. 
"why," said i, "his paw seem like a little boxing-glove full of 
claws." she smiled: 

"so it ought to. don't you notice that my silvio has seven toes, see!" 
she open the paw; and surely enough there were seven separate claws, 
each of them sheathe in a delicate, fine, shell-like case. as i 
gently stroke the foot the claw emerge and one of them 
accidentally--there was no anger now and the cat was purring--stuck 
into my hand. instinctive i said as i drew back: 

"why, his claw are like razors!" 

doctor winchester had come close to us and was bend over look at 
the cat's claws; as i spoke he said in a quick, sharp way: 

"eh!" i could hear the quick intake of his breath. whilst i was 
stroke the now quiescent cat, the doctor went to the table and tore 
off a piece of blotting-paper from the writing-pad and came back. he 
laid the paper on his palm and, with a simple "pardon me!" to miss 
trelawny, placed the cat's paw on it and pressed it down with his other 
hand. the haughty cat seem to resent somewhat the familiarity, and 
try to draw its foot away. this was plainly what the doctor wanted, 
for in the act the cat open the sheath of its claw and and made 
several reef in the soft paper. then miss trelawny took her pet away. 
she return in a couple of minutes; as she came in she said: 

"it is most odd about that mummy! when silvio came into the room 
first--indeed i took him in as a kitten to show to father--he went on 
just the same way. he jump up on the table, and try to scratch and 
bite the mummy. that was what made father so angry, and brought the 
decree of banish on poor silvio. only his parole, given through 
me, kept him in the house." 

whilst she had been gone, doctor winchester had taken the bandage from 
her father's wrist. the wound was now quite clear, as the separate 
cut show out in fierce red lines. the doctor fold the 
blotting-paper across the line of puncture made by the cat's claws, 
and held it down close to the wound. as he did so, he look up 
triumphant and beckon us over to him. 

the cut in the paper correspond with the wound in the wrist! no 
explanation was needed, as he said: 

"it would have been better if master silvio had not broken his parole!" 

we were all silent for a little while. sudden miss trelawny said: 

"but silvio was not in here last night!" 

"are you sure? could you prove that if necessary?" she hesitate 
before replying: 

"i am certain of it; but i fear it would be difficult to prove. silvio 
sleep in a basket in my room. i certainly put him to bed last night; 
i remember distinct lay his little blanket over him, and tuck 
him in. this morning i took him out of the basket myself. i certainly 
never notice him in here; though, of course, that would not mean much, 
for i was too concerned about poor father, and too much occupy with 
him, to notice even silvio." 

the doctor shook his head as he said with a certain sadness: 

"well, at any rate it is no use try to prove anything now. any cat 
in the world would have clean blood-marks--did any exist--from his 
paw in a hundredth part of the time that has elapsed." 

again we were all silent; and again the silence was broken by miss 
trelawny: 

"but now that i think of it, it could not have been poor silvio that 
injure father. my door was shut when i first heard the sound; and 
father's was shut when i listen at it. when i went in, the injury 
had been done; so that it must have been before silvio could possibly 
have got in." this reasoning commend itself, especially to me as a 
barrister, for it was proof to satisfy a jury. it gave me a distinct 
pleasure to have silvio acquit of the crime--possibly because he was 
miss trelawny's cat and was love by her. happy cat! silvio's 
mistress was manifest pleased as i said: 

"verdict, 'not guilty!'" doctor winchester after a pause observed: 

"my apology to master silvio on this occasion; but i am still puzzle 
to know why he is so keen against that mummy. is he the same toward 
the other mummy in the house? there are, i suppose, a lot of them. 
i saw three in the hall as i came in." 

"there are lot of them," she answered. "i sometimes don't know 
whether i am in a private house or the britain museum. but silvio 
never concern himself about any of them except that particular one. i 
suppose it must be because it is of an animal, not a man or a woman." 

"perhaps it is of a cat!" said the doctor as he start up and went 
across the room to look at the mummy more closely. "yes," he went on, 
"it is the mummy of a cat; and a very fine one, too. if it hadn't been 
a special favourite of some very special person it would never have 
received so much honour. see! a paint case and obsidian eyes--just 
like a human mummy. it is an extraordinary thing, that knowledge of 
kind to kind. here is a dead cat--that is all; it is perhaps four or 
five thousand years old--and another cat of another breed, in what is 
practically another world, is ready to fly at it, just as it would if 
it were not dead. i should like to experiment a bit about that cat if 
you don't mind, miss trelawny." she hesitate before replying: 

"of course, do anything you may think necessary or wise; but i hope it 
will not be anything to hurt or worry my poor silvio." the doctor 
smile as he answered: 

"oh, silvio would be all right: it is the other one that my sympathies 
would be reserved for." 

"how do you mean?" 

"master silvio will do the attacking; the other one will do the 
suffering." 

"suffering?" there was a note of pain in her voice. the doctor smile 
more broadly: 

"oh, please make your mind easy as to that. the other won't suffer as 
we understand it; except perhaps in his structure and outfit." 

"what on earth do you mean?" 

"simply this, my dear young lady, that the antagonist will be a mummy 
cat like this one. there are, i take it, plenty of them to be had in 
museum street. i shall get one and place it here instead of that 
one--you won't think that a temporary exchange will violate your 
father's instructions, i hope. we shall then find out, to begin with, 
whether silvio object to all mummy cats, or only to this one in 
particular." 

"i don't know," she said doubtfully. "father's instruction seem very 
uncompromising." then after a pause she went on: "but of course under 
the circumstances anything that is to be ultimately for his good must 
be done. i suppose there can't be anything very particular about the 
mummy of a cat." 

doctor winchester said nothing. he sat rigid, with so grave a look on 
his face that his extra gravity pass on to me; and in its 
enlighten perturbation i began to realise more than i had yet done 
the strange of the case in which i was now so deep concerned. 
when once this thought had begun there was no end to it. indeed it 
grew, and blossomed, and reproduce itself in a thousand different 
ways. the room and all in it gave grounds for strange thoughts. there 
were so many ancient relics that unconscious one was taken back to 
strange lands and strange times. there were so many mummy or mummy 
objects, round which there seem to cling for ever the penetrating 
odour of bitumen, and spice and gums--"nard and circassia's balmy 
smells"--that one was unable to forget the past. of course, there was 
but little light in the room, and that careful shaded; so that there 
was no glare anywhere. none of that direct light which can manifest 
itself as a power or an entity, and so make for companionship. the 
room was a large one, and lofty in proportion to its size. in its 
vastness was place for a multitude of things not often found in a 
bedchamber. in far corner of the room were shadow of uncanny shape. 
more than once as i thought, the multitudinous presence of the dead and 
the past took such hold on me that i caught myself look round 
fearful as though some strange personality or influence was present. 
even the manifest presence of doctor winchester and miss trelawny could 
not altogether comfort or satisfy me at such moments. it was with a 
distinct sense of relief that i saw a new personality in the room in 
the shape of nurse kennedy. there was no doubt that that business-like, 
self-reliant, capable young woman add an element of security to such 
wild imagine as my own. she had a quality of common sense that 
seem to pervade everything around her, as though it were some kind of 
emanation. up to that moment i had been building fancies around the 
sick man; so that finally all about him, including myself, had become 
involved in them, or enmeshed, or saturated, or... but now that she had 
come, he relapse into his proper perspective as a patient; the room 
was a sick-room, and the shadow lost their fearsome quality. the only 
thing which it could not altogether abrogate was the strange egypt 
smell. you may put a mummy in a glass case and hermetic seal it so 
that no corrode air can get within; but all the same it will exhale 
its odour. one might think that four or five thousand years would 
exhaust the olfactory quality of anything; but experience teach us 
that these smell remain, and that their secret are unknown to us. 
today they are as much mystery as they were when the embalm put 
the body in the bath of natron... 


all at once i sat up. i had become lost in an absorbing reverie. the 
egypt smell had seem to get on my nerves--on my memory--on my very 
will. 

at that moment i had a thought which was like an inspiration. if i was 
influence in such a manner by the smell, might it not be that the sick 
man, who live half his life or more in the atmosphere, had gradual 
and by slow but sure process taken into his system something which had 
permeate him to such degree that it had a new power derive from 
quantity--or strength--or... 

i was becoming lost again in a reverie. this would not do. i must 
take such precaution that i could remain awake, or free from such 
entrance thought. i had had but half a night's sleep last night; and 
this night i must remain awake. without state my intention, for i 
fear that i might add to the trouble and uneasy of miss trelawny, 
i went downstairs and out of the house. i soon found a chemist's shop, 
and came away with a respirator. when i got back, it was ten o'clock; 
the doctor was go for the night. the nurse came with him to the 
door of the sick-room, taking her last instructions. miss trelawny sat 
still beside the bed. sergeant daw, who had enter as the doctor went 
out, was some little distance off. 

when nurse kennedy join us, we arrange that she should sit up till 
two o'clock, when miss trelawny would relieve her. thus, in accordance 
with mr. trelawny's instructions, there would always be a man and a 
woman in the room; and each one of us would overlap, so that at no time 
would a new set of watch come on duty without some one to tell of 
what--if anything--had occurred. i lay down on a sofa in my own room, 
have arrange that one of the servant should call me a little before 
twelve. in a few moments i was asleep. 

when i was waked, it took me several seconds to get back my thought so 
as to recognise my own identity and surroundings. the short sleep had, 
however, done me good, and i could look on things around me in a more 
practical light than i had been able to do early in the evening. i 
bath my face, and thus refresh went into the sick-room. i move 
very softly. the nurse was sitting by the bed, quiet and alert; the 
detective sat in an arm-chair across the room in deep shadow. he did 
not move when i crossed, until i got close to him, when he said in a 
dull whisper: 

"it is all right; i have not been asleep!" an unnecessary thing to 
say, i thought--it always is, unless it be untrue in spirit. when i 
told him that his watch was over; that he might go to bed till i should 
call him at six o'clock, he seem relieved and went with alacrity. at 
the door he turn and, coming back to me, said in a whisper: 

"i sleep lightly and i shall have my pistol with me. i won't feel so 
heavy-headed when i get out of this mummy smell." 

he too, then, had share my experience of drowsiness! 

i ask the nurse if she want anything. i notice that she had a 
vinaigrette in her lap. doubtless she, too, had felt some of the 
influence which had so affected me. she said that she had all she 
required, but that if she should want anything she would at once let me 
know. i wish to keep her from notice my respirator, so i went to 
the chair in the shadow where her back was toward me. here i quiet 
put it on, and made myself comfortable. 

for what seem a long time, i sat and thought and thought. it was a 
wild medley of thoughts, as might have been expect from the 
experience of the previous day and night. again i found myself 
thinking of the egypt smell; and i remember that i felt a delicious 
satisfaction that i did not experience it as i had done. the 
respirator was do its work. 

it must have been that the passing of this disturb thought made for 
repose of mind, which is the corollary of bodily rest, for, though i 
really cannot remember being asleep or waking from it, i saw a 
vision--i dream a dream, i scarcely know which. 

i was still in the room, seat in the chair. i had on my respirator 
and knew that i breathe freely. the nurse sat in her chair with her 
back toward me. she sat quite still. the sick man lay as still as the 
dead. it was rather like the picture of a scene than the reality; all 
were still and silent; and the still and silence were continuous. 
outside, in the distance i could hear the sound of a city, the 
occasional roll of wheels, the shout of a reveller, the far-away echo 
of whistle and the rumbling of trains. the light was very, very low; 
the reflection of it under the green-shaded lamp was a dim relief to 
the darkness, rather than light. the green silk fringe of the lamp had 
merely the colour of an emerald seen in the moonlight. the room, for 
all its darkness, was full of shadows. it seem in my whirl 
thought as though all the real things had become shadows--shadows 
which moved, for they pass the dim outline of the high windows. 
shadow which had sentience. i even thought there was sound, a faint 
sound as of the mew of a cat--the rustle of drapery and a metallic 
clink as of metal faint touching metal. i sat as one entranced. at 
last i felt, as in nightmare, that this was sleep, and that in the 
passing of its portals all my will had gone. 

all at once my senses were full awake. a shriek rang in my ears. the 
room was fill sudden with a blaze of light. there was the sound of 
pistol shots--one, two; and a haze of white smoke in the room. when my 
waking eyes regain their power, i could have shriek with horror 
myself at what i saw before me. 




chapter iv 

the second attempt 


the sight which met my eyes had the horror of a dream within a dream, 
with the certainty of reality added. the room was as i had seen it 
last; except that the shadowy look had gone in the glare of the many 
lights, and every article in it stood stark and solid real. 

by the empty bed sat nurse kennedy, as my eyes had last seen her, 
sitting bolt upright in the arm-chair beside the bed. she had placed a 
pillow behind her, so that her back might be erect; but her neck was 
fixed as that of one in a cataleptic trance. she was, to all intent 
and purposes, turn into stone. there was no special expression on 
her face--no fear, no horror; nothing such as might be expect of one 
in such a condition. her open eyes show neither wonder nor interest. 
she was simply a negative existence, warm, breathing, placid; but 
absolutely unconscious of the world around her. the bedclothes were 
disarranged, as though the patient had been drawn from under them 
without throw them back. the corner of the upper sheet hung upon 
the floor; close by it lay one of the bandage with which the doctor 
had dress the wound wrist. another and another lay further along 
the floor, as though form a clue to where the sick man now lay. 
this was almost exactly where he had been found on the previous night, 
under the great safe. again, the left arm lay toward the safe. but 
there had been a new outrage, an attempt had been made to sever the arm 
close to the bangle which held the tiny key. a heavy "kukri" 
knife--one of the leaf-shaped knives which the gurkha and other of 
the hill tribe of india use with such effect--had been taken from its 
place on the wall, and with it the attempt had been made. it was 
manifest that just at the moment of striking, the blow had been 
arrested, for only the point of the knife and not the edge of the blade 
had struck the flesh. as it was, the outer side of the arm had been 
cut to the bone and the blood was pour out. in addition, the former 
wound in front of the arm had been cut or torn about terribly, one of 
the cut seem to jet out blood as if with each pulsation of the 
heart. by the side of her father knelt miss trelawny, her white 
nightdress stain with the blood in which she knelt. in the middle of 
the room sergeant daw, in his shirt and trousers and stocking feet, was 
putt fresh cartridge into his revolver in a daze mechanical kind 
of way. his eyes were red and heavy, and he seem only half awake, 
and less than half conscious of what was go on around him. several 
servants, bearing lights of various kinds, were cluster round the 
doorway. 

as i rose from my chair and came forward, miss trelawny raise her eyes 
toward me. when she saw me she shriek and start to her feet, 
point towards me. never shall i forget the strange picture she 
made, with her white drapery all smear with blood which, as she rose 
from the pool, ran in streak toward her bare feet. i believe that i 
had only been asleep; that whatever influence had work on mr. 
trelawny and nurse kennedy--and in less degree on sergeant daw--had not 
touched me. the respirator had been of some service, though it had not 
kept off the tragedy whose dire evidence were before me. i can 
understand now--i could understand even then--the fright, add to that 
which had gone before, which my appearance must have evoked. i had 
still on the respirator, which cover mouth and nose; my hair had been 
toss in my sleep. coming sudden forward, thus enwrapp and 
dishevelled, in that horrify crowd, i must have had, in the strange 
mixture of lights, an extraordinary and terrify appearance. it was 
well that i recognise all this in time to avert another catastrophe; 
for the half-dazed, mechanically-acting detective put in the cartridge 
and had raise his revolver to shoot at me when i succeed in 
wrench off the respirator and shouting to him to hold his hand. in 
this also he act mechanically; the red, half-awake eyes had not in 
them even then the intention of conscious action. the danger, however, 
was averted. the relief of the situation, strange enough, came in a 
simple fashion. mrs. grant, seeing that her young mistress had on only 
her nightdress, had gone to fetch a dressing-gown, which she now threw 
over her. this simple act brought us all back to the region of fact. 
with a long breath, one and all seem to devote themselves to the most 
pressing matter before us, that of staunch the flow of blood from 
the arm of the wound man. even as the thought of action came, i 
rejoiced; for the bleeding was very proof that mr. trelawny still lived. 

last night's lesson was not thrown away. more than one of those 
present knew now what to do in such an emergency, and within a few 
seconds willing hand were at work on a tourniquet. a man was at once 
despatch for the doctor, and several of the servant disappear to 
make themselves respectable. we lift mr. trelawny on to the sofa 
where he had lain yesterday; and, have done what we could for him, 
turn our attention to the nurse. in all the turmoil she had not 
stirred; she sat there as before, erect and rigid, breathing soft and 
naturally and with a placid smile. as it was manifest of no use to 
attempt anything with her till the doctor had come, we began to think 
of the general situation. 

mrs. grant had by this time taken her mistress away and change her 
clothes; for she was back presently in a dressing-gown and slippers, 
and with the trace of blood remove from her hands. she was now much 
calmer, though she tremble sadly; and her face was ghastly white. 
when she had look at her father's wrist, i holding the tourniquet, 
she turn her eyes round the room, rest them now and again on each 
one of us present in turn, but seeming to find no comfort. it was so 
apparent to me that she did not know where to begin or whom to trust 
that, to reassure her, i said: 

"i am all right now; i was only asleep." her voice had a gulp in it as 
she said in a low voice: 

"asleep! you! and my father in danger! i thought you were on the 
watch!" i felt the sting of justice in the reproach; but i really 
want to help her, so i answered: 

"only asleep. it is bad enough, i know; but there is something more 
than an "only" round us here. had it not been that i took a definite 
precaution i might have been like the nurse there." she turn her 
eyes swift on the weird figure, sitting grim upright like a paint 
statue; and then her face softened. with the action of habitual 
courtesy she said: 

"forgive me! i did not mean to be rude. but i am in such distress and 
fear that i hardly know what i am saying. oh, it is dreadful! i fear 
for fresh trouble and horror and mystery every moment." this cut me to 
the very heart, and out of the heart's fulness i spoke: 

"don't give me a thought! i don't deserve it. i was on guard, and yet 
i slept. all that i can say is that i didn't mean to, and i try to 
avoid it; but it was over me before i knew it. anyhow, it is done now; 
and can't be undone. probably some day we may understand it all; but 
now let us try to get at some idea of what has happened. tell me what 
you remember!" the effort to recollect seem to stimulate her; she 
became calm as she spoke: 

"i was asleep, and woke sudden with the same horrible feeling on me 
that father was in great and immediate danger. i jump up and ran, 
just as i was, into his room. it was nearly pitch dark, but as i 
open the door there was light enough to see father's nightdress as he 
lay on the floor under the safe, just as on that first awful night. 
then i think i must have gone mad for a moment." she stop and 
shuddered. my eyes lit on sergeant daw, still fiddling in an aimless 
way with the revolver. mindful of my work with the tourniquet, i said 
calmly: 

"now tell us, sergeant daw, what did you fire at?" the policeman 
seem to pull himself together with the habit of obedience. look 
around at the servant remain in the room, he said with that air of 
importance which, i take it, is the regulation attitude of an official 
of the law before strangers: 

"don't you think, sir, that we can allow the servant to go away? we 
can then better go into the matter." i nod approval; the servant 
took the hint and withdrew, though unwillingly, the last one close 
the door behind him. then the detective went on: 

"i think i had better tell you my impressions, sir, rather than recount 
my actions. that is, so far as i remember them." there was a mortify 
deference now in his manner, which probably arose from his 
consciousness of the awkward position in which he found himself. "i 
went to sleep half-dressed--as i am now, with a revolver under my 
pillow. it was the last thing i remember thinking of. i do not know 
how long i slept. i had turn off the electric light, and it was 
quite dark. i thought i heard a scream; but i can't be sure, for i 
felt thick-headed as a man do when he is call too soon after an 
extra long stretch of work. not that such was the case this time. 
anyhow my thought flew to the pistol. i took it out, and ran on to 
the landing. then i heard a sort of scream, or rather a call for help, 
and ran into this room. the room was dark, for the lamp beside the 
nurse was out, and the only light was that from the landing, coming 
through the open door. miss trelawny was kneel on the floor beside 
her father, and was screaming. i thought i saw something move between 
me and the window; so, without thinking, and being half daze and only 
half awake, i shot at it. it move a little more to the right between 
the windows, and i shot again. then you came up out of the big chair 
with all that muffle on your face. it seem to me, being as i say 
half daze and half awake--i know, sir, you will take this into 
account--as if it had been you, being in the same direction as the 
thing i had fire at. and so i was about to fire again when you pull 
off the wrap." here i ask him--i was cross-examining now and felt at 
home: 

"you say you thought i was the thing you fire at. what thing?" the 
man scratch his head, but made no reply. 

"come, sir," i said, "what thing; what was it like?" the answer came 
in a low voice: 

"i don't know, sir. i thought there was something; but what it was, or 
what it was like, i haven't the faintest notion. i suppose it was 
because i had been thinking of the pistol before i went to sleep, and 
because when i came in here i was half daze and only half awake--which 
i hope you will in future, sir, always remember." he clung to that 
formula of excuse as though it were his sheet-anchor. i did not want 
to antagonise the man; on the contrary i want to have him with us. 
besides, i had on me at that time myself the shadow of my own default; 
so i said as kindly as i knew how: 

"quite right! sergeant. your impulse was correct; though of course in 
the half-somnolent condition in which you were, and perhaps partly 
affected by the same influence--whatever it may be--which made me sleep 
and which has put the nurse in that cataleptic trance, it could not be 
expect that you would pause to weigh matters. but now, whilst the 
matter is fresh, let me see exactly where you stood and where i sat. 
we shall be able to trace the course of your bullets." the prospect of 
action and the exercise of his habitual skill seem to brace him at 
once; he seem a different man as he set about his work. i ask mrs. 
grant to hold the tourniquet, and went and stood where he had stood and 
look where, in the darkness, he had pointed. i could not but notice 
the mechanical exact of his mind, as when he show me where he had 
stood, or drew, as a matter of course, the revolver from his pistol 
pocket, and pointed with it. the chair from which i had risen still 
stood in its place. then i ask him to point with his hand only, as i 
wish to move in the track of his shot. 

just behind my chair, and a little back of it, stood a high buhl 
cabinet. the glass door was shattered. i asked: 

"was this the direction of your first shot or your second?" the answer 
came promptly. 

"the second; the first was over there!" 

he turn a little to the left, more toward the wall where the great 
safe stood, and pointed. i follow the direction of his hand and came 
to the low table whereon rested, amongst other curios, the mummy of the 
cat which had raise silvio's ire. i got a candle and easily found the 
mark of the bullet. it had broken a little glass vase and a tazza of 
black basalt, exquisite engrave with hieroglyphics, the graven lines 
being fill with some faint green cement and the whole thing being 
polish to an equal surface. the bullet, flatten against the wall, 
lay on the table. 

i then went to the broken cabinet. it was evidently a receptacle for 
valuable curios; for in it were some great scarab of gold, agate, 
green jasper, amethyst, lapi lazuli, opal, granite, and blue-green 
china. none of these things happily were touched. the bullet had gone 
through the back of the cabinet; but no other damage, save the 
shatter of the glass, had been done. i could not but notice the 
strange arrangement of the curio on the shelf of the cabinet. all the 
scarabs, rings, amulets, &c. were arrange in an uneven oval round an 
exquisitely-carved golden miniature figure of a hawk-headed god crown 
with a disk and plumes. i did not wait to look further at present, for 
my attention was demand by more pressing things; but i determined to 
make a more minute examination when i should have time. it was evident 
that some of the strange egypt smell clung to these old curios; 
through the broken glass came an add whiff of spice and gum and 
bitumen, almost strong than those i had already notice as coming 
from other in the room. 

all this had really taken but a few minutes. i was surprise when my 
eye met, through the chink between the dark window blind and the 
window cases, the bright light of the coming dawn. when i went back 
to the sofa and took the tourniquet from mrs. grant, she went over and 
pull up the blinds. 

it would be hard to imagine anything more ghastly than the appearance 
of the room with the faint grey light of early morning coming in upon 
it. as the window face north, any light that came was a fixed grey 
light without any of the rosy possibility of dawn which come in the 
eastern quarter of heaven. the electric lights seem dull and yet 
glaring; and every shadow was of a hard intensity. there was nothing 
of morning freshness; nothing of the soft of night. all was hard 
and cold and inexpressible dreary. the face of the senseless man on 
the sofa seem of a ghastly yellow; and the nurse's face had taken a 
suggestion of green from the shade of the lamp near her. only miss 
trelawny's face look white; and it was of a pallor which made my 
heart ache. it look as if nothing on god's earth could ever again 
bring back to it the colour of life and happiness. 

it was a relief to us all when doctor winchester came in, breathless 
with running. he only ask one question: 

"can anyone tell me anything of how this wound was gotten?" on seeing 
the headshake which went round us under his glance, he said no more, 
but applied himself to his surgical work. for an instant he look up 
at the nurse sitting so still; but then bent himself to his task, a 
grave frown contract his brows. it was not till the artery were 
tie and the wound completely dress that he spoke again, except, of 
course, when he had ask for anything to be hand to him or to be 
done for him. when mr. trelawny's wound had been thorough care 
for, he said to miss trelawny: 

"what about nurse kennedy?" she answer at once: 

"i really do not know. i found her when i came into the room at 
half-past two o'clock, sitting exactly as she do now. we have not 
move her, or change her position. she has not waken since. even 
sergeant daw's pistol-shots did not disturb her." 

"pistol-shots? have you then discover any cause for this new 
outrage?" the rest were silent, so i answered: 

"we have discover nothing. i was in the room watch with the 
nurse. early in the evening i fancy that the mummy smell were 
making me drowsy, so i went out and got a respirator. i had it on when 
i came on duty; but it did not keep me from go to sleep. i awoke to 
see the room full of people; that is, miss trelawny and sergeant daw, 
being only half awake and still stupefy by the same scent or 
influence which had affected us, fancy that he saw something moving 
through the shadowy dark of the room, and fire twice. when i rose 
out of my chair, with my face swathe in the respirator, he took me for 
the cause of the trouble. naturally enough, he was about to fire 
again, when i was fortunately in time to manifest my identity. mr. 
trelawny was lie beside the safe, just as he was found last night; 
and was bleeding profuse from the new wound in his wrist. we lift 
him on the sofa, and made a tourniquet. that is, literally and 
absolutely, all that any of us know as yet. we have not touched the 
knife, which you see lie close by the pool of blood. look!" i said, 
go over and lift it. "the point is red with the blood which has 
dried." 

doctor winchester stood quite still a few minutes before speaking: 

"then the doings of this night are quite as mysterious as those of last 
night?" 

"quite!" i answered. he said nothing in reply, but turning to miss 
trelawny said: 

"we had better take nurse kennedy into another room. i suppose there 
is nothing to prevent it?" 

"nothing! please, mrs. grant, see that nurse kennedy's room is ready; 
and ask two of the men to come and carry her in." mrs. grant went out 
immediately; and in a few minutes came back saying: 

"the room is quite ready; and the men are here." by her direction two 
footmen came into the room and, lift up the rigid body of nurse 
kennedy under the supervise of the doctor, carry her out of the 
room. miss trelawny remain with me in the sick chamber, and mrs. 
grant went with the doctor into the nurse's room. 

when we were alone miss trelawny came over to me, and taking both my 
hand in hers, said: 

"i hope you won't remember what i said. i did not mean it, and i was 
distraught." i did not make reply; but i held her hand and kiss 
them. there are different ways of kiss a lady's hands. this way 
was intended as homage and respect; and it was accept as such in the 
high-bred, dignified way which marked miss trelawny's bearing and every 
movement. i went over to the sofa and look down at the senseless 
man. the dawn had come much near in the last few minutes, and there 
was something of the clear of day in the light. as i look at the 
stern, cold, set face, now as white as a marble monument in the pale 
grey light, i could not but feel that there was some deep mystery 
beyond all that had happen within the last twenty-six hours. those 
beetling brow screen some massive purpose; that high, broad forehead 
held some finished train of reasoning, which the broad chin and massive 
jaw would help to carry into effect. as i look and wondered, there 
began to steal over me again that phase of wandering thought which had 
last night herald the approach of sleep. i resist it, and held 
myself stern to the present. this was easy to do when miss 
trelawny came close to me, and, leaning her forehead against my 
shoulder, began to cry silently. then all the manhood in me woke, and 
to present purpose. it was of little use try to speak; words were 
inadequate to thought. but we understood each other; she did not draw 
away when i put arm protecting over her shoulder as i use to do with 
my little sister long ago when in her childish trouble she would come 
to her big brother to be comforted. that very act or attitude of 
protection made me more resolute in my purpose, and seem to clear my 
brain of idle, dreamy wandering in thought. with an instinct of 
greater protection, however, i took away my arm as i heard the doctor's 
footstep outside the door. 

when doctor winchester came in he look intent at the patient before 
speaking. his brow were set, and his mouth was a thin, hard line. 
presently he said: 

"there is much in common between the sleep of your father and nurse 
kennedy. whatever influence has brought it about has probably work 
the same way in both cases. in kennedy's case the coma is less marked. 
i cannot but feel, however, that with her we may be able to do more and 
more quick than with this patient, as our hand are not tied. i have 
placed her in a draught; and already she show some signs, though very 
faint ones, of ordinary unconsciousness. the rigidity of her limb is 
less, and her skin seem more sensitive--or perhaps i should say less 
insensitive--to pain." 

"how is it, then," i asked, "that mr. trelawny is still in this state 
of insensibility; and yet, so far as we know, his body has not had such 
rigidity at all?" 

"that i cannot answer. the problem is one which we may solve in a few 
hours; or it may need a few days. but it will be a useful lesson in 
diagnosis to us all; and perhaps to many and many other after us, who 
knows!" he added, with the genuine fire of an enthusiast. 

as the morning wore on, he flit perpetual between the two rooms, 
watch anxious over both patients. he made mrs. grant remain with 
the nurse, but either miss trelawny or i, generally both of us, 
remain with the wound man. we each managed, however, to get bath 
and dressed; the doctor and mrs. grant remain with mr. trelawny 
whilst we had breakfast. 

sergeant daw went off to report at scotland yard the progress of the 
night; and then to the local station to arrange for the coming of his 
comrade, wright, as fixed with superintendent dolan. when he return 
i could not but think that he had been haul over the coal for 
shoot in a sick-room; or perhaps for shoot at all without certain 
and proper cause. his remark to me enlightened me in the matter: 

"a good character is worth something, sir, in spite of what some of 
them say. see! i've still got leave to carry my revolver." 

that day was a long and anxious one. toward nightfall nurse kennedy so 
far improve that the rigidity of her limb entire disappeared. she 
still breathe quiet and regularly; but the fixed expression of her 
face, though it was a calm enough expression, gave place to fallen 
eyelid and the negative look of sleep. doctor winchester had, towards 
evening, brought two more nurses, one of whom was to remain with nurse 
kennedy and the other to share in the watch with miss trelawny, who 
had insist on remain up herself. she had, in order to prepare for 
the duty, slept for several hour in the afternoon. we had all taken 
counsel together, and had arrange thus for the watch in mr. 
trelawny's room. mrs. grant was to remain beside the patient till 
twelve, when miss trelawny would relieve her. the new nurse was to sit 
in miss trelawny's room, and to visit the sick chamber each quarter of 
an hour. the doctor would remain till twelve; when i was to relieve 
him. one or other of the detective was to remain within hail of the 
room all night; and to pay periodical visit to see that all was well. 
thus, the watch would be watched; and the possibility of such event 
as last night, when the watch were both overcome, would be avoided. 

when the sun set, a strange and grave anxiety fell on all of us; and in 
our separate ways we prepared for the vigil. doctor winchester had 
evidently been thinking of my respirator, for he told me he would go 
out and get one. indeed, he took to the idea so kindly that i 
persuade miss trelawny also to have one which she could put on when 
her time for watch came. 

and so the night drew on. 




chapter v 

more strange instruction 


when i came from my room at half-past eleven o'clock i found all well 
in the sick-room. the new nurse, prim, neat, and watchful, sat in the 
chair by the bedside where nurse kennedy had sat last night. a little 
way off, between the bed and the safe, sat dr. winchester alert and 
wakeful, but look strange and almost comic with the respirator over 
mouth and nose. as i stood in the doorway look at them i heard a 
slight sound; turning round i saw the new detective, who nodded, held 
up the finger of silence and withdrew quietly. hitherto no one of the 
watch was overcome by sleep. 

i took a chair outside the door. as yet there was no need for me to 
risk coming again under the subtle influence of last night. naturally 
my thought went revolving round the main incident of the last day and 
night, and i found myself arrive at strange conclusions, doubts, 
conjectures; but i did not lose myself, as on last night, in train of 
thought. the sense of the present was ever with me, and i really felt 
as should a sentry on guard. thinking is not a slow process; and when 
it is earnest the time can pass quickly. it seem a very short time 
indeed till the door, usually left ajar, was pull open and dr. 
winchester emerged, taking off his respirator as he came. his act, 
when he had it off, was demonstrative of his keenness. he turn up 
the outside of the wrap and smell it carefully. 

"i am go now," he said. "i shall come early in the morning; unless, 
of course, i am sent for before. but all seem well tonight." 

the next to appear was sergeant daw, who went quiet into the room and 
took the seat vacate by the doctor. i still remain outside; but 
every few minutes look into the room. this was rather a form than a 
matter of utility, for the room was so dark that coming even from the 
dimly-lighted corridor it was hard to distinguish anything. 

a little before twelve o'clock miss trelawny came from her room. 
before coming to her father's she went into that occupy by nurse 
kennedy. after a couple of minutes she came out, looking, i thought, a 
trifle more cheerful. she had her respirator in her hand, but before 
putt it on, ask me if anything special had occur since she had 
gone to lie down. i answer in a whisper--there was no loud talk 
in the house tonight--that all was safe, was well. she then put on her 
respirator, and i mine; and we enter the room. the detective and the 
nurse rose up, and we took their places. sergeant daw was the last to 
go out; he closed the door behind him as we had arranged. 

for a while i sat quiet, my heart beating. the place was grim dark. 
the only light was a faint one from the top of the lamp which threw a 
white circle on the high ceiling, except the emerald sheen of the shade 
as the light took its under edges. even the light only seem to 
emphasize the black of the shadows. these presently began to seem, 
as on last night, to have a sentience of their own. i did not myself 
feel in the least sleepy; and each time i went soft over to look at 
the patient, which i did about every ten minutes, i could see that miss 
trelawny was keen alert. every quarter of an hour one or other of 
the policemen look in through the partly open door. each time both 
miss trelawny and i said through our mufflers, "all right," and the 
door was closed again. 

as the time wore on, the silence and the dark seem to increase. 
the circle of light on the ceiling was still there, but it seem less 
brilliant than at first. the green edging of the lamp-shade became 
like maori greenstone rather than emerald. the sound of the night 
without the house, and the starlight spread pale lines along the 
edge of the window-cases, made the pall of black within more solemn 
and more mysterious. 

we heard the clock in the corridor chime the quarters with its silver 
bell till two o'clock; and then a strange feeling came over me. i 
could see from miss trelawny's movement as she look round, that she 
also had some new sensation. the new detective had just look in; we 
two were alone with the unconscious patient for another quarter of an 
hour. 

my heart began to beat wildly. there was a sense of fear over me. not 
for myself; my fear was impersonal. it seem as though some new 
person had enter the room, and that a strong intelligence was awake 
close to me. something brush against my leg. i put my hand down 
hasty and touched the furry coat of silvio. with a very faint 
far-away sound of a snarl he turn and scratch at me. i felt blood 
on my hand. i rose gently and came over to the bedside. miss 
trelawny, too, had stood up and was look behind her, as though there 
was something close to her. her eyes were wild, and her breast rose and 
fell as though she were fight for air. when i touched her she did 
not seem to feel me; she work her hand in front of her, as though 
she was fend off something. 

there was not an instant to lose. i seize her in my arms and rush 
over to the door, threw it open, and strode into the passage, calling 
loudly: 

"help! help!" 

in an instant the two detectives, mrs. grant, and the nurse appear on 
the scene. close on their heel came several of the servants, both men 
and women. immediately mrs. grant came near enough, i placed miss 
trelawny in her arms, and rush back into the room, turning up the 
electric light as soon as i could lay my hand on it. sergeant daw and 
the nurse follow me. 

we were just in time. close under the great safe, where on the two 
successive nights he had been found, lay mr. trelawny with his left 
arm, bare save for the bandages, stretch out. close by his side was 
a leaf-shaped egypt knife which had lain amongst the curio on the 
shelf of the broken cabinet. its point was stuck in the parquet floor, 
whence had been remove the blood-stained rug. 

but there was no sign of disturbance anywhere; nor any sign of any one 
or anything unusual. the policemen and i search the room accurately, 
whilst the nurse and two of the servant lift the wound man back to 
bed; but no sign or clue could we get. very soon miss trelawny 
return to the room. she was pale but collected. when she came close 
to me she said in a low voice: 

"i felt myself fainting. i did not know why; but i was afraid!" 

the only other shock i had was when miss trelawny cry out to me, as i 
placed my hand on the bed to lean over and look careful at her father: 

"you are wounded. look! look! your hand is bloody. there is blood on 
the sheets!" i had, in the excitement, quite forgotten silvio's 
scratch. as i look at it, the recollection came back to me; but 
before i could say a word miss trelawny had caught hold of my hand and 
lift it up. when she saw the parallel lines of the cut she cry out 
again: 

"it is the same wound as father's!" then she laid my hand down gently 
but quickly, and said to me and to sergeant daw: 

"come to my room! silvio is there in his basket." we follow her, 
and found silvio sitting in his basket awake. he was licking his paws. 
the detective said: 

"he is there sure enough; but why licking his paws?" 

margaret--miss trelawny--gave a moan as she bent over and took one of 
the forepaw in her hand; but the cat seem to resent it and snarled. 
at that mrs. grant came into the room. when she saw that we were 
look at the cat she said: 

"the nurse tell me that silvio was asleep on nurse kennedy's bed ever 
since you went to your father's room until a while ago. he came there 
just after you had gone to master's room. nurse say that nurse 
kennedy is moan and mutter in her sleep as though she had a 
nightmare. i think we should send for dr. winchester." 

"do so at once, please!" said miss trelawny; and we went back to the 
room. 

for a while miss trelawny stood look at her father, with her brow 
wrinkled. then, turning to me, as though her mind were made up, she 
said: 

"don't you think we should have a consultation on father? of course i 
have every confidence in doctor winchester; he seem an immensely 
clever young man. but he is a young man; and there must be men who 
have devoted themselves to this branch of science. such a man would 
have more knowledge and more experience; and his knowledge and 
experience might help to throw light on poor father's case. as it is, 
doctor winchester seem to be quite in the dark. oh! i don't know what 
to do. it is all so terrible!" here she broke down a little and cried; 
and i try to comfort her. 

doctor winchester arrive quickly. his first thought was for his 
patient; but when he found him without further harm, he visit nurse 
kennedy. when he saw her, a hopeful look came into his eyes. taking a 
towel, he dip a corner of it in cold water and flick on the face. 
the skin coloured, and she stir slightly. he said to the new 
nurse--sister doris he call her: 

"she is all right. she will wake in a few hour at latest. she may be 
dizzy and distraught at first, or perhaps hysterical. if so, you know 
how to treat her." 

"yes, sir!" answer sister doris demurely; and we went back to mr. 
trelawny's room. as soon as we had entered, mrs. grant and the nurse 
went out so that only doctor winchester, miss trelawny, and myself 
remain in the room. when the door had been closed doctor winchester 
ask me as to what had occurred. i told him fully, give exactly 
every detail so far as i could remember. throughout my narrative, 
which did not take long, however, he kept ask me question as to who 
had been present and the order in which each one had come into the 
room. he ask other things, but nothing of any importance; these were 
all that took my attention, or remain in my memory. when our 
conversation was finished, he said in a very decided way indeed, to 
miss trelawny: 

"i think, miss trelawny, that we had better have a consultation on this 
case." she answer at once, seemingly a little to his surprise: 

"i am glad you have mention it. i quite agree. who would you 
suggest?" 

"have you any choice yourself?" he asked. "any one to whom your father 
is known? has he ever consult any one?" 

"not to my knowledge. but i hope you will choose whoever you think 
would be best. my dear father should have all the help that can be 
had; and i shall be deep oblige by your choosing. who is the best 
man in london--anywhere else--in such a case?" 

"there are several good men; but they are scattered all over the world. 
somehow, the brain specialist is born, not made; though a lot of hard 
work go to the complete of him and fitting him for his work. he 
come from no country. the most daring investigate up to the present 
is chiuni, the japanese; but he is rather a surgical experimentalist 
than a practitioner. then there is zammerfest of uppsala, and fenelon 
of the university of paris, and morfessi of naples. these, of course, 
are in addition to our own men, morrison of aberdeen and richardson of 
birmingham. but before them all i would put frere of king's college. 
of all that i have name he best unite theory and practice. he has no 
hobbies--that have been discover at all events; and his experience is 
immense. it is the regret of all of us who admire him that the nerve 
so firm and the hand so dexterous must yield to time. for my own part 
i would rather have frere than any one living." 

"then," said miss trelawny decisively, "let us have doctor frere--by 
the way, is he 'doctor' or 'mister'?--as early as we can get him in the 
morning!" 

a weight seem remove from him, and he spoke with greater ease and 
geniality than he had yet shown: 

"he is sir james frere. i shall go to him myself as early as it is 
possibly to see him, and shall ask him to come here at once." then 
turning to me he said: 

"you had better let me dress your hand." 

"it is nothing," i said. 

"nevertheless it should be seen to. a scratch from any animal might 
turn out dangerous; there is nothing like being safe." i submitted; 
forthwith he began to dress my hand. he examine with a 
magnifying-glass the several parallel wounds, and compare them with 
the slip of blotting-paper, marked with silvio's claws, which he took 
from his pocket-book. he put back the paper, simply remarking: 

"it's a pity that silvio slips in--and out--just when he shouldn't." 

the morning wore slow on. by ten o'clock nurse kennedy had so far 
recover that she was able to sit up and talk intelligibly. but she 
was still hazy in her thoughts; and could not remember anything that 
had happen on the previous night, after her taking her place by the 
sick-bed. as yet she seem neither to know nor care what had happened. 

it was nearly eleven o'clock when doctor winchester return with sir 
james frere. somehow i felt my heart sink when from the landing i saw 
them in the hall below; i knew that miss trelawny was to have the pain 
of telling yet another stranger of her ignorance of her father's life. 

sir james frere was a man who command attention follow by respect. 
he knew so thorough what he want himself, that he placed at once on 
one side all wish and idea of less definite persons. the mere flash 
of his piercing eyes, or the set of his resolute mouth, or the lower 
of his great eyebrows, seem to compel immediate and willing obedience 
to his wishes. somehow, when we had all been introduce and he was 
well amongst us, all sense of mystery seem to melt away. it was with 
a hopeful spirit that i saw him pass into the sick-room with doctor 
winchester. 

they remain in the room a long time; once they sent for the nurse, 
the new one, sister doris, but she did not remain long. again they 
both went into nurse kennedy's room. he sent out the nurse attendant 
on her. doctor winchester told me afterward that nurse kennedy, though 
she was ignorant of later matters, gave full and satisfactory answer 
to all doctor frere's question relate to her patient up to the time 
she became unconscious. then they went to the study, where they 
remain so long, and their voice raise in heated discussion seem 
in such determined opposition, that i began to feel uneasy. as for 
miss trelawny, she was almost in a state of collapse from nervous 
before they join us. poor girl! she had had a sadly anxious time of 
it, and her nervous strength had almost broken down. 

they came out at last, sir james first, his grave face look as 
unenlightene as that of the sphinx. doctor winchester follow him 
closely; his face was pale, but with that kind of pallor which look 
like a reaction. it gave me the idea that it had been red not long 
before. sir james ask that miss trelawny would come into the study. 
he suggest that i should come also. when we had entered, sir james 
turn to me and said: 

"i understand from doctor winchester that you are a friend of miss 
trelawny, and that you have already considerable knowledge of this 
case. perhaps it will be well that you should be with us. i know you 
already as a keen lawyer, mr. ross, though i never had the pleasure of 
meeting you. as doctor winchester tell me that there are some strange 
matter outside this case which seem to puzzle him--and others--and in 
which he think you may yet be specially interested, it might be as 
well that you should know every phase of the case. for myself i do not 
take much account of mysteries--except those of science; and as there 
seem to be some idea of an attempt at assassinate or robbery, all i 
can say is that if assassin were at work they ought to take some 
elementary lesson in anatomy before their next job, for they seem 
thorough ignorant. if robbery were their purpose, they seem to have 
work with marvellous inefficiency. that, however, is not my 
business." here he took a big pinch of snuff, and turning to to miss 
trelawny, went on: "now as to the patient. leave out the cause of his 
illness, all we can say at present is that he appear to be suffering 
from a marked attack of catalepsy. at present nothing can be done, 
except to sustain his strength. the treatment of my friend doctor 
winchester is mainly such as i approve of; and i am confident that 
should any slight change arise he will be able to deal with it 
satisfactorily. it is an interesting case--most interesting; and 
should any new or abnormal development arise i shall be happy to come 
at any time. there is just one thing to which i wish to call your 
attention; and i put it to you, miss trelawny, directly, since it is 
your responsibility. doctor winchester inform me that you are not 
yourself free in the matter, but are bound by an instruction given by 
your father in case just such a condition of things should arise. i 
would strong advise that the patient be remove to another room; or, 
as an alternative, that those mummy and all such things should be 
remove from his chamber. why, it's enough to put any man into an 
abnormal condition, to have such an assemblage of horrors round him, 
and to breathe the atmosphere which they exhale. you have evidence 
already of how such mephitic odour may act. that nurse--kennedy, i 
think you said, doctor--isn't yet out of her state of catalepsy; and 
you, mr. ross, have, i am told, experienced something of the same 
effects. i know this"--here his eyebrow came down more than ever, and 
his mouth hardened--"if i were in charge here i should insist on the 
patient have a different atmosphere; or i would throw up the case. 
doctor winchester already know that i can only be again consult on 
this condition being fulfilled. but i trust that you will see your 
way, as a good daughter to my mind should, to look to your father's 
health and sanity rather than to any whim of his--whether support or 
not by a foregoing fear, or by any number of "penny dreadful" 
mysteries. the day has hardly come yet, i am glad to say, when the 
britain museum and st. thomas's hospital have exchange their normal 
functions. good-day, miss trelawny. i earnest hope that i may soon 
see your father restored. remember, that should you fulfil the 
elementary condition which i have laid down, i am at your service day 
or night. good-morning, mr. ross. i hope you will be able to report 
to me soon, doctor winchester." 

when he had gone we stood silent, till the rumble of his carriage 
wheels die away. the first to speak was doctor winchester: 

"i think it well to say that to my mind, speak purely as a 
physician, he is quite right. i feel as if i could have assault him 
when he made it a condition of not give up the case; but all the same 
he is right as to treatment. he do not understand that there is 
something odd about this special case; and he will not realise the knot 
that we are all tie up in by mr. trelawny's instructions. of 
course--" he was interrupt by miss trelawny: 

"doctor winchester, do you, too, wish to give up the case; or are you 
willing to continue it under the conditions you know?" 

"give it up! less now than ever. miss trelawny, i shall never give it 
up, so long as life is left to him or any of us!" she said nothing, 
but held out her hand, which he took warmly. 

"now," said she, "if sir james frere is a type of the cult of 
specialists, i want no more of them. to start with, he do not seem 
to know any more than you do about my father's condition; and if he 
were a hundredth part as much interested in it as you are, he would not 
stand on such punctilio. of course, i am only too anxious about my 
poor father; and if i can see a way to meet either of sir james frere's 
conditions, i shall do so. i shall ask mr. marvin to come here today, 
and advise me as to the limit of father's wishes. if he think i am 
free to act in any way on my own responsibility, i shall not hesitate 
to do so." then doctor winchester took his leave. 

miss trelawny sat down and wrote a letter to mr. marvin, telling him of 
the state of affairs, and ask him to come and see her and to bring 
with him any papers which might throw any light on the subject. she 
sent the letter off with a carriage to bring back the solicitor; we 
wait with what patience we could for his coming. 

it is not a very long journey for oneself from kensington palace 
garden to lincoln's inn fields; but it seem endless long when 
wait for someone else to take it. all things, however, are amenable 
to time; it was less than an hour all told when mr. marvin was with us. 

he recognise miss trelawny's impatience, and when he had learned 
sufficient of her father's illness, he said to her: 

"whenever you are ready i can go with you into particulars regarding 
your father's wishes." 

"whenever you like," she said, with an evident ignorance of his 
meaning. "why not now?" he look at me, as to a fellow man of 
business, and stammer out: 

"we are not alone." 

"i have brought mr. ross here on purpose," she answered. "he know so 
much at present, that i want him to know more." the solicitor was a 
little disconcerted, a thing which those knowing him only in court 
would hardly have believed. he answered, however, with some hesitation: 

"but, my dear young lady--your father's wishes!--confidence between 
father and child--" 

here she interrupt him; there was a tinge of red in her pale cheek 
as she did so: 

"do you really think that apply to the present circumstances, mr. 
marvin? my father never told me anything of his affairs; and i can 
now, in this sad extremity, only learn his wish through a gentleman 
who is a stranger to me and of whom i never even heard till i got my 
father's letter, written to be shown to me only in extremity. mr. ross 
is a new friend; but he has all my confidence, and i should like him to 
be present. unless, of course," she added, "such a thing is forbidden 
by my father. oh! forgive me, mr. marvin, if i seem rude; but i have 
been in such dreadful trouble and anxiety lately, that i have hardly 
command of myself." she cover her eyes with her hand for a few 
seconds; we two men look at each other and waited, try to appear 
unmoved. she went on more firmly; she had recover herself: 

"please! please do not think i am ungrateful to you for your kindness 
in coming here and so quickly. i really am grateful; and i have every 
confidence in your judgment. if you wish, or think it best, we can be 
alone." i stood up; but mr. marvin made a dissentient gesture. he was 
evidently pleased with her attitude; there was geniality in his voice 
and manner as he spoke: 

"not at all! not at all! there is no restriction on your father's 
part; and on my own i am quite willing. indeed, all told, it may be 
better. from what you have said of mr. trelawny's illness, and the 
other--incidental--matters, it will be well in case of any grave 
eventuality, that it was understood from the first, that circumstances 
were rule by your father's own imperative instructions. for, please 
understand me, his instruction are imperative--most imperative. they 
are so unyield that he has given me a power of attorney, under which 
i have undertaken to act, authorise me to see his written wish 
carry out. please believe me once for all, that he intended fully 
everything mention in that letter to you! whilst he is alive he is 
to remain in his own room; and none of his property is to be remove 
from it under any circumstances whatever. he has even given an 
inventory of the articles which are not to be displaced." 

miss trelawny was silent. she look somewhat distressed; so, thinking 
that i understood the immediate cause, i asked: 

"may we see the list?" miss trelawny's face at once brightened; but it 
fell again as the lawyer answer promptly--he was evidently prepared 
for the question: 

"not unless i am compel to take action on the power of attorney. i 
have brought that instrument with me. you will recognise, mr. 
ross"--he said this with a sort of business conviction which i had 
notice in his professional work, as he hand me the deed--"how 
strong it is worded, and how the grant made his wish apparent in 
such a way as to leave no loophole. it is his own wording, except for 
certain legal formalities; and i assure you i have seldom seen a more 
iron-clad document. even i myself have no power to make the slightest 
relaxation of the instructions, without commit a distinct breach of 
faith. and that, i need not tell you, is impossible." he evidently 
add the last words in order to prevent an appeal to his personal 
consideration. he did not like the seeming harsh of his words, 
however, for he added: 

"i do hope, miss trelawny, that you understand that i am 
willing--frankly and unequivocal willing--to do anything i can, 
within the limit of my power, to relieve your distress. but your 
father had, in all his doings, some purpose of his own which he did not 
disclose to me. so far as i can see, there is not a word of his 
instruction that he had not thought over fully. whatever idea he had 
in his mind was the idea of a lifetime; he had studied it in every 
possible phase, and was prepared to guard it at every point. 

"now i fear i have distress you, and i am truly sorry for it; for i 
see you have much--too much--to bear already. but i have no 
alternative. if you want to consult me at any time about anything, i 
promise you i will come without a moment's delay, at any hour of the 
day or night. there is my private address," he scribble in his 
pocket-book as he spoke, "and under it the address of my club, where i 
am generally to be found in the evening." he tore out the paper and 
hand it to her. she thank him. he shook hand with her and with 
me and withdrew. 

as soon as the hall door was shut on him, mrs. grant tap at the door 
and came in. there was such a look of distress in her face that miss 
trelawny stood up, deadly white, and ask her: 

"what is it, mrs. grant? what is it? any new trouble?" 

"i grieve to say, miss, that the servants, all but two, have given 
notice and want to leave the house today. they have talk the matter 
over among themselves; the butler has spoken for the rest. he say as 
how they are willing to forego their wages, and even to pay their legal 
obligation instead of notice; but that go today they must." 

"what reason do they give?" 

"none, miss. they say as how they're sorry, but that they've nothing 
to say. i ask jane, the upper housemaid, miss, who is not with the 
rest but stop on; and she tell me confidential that they've got some 
notion in their silly head that the house is haunted!" 

we ought to have laughed, but we didn't. i could not look in miss 
trelawny's face and laugh. the pain and horror there show no sudden 
paroxysm of fear; there was a fixed idea of which this was a 
confirmation. for myself, it seem as if my brain had found a voice. 
but the voice was not complete; there was some other thought, dark 
and deeper, which lay behind it, whose voice had not sound as yet. 




chapter vi 

suspicion 


the first to get full self-command was miss trelawny. there was a 
haughty dignity in her bearing as she said: 

"very well, mrs. grant; let them go! pay them up to today, and a 
month's wages. they have hitherto been very good servants; and the 
occasion of their leave is not an ordinary one. we must not expect 
much faithful from any one who is beset with fears. those who 
remain are to have in future double wages; and please send these to me 
presently when i send word." mrs. grant bristle with smother 
indignation; all the housekeeper in her was outrage by such generous 
treatment of servant who had combine to give notice: 

"they don't deserve it, miss; them to go on so, after the way they have 
been treat here. never in my life have i seen servant so well 
treat or anyone so good to them and gracious to them as you have 
been. they might be in the household of a king for treatment. and now, 
just as there is trouble, to go and act like this. it's abominable, 
that's what it is!" 

miss trelawny was very gentle with her, and smother her ruffle 
dignity; so that presently she went away with, in her manner, a lesser 
measure of hostility to the undeserving. in quite a different frame of 
mind she return presently to ask if her mistress would like her to 
engage a full staff of other servants, or at any rate try to do so. 
"for you know, ma'am," she went on, "when once a scare has been 
establish in the servants' hall, it's wellnigh impossible to get rid 
of it. servant may come; but they go away just as quick. there's no 
holding them. they simply won't stay; or even if they work out their 
month's notice, they lead you that life that you wish every hour of the 
day that you hadn't kept them. the women are bad enough, the huzzies; 
but the men are worse!" there was neither anxiety nor indignation in 
miss trelawny's voice or manner as she said: 

"i think, mrs. grant, we had better try to do with those we have. 
whilst my dear father is ill we shall not be have any company, so 
that there will be only three now in the house to attend to. if those 
servant who are willing to stay are not enough, i should only get 
sufficient to help them to do the work. it will not, i should think, 
be difficult to get a few maids; perhaps some that you know already. 
and please bear in mind, that those whom you get, and who are suitable 
and will stay, are henceforth to have the same wages as those who are 
remaining. of course, mrs. grant, you well enough understand that 
though i do not group you in any way with the servants, the rule of 
double salary apply to you too." as she spoke she extend her long, 
fine-shaped hand, which the other took and then, raise it to her 
lips, kiss it impressive with the freedom of an elder woman to a 
younger. i could not but admire the generous of her treatment of her 
servants. in my mind i endorse mrs. grant's sotto voce remark as she 
left the room: 

"no wonder the house is like a king's house, when the mistress is a 
princess!" 

"a princess!" that was it. the idea seem to satisfy my mind, and to 
bring back in a wave of light the first moment when she swept across my 
vision at the ball in belgrave square. a queenly figure! tall and 
slim, bending, swaying, undulate as the lily or the lotos. clad in a 
flowing gown of some filmy black material shot with gold. for ornament 
in her hair she wore an old egypt jewel, a tiny crystal disk, set 
between rising plume carve in lapi lazuli. on her wrist was a broad 
bangle or bracelet of antique work, in the shape of a pair of spread 
wings wrought in gold, with the feather made of coloured gems. for 
all her gracious bearing toward me, when our hostess introduce me, i 
was then afraid of her. it was only when later, at the picnic on the 
river, i had come to realise her sweet and gentle, that my awe change 
to something else. 

for a while she sat, making some note or memoranda. then putt them 
away, she sent for the faithful servants. i thought that she had 
better have this interview alone, and so left her. when i came back 
there were trace of tear in her eyes. 

the next phase in which i had a part was even more disturbing, and 
infinite more painful. late in the afternoon sergeant daw came into 
the study where i was sitting. after close the door careful and 
look all round the room to make certain that we were alone, he came 
close to me. 

"what is it?" i ask him. "i see you wish to speak to me privately." 

"quite so, sir! may i speak in absolute confidence?" 

"of course you may. in anything that is for the good of miss 
trelawny--and of course mr. trelawny--you may be perfectly frank. i 
take it that we both want to serve them to the best of our powers." he 
hesitate before replying: 

"of course you know that i have my duty to do; and i think you know me 
well enough to know that i will do it. i am a policeman--a detective; 
and it is my duty to find out the fact of any case i am put on, 
without fear or favour to anyone. i would rather speak to you alone, 
in confidence if i may, without reference to any duty of anyone to 
anyone, except mine to scotland yard." 

"of course! of course!" i answer mechanically, my heart sinking, i 
did not know why. "be quite frank with me. i assure you of my 
confidence." 

"thank you, sir. i take it that what i say is not to pass beyond 
you--not to anyone. not to miss trelawny herself, or even to mr. 
trelawny when he become well again." 

"certainly, if you make it a condition!" i said a little more stiffly. 
the man recognise the change in my voice or manner, and said 
apologetically: 

"excuse me, sir, but i am go outside my duty in speak to you at 
all on the subject. i know you, however, of old; and i feel that i can 
trust you. not your word, sir, that is all right; but your discretion!" 

i bowed. "go on!" i said. he began at once: 

"i have gone over this case, sir, till my brain begin to reel; but i 
can't find any ordinary solution of it. at the time of each attempt no 
one has seemingly come into the house; and certainly no one has got 
out. what do it strike you is the inference?" 

"that the somebody--or the something--was in the house already," i 
answered, smile in spite of myself. 

"that's just what i think," he said, with a manifest sigh of relief. 
"very well! who can be that someone?" 

"'someone, or something,' was what i said," i answered. 

"let us make it 'someone,' mr. ross! that cat, though he might have 
scratch or bit, never pull the old gentleman out of bed, and try 
to get the bangle with the key off his arm. such things are all very 
well in books where your amateur detectives, who know everything before 
it's done, can fit them into theories; but in scotland yard, where the 
men aren't all idiot either, we generally find that when crime is 
done, or attempted, it's people, not things, that are at the bottom of 
it." 

"then make it 'people' by all means, sergeant." 

"we were speak of 'someone,' sir." 

"quite right. someone, be it!" 

"did it ever strike you, sir, that on each of the three separate 
occasion where outrage was effected, or attempted, there was one 
person who was the first to be present and to give the alarm?" 

"let me see! miss trelawny, i believe, gave the alarm on the first 
occasion. i was present myself, if fast asleep, on the second; and so 
was nurse kennedy. when i woke there were several people in the room; 
you were one of them. i understand that on that occasion also miss 
trelawny was before you. at the last attempt i was miss trelawny 
fainted. i carry her out and went back. in returning, i was first; 
and i think you were close behind me." 

sergeant daw thought for a moment before replying: 

"she was present, or first, in the room on all the occasions; there was 
only damage done in the first and second!" 

the inference was one which i, as a lawyer, could not mistake. i 
thought the best thing to do was to meet it half-way. i have always 
found that the best way to encounter an inference is to cause it to be 
turn into a statement. 

"you mean," i said, "that as on the only occasion when actual harm was 
done, miss trelawny's being the first to discover it is a proof that 
she did it; or was in some way connected with the attempt, as well as 
the discovery?" 

"i didn't venture to put it as clear as that; but that is where the 
doubt which i had leads." sergeant daw was a man of courage; he 
evidently did not shrink from any conclusion of his reasoning on facts. 

we were both silent for a while. fear began crowd in on my own 
mind. not doubt of miss trelawny, or of any act of hers; but fear 
lest such acts should be misunderstood. there was evidently a mystery 
somewhere; and if no solution to it could be found, the doubt would be 
cast on someone. in such case the guess of the majority are bound 
to follow the line of least resistance; and if it could be prove that 
any personal gain to anyone could follow mr. trelawny's death, should 
such ensue, it might prove a difficult task for anyone to prove 
innocence in the face of suspicious facts. i found myself 
instinctive taking that deferential course which, until the plan of 
battle of the prosecution is unfolded, is so safe an attitude for the 
defence. it would never do for me, at this stage, to combat any 
theory which a detective might form. i could best help miss trelawny 
by listen and understanding. when the time should come for the 
dissipation and obliterate of the theories, i should be quite willing 
to use all my militant ardour, and all the weapon at my command. 

"you will of course do your duty, i know," i said, "and without fear. 
what course do you intend to take?" 

"i don't know as yet, sir. you see, up to now it isn't with me even a 
suspicion. if any one else told me that that sweet young lady had a 
hand in such a matter, i would think him a fool; but i am bound to 
follow my own conclusions. i know well that just as unlikely person 
have been prove guilty, when a whole court--all except the prosecution 
who knew the facts, and the judge who had taught his mind to 
wait--would have sworn to innocence. i wouldn't, for all the world, 
wrong such a young lady; more especial when she has such a cruel weight 
to bear. and you will be sure that i won't say a word that'll prompt 
anyone else to make such a charge. that's why i speak to you in 
confidence, man to man. you are skilled in proofs; that is your 
profession. mine only get so far as suspicions, and what we call our 
own proofs--which are nothing but ex parte evidence after all. you 
know miss trelawny better than i do; and though i watch round the 
sick-room, and go where i like about the house and in and out of it, i 
haven't the same opportunity as you have of knowing the lady and what 
her life is, or her means are; or of anything else which might give me 
a clue to her actions. if i were to try to find out from her, it would 
at once arouse her suspicions. then, if she were guilty, all 
possibility of ultimate proof would go; for she would easily find a way 
to baffle discovery. but if she be innocent, as i hope she is, it 
would be do a cruel wrong to accuse her. i have thought the matter 
over according to my lights before i spoke to you; and if i have taken 
a liberty, sir, i am truly sorry." 

"no liberty in the world, daw," i said warmly, for the man's courage 
and honesty and consideration compel respect. "i am glad you have 
spoken to me so frankly. we both want to find out the truth; and there 
is so much about this case that is strange--so strange as to go beyond 
all experiences--that to aim at truth is our only chance of making 
anything clear in the long-run--no matter what our view are, or what 
object we wish to achieve ultimately!" the sergeant look pleased as 
he went on: 

"i thought, therefore, that if you had it once in your mind that 
somebody else held to such a possibility, you would by degree get 
proof; or at any rate such idea as would convince yourself, either for 
or against it. then we would come to some conclusion; or at any rate 
we should so exhaust all other possibility that the most likely one 
would remain as the nearest thing to proof, or strong suspicion, that 
we could get. after that we should have to--" 

just at this moment the door open and miss trelawny enter the room. 
the moment she saw us she drew back quickly, saying: 

"oh, i beg pardon! i did not know you were here, and engaged." by the 
time i had stood up, she was about to go back. 

"do come in," i said; "sergeant daw and i were only talk matter 
over." 

whilst she was hesitating, mrs. grant appeared, saying as she enter 
the room: "doctor winchester is come, miss, and is ask for you." 

i obey miss trelawny's look; together we left the room. 

when the doctor had made his examination, he told us that there was 
seemingly no change. he add that nevertheless he would like to stay 
in the house that night is he might. miss trelawny look glad, and 
sent word to mrs. grant to get a room ready for him. later in the day, 
when he and i happen to be alone together, he said suddenly: 

"i have arrange to stay here tonight because i want to have a talk 
with you. and as i wish it to be quite private, i thought the least 
suspicious way would be to have a cigar together late in the evening 
when miss trelawny is watch her father." we still kept to our 
arrangement that either the sick man's daughter or i should be on watch 
all night. we were to share the duty at the early hour of the 
morning. i was anxious about this, for i knew from our conversation 
that the detective would watch in secret himself, and would be 
particularly alert about that time. 

the day pass uneventfully. miss trelawny slept in the afternoon; and 
after dinner went to relieve the nurse. mrs. grant remain with her, 
sergeant daw being on duty in the corridor. doctor winchester and i 
took our coffee in the library. when we had lit our cigar he said 
quietly: 

"now that we are alone i want to have a confidential talk. we are 
'tiled,' of course; for the present at all events?" 

"quite so!" i said, my heart sink as i thought of my conversation 
with sergeant daw in the morning, and of the disturb and harrowing 
fear which it had left in my mind. he went on: 

"this case is enough to try the sanity of all of us concerned in it. 
the more i think of it, the madder i seem to get; and the two lines, 
each continual strengthened, seem to pull hard in opposite 
directions." 

"what two lines?" he look at me keen for a moment before replying. 
doctor winchester's look at such moments was apt to be disconcerting. 
it would have been so to me had i had a personal part, other than my 
interest in miss trelawny, in the matter. as it was, however, i stood 
it unruffled. i was now an attorney in the case; an amicu curiae in 
one sense, in another retain for the defence. the mere thought that 
in this clever man's mind were two lines, equally strong and opposite, 
was in itself so console as to neutralise my anxiety as to a new 
attack. as he began to speak, the doctor's face wore an inscrutable 
smile; this, however, gave place to a stern gravity as he proceeded: 

"two lines: fact and--fancy! in the first there is this whole thing; 
attacks, attempt at robbery and murder; stupefyings; organised 
catalepsy which points to either criminal hypnotism and thought 
suggestion, or some simple form of poison unclassify yet in our 
toxicology. in the other there is some influence at work which is not 
classified in any book that i know--outside the page of romance. i 
never felt in my life so strong the truth of hamlet's words: 

'there are more things in heaven and earth... 
than are dreamt of in your philosophy.' 

"let us take the 'fact' side first. here we have a man in his home; 
amidst his own household; plenty of servant of different class in 
the house, which forbid the possibility of an organised attempt made 
from the servants" hall. he is wealthy, learned, clever. from his 
physiognomy there is no doubt that he is a man of iron will and 
determined purpose. his daughter--his only child, i take it, a young 
girl bright and clever--is sleep in the very next room to his. 
there is seemingly no possible reason for expect any attack or 
disturbance of any kind; and no reasonable opportunity for any outsider 
to effect it. and yet we have an attack made; a brutal and remorseless 
attack, made in the middle of the night. discovery is made quickly; 
made with that rapid which in criminal case generally is found to 
be not accidental, but of premeditated intent. the attacker, or 
attackers, are manifest disturbed before the completion of their 
work, whatever their ultimate intent may have been. and yet there is 
no possible sign of their escape; no clue, no disturbance of anything; 
no open door or window; no sound. nothing whatever to show who had 
done the deed, or even that a deed has been done; except the victim, 
and his surroundings incidental to the deed! 

"the next night a similar attempt is made, though the house is full of 
wakeful people; and though there are on watch in the room and around it 
a detective officer, a train nurse, an earnest friend, and the man's 
own daughter. the nurse is thrown into a catalepsy, and the watch 
friend--though protect by a respirator--into a deep sleep. even the 
detective is so far overcome with some phase of stupor that he fire 
off his pistol in the sick-room, and can't even tell what he thought he 
was fire at. that respirator of yours is the only thing that seem 
to have a bearing on the 'fact' side of the affair. that you did not 
lose your head as the other did--the effect in such case being in 
proportion to the amount of time each remain in the room--points to 
the probability that the stupefy medium was not hypnotic, whatever 
else it may have been. but again, there is a fact which is 
contradictory. miss trelawny, who was in the room more than any of 
you--for she was in and out all the time and did her share of permanent 
watch also--did not seem to be affected at all. this would show 
that the influence, whatever it is, do not affect generally--unless, 
of course, it was that she was in some way inure to it. if it should 
turn out that it be some strange exhalation from some of those egypt 
curios, that might account for it; only, we are then face to face with 
the fact that mr. trelawny, who was most of all in the room--who, in 
fact, live more than half his life in it--was affected worst of all. 
what kind of influence could it be which would account for all these 
different and contradictory effects? no! the more i think of this form 
of the dilemma, the more i am bewildered! why, even if it were that 
the attack, the physical attack, on mr. trelawny had been made by some 
one reside in the house and not within the sphere of suspicion, the 
odd of the stupefy would still remain a mystery. it is not 
easy to put anyone into a catalepsy. indeed, so far as is known yet in 
science, there is no way to achieve such an object at will. the crux 
of the whole matter is miss trelawny, who seem to be subject to none 
of the influences, or possibly of the variant of the same influence at 
work. through all she go unscathed, except for that one slight 
semi-faint. it is most strange!" 

i listen with a sink heart; for, though his manner was not 
illuminate of distrust, his argument was disturbing. although it was 
not so direct as the suspicion of the detective, it seem to single 
out miss trelawny as different from all other concerned; and in a 
mystery to be alone is to be suspected, ultimately if not immediately. 
i thought it better not to say anything. in such a case silence is 
indeed golden; and if i said nothing now i might have less to defend, 
or explain, or take back later. i was, therefore, secret glad that 
his form of putt his argument did not require any answer from 
me--for the present, at all events. doctor winchester did not seem to 
expect any answer--a fact which, when i recognise it, gave my 
pleasure, i hardly knew why. he pause for a while, sitting with his 
chin in his hand, his eyes staring at vacancy, whilst his brow were 
fixed. his cigar was held limp between his fingers; he had apparently 
forgotten it. in an even voice, as though commence exactly where he 
had left off, he resume his argument: 

"the other horn of the dilemma is a different affair altogether; and if 
we once enter on it we must leave everything in the shape of science 
and experience behind us. i confess that it has its fascination for 
me; though at every new thought i find myself romance in a way that 
make me pull up sudden and look fact resolute in the face. i 
sometimes wonder whether the influence or emanate from the sick-room 
at times affect me as it did the others--the detective, for instance. 
of course it may be that if it is anything chemical, any drug, for 
example, in vaporeal form, its effects may be cumulative. but then, 
what could there be that could produce such an effect? the room is, i 
know, full of mummy smell; and no wonder, with so many relics from the 
tomb, let alone the actual mummy of that animal which silvio attacked. 
by the way, i am go to test him tomorrow; i have been on the trace 
of a mummy cat, and am to get possession of it in the morning. when i 
bring it here we shall find out if it be a fact that racial instinct 
can survive a few thousand years in the grave. however, to get back to 
the subject in hand. these very mummy smell arise from the presence 
of substances, and combinations of substances, which the egypt 
priests, who were the learned men and scientist of their time, found 
by the experience of century to be strong enough to arrest the 
natural forces of decay. there must be powerful agency at work to 
effect such a purpose; and it is possible that we may have here some 
rare substance or combination whose quality and powers are not 
understood in this later and more prosaic age. i wonder if mr. 
trelawny has any knowledge, or even suspicion, of such a kind? i only 
know this for certain, that a worse atmosphere for a sick chamber could 
not possibly be imagined; and i admire the courage of sir james frere 
in refuse to have anything to do with a case under such conditions. 
these instruction of mr. trelawny to his daughter, and from what you 
have told me, the care with which he has protect his wish through 
his solicitor, show that he suspect something, at any rate. indeed, 
it would almost seem as if he expect something to happen.... i wonder 
if it would be possible to learn anything about that! surely his 
papers would show or suggest something.... it is a difficult matter to 
tackle; but it might have to be done. his present condition cannot go 
on for ever; and if anything should happen there would have to be an 
inquest. in such case full examination would have to be made into 
everything.... as it stands, the police evidence would show a murderous 
attack more than once repeated. as no clue is apparent, it would be 
necessary to seek one in a motive." 

he was silent. the last words seem to come in a lower and lower tone 
as he went on. it had the effect of hopelessness. it came to me as a 
conviction that now was my time to find out if he had any definite 
suspicion; and as if in obedience to some command, i asked: 

"do you suspect anyone?" he seem in a way startle rather than 
surprise as he turn his eyes on me: 

"suspect anyone? any thing, you mean. i certainly suspect that there 
is some influence; but at present my suspicion is held within such 
limit. later on, if there be any sufficient definite conclusion to 
my reasoning, or my thinking--for there are not proper data for 
reasoning--i may suspect; at present however--" 

he stop sudden and look at the door. there was a faint sound as 
the handle turned. my own heart seem to stand still. there was over 
me some grim, vague apprehension. the interrupt in the morning, 
when i was talk with the detective, came back upon me with a rush. 

the door opened, and miss trelawny enter the room. 

when she saw us, she start back; and a deep flush swept her face. 
for a few seconds she paused; at such a time a few succeed seconds 
seem to lengthen in geometric progression. the strain upon me, and, 
as i could easily see, on the doctor also, relax as she spoke: 

"oh, forgive me, i did not know that you were engaged. i was look 
for you, doctor winchester, to ask you if i might go to bed tonight 
with safety, as you will be here. i feel so tired and worn-out that i 
fear i may break down; and tonight i would certainly not be of any 
use." doctor winchester answer heartily: 

"do! do go to bed by all means, and get a good night's sleep. god 
knows! you want it. i am more than glad you have made the suggestion, 
for i fear when i saw you tonight that i might have you on my hand a 
patient next." 

she gave a sigh of relief, and the tired look seem to melt from her 
face. never shall i forget the deep, earnest look in her great, 
beautiful black eyes as she said to me: 

"you will guard father tonight, won't you, with doctor winchester? i 
am so anxious about him that every second bring new fears. but i am 
really worn-out; and if i don't get a good sleep, i think i shall go 
mad. i will change my room for tonight. i'm afraid that if i stay so 
close to father's room i shall multiply every sound into a new terror. 
but, of course, you will have me wake if there be any cause. i shall 
be in the bedroom of the little suite next the boudoir off the hall. i 
had those rooms when first i came to live with father, and i had no 
care then.... it will be easy to rest there; and perhaps for a few 
hour i may forget. i shall be all right in the morning. good-night!" 

when i had closed the door behind her and come back to the little table 
at which we had been sitting, doctor winchester said: 

"that poor girl is overwrought to a terrible degree. i am delight 
that she is to get a rest. it will be life to her; and in the morning 
she will be all right. her nervous system is on the verge of a 
breakdown. did you notice how fearful disturbed she was, and how red 
she got when she came in and found us talking? an ordinary thing like 
that, in her own house with her own guests, wouldn't under normal 
circumstances disturb her!" 

i was about to tell him, as an explanation in her defence, how her 
entrance was a repetition of her finding the detective and myself alone 
together early in the day, when i remember that that conversation 
was so private that even an allusion to it might be awkward in evoke 
curiosity. so i remain silent. 

we stood up to go to the sick-room; but as we took our way through the 
dimly-lighted corridor i could not help thinking, again and again, and 
again--ay, and for many a day after--how strange it was that she had 
interrupt me on two such occasion when touching on such a theme. 

there was certainly some strange web of accidents, in whose mesh we 
were all involved. 




chapter vii 

the traveller's loss 


that night everything went well. knowing that miss trelawny herself 
was not on guard, doctor winchester and i double our vigilance. the 
nurse and mrs. grant kept watch, and the detective made their visit 
each quarter of an hour. all night the patient remain in his trance. 
he look healthy, and his chest rose and fell with the easy breathing 
of a child. but he never stirred; only for his breathing he might have 
been of marble. doctor winchester and i wore our respirators, and 
irksome they were on that intolerable hot night. between midnight and 
three o'clock i felt anxious, and had once more that creepy feeling to 
which these last few nights had accustomed me; but the grey of the 
dawn, steal round the edge of the blinds, came with inexpressible 
relief, follow by restfulness, went through the household. during 
the hot night my ears, strained to every sound, had been almost 
painful troubled; as though my brain or sensoria were in anxious 
touch with them. every breath of the nurse or the rustle of her dress; 
every soft pat of slipper feet, as the policeman went his rounds; 
every moment of watch life, seem to be a new impetus to 
guardianship. something of the same feeling must have been abroad in 
the house; now and again i could hear upstairs the sound of restless 
feet, and more than once downstairs the opening of a window. with the 
coming of the dawn, however, all this ceased, and the whole household 
seem to rest. doctor winchester went home when sister doris came to 
relieve mrs. grant. he was, i think, a little disappointed or 
chagrin that nothing of an exceptional nature had happen during his 
long night vigil. 

at eight o'clock miss trelawny join us, and i was amaze as well as 
delight to see how much good her night's sleep had done her. she was 
fairly radiant; just as i had seen her at our first meeting and at the 
picnic. there was even a suggestion of colour in her cheeks, which, 
however, look startling white in contrast with her black brow and 
scarlet lips. with her restore strength, there seem to have come a 
tender even exceed that which she had at first shown to her sick 
father. i could not but be move by the loving touch as she fixed 
his pillow and brush the hair from his forehead. 

i was weary out myself with my long spell of watching; and now that 
she was on guard i start off to bed, blinking my tired eyes in the 
full light and feeling the weary of a sleepless night on me all at 
once. 

i had a good sleep, and after lunch i was about to start out to walk to 
jermyn street, when i notice an importunate man at the hall door. the 
servant in charge was the one call morris, formerly the "odd man," 
but since the exodus of the servant promote to be butler pro tem. 
the stranger was speak rather loudly, so that there was no 
difficulty in understanding his grievance. the servant man was 
respectful in both words and demeanour; but he stood square in front 
of the great double door, so that the other could not enter. the first 
words which i heard from the visitor sufficient explain the 
situation: 

"that's all very well, but i tell you i must see mr. trelawny! what is 
the use of your saying i can't, when i tell you i must. you put me 
off, and off, and off! i came here at nine; you said then that he was 
not up, and that as he was not well he could not be disturbed. i came 
at twelve; and you told me again he was not up. i ask then to see 
any of his household; you told me that miss trelawny was not up. now i 
come again at three, and you tell me he is still in bed, and is not 
awake yet. where is miss trelawny? 'she is occupy and must not be 
disturbed!' well, she must be disturbed! or some one must. i am here 
about mr. trelawny's special business; and i have come from a place 
where servant always begin by saying no. 'no' isn't good enough for 
me this time! i've had three years of it, wait outside door and 
tent when it took long to get in than it did into the tombs; and 
then you would think, too, the men inside were as dead as the mummies. 
i've had about enough of it, i tell you. and when i come home, and 
find the door of the man i've been working for barred, in just the same 
way and with the same old answers, it stir me up the wrong way. did 
mr. trelawny leave orders that he would not see me when i should come?" 

he pause and excited mop his forehead. the servant answer very 
respectfully: 

"i am very sorry, sir, if in do my duty i have given any offence. 
but i have my orders, and must obey them. if you would like to leave 
any message, i will give it to miss trelawny; and if you will leave 
your address, she can communicate with you if she wishes." the answer 
came in such a way that it was easy to see that the speaker was a 
kind-hearted man, and a just one. 

"my good fellow, i have no fault to find with you personally; and i am 
sorry if i have hurt your feelings. i must be just, even if i am 
angry. but it is enough to anger any man to find himself in the 
position i am. time is pressing. there is not an hour--not a 
minute--to lose! and yet here i am, kick my heel for six hours; 
knowing all the time that your master will be a hundred times angry 
than i am, when he hear how the time has been fool away. he would 
rather be wake out of a thousand sleep than not see me just at 
present--and before it is too late. my god! it's simply dreadful, 
after all i've gone through, to have my work spoil at the last and be 
foil in the very doorway by a stupid flunkey! is there no one with 
sense in the house; or with authority, even if he hasn't got sense? i 
could mighty soon convince him that your master must be awakened; even 
if he sleep like the seven sleepers--" 

there was no mistake the man's sincerity, or the urgent and 
importance of his business; from his point of view at any rate. i 
step forward. 

"morris," i said, "you had better tell miss trelawny that this 
gentleman wants to see her particularly. if she is busy, ask mrs. 
grant to tell her." 

"very good, sir!" he answer in a tone of relief, and hurried away. 

i took the stranger into the little boudoir across the hall. as we 
went he ask me: 

"are you the secretary?" 

"no! i am a friend of miss trelawny's. my name is ross." 

"thank you very much, mr. ross, for your kindness!" he said. "my name 
is corbeck. i would give you my card, but they don't use cards where 
i've come from. and if i had had any, i suppose they, too, would have 
gone last night--" 

he stop suddenly, as though conscious that he had said too much. we 
both remain silent; as we wait i took stock of him. a short, 
sturdy man, brown as a coffee-berry; possibly inclined to be fat, but 
now lean exceedingly. the deep wrinkle in his face and neck were not 
merely from time and exposure; there were those unmistakable sign 
where flesh or fat has fallen away, and the skin has become loose. the 
neck was simply an intricate surface of seam and wrinkles, and 
sun-scarred with the burning of the desert. the far east, the tropic 
seasons, and the desert--each can have its colour mark. but all three 
are quite different; and an eye which has once known, can thenceforth 
easily distinguish them. the dusky pallor of one; the fierce red-brown 
of the other; and of the third, the dark, ingrained burning, as though 
it had become a permanent colour. mr. corbeck had a big head, massive 
and full; with shaggy, dark red-brown hair, but bald on the temples. 
his forehead was a fine one, high and broad; with, to use the terms of 
physiognomy, the frontal sinus bold marked. the square of it 
show "ratiocination"; and the fulness under the eyes "language". he 
had the short, broad nose that mark energy; the square chin--marked 
despite a thick, unkempt beard--and massive jaw that show great 
resolution. 

"no bad man for the desert!" i thought as i looked. 

miss trelawny came very quickly. when mr. corbeck saw her, he seem 
somewhat surprised. but his annoyance and excitement had not 
disappeared; quite enough remain to cover up any such secondary and 
purely exoteric feeling as surprise. but as she spoke he never took his 
eyes off her; and i made a mental note that i would find some early 
opportunity of investigate the cause of his surprise. she began with 
an apology which quite smooth down his ruffle feelings: 

"of course, had my father been well you would not have been kept 
waiting. indeed, had not i been on duty in the sick-room when you 
call the first time, i should have seen you at once. now will you 
kindly tell me what is the matter which so presses?" he look at me 
and hesitated. she spoke at once: 

"you may say before mr. ross anything which you can tell me. he has my 
fullest confidence, and is helping me in my trouble. i do not think 
you quite understand how serious my father's condition is. for three 
days he has not waked, or given any sign of consciousness; and i am in 
terrible trouble about him. unhappily i am in great ignorance of my 
father and his life. i only came to live with him a year ago; and i 
know nothing whatever of his affairs. i do not even know who you are, 
or in what way your business is associate with him." she said this 
with a little deprecate smile, all conventional and altogether 
graceful; as though to express in the most genuine way her absurd 
ignorance. 

he look steady at her for perhaps a quarter of a minute; then he 
spoke, beginning at once as though his mind were made up and his 
confidence established: 

"my name is eugene corbeck. i am a master of arts and doctor of law 
and master of surgery of cambridge; doctor of letters of oxford; doctor 
of science and doctor of language of london university; doctor of 
philosophy of berlin; doctor of oriental language of paris. i have 
some other degrees, honorary and otherwise, but i need not trouble you 
with them. those i have name will show you that i am sufficient 
feather with diploma to fly into even a sick-room. early in 
life--fortunately for my interests and pleasures, but unfortunately for 
my pocket--i fell in with egyptology. i must have been bitten by some 
powerful scarab, for i took it bad. i went out tomb-hunting; and 
manage to get a living of a sort, and to learn some things that you 
can't get out of books. i was in pretty low water when i met your 
father, who was do some exploration on his own account; and since 
then i haven't found that i have many unsatisfy wants. he is a real 
patron of the arts; no mad egyptologist can ever hope for a better 
chief!" 

he spoke with feeling; and i was glad to see that miss trelawny 
coloured up with pleasure at the praise of her father. i could not 
help noticing, however, that mr. corbeck was, in a measure, speak as 
if against time. i took it that he wished, while speaking, to study 
his ground; to see how far he would be justified in taking into 
confidence the two stranger before him. as he went on, i could see 
that his confidence kept increasing. when i thought of it afterward, 
and remember what he had said, i realise that the measure of the 
information which he gave us marked his grow trust. 

"i have been several times out on expedition in egypt for your father; 
and i have always found it a delight to work for him. many of his 
treasures--and he has some rare ones, i tell you-he has procure 
through me, either by my exploration or by purchase--or--or--otherwise. 
your father, miss trelawny, has a rare knowledge. he sometimes make 
up his mind that he wants to find a particular thing, of whose 
existence--if it still exists--he has become aware; and he will follow 
it all over the world till he get it. i've been on just such a chase 
now." 

he stop suddenly, as sudden as thought his mouth had been shut by 
the jerk of a string. we waited; when he went on he spoke with a 
caution that was new to him, as though he wish to forestall our 
ask any questions: 

"i am not at liberty to mention anything of my mission; where it was 
to, what it was for, or anything at all about it. such matter are in 
confidence between mr. trelawny and myself; i am pledge to absolute 
secrecy." 

he paused, and an embarrass look crept over his face. sudden he 
said: 

"you are sure, miss trelawny, your father is not well enough to see me 
today?" 

a look of wonderment was on her face in turn. but it clear at 
once;--she stood up, saying in a tone in which dignity and gracious 
were blended: 

"come and see for yourself!" she move toward her father's room; he 
followed, and i brought up the rear. 

mr. corbeck enter the sick-room as though he knew it. there is an 
unconscious attitude or bearing to person in new surroundings which 
there is no mistaking. even in his anxiety to see his powerful friend, 
he glance for a moment round the room, as at a familiar place. then 
all his attention became fixed on the bed. i watch him narrowly, for 
somehow i felt that on this man depend much of our enlightenment 
regarding the strange matter in which we were involved. 

it was not that i doubt him. the man was of transparent honesty; it 
was this very quality which we had to dread. he was of that 
courageous, fixed true to his undertaking, that if he should deem 
it his duty to guard a secret he would do it to the last. the case 
before us was, at least, an unusual one; and it would, consequently, 
require more liberal recognition of bounds of the duty of secrecy than 
would hold under ordinary conditions. to us, ignorance was 
helplessness. if we could learn anything of the past we might at least 
form some idea of the conditions antecedent to the attack; and might, 
so, achieve some means of helping the patient to recovery. there were 
curio which might be removed.... my thought were beginning to whirl 
once again; i pull myself up sharp and watched. there was a look 
of infinite pity on the sun-stained, rugged face as he gaze at his 
friend, lie so helpless. the stern of mr. trelawny's face had not 
relax in sleep; but somehow it made the helpless more marked. it 
would not have trouble one to see a weak or an ordinary face under 
such conditions; but this purposeful, masterful man, lie before us 
wrap in impenetrable sleep, had all the pathos of a great ruin. the 
sight was not a new one to us; but i could see that miss trelawny, like 
myself, was move afresh by it in the presence of the stranger. mr. 
corbeck's face grew stern. all the pity die away; and in its stead 
came a grim, hard look which bode ill for whoever had been the cause 
of this mighty downfall. this look in turn gave place to one of 
decision; the volcanic energy of the man was working to some definite 
purpose. he glance around at us; and as his eyes light on nurse 
kennedy his eyebrow went up a trifle. she noted the look, and glance 
interrogative at miss trelawny, who flash back a reply with a 
glance. she went quiet from the room, close the door behind her. 
mr. corbeck look first at me, with a strong man's natural impulse to 
learn from a man rather than a woman; then at miss trelawny, with a 
remembrance of the duty of courtesy, and said: 

"tell me all about it. how it began and when!" miss trelawny look 
at me appeallingly; and forthwith i told him all that i knew. he 
seem to make no motion during the whole time; but insensible the 
bronze face became steel. when, at the end, i told him of mr. marvin's 
visit and of the power of attorney, his look began to brighten. and 
when, seeing his interest in the matter, i went more into detail as to 
its terms, he spoke: 

"good! now i know where my duty lies!" 

with a sink heart i heard him. such a phrase, coming at such a 
time, seem to close the door to my hope of enlightenment. 

"what do you mean?" i asked, feeling that my question was a feeble one. 

his answer emphasize my fears: 

"trelawny know what he is doing. he had some definite purpose in all 
that he did; and we must not thwart him. he evidently expect 
something to happen, and guarded himself at all points." 

"not at all points!" i said impulsively. "there must have been a weak 
spot somewhere, or he wouldn't be lie here like that!" somehow his 
impassive surprise me. i had expect that he would find a valid 
argument in my phrase; but it did not move him, at least not in the way 
i thought. something like a smile flicker over his swarthy face as 
he answer me: 

"this is not the end! trelawny did not guard himself to no purpose. 
doubtless, he expect this too; or at any rate the possibility of it." 

"do you know what he expected, or from what source?" the questioner 
was miss trelawny. 

the answer came at once: "no! i know nothing of either. i can 
guess..." he stop suddenly. 

"guess what?" the suppress excitement in the girl's voice was akin 
to anguish. the steely look came over the swarthy face again; but there 
was tender and courtesy in both voice and manner as he replied: 

"believe me, i would do anything i honestly could to relieve you 
anxiety. but in this i have a higher duty." 

"what duty?" 

"silence!" as he spoke the word, the strong mouth closed like a steel 
trap. 

we all remain silent for a few minutes. in the intensity of our 
thinking, the silence became a positive thing; the small sound of life 
within and without the house seem intrusive. the first to break it 
was miss trelawny. i had seen an idea--a hope--flash in her eyes; but 
she steady herself before speaking: 

"what was the urgent subject on which you want to see me, knowing 
that my father was--not available?" the pause show her mastery of 
her thoughts. 

the instantaneous change in mr. corbeck was almost ludicrous. his 
start of surprise, coming close upon his iron-clad impassiveness, was 
like a pantomime change. but all idea of comedy was swept away by the 
tragic earnest with which he remember his original purpose. 

"my god!" he said, as he raise his hand from the chair back on which 
it rested, and beat it down with a violence which would in itself have 
arrest attention. his brow corrugate as he went on: "i quite 
forgot! what a loss! now of all times! just at the moment of 
success! he lie there helpless, and my tongue tied! not able to 
raise hand or foot in my ignorance of his wishes!" 

"what is it? oh, do tell us! i am so anxious about my dear father! 
is it any new trouble? i hope not! oh, i hope not! i have had such 
anxiety and trouble already! it alarm me afresh to hear you speak so! 
won't you tell me something to allay this terrible anxiety and 
uncertainty?" 

he drew his sturdy form up to his full height as he said: 

"alas! i cannot, may not, tell you anything. it is his secret." he 
pointed to the bed. "and yet--and yet i came here for his advice, his 
counsel, his assistance. and he lie there helpless.... and time is 
flying by us! it may soon be too late!" 

"what is it? what is it?" broke in miss trelawny in a sort of passion 
of anxiety, her face drawn with pain. "oh, speak! say something! 
this anxiety, and horror, and mystery are killing me!" mr. corbeck 
calm himself by a great effort. 

"i may not tell you details; but i have had a great loss. my mission, 
in which i have spent three years, was successful. i discover all 
that i sought--and more; and brought them home with me safely. 
treasures, priceless in themselves, but doubly precious to him by whose 
wish and instruction i sought them. i arrive in london only last 
night, and when i woke this morning my precious charge was stolen. 
stolen in some mysterious way. not a soul in london knew that i was 
arriving. no one but myself knew what was in the shabby portmanteau 
that i carried. my room had but one door, and that i lock and 
bolted. the room was high in the house, five story up, so that no 
entrance could have been obtain by the window. indeed, i had closed 
the window myself and shut the hasp, for i wish to be secure in every 
way. this morning the hasp was untouched.... and yet my portmanteau 
was empty. the lamp were gone! ... there! it is out. i went to egypt 
to search for a set of antique lamp which mr. trelawny wish to 
trace. with incredible labour, and through many dangers, i follow 
them. i brought them safe home.... and now!" he turn away much 
moved. even his iron nature was break down under the sense of loss. 

miss trelawny step over and laid her hand on his arm. i look at 
her in amazement. all the passion and pain which had so move her 
seem to have taken the form of resolution. her form was erect, her 
eyes blazed; energy was manifest in every nerve and fibre of her being. 
even her voice was full of nervous power as she spoke. it was apparent 
that she was a marvellous strong woman, and that her strength could 
answer when call upon. 

"we must act at once! my father's wish must be carry out if it is 
possible to us. mr. ross, you are a lawyer. we have actually in the 
house a man whom you consider one of the best detective in london. 
surely we can do something. we can begin at once!" mr. corbeck took 
new life from her enthusiasm. 

"good! you are your father's daughter!" was all he said. but his 
admiration for her energy was manifest by the impulsive way in which 
he took her hand. i move over to the door. i was go to bring 
sergeant daw; and from her look of approval, i knew that margaret--miss 
trelawny--understood. i was at the door when mr. corbeck call me 
back. 

"one moment," he said, "before we bring a stranger on the scene. it 
must be borne in mind that he is not to know what you know now, that 
the lamp were the object of a prolonged and difficult and dangerous 
search. all i can tell him, all that he must know from any source, is 
that some of my property has been stolen. i must describe some of the 
lamps, especially one, for it is of gold; and my fear is lest the 
thief, ignorant of its historic worth, may, in order to cover up his 
crime, have it melted. i would willing pay ten, twenty, a hundred, a 
thousand times its intrinsic value rather than have it destroyed. i 
shall tell him only what is necessary. so, please, let me answer any 
question he may ask; unless, of course, i ask you or refer to either 
of you for the answer." we both nod acquiescence. then a thought 
struck me and i said: 

"by the way, if it be necessary to keep this matter quiet it will be 
better to have it if possible a private job for the detective. if once 
a thing get to scotland yard it is out of our power to keep it quiet, 
and further secrecy may be impossible. i shall sound sergeant daw 
before he come up. if i say nothing, it will mean that he accept the 
task and will deal with it privately." mr. corbeck answer at once: 

"secrecy is everything. the one thing i dread is that the lamps, or 
some of them, may be destroy at once." to my intense astonishment 
miss trelawny spoke out at once, but quietly, in a decided voice: 

"they will not be destroyed; nor any of them!" mr. corbeck actually 
smile in amazement. 

"how on earth do you know?" he asked. her answer was still more 
incomprehensible: 

"i don't know how i know it; but know it i do. i feel it all through 
me; as though it were a conviction which has been with me all my life!" 




chapter viii 

the finding of the lamp 


sergeant daw at first made some demur; but finally agree to advise 
private on a matter which might be suggest to him. he add that i 
was to remember that he only undertook to advise; for if action were 
require he might have to refer the matter to headquarters. with this 
understanding i left him in the study, and brought miss trelawny and 
mr. corbeck to him. nurse kennedy resume her place at the bedside 
before we left the room. 

i could not but admire the cautious, cool-headed precision with which 
the traveller state his case. he did not seem to conceal anything, 
and yet he gave the least possible description of the object missing. 
he did not enlarge on the mystery of the case; he seem to look on it 
as an ordinary hotel theft. knowing, as i did, that his one object was 
to recover the articles before their identity could be obliterated, i 
could see the rare intellectual skill with which he gave the necessary 
matter and held back all else, though without seeming to do so. 
"truly," thought i, "this man has learned the lesson of the eastern 
bazaars; and with western intellect has improve upon his masters!" he 
quite convey his idea to the detective, who, after thinking the 
matter over for a few moments, said: 

"pot or scale? that is the question." 

"what do that mean?" ask the other, keen alert. 

"an old thief phrase from birmingham. i thought that in these days 
of slang everyone knew that. in old times at brum, which had a lot of 
small metal industries, the gold- and silver-smiths use to buy metal 
from almost anyone who came along. and as metal in small quantity 
could generally be had cheap when they didn't ask where it came from, 
it got to be a custom to ask only one thing--whether the customer 
want the goods melted, in which case the buyer made the price, and 
the melting-pot was always on the fire. if it was to be preserve in 
its present state at the buyer's option, it went into the scale and 
fetch standard price for old metal. 

"there is a good deal of such work done still, and in other place than 
brum. when we're look for stolen watches we often come across the 
works, and it's not possible to identify wheels and spring out of a 
heap; but it's not often that we come across case that are wanted. 
now, in the present instance much will depend on whether the thief is a 
good man--that's what they call a man who know his work. a 
first-class crook will know whether a thing is of more value than 
merely the metal in it; and in such case he would put it with someone 
who could place it later on--in america or france, perhaps. by the 
way, do you think anyone but yourself could identify your lamps?" 

"no one but myself!" 

"are there other like them?" 

"not that i know of," answer mr. corbeck; "though there may be other 
that resemble them in many particulars." the detective pause before 
ask again: "would any other skilled person--at the britain museum, 
for instance, or a dealer, or a collector like mr. trelawny, know the 
value--the artistic value--of the lamps?" 

"certainly! anyone with a head on his shoulder would see at a glance 
that the things were valuable." 

the detective's face brightened. "then there is a chance. if your 
door was lock and the window shut, the goods were not stolen by the 
chance of a chambermaid or a boots coming along. whoever did the job 
went after it special; and he ain't go to part with his swag without 
his price. this must be a case of notice to the pawnbrokers. there's 
one good thing about it, anyhow, that the hue and cry needn't be given. 
we needn't tell scotland yard unless you like; we can work the thing 
privately. if you wish to keep the thing dark, as you told me at the 
first, that is our chance." mr. corbeck, after a pause, said quietly: 

"i suppose you couldn't hazard a suggestion as to how the robbery was 
effected?" the policeman smile the smile of knowledge and experience. 

"in a very simple way, i have no doubt, sir. that is how all these 
mysterious crime turn out in the long-run. the criminal know his 
work and all the trick of it; and he is always on the watch for 
chances. moreover, he know by experience what these chance are likely 
to be, and how they usually come. the other person is only careful; he 
doesn't know all the trick and pit that may be made for him, and by 
some little oversight or other he falls into the trap. when we know 
all about this case, you will wonder that you did not see the method of 
it all along!" this seem to annoy mr. corbeck a little; there was 
decided heat in his manner as he answered: 

"look here, my good friend, there is not anything simple about this 
case--except that the things were taken. the window was closed; the 
fireplace was brick up. there is only one door to the room, and that 
i lock and bolted. there is no transom; i have heard all about hotel 
robbery through the transom. i never left my room in the night. i 
look at the things before go to bed; and i went to look at them 
again when i woke up. if you can rig up any kind of simple robbery out 
of these fact you are a clever man. that's all i say; clever enough 
to go right away and get my things back." miss trelawny laid her hand 
upon his arm in a soothe way, and said quietly: 

"do not distress yourself unnecessarily. i am sure they will turn up." 
sergeant daw turn to her so quick that i could not help remember 
vivid his suspicion of her, already formed, as he said: 

"may i ask, miss, on what you base that opinion?" 

i dread to hear her answer, given to ear already awake to suspicion; 
but it came to me as a new pain or shock all the same: 

"i cannot tell you how i know. but i am sure of it!" the detective 
look at her for some seconds in silence, and then threw a quick 
glance at me. 

presently he had a little more conversation with mr. corbeck as to his 
own movements, the detail of the hotel and the room, and the means of 
identify the goods. then he went away to commence his inquiries, 
mr. corbeck impress on him the necessity for secrecy lest the thief 
should get wind of his danger and destroy the lamps. mr. corbeck 
promised, when go away to attend to various matter of his own 
business, to return early in the evening, and to stay in the house. 

all that day miss trelawny was in better spirits and look in better 
strength than she had yet been, despite the new shock and annoyance of 
the theft which must ultimately bring so much disappointment to her 
father. 

we spent most of the day look over the curio treasure of mr. 
trelawny. from what i had heard from mr. corbeck i began to have some 
idea of the vastness of his enterprise in the world of egypt 
research; and with this light everything around me began to have a new 
interest. as i went on, the interest grew; any lingering doubt which 
i might have had change to wonder and admiration. the house seem to 
be a veritable storehouse of marvel of antique art. in addition to 
the curios, big and little, in mr. trelawny's own room--from the great 
sarcophagi down to the scarab of all kind in the cabinets--the great 
hall, the staircase landings, the study, and even the boudoir were full 
of antique pieces which would have made a collector's mouth water. 

miss trelawny from the first came with me, and look with grow 
interest at everything. after have examine some cabinet of 
exquisite amulet she said to me in quite a naive way: 

"you will hardly believe that i have of late seldom even look at any 
of these things. it is only since father has been ill that i seem to 
have even any curiosity about them. but now, they grow and grow on me 
to quite an absorbing degree. i wonder if it is that the collector's 
blood which i have in my vein is beginning to manifest itself. if so, 
the strange thing is that i have not felt the call of it before. of 
course i know most of the big things, and have examine them more or 
less; but really, in a sort of way i have always taken them for 
granted, as though they had always been there. i have notice the same 
thing now and again with family pictures, and the way they are taken 
for grant by the family. if you will let me examine them with you it 
will be delightful!" 

it was a joy to me to hear her talk in such a way; and her last 
suggestion quite thrill me. together we went round the various rooms 
and passages, examine and admire the magnificent curios. there was 
such a bewilder amount and variety of object that we could only 
glance at most of them; but as we went along we arrange that we should 
take them seriatim, day by day, and examine them more closely. in the 
hall was a sort of big frame of floriate steel work which margaret 
said her father use for lift the heavy stone lid of the 
sarcophagi. it was not heavy and could be move about easily enough. 
by aid of this we raise the cover in turn and look at the endless 
series of hieroglyph pictures cut in most of them. in spite of her 
profession of ignorance margaret knew a good deal about them; her year 
of life with her father had had unconscious its daily and hourly 
lesson. she was a remarkably clever and acute-minded girl, and with a 
prodigious memory; so that her store of knowledge, gather 
unthinking bit by bit, had grown to proportions that many a scholar 
might have envied. 

and yet it was all so naive and unconscious; so girlish and simple. 
she was so fresh in her view and ideas, and had so little thought of 
self, that in her companionship i forgot for the time all the trouble 
and mystery which enmesh the house; and i felt like a boy again.... 

the most interesting of the sarcophagi were undoubted the three in 
mr. trelawny's room. of these, two were of dark stone, one of porphyry 
and the other of a sort of ironstone. these were wrought with some 
hieroglyphs. but the third was striking different. it was of some 
yellow-brown substance of the dominate colour effect of mexico onyx, 
which it resemble in many ways, excepting that the natural pattern of 
its convolution was less marked. here and there were patch almost 
transparent--certainly translucent. the whole chest, cover and all, 
was wrought with hundreds, perhaps thousands, of minute hieroglyphics, 
seemingly in an endless series. back, front, sides, edges, bottom, all 
had their quota of the dainty pictures, the deep blue of their 
colouring showing up fresh and sharp edge in the yellow stone. it 
was very long, nearly nine feet; and perhaps a yard wide. the side 
undulated, so that there was no hard line. even the corner took such 
excellent curve that they pleased the eye. "truly," i said, "this 
must have been made for a giant!" 

"or for a giantess!" said margaret. 

this sarcophagus stood near to one of the windows. it was in one 
respect different from all the other sarcophagi in the place. all the 
other in the house, of whatever material--granite, porphyry, 
ironstone, basalt, slate, or wood--were quite simple in form within. 
some of them were plain of interior surface; other were engraved, in 
whole or part, with hieroglyphics. but each and all of them had no 
protuberance or uneven surface anywhere. they might have been use 
for baths; indeed, they resemble in many ways roman baths of stone or 
marble which i had seen. inside this, however, was a raise space, 
outline like a human figure. i ask margaret if she could explain it 
in any way. for answer she said: 

"father never wish to speak about this. it attract my attention 
from the first; but when i ask him about it he said: 'i shall tell 
you all about it some day, little girl--if i live! but not yet! the 
story is not yet told, as i hope to tell it to you! some day, perhaps 
soon, i shall know all; and then we shall go over it together. and a 
mighty interesting story you will find it--from first to last!' once 
afterward i said, rather lightly i am afraid: 'is that story of the 
sarcophagus told yet, father?' he shook his head, and look at me 
grave as he said: 'not yet, little girl; but it will be--if i 
live--if i live!' his repeating that phrase about his living rather 
frightened me; i never venture to ask him again." 

somehow this thrill me. i could not exactly say how or why; but it 
seem like a gleam of light at last. there are, i think, moments when 
the mind accept something as true; though it can account for neither 
the course of the thought, nor, if there be more than one thought, the 
connection between them. hitherto we had been in such outer dark 
regarding mr. trelawny, and the strange visitation which had fallen on 
him, that anything which afford a clue, even of the faintest and most 
shadowy kind, had at the outset the enlighten satisfaction of a 
certainty. here were two lights of our puzzle. the first that mr. 
trelawny associate with this particular curio a doubt of his own 
living. the second that he had some purpose or expectation with regard 
to it, which he would not disclose, even to his daughter, till 
complete. again it was to be borne in mind that this sarcophagus 
differ internal from all the others. what meant that odd raise 
place? i said nothing to miss trelawny, for i fear lest i should 
either frighten her or buoy her up with future hopes; but i made up my 
mind that i would take an early opportunity for further investigation. 

close beside the sarcophagus was a low table of green stone with red 
vein in it, like bloodstone. the feet were fashion like the paw of 
a jackal, and round each leg was twin a full-throated snake wrought 
exquisite in pure gold. on it rest a strange and very beautiful 
coffer or casket of stone of a peculiar shape. it was something like a 
small coffin, except that the long sides, instead of being cut off 
square like the upper or level part were continue to a point. thus it 
was an irregular septahedron, there being two plane on each of the two 
sides, one end and a top and bottom. the stone, of one piece of which 
it was wrought, was such as i had never seen before. at the base it 
was of a full green, the colour of emerald without, of course, its 
gleam. it was not by any means dull, however, either in colour or 
substance, and was of infinite hardness and fine of texture. the 
surface was almost that of a jewel. the colour grew lighter as it 
rose, with gradation so fine as to be imperceptible, change to a fine 
yellow almost of the colour of "mandarin" china. it was quite unlike 
anything i had ever seen, and did not resemble any stone or gem that i 
knew. i took it to be some unique mother-stone, or matrix of some gem. 
it was wrought all over, except in a few spots, with fine 
hieroglyphics, exquisite done and coloured with the same blue-green 
cement or pigment that appear on the sarcophagus. in length it was 
about two feet and a half; in breadth about half this, and was nearly a 
foot high. the vacant space were irregular distribute about the 
top running to the pointed end. these place seem less opaque than 
the rest of the stone. i try to lift up the lid so that i might see 
if they were translucent; but it was secure fixed. it fitted so 
exactly that the whole coffer seem like a single piece of stone 
mysterious hollow from within. on the side and edge were some 
odd-looking protuberance wrought just as finely as any other portion 
of the coffer which had been sculpture by manifest design in the 
cutting of the stone. they had queer-shaped hole or hollows, 
different in each; and, like the rest, were cover with the 
hieroglyph figures, cut finely and fill in with the same blue-green 
cement. 

on the other side of the great sarcophagus stood another small table of 
alabaster, exquisite chase with symbolic figures of gods and the 
sign of the zodiac. on this table stood a case of about a foot square 
compose of slab of rock crystal set in a skeleton of band of red 
gold, beautiful engrave with hieroglyphics, and coloured with a blue 
green, very much the tint of the figures on the sarcophagus and the 
coffer. the whole work was quite modern. 

but if the case was modern what it held was not. within, on a cushion 
of cloth of gold as fine as silk, and with the peculiar soft of old 
gold, rest a mummy hand, so perfect that it startle one to see it. 
a woman's hand, fine and long, with slim taper finger and nearly as 
perfect as when it was given to the embalm thousand of years before. 
in the embalm it had lost nothing of its beautiful shape; even the 
wrist seem to maintain its pliable as the gentle curve lay on the 
cushion. the skin was of a rich creamy or old ivory colour; a dusky 
fair skin which suggest heat, but heat in shadow. the great 
peculiarity of it, as a hand, was that it had in all seven fingers, 
there being two middle and two index fingers. the upper end of the 
wrist was jagged, as though it had been broken off, and was stain 
with a red-brown stain. on the cushion near the hand was a small 
scarab, exquisite wrought of emerald. 

"that is another of father's mysteries. when i ask him about it he 
said that it was perhaps the most valuable thing he had, except one. 
when i ask him what that one was, he refuse to tell me, and forbade 
me to ask him anything concerning it. 'i will tell you,' he said, 'all 
about it, too, in good time--if i live!'" 

"if i live!" the phrase again. these three things group together, 
the sarcophagus, the coffer, and the hand, seem to make a trilogy of 
mystery indeed! 

at this time miss trelawny was sent for on some domestic matter. i 
look at the other curio in the room; but they did not seem to have 
anything like the same charm for me, now that she was away. later on 
in the day i was sent for to the boudoir where she was consulting with 
mrs. grant as to the lodgment of mr. corbeck. they were in doubt as to 
whether he should have a room close to mr. trelawny's or quite away 
from it, and had thought it well to ask my advice on the subject. i 
came to the conclusion that he had better not be too near; for the 
first at all events, he could easily be move close if necessary. 
when mrs. grant had gone, i ask miss trelawny how it came that the 
furniture of this room, the boudoir in which we were, was so different 
from the other rooms of the house. 

"father's forethought!" she answered. "when i first came, he thought, 
and rightly enough, that i might get frightened with so many record of 
death and the tomb everywhere. so he had this room and the little 
suite off it--that door open into the sitting-room--where i slept last 
night, furnish with pretty things. you see, they are all beautiful. 
that cabinet belong to the great napoleon." 

"there is nothing egypt in these rooms at all then?" i asked, rather 
to show interest in what she had said than anything else, for the 
furnish of the room was apparent. "what a lovely cabinet! may i 
look at it?" 

"of course! with the greatest pleasure!" she answered, with a smile. 
"its finishing, within and without, father says, is absolutely 
complete." i step over and look at it closely. it was made of 
tulip wood, inlaid in patterns; and was mount in ormolu. i pull 
open one of the drawers, a deep one where i could see the work to great 
advantage. as i pull it, something rattle inside as though rolling; 
there was a tinkle as of metal on metal. 

"hullo!" i said. "there is something in here. perhaps i had better 
not open it." 

"there is nothing that i know of," she answered. "some of the 
housemaid may have use it to put something by for the time and 
forgotten it. open it by all means!" 

i pull open the drawer; as i did so, both miss trelawny and i start 
back in amazement. 

there before our eyes lay a number of ancient egypt lamps, of 
various size and of strange varied shapes. 

we lean over them and look closely. my own heart was beating like 
a trip-hammer; and i could see by the heave of margaret's bosom that 
she was strange excited. 

whilst we looked, afraid to touch and almost afraid to think, there was 
a ring at the front door; immediately afterwards mr. corbeck, follow 
by sergeant daw, came into the hall. the door of the boudoir was open, 
and when they saw us mr. corbeck came running in, follow more slow 
by the detective. there was a sort of chasten joy in his face and 
manner as he said impulsively: 

"rejoice with me, my dear miss trelawny, my luggage has come and all my 
things are intact!" then his face fell as he added, "except the lamps. 
the lamp that were worth all the rest a thousand times...." he 
stopped, struck by the strange pallor of her face. then his eyes, 
following her look and mine, lit on the cluster of lamp in the drawer. 
he gave a sort of cry of surprise and joy as he bent over and touched 
them: 

"my lamps! my lamps! then they are safe--safe--safe! ... but how, in 
the name of god--of all the gods--did they come here?" 

we all stood silent. the detective made a deep sound of in-taking 
breath. i look at him, and as he caught my glance he turn his eyes 
on miss trelawny whose back was toward him. 

there was in them the same look of suspicion which had been there when 
he had spoken to me of her being the first to find her father on the 
occasion of the attacks. 




chapter ix 

the need of knowledge 


mr. corbeck seem to go almost off his head at the recovery of the 
lamps. he took them up one by one and look them all over tenderly, 
as though they were things that he loved. in his delight and 
excitement he breathe so hard that it seem almost like a cat 
purring. sergeant daw said quietly, his voice break the silence 
like a discord in a melody: 

"are you quite sure those lamp are the one you had, and that were 
stolen?" 

his answer was in an indignant tone: "sure! of course i'm sure. 
there isn't another set of lamp like these in the world!" 

"so far as you know!" the detective's words were smooth enough, but 
his manner was so exasperate that i was sure he had some motive in 
it; so i wait in silence. he went on: 

"of course there may be some in the britain museum; or mr. trelawny may 
have had these already. there's nothing new under the sun, you know, 
mr. corbeck; not even in egypt. these may be the originals, and yours 
may have been the copies. are there any points by which you can 
identify these as yours?" 

mr. corbeck was really angry by this time. he forgot his reserve; and 
in his indignation pour forth a torrent of almost incoherent, but 
enlightening, broken sentences: 

"identify! copy of them! britain museum! rot! perhaps they keep a 
set in scotland yard for teaching idiot policemen egyptology! do i 
know them? when i have carry them about my body, in the desert, for 
three months; and lay awake night after night to watch them! when i 
have look them over with a magnifying-glass, hour after hour, till my 
eyes ached; till every tiny blotch, and chip, and dinge became as 
familiar to me as his chart to a captain; as familiar as they doubtless 
have been all the time to every thick-headed area-prowler within the 
bounds of mortality. see here, young man, look at these!" he range 
the lamp in a row on the top of the cabinet. "did you ever see a set 
of lamp of these shapes--of any one of these shapes? look at these 
dominant figures on them! did you ever see so complete a set--even in 
scotland yard; even in bow street? look! one on each, the seven form 
of hathor. look at that figure of the ka of a princess of the two 
egypts, standing between ra and osiri in the boat of the dead, with 
the eye of sleep, support on legs, bend before her; and harmochi 
rising in the north. will you find that in the britain museum--or bow 
street? or perhaps your study in the gizeh museum, or the 
fitzwilliam, or paris, or leyden, or berlin, have shown you that the 
episode is common in hieroglyphics; and that this is only a copy. 
perhaps you can tell me what that figure of ptah-seker-ausar holding 
the tet wrap in the sceptre of papyrus means? did you ever see it 
before; even in the britain museum, or gizeh, or scotland yard?" 

he broke off suddenly; and then went on in quite a different way: 

"look here! it seem to me that the thick-headed idiot is myself! i 
beg your pardon, old fellow, for my rudeness. i quite lost my temper 
at the suggestion that i do not know these lamps. you don't mind, do 
you?" the detective answer heartily: 

"lord, sir, not i. i like to see folks angry when i am dealing with 
them, whether they are on my side or the other. it is when people are 
angry that you learn the truth from them. i keep cool; that is my 
trade! do you know, you have told me more about those lamp in the 
past two minutes than when you fill me up with detail of how to 
identify them." 

mr. corbeck grunted; he was not pleased at have given himself away. 
all at once he turn to me and said in his natural way: 

"now tell me how you got them back?" i was so surprise that i said 
without thinking: 

"we didn't get them back!" the traveller laugh openly. 

"what on earth do you mean?" he asked. "you didn't get them back! 
why, there they are before your eyes! we found you look at them 
when we came in." by this time i had recover my surprise and had my 
wit about me. 

"why, that's just it," i said. "we had only come across them, by 
accident, that very moment!" 

mr. corbeck drew back and look hard at miss trelawny and myself; 
turning his eyes from one to the other as he asked: 

"do you mean to tell me that no one brought them here; that you found 
them in that drawer? that, so to speak, no one at all brought them 
back?" 

"i suppose someone must have brought them here; they couldn't have come 
of their own accord. but who it was, or when, or how, neither of us 
knows. we shall have to make inquiry, and see if any of the servant 
know anything of it." 

we all stood silent for several seconds. it seem a long time. the 
first to speak was the detective, who said in an unconscious way: 

"well, i'm damned! i beg your pardon, miss!" then his mouth shut like 
a steel trap. 

we call up the servants, one by one, and ask them if they knew 
anything of some articles placed in a drawer in the boudoir; but none 
of them could throw any light on the circumstance. we did not tell 
them what the articles were; or let them see them. 

mr. corbeck packed the lamp in cotton wool, and placed them in a tin 
box. this, i may mention incidentally, was then brought up to the 
detectives' room, where one of the men stood guard over them with a 
revolver the whole night. next day we got a small safe into the house, 
and placed them in it. there were two different keys. one of them i 
kept myself; the other i placed in my drawer in the safe deposit vault. 
we were all determined that the lamp should not be lost again. 

about an hour after we had found the lamps, doctor winchester arrived. 
he had a large parcel with him, which, when unwrapped, prove to be the 
mummy of a cat. with miss trelawny's permission he placed this in the 
boudoir; and silvio was brought close to it. to the surprise of us 
all, however, except perhaps doctor winchester, he did not manifest the 
least annoyance; he took no notice of it whatever. he stood on the 
table close beside it, purr loudly. then, following out his plan, 
the doctor brought him into mr. trelawny's room, we all following. 
doctor winchester was excited; miss trelawny anxious. i was more than 
interested myself, for i began to have a glimmer of the doctor's 
idea. the detective was calm and cold superior; but mr. corbeck, 
who was an enthusiast, was full of eager curiosity. 

the moment doctor winchester got into the room, silvio began to mew and 
wriggle; and jump out of his arms, ran over to the cat mummy and 
began to scratch angry at it. miss trelawny had some difficulty in 
taking him away; but so soon as he was out of the room he became quiet. 
when she came back there was a clamour of comments: 

"i thought so!" from the doctor. 

"what can it mean?" from miss trelawny. 

"that's a very strange thing!" from mr. corbeck. 

"odd! but it doesn't prove anything!" from the detective. 

"i suspend my judgment!" from myself, thinking it advisable to say 
something. 

then by common consent we drop the theme--for the present. 

in my room that evening i was making some note of what had happened, 
when there came a low tap on the door. in obedience to my summons 
sergeant daw came in, careful close the door behind him. 

"well, sergeant," said i, "sit down. what is it?" 

"i want to speak to you, sir, about those lamps." i nod and 
waited: he went on: "you know that that room where they were found 
open directly into the room where miss trelawny slept last night?" 

"yes." 

"during the night a window somewhere in that part of the house was 
opened, and shut again. i heard it, and took a look round; but i could 
see no sign of anything." 

"yes, i know that!" i said; "i heard a window move myself." 

"does nothing strike you as strange about it, sir?" 

"strange!" i said; "strange! why it's all the most bewildering, 
maddening thing i have ever encountered. it is all so strange that one 
seem to wonder, and simply waits for what will happen next. but what 
do you mean by strange?" 

the detective paused, as if choose his words to begin; and then said 
deliberately: 

"you see, i am not one who believe in magic and such things. i am for 
fact all the time; and i always find in the long-run that there is a 
reason and a cause for everything. this new gentleman say these 
things were stolen out of his room in the hotel. the lamps, i take it 
from some things he has said, really belong to mr. trelawny. his 
daughter, the lady of the house, have left the room she usually 
occupies, sleep that night on the ground floor. a window is heard to 
open and shut during the night. when we, who have been during the day 
try to find a clue to the robbery, come to the house, we find the 
stolen goods in a room close to where she slept, and opening out of it!" 

he stopped. i felt that same sense of pain and apprehension, which i 
had experienced when he had spoken to me before, creeping, or rather 
rushing, over me again. i had to face the matter out, however. my 
relations with her, and the feeling toward her which i now knew full 
well meant a very deep love and devotion, demand so much. i said as 
calm as i could, for i knew the keen eyes of the skilful investigate 
were on me: 

"and the inference?" 

he answer with the cool audacity of conviction: 

"the inference to me is that there was no robbery at all. the goods 
were taken by someone to this house, where they were received through a 
window on the ground floor. they were placed in the cabinet, ready to 
be discover when the proper time should come!" 

somehow i felt relieved; the assumption was too monstrous. i did not 
want, however, my relief to be apparent, so i answer as grave as i 
could: 

"and who do you suppose brought them to the house?" 

"i keep my mind open as to that. possibly mr. corbeck himself; the 
matter might be too risky to trust to a third party." 

"then the natural extension of your inference is that mr. corbeck is a 
liar and a fraud; and that he is in conspiracy with miss trelawny to 
deceive someone or other about those lamps." 

"those are harsh words, mr. ross. they're so plain-spoken that they 
bring a man up standing, and make new doubt for him. but i have to go 
where my reason points. it may be that there is another party than 
miss trelawny in it. indeed, if it hadn't been for the other matter 
that set me thinking and bred doubt of its own about her, i wouldn't 
dream of mix her up in this. but i'm safe on corbeck. whoever else 
is in it, he is! the things couldn't have been taken without his 
connivance--if what he say is true. if it isn't--well! he is a liar 
anyhow. i would think it a bad job to have him stay in the house with 
so many valuables, only that it will give me and my mate a chance of 
watch him. we'll keep a pretty good look-out, too, i tell you. 
he's up in my room now, guard those lamps; but johnny wright is 
there too. i go on before he come off; so there won't be much chance 
of another house-breaking. of course, mr. ross, all this, too, is 
between you and me." 

"quite so! you may depend on my silence!" i said; and he went away to 
keep a close eye on the egyptologist. 

it seem as though all my painful experience were to go in pairs, and 
that the sequence of the previous day was to be repeated; for before 
long i had another private visit from doctor winchester who had now 
paid his nightly visit to his patient and was on his way home. he took 
the seat which i proffer and began at once: 

"this is a strange affair altogether. miss trelawny has just been 
telling me about the stolen lamps, and of the finding of them in the 
napoleon cabinet. it would seem to be another complication of the 
mystery; and yet, do you know, it is a relief to me. i have exhaust 
all human and natural possibility of the case, and am beginning to 
fall back on superhuman and supernatural possibilities. here are such 
strange things that, if i am not go mad, i think we must have a 
solution before long. i wonder if i might ask some question and some 
help from mr. corbeck, without making further complication and 
embarrass us. he seem to know an amazing amount regarding egypt 
and all relate to it. perhaps he wouldn't mind translate a little 
bit of hieroglyphic. it is child's play to him. what do you think?" 

when i had thought the matter over a few seconds i spoke. we want 
all the help we could get. for myself, i had perfect confidence in 
both men; and any compare notes, or mutual assistance, might bring 
good results. such could hardly bring evil. 

"by all means i should ask him. he seem an extraordinarily learned 
man in egyptology; and he seem to me a good fellow as well as an 
enthusiast. by the way, it will be necessary to be a little guarded as 
to whom you speak regarding any information which he may give you." 

"of course!" he answered. "indeed i should not dream of saying 
anything to anybody, excepting yourself. we have to remember that when 
mr. trelawny recover he may not like to think that we have been 
chatter unduly over his affairs." 

"look here!" i said, "why not stay for a while: and i shall ask him to 
come and have a pipe with us. we can then talk over things." 

he acquiesced: so i went to the room where mr. corbeck was, and 
brought him back with me. i thought the detective were pleased at his 
going. on the way to my room he said: 

"i don't half like leave those things there, with only those men to 
guard them. they're a deal sight too precious to be left to the police!" 

from which it would appear that suspicion was not confine to sergeant 
daw. 

mr. corbeck and doctor winchester, after a quick glance at each other, 
became at once on most friendly terms. the traveller professed his 
willing to be of any assistance which he could, provided, he added, 
that it was anything about which he was free to speak. this was not 
very promising; but doctor winchester began at once: 

"i want you, if you will, to translate some hieroglyph for me." 

"certainly, with the greatest pleasure, so far as i can. for i may 
tell you that hieroglyph writing is not quite master yet; though we 
are get at it! we are get at it! what is the inscription?" 

"there are two," he answered. "one of them i shall bring here." 

he went out, and return in a minute with the mummy cat which he had 
that evening introduce to silvio. the scholar took it; and, after a 
short examination, said: 

"there is nothing especial in this. it is an appeal to bast, the lady 
of bubastis, to give her good bread and milk in the elysian fields. 
there may be more inside; and if you will care to unroll it, i will do 
my best. i do not think, however, that there is anything special. 
from the method of wrapping i should say it is from the delta; and of a 
late period, when such mummy work was common and cheap. what is the 
other inscription you wish me to see?" 

"the inscription on the mummy cat in mr. trelawny's room." 

mr. corbeck's face fell. "no!" he said, "i cannot do that! i am, for 
the present at all events, practically bound to secrecy regarding any 
of the things in mr. trelawny's room." 

doctor winchester's comment and my own were made at the same moment. i 
said only the one word "checkmate!" from which i think he may have 
gather that i guess more of his idea and purpose than perhaps i had 
intentional convey to him. he murmured: 

"practically bound to secrecy?" 

mr. corbeck at once took up the challenge conveyed: 

"do not misunderstand me! i am not bound by any definite pledge of 
secrecy; but i am bound in honour to respect mr. trelawny's confidence, 
given to me, i may tell you, in a very large measure. regarding many 
of the object in his room he has a definite purpose in view; and it 
would not be either right or becoming for me, his trust friend and 
confidant, to forestall that purpose. mr. trelawny, you may know--or 
rather you do not know or you would not have so construe my remark--is 
a scholar, a very great scholar. he has work for years toward a 
certain end. for this he has spare no labour, no expense, no personal 
danger or self-denial. he is on the line of a result which will place 
him amongst the foremost discover or investigate of his age. and 
now, just at the time when any hour might bring him success, he is 
stricken down!" 

he stopped, seemingly overcome with emotion. after a time he recover 
himself and went on: 

"again, do not misunderstand me as to another point. i have said that 
mr. trelawny has made much confidence with me; but i do not mean to 
lead you to believe that i know all his plans, or his aim or objects. 
i know the period which he has been studying; and the definite 
historical individual whose life he has been investigating, and whose 
record he has been following up one by one with infinite patience. 
but beyond this i know nothing. that he has some aim or object in the 
completion of this knowledge i am convinced. what it is i may guess; 
but i must say nothing. please to remember, gentlemen, that i have 
voluntary accept the position of recipient of a partial confidence. 
i have respect that; and i must ask any of my friends to do the same." 

he spoke with great dignity; and he grew, moment by moment, in the 
respect and esteem of both doctor winchester and myself. we understood 
that he had not done speaking; so we wait in silence till he 
continued: 

"i have spoken this much, although i know well that even such a hint as 
either of you might gather from my words might jeopardise the success 
of his work. but i am convinced that you both wish to help him--and 
his daughter," he said this look me fairly between the eyes, "to the 
best of your power, honestly and unselfishly. he is so stricken down, 
and the manner of it is so mysterious that i cannot but think that it 
is in some way a result of his own work. that he calculate on some 
set-back is manifest to us all. god knows! i am willing to do what i 
can, and to use any knowledge i have in his behalf. i arrive in 
england full of exultation at the thought that i had fulfill the 
mission with which he had trust me. i had got what he said were the 
last object of his search; and i felt assured that he would now be 
able to begin the experiment of which he had often hint to me. it is 
too dreadful that at just such a time such a calamity should have 
fallen on him. doctor winchester, you are a physician; and, if your 
face do not belie you, you are a clever and a bold one. is there no 
way which you can devise to wake this man from his unnatural stupor?" 

there was a pause; then the answer came slow and deliberately: 

"there is no ordinary remedy that i know of. there might possibly be 
some extraordinary one. but there would be no use in try to find 
it, except on one condition." 

"and that?" 

"knowledge! i am completely ignorant of egypt matters, language, 
writing, history, secrets, medicines, poisons, occult powers--all that 
go to make up the mystery of that mysterious land. this disease, or 
condition, or whatever it may be called, from which mr. trelawny is 
suffering, is in some way connected with egypt. i have had a suspicion 
of this from the first; and later it grew into a certainty, though 
without proof. what you have said tonight confirm my conjecture, and 
make me believe that a proof is to be had. i do not think that you 
quite know all that has gone on in this house since the night of the 
attack--of the finding of mr. trelawny's body. now i propose that we 
confide in you. if mr. ross agrees, i shall ask him to tell you. he is 
more skilled than i am in putt fact before other people. he can 
speak by his brief; and in this case he has the best of all briefs, the 
experience of his own eyes and ears, and the evidence that he has 
himself taken on the spot from participate in, or spectator of, what 
has happened. when you know all, you will, i hope, be in a position to 
judge as to whether you can best help mr. trelawny, and further his 
secret wishes, by your silence or your speech." 

i nod approval. mr. corbeck jump up, and in his impulsive way 
held out a hand to each. 

"done!" he said. "i acknowledge the honour of your confidence; and on 
my part i pledge myself that if i find my duty to mr. trelawny's wish 
will, in his own interest, allow my lip to open on his affairs, i 
shall speak so freely as i may." 

accordingly i began, and told him, as exactly as i could, everything 
that had happen from the moment of my waking at the knock on the 
door in jermyn street. the only reservation i made were as to my own 
feeling toward miss trelawny and the matter of small import to the 
main subject which follow it; and my conversation with sergeant daw, 
which were in themselves private, and which would have demand 
discretionary silence in any case. as i spoke, mr. corbeck follow 
with breathless interest. sometimes he would stand up and pace about 
the room in uncontrollable excitement; and then recover himself 
suddenly, and sit down again. sometimes he would be about to speak, 
but would, with an effort, restrain himself. i think the narration 
help me to make up my own mind; for even as i talked, things seem 
to appear in a clear light. things big and little, in relation of 
their importance to the case, fell into proper perspective. the story 
up to date became coherent, except as to its cause, which seem a 
greater mystery than ever. this is the merit of entire, or collected, 
narrative. isolated facts, doubts, suspicions, conjectures, give way 
to a homogene which is convincing. 

that mr. corbeck was convinced was evident. he did not go through any 
process of explanation or limitation, but spoke right out at once to 
the point, and fearless like a man: 

"that settle me! there is in activity some force that needs special 
care. if we all go on working in the dark we shall get in one 
another's way, and by hamper each other, undo the good that any or 
each of us, working in different directions, might do. it seem to me 
that the first thing we have to accomplish is to get mr. trelawny wake 
out of that unnatural sleep. that he can be wake is apparent from the 
way the nurse has recovered; though what additional harm may have been 
done to him in the time he has been lie in that room i suppose no one 
can tell. we must chance that, however. he has lain there, and 
whatever the effect might be, it is there now; and we have, and shall 
have, to deal with it as a fact. a day more or less won't hurt in the 
long-run. it is late now; and we shall probably have tomorrow a task 
before us that will require our energy afresh. you, doctor, will 
want to get to your sleep; for i suppose you have other work as well as 
this to do tomorrow. as for you, mr. ross, i understand that you are 
to have a spell of watch in the sick-room tonight. i shall get you 
a book which will help to pass the time for you. i shall go and look 
for it in the library. i know where it was when i was here last; and i 
don't suppose mr. trelawny has use it since. he knew long ago all 
that was in it which was or might be of interest to him. but it will 
be necessary, or at least helpful, to understand other things which i 
shall tell you later. you will be able to tell doctor winchester all 
that would aid him. for i take it that our work will branch out pretty 
soon. we shall each have our own end to hold up; and it will take each 
of us all our time and understanding to get through his own tasks. it 
will not be necessary for you to read the whole book. all that will 
interest you--with regard to our matter i mean of course, for the whole 
book is interesting as a record of travel in a country then quite 
unknown--is the preface, and two or three chapter which i shall mark 
for you." 

he shook hand warm with doctor winchester who had stood up to go. 

whilst he was away i sat lonely, thinking. as i thought, the world 
around me seem to be illimitable great. the only little spot in 
which i was interested seem like a tiny speck in the midst of a 
wilderness. without and around it were dark and unknown danger, 
pressing in from every side. and the central figure in our little 
oasis was one of sweet and beauty. a figure one could love; could 
work for; could die for...! 

mr. corbeck came back in a very short time with the book; he had found 
it at once in the spot where he had seen it three years before. have 
placed in it several slips of paper, marking the place where i was to 
read, he put it into my hands, saying: 

"that is what start mr. trelawny; what start me when i read it; and 
which will, i have no doubt, be to you an interesting beginning to a 
special study--whatever the end may be. if, indeed, any of us here may 
ever see the end." 

at the door he pause and said: 

"i want to take back one thing. that detective is a good fellow. what 
you have told me of him put him in a new light. the best proof of it 
is that i can go quiet to sleep tonight, and leave the lamp in his 
care!" 

when he had gone i took the book with me, put on my respirator, and 
went to my spell of duty in the sick-room! 




chapter x 

the valley of the sorcerer 


i placed the book on the little table on which the shade lamp rest 
and move the screen to one side. thus i could have the light on my 
book; and by look up, see the bed, and the nurse, and the door. i 
cannot say that the conditions were enjoyable, or calculate to allow 
of that absorption in the subject which is advisable for effective 
study. however, i compose myself to the work as well as i could. the 
book was one which, on the very face of it, require special attention. 
it was a folio in dutch, print in amsterdam in 1650. some one had 
made a literal translation, writing generally the english word under 
the dutch, so that the grammatical difference between the two tongue 
made even the reading of the translate a difficult matter. one had 
to dodge backward and forward among the words. this was in addition to 
the difficulty of decipher a strange handwriting of two hundred 
years ago. i found, however, that after a short time i got into the 
habit of following in conventional english the dutch construction; and, 
as i became more familiar with the writing, my task became easier. 

at first the circumstances of the room, and the fear lest miss trelawny 
should return unexpected and find me reading the book, disturbed me 
somewhat. for we had arrange amongst us, before doctor winchester had 
gone home, that she was not to be brought into the range of the coming 
investigation. we considered that there might be some shock to a 
woman's mind in matter of apparent mystery; and further, that she, 
being mr. trelawny's daughter, might be placed in a difficult position 
with him afterward if she took part in, or even had a personal 
knowledge of, the disregard of his express wishes. but when i 
remember that she did not come on nursing duty till two o'clock, the 
fear of interrupt pass away. i had still nearly three house 
before me. nurse kennedy sat in her chair by the bedside, patient and 
alert. a clock tick on the landing; other clock in the house 
ticked; the life of the city without manifest itself in the distant 
hum, now and again swelling into a roar as a breeze floating westward 
took the concourse of sound with it. but still the dominant idea was 
of silence. the light on my book, and the soothe fringe of green 
silk round the shade intensified, whenever i look up, the gloom of 
the sick-room. with every line i read, this seem to grow deep and 
deeper; so that when my eyes came back to the page the light seem to 
dazzle me. i stuck to my work, however, and presently began to get 
sufficient into the subject to become interested in it. 

the book was by one nichola van huyn of hoorn. in the preface he told 
how, attract by the work of john greave of merton college, 
pyramidographia, he himself visit egypt, where he became so 
interested in its wonders that he devoted some years of his life to 
visiting strange places, and explore the ruins of many temple and 
tombs. he had come across many variant of the story of the building 
of the pyramid as told by the arabia historian, ibn abd alhokin, some 
of which he set down. these i did not stop to read, but went on to the 
marked pages. 

as soon as i began to read these, however, there grew on me some sense 
of a disturb influence. once or twice i look to see if the nurse 
had moved, for there was a feeling as though some one were near me. 
nurse kennedy sat in her place, as steady and alert as ever; and i came 
back to my book again. 

the narrative went on to tell how, after passing for several days 
through the mountain to the east of aswan, the explore came to a 
certain place. here i give his own words, simply putt the 
translate into modern english: 

"toward evening we came to the entrance of a narrow, deep valley, 
running east and west. i wish to proceed through this; for the sun, 
now nearly down on the horizon, show a wide opening beyond the 
narrow of the cliffs. but the fellaheen absolutely refuse to enter 
the valley at such a time, allege that they might be caught by the 
night before they could emerge from the other end. at first they would 
give no reason for their fear. they had hitherto gone anywhere i 
wished, and at any time, without demur. on being pressed, however, 
they said that the place was the valley of the sorcerer, where none 
might come in the night. on being ask to tell of the sorcerer, they 
refused, saying that there was no name, and that they knew nothing. on 
the next morning, however, when the sun was up and shining down the 
valley, their fear had somewhat pass away. then they told me that a 
great sorcerer in ancient days--'millions of million of years' was the 
term they used--a king or a queen, they could not say which, was bury 
there. they could not give the name, persist to the last that there 
was no name; and that anyone who should name it would waste away in 
life so that at death nothing of him would remain to be raise again in 
the other world. in passing through the valley they kept together in a 
cluster, hurry on in front of me. none dare to remain behind. they 
gave, as their reason for so proceeding, that the arms of the sorcerer 
were long, and that it was dangerous to be the last. the which was of 
little comfort to me who of this necessity took that honourable post. 
in the narrowest part of the valley, on the south side, was a great 
cliff of rock, rising sheer, of smooth and even surface. hereon were 
graven certain cabalistic signs, and many figures of men and animals, 
fishes, reptile and birds; sun and stars; and many quaint symbols. 
some of these latter were disjointed limb and features, such as arms 
and legs, fingers, eyes, noses, ears, and lips. mysterious symbol 
which will puzzle the recording angel to interpret at the judgment day. 
the cliff face exactly north. there was something about it so 
strange, and so different from the other carve rocks which i had 
visited, that i call a halt and spent the day in examine the rock 
front as well as i could with my telescope. the egypt of my 
company were terribly afraid, and use every kind of persuasion to 
induce me to pass on. i stay till late in the afternoon, by which 
time i had fail to make out aright the entry of any tomb, for i 
suspect that such was the purpose of the sculpture of the rock. by 
this time the men were rebellious; and i had to leave the valley if i 
did not wish my whole retinue to desert. but i secret made up my 
mind to discover the tomb, and explore it. to this end i went further 
into the mountains, where i met with an arab sheik who was willing to 
take service with me. the arab were not bound by the same 
superstitious fear as the egyptians; sheik abu some and his following 
were willing to take a part in the explorations. 

"when i return to the valley with these bedouins, i made effort to 
climb the face of the rock, but failed, it being of one impenetrable 
smoothness. the stone, generally flat and smooth by nature, had been 
chisel to completeness. that there had been project steps was 
manifest, for there remained, untouched by the wondrous climate of that 
strange land, the mark of saw and chisel and mallet where the steps 
had been cut or broken away. 

"being thus baffle of winning the tomb from below, and being 
unprovided with ladder to scale, i found a way by much circuitous 
journey to the top of the cliff. thence i cause myself to be 
lower by ropes, till i had investigate that portion of the rock face 
wherein i expect to find the opening. i found that there was an 
entrance, closed however by a great stone slab. this was cut in the 
rock more than a hundred feet up, being two-thirds the height of the 
cliff. the hieroglyph and cabalistic symbol cut in the rock were so 
manage as to disguise it. the cutting was deep, and was continue 
through the rock and the portals of the doorway, and through the great 
slab which form the door itself. this was fixed in place with such 
incredible exact that no stone chisel or cutting implement which i 
had with me could find a lodgment in the interstices. i use much 
force, however; and by many heavy stroke won a way into the tomb, for 
such i found it to be. the stone door have fallen into the entrance 
i pass over it into the tomb, note as i went a long iron chain 
which hung coil on a bracket close to the doorway. 

"the tomb i found to be complete, after the manner of the finest 
egypt tombs, with chamber and shaft leading down to the corridor, 
ending in the mummy pit. it had the table of pictures, which seem 
some kind of record--whose meaning is now for ever lost--graven in a 
wondrous colour on a wondrous stone. 

"all the wall of the chamber and the passage were carve with strange 
writings in the uncanny form mentioned. the huge stone coffin or 
sarcophagus in the deep pit was marvellous graven throughout with 
signs. the arab chief and two other who venture into the tomb with 
me, and who were evidently use to such grim explorations, manage to 
take the cover from the sarcophagus without break it. at which they 
wondered; for such good fortune, they said, did not usually attend such 
efforts. indeed they seem not over careful; and did handle the 
various furniture of the tomb with such little concern that, only for 
its great strength and thickness, even the coffin itself might have 
been injured. which gave me much concern, for it was very beautiful 
wrought of rare stone, such as i had no knowledge of. much i grieve 
that it were not possible to carry it away. but time and desert 
journey forbade such; i could only take with me such small matter 
as could be carry on the person. 

"within the sarcophagus was a body, manifest of a woman, swathe with 
many wrapping of linen, as is usual with all mummies. from certain 
embroider thereon, i gather that she was of high rank. across 
the breast was one hand, unwrapped. in the mummy which i had seen, 
the arms and hand are within the wrappings, and certain adornment of 
wood, shaped and paint to resemble arms and hands, lie outside the 
enwrapp body. 

"but this hand was strange to see, for it was the real hand of her who 
lay enwrapp there; the arm project from the cerement being of 
flesh, seemingly made as like marble in the process of embalming. arm 
and hand were of dusky white, being of the hue of ivory that hath lain 
long in air. the skin and the nail were complete and whole, as though 
the body had been placed for burial over night. i touched the hand and 
move it, the arm being something flexible as a live arm; though stiff 
with long disuse, as are the arms of those faqueer which i have seen 
in the indees. there was, too, an add wonder that on this ancient 
hand were no less than seven fingers, the same all being fine and long, 
and of great beauty. sooth to say, it made me shudder and my flesh 
creep to touch that hand that had lain there undisturbed for so many 
thousand of years, and yet was like unto living flesh. underneath the 
hand, as though guarded by it, lay a huge jewel of ruby; a great stone 
of wondrous bigness, for the ruby is in the main a small jewel. this 
one was of wondrous colour, being as of fine blood whereon the light 
shineth. but its wonder lay not in its size or colour, though these 
were, as i have said, of priceless rarity; but in that the light of it 
shone from seven stars, each of seven points, as clearly as though the 
stars were in reality there imprisoned. when that the hand was lifted, 
the sight of that wondrous stone lie there struck me with a shock 
almost to momentary paralysis. i stood gaze on it, as did those with 
me, as though it were that fade head of the gorgon medusa with the 
snake in her hair, whose sight struck into stone those who beheld. so 
strong was the feeling that i want to hurry away from the place. so, 
too, those with me; therefore, taking this rare jewel, together with 
certain amulet of strange and richness being wrought of 
jewel-stones, i made haste to depart. i would have remain longer, 
and made further research in the wrapping of the mummy, but that i 
fear so to do. for it came to me all at once that i was in a desert 
place, with strange men who were with me because they were not 
over-scrupulous. that we were in a lone cavern of the dead, an hundred 
feet above the ground, where none could find me were ill done to me, 
nor would any ever seek. but in secret i determined that i would come 
again, though with more secure following. moreover, was i tempt to 
seek further, as in examine the wrapping i saw many things of 
strange import in that wondrous tomb; including a casket of eccentric 
shape made of some strange stone, which methought might have contained 
other jewels, inasmuch as it had secure lodgment in the great 
sarcophagus itself. there was in the tomb also another coffer which, 
though of rare proportion and adornment, was more simply shaped. it 
was of ironstone of great thickness; but the cover was lightly cement 
down with what seem gum and paris plaster, as though to insure that 
no air could penetrate. the arab with me so insist in its opening, 
thinking that from its thickness much treasure was store therein, that 
i consent thereto. but their hope was a false one, as it proved. 
within, close packed, stood four jar finely wrought and carve with 
various adornments. of these one was the head of a man, another of a 
dog, another of a jackal, and another of a hawk. i had before known 
that such burial urn as these were use to contain the entrails and 
other organ of the mummy dead; but on opening these, for the 
fastening of wax, though complete, was thin, and yield easily, we 
found that they held but oil. the bedouins, spill most of the oil 
in the process, grope with their hand in the jar lest treasure 
should have been there concealed. but their searching was of no avail; 
no treasure was there. i was warn of my danger by seeing in the eyes 
of the arab certain covetous glances. whereon, in order to hasten 
their departure, i wrought upon those fear of superstition which even 
in these callous men were apparent. the chief of the bedouin ascend 
from the pit to give the signal to those above to raise us; and i, not 
care to remain with the men whom i mistrusted, follow him 
immediately. the other did not come at once; from which i fear that 
they were rifling the tomb afresh on their own account. i refrain to 
speak of it, however, lest worse should befall. at last they came. 
one of them, who ascend first, in landing at the top of the cliff 
lost his foothold and fell below. he was instantly killed. the other 
followed, but in safety. the chief came next, and i came last. before 
coming away i pull into its place again, as well as i could, the slab 
of stone that cover the entrance to the tomb. i wished, if possible, 
to preserve it for my own examination should i come again. 

"when we all stood on the hill above the cliff, the burning sun that 
was bright and full of glory was good to see after the dark and 
strange mystery of the tomb. even was i glad that the poor arab who 
fell down the cliff and lay dead below, lay in the sunlight and not in 
that gloomy cavern. i would fain have gone with my companion to seek 
him and give him sepulture of some kind; but the sheik made light of 
it, and sent two of his men to see to it whilst we went on our way. 

"that night as we camped, one of the men only returned, saying that a 
lion of the desert had kill his companion after that they had bury 
the dead man in a deep sand without the valley, and had cover the 
spot where he lay with many great rocks, so that jackal or other 
prey beast might not dig him up again as is their wont. 

"later, in the light of the fire round which the men sat or lay, i saw 
him exhibit to his fellow something white which they seem to regard 
with special awe and reverence. so i drew near silently, and saw that 
it was none other than the white hand of the mummy which had lain 
protect the jewel in the great sarcophagus. i heard the bedouin tell 
how he had found it on the body of him who had fallen from the cliff. 
there was no mistake it, for there were the seven finger which i had 
noted before. this man must have wrench it off the dead body whilst 
his chief and i were otherwise engaged; and from the awe of the other 
i doubt not that he had hope to use it as an amulet, or charm. 
whereas if powers it had, they were not for him who had taken it from 
the dead; since his death follow hard upon his theft. already his 
amulet had had an awesome baptism; for the wrist of the dead hand was 
stain with red as though it had been dip in recent blood. 

"that night i was in certain fear lest there should be some violence 
done to me; for if the poor dead hand was so value as a charm, what 
must be the worth in such wise of the rare jewel which it had guarded. 
though only the chief knew of it, my doubt was perhaps even greater; 
for he could so order matter as to have me at his mercy when he would. 
i guarded myself, therefore, with wakeful so well as i could, 
determined that at my earliest opportunity i should leave this party, 
and complete my journey home, first to the nile bank, and then down 
its course to alexandria; with other guide who knew not what strange 
matter i had with me. 

"at last there came over me a disposition of sleep, so potent that i 
felt it would be resistless. fear attack, or that being search in 
my sleep the bedouin might find the star jewel which he had seen me 
place with other in my dress, i took it out unobserved and held it in 
my hand. it seem to give back the light of the flicker fire and 
the light of the stars--for there was no moon--with equal fidelity; and 
i could note that on its reverse it was graven deep with certain 
sign such as i had seen in the tomb. as i sank into the 
unconscious of sleep, the graven star jewel was hidden in the 
hollow of my clench hand. 

"i wake out of sleep with the light of the morning sun on my face. i 
sat up and look around me. the fire was out, and the camp was 
desolate; save for one figure which lay prone close to me. it was that 
of the arab chief, who lay on his back, dead. his face was almost 
black; and his eyes were open, and staring horrible up at the sky, as 
though he saw there some dreadful vision. he had evidently been 
strangled; for on looking, i found on his throat the red mark where 
finger had pressed. there seem so many of these mark that i 
count them. there were seven; and all parallel, except the thumb 
mark, as though made with one hand. this thrill me as i thought of 
the mummy hand with the seven fingers. 

"even there, in the open desert, it seem as if there could be 
enchantments! 

"in my surprise, as i bent over him, i open my right hand, which up 
to now i had held shut with the feeling, instinctive even in sleep, of 
keeping safe that which it held. as i did so, the star jewel held 
there fell out and struck the dead man on the mouth. mirabile dictu 
there came forth at once from the dead mouth a great gush of blood, in 
which the red jewel was for the moment lost. i turn the dead man 
over to look for it, and found that he lay with his right hand bent 
under him as though he had fallen on it; and in it he held a great 
knife, keen of point and edge, such as arab carry at the belt. it may 
have been that he was about to murder me when vengeance came on him, 
whether from man or god, or the gods of old, i know not. suffice it, 
that when i found my ruby jewel, which shone up as a living star from 
the mess of blood wherein it lay, i pause not, but flee from the 
place. i journey on alone through the hot desert, till, by god's 
grace, i came upon an arab tribe camp by a well, who gave me salt. 
with them i rest till they had set me on my way. 

"i know not what became of the mummy hand, or of those who had it. 
what strife, or suspicion, or disaster, or greed went with it i know 
not; but some such cause there must have been, since those who had it 
flee with it. it doubtless is use as a charm of pot by some 
desert tribe. 

"at the earliest opportunity i made examination of the star ruby, as i 
wish to try to understand what was graven on it. the symbols--whose 
meaning, however, i could not understand--were as follows..." 

twice, whilst i had been reading this engrossing narrative, i had 
thought that i had seen across the page streak of shade, which the 
weird of the subject had made to seem like the shadow of a hand. 
on the first of these occasion i found that the illusion came from the 
fringe of green silk around the lamp; but on the second i had look 
up, and my eyes had lit on the mummy hand across the room on which the 
starlight was fall under the edge of the blind. it was of little 
wonder that i had connected it with such a narrative; for if my eyes 
told me truly, here, in this room with me, was the very hand of which 
the traveller van huyn had written. i look over at the bed; and it 
comfort me to think that the nurse still sat there, calm and wakeful. 
at such a time, with such surrounds, during such a narrative, it was 
well to have assurance of the presence of some living person. 

i sat look at the book on the table before me; and so many strange 
thought crowded on me that my mind began to whirl. it was almost as 
if the light on the white finger in front of me was beginning to have 
some hypnotic effect. all at once, all thought seem to stop; and 
for an instant the world and time stood still. 

there lay a real hand across the book! what was there to so overcome 
me, as was the case? i knew the hand that i saw on the book--and love 
it. margaret trelawny's hand was a joy to me to see--to touch; and yet 
at that moment, coming after other marvellous things, it had a 
strange moving effect on me. it was but momentary, however, and had 
pass even before her voice had reach me. 

"what disturb you? what are you staring at the book for? i thought 
for an instant that you must have been overcome again!" i jump up. 

"i was reading," i said, "an old book from the library." as i spoke i 
closed it and put it under my arm. "i shall now put it back, as i 
understand that your father wish all things, especially books, kept 
in their proper places." my words were intentional misleading; for i 
did not wish her to know what i was reading, and thought it best not to 
wake her curiosity by leave the book about. i went away, but not to 
the library; i left the book in my room where i could get it when i had 
had my sleep in the day. when i return nurse kennedy was ready to go 
to bed; so miss trelawny watch with me in the room. i did not want 
any book whilst she was present. we sat close together and talk in a 
whisper whilst the moments flew by. it was with surprise that i noted 
the edge of the curtains change from grey to yellow light. what we 
talk of had nothing to do with the sick man, except in so far that 
all which concerned his daughter must ultimately concern him. but it 
had nothing to say to egypt, or mummies, or the dead, or caves, or 
bedouin chiefs. i could well take note in the grow light that 
margaret's hand had not seven fingers, but five; for it lay in mine. 

when doctor winchester arrive in the morning and had made his visit to 
his patient, he came to see me as i sat in the dining-room have a 
little meal--breakfast or supper, i hardly knew which it was--before i 
went to lie down. mr. corbeck came in at the same time; and we resume 
out conversation where we had left it the night before. i told mr. 
corbeck that i had read the chapter about the finding of the tomb, and 
that i thought doctor winchester should read it, too. the latter said 
that, if he might, he would take it with him; he had that morning to 
make a railway journey to ipswich, and would read it on the train. he 
said he would bring it back with him when he came again in the evening. 
i went up to my room to bring it down; but i could not find it 
anywhere. i had a distinct recollection of have left it on the little 
table beside my bed, when i had come up after miss trelawny's go on 
duty into the sick-room. it was very strange; for the book was not of 
a kind that any of the servant would be likely to take. i had to come 
back and explain to the other that i could not find it. 

when doctor winchester had gone, mr. corbeck, who seem to know the 
dutchman's work by heart, talk the whole matter over with me. i told 
him that i was interrupt by a change of nurses, just as i had come to 
the description of the ring. he smile as he said: 

"so far as that is concerned, you need not be disappointed. not in van 
huyn's time, nor for nearly two century later, could the meaning of 
that engraving have been understood. it was only when the work was 
taken up and follow by young and champollion, by birch and lepsiu 
and rosellini and salvolini, by mariette bey and by walli budge and 
flinder petrie and the other scholar of their times that great 
result ensued, and that the true meaning of hieroglyph was known. 

"later, i shall explain to you, if mr. trelawny do not explain it 
himself, or if he do not forbid me to, what it means in that 
particular place. i think it will be better for you to know what 
follow van huyn's narrative; for with the description of the stone, 
and the account of his bring it to dutch at the termination of his 
travels, the episode ends. end so far as his book is concerned. the 
chief thing about the book is that it set other thinking--and acting. 
amongst them were mr. trelawny and myself. mr. trelawny is a good 
linguist of the orient, but he do not know northern tongues. as for 
me i have a faculty for learning languages; and when i was pursue my 
study in leyden i learned dutch so that i might more easily make 
reference in the library there. thus it was, that at the very time 
when mr. trelawny, who, in making his great collection of works on 
egypt, had, through a booksellers' catalogue, acquire this volume with 
the manuscript translation, was study it, i was reading another 
copy, in original dutch, in leyden. we were both struck by the 
description of the lonely tomb in the rock; cut so high up as to be 
inaccessible to ordinary seekers: with all means of reach it 
careful obliterated; and yet with such an elaborate ornamentation of 
the smooth surface of the cliff as van huyn has described. it also 
struck us both as an odd thing--for in the years between van huyn's 
time and our own the general knowledge of egypt curio and record 
has increase marvellously--that in the case of such a tomb, made in 
such a place, and which must have cost an immense sum of money, there 
was no seeming record or effigy to point out who lay within. moreover, 
the very name of the place, 'the valley of the sorcerer', had, in a 
prosaic age, attraction of its own. when we met, which we did through 
his seek the assistance of other egyptologist in his work, we 
talk over this as we did over many other things; and we determined to 
make search for the mysterious valley. whilst we were wait to start 
on the travel, for many things were require which mr. trelawny 
undertook to see to himself, i went to dutch to try if i could by any 
trace verify van huyn's narrative. i went straight to hoorn, and set 
patient to work to find the house of the traveller and his 
descendants, if any. i need not trouble you with detail of my 
seeking--and finding. hoorn is a place that has not change much since 
van huyn's time, except that it has lost the place which it held 
amongst commercial cities. its externals are such as they had been 
then; in such a sleepy old place a century or two do not count for 
much. i found the house, and discover that none of the descendant 
were alive. i search records; but only to one end--death and 
extinction. then i set me to work to find what had become of his 
treasures; for that such a traveller must have had great treasure was 
apparent. i trace a good many to museum in leyden, utrecht, and 
amsterdam; and some few to the private house of rich collectors. at 
last, in the shop of an old watchmaker and jeweller at hoorn, i found 
what he considered his chiefest treasure; a great ruby, carven like a 
scarab, with seven stars, and engraven with hieroglyphics. the old man 
did not know hieroglyph character, and in his old-world, sleepy life, 
the philological discovery of recent years had not reach him. he 
did not know anything of van huyn, except that such a person had been, 
and that his name was, during two centuries, venerate in the town as a 
great traveller. he value the jewel as only a rare stone, spoil in 
part by the cutting; and though he was at first loth to part with such 
an unique gem, he became amenable ultimately to commercial reason. i 
had a full purse, since i bought for mr. trelawny, who is, as i suppose 
you know, immensely wealthy. i was shortly on my way back to london, 
with the star ruby safe in my pocket-book; and in my heart a joy and 
exultation which knew no bounds. 

"for here we were with proof of van huyn's wonderful story. the jewel 
was put in security in mr. trelawny's great safe; and we start out on 
our journey of exploration in full hope. 

"mr. trelawny was, at the last, loth to leave his young wife whom he 
dearly loved; but she, who love him equally, knew his longing to 
prosecute the search. so keeping to herself, as all good women do, all 
her anxieties--which in her case were special--she bade him follow out 
his bent." 




chapter xi 

a queen's tomb 


"mr. trelawny's hope was at least as great as my own. he is not so 
volatile a man as i am, prone to ups and downs of hope and despair; but 
he has a fixed purpose which crystallise hope into belief. at times i 
had fear that there might have been two such stones, or that the 
adventure of van huyn were traveller's fictions, base on some 
ordinary acquisition of the curio in alexandria or cairo, or london or 
amsterdam. but mr. trelawny never falter in his belief. we had many 
things to distract our mind from belief or disbelief. this was soon 
after arabi pasha, and egypt was so safe place for travellers, 
especially if they were english. but mr. trelawny is a fearless man; 
and i almost come to think at times that i am not a coward myself. we 
got together a band of arab whom one or other of us had known in 
former trip to the desert, and whom we could trust; that is, we did 
not distrust them as much as others. we were numerous enough to 
protect ourselves from chance maraud bands, and we took with us 
large impedimenta. we had secure the consent and passive co-operation 
of the official still friendly to britain; in the acquire of which 
consent i need hardly say that mr. trelawny's riches were of chief 
importance. we found our way in dhahabiyeh to aswan; whence, have 
got some arab from the sheik and have given our usual backsheesh, we 
set out on our journey through the desert. 

"well, after much wandering and try every winding in the 
interminable jumble of hills, we came at last at nightfall on just such 
a valley as van huyn had described. a valley with high, steep cliffs; 
narrow in the centre, and widen out to the eastern and western 
ends. at daylight we were opposite the cliff and could easily note the 
opening high up in the rock, and the hieroglyph figures which were 
evidently intended originally to conceal it. 

"but the sign which had baffle van huyn and those of his time--and 
later, were no secret to us. the host of scholar who have given 
their brains and their lives to this work, had wrest open the 
mysterious prison-house of egypt language. on the hewn face of the 
rocky cliff we, who had learned the secrets, could read what the theban 
priesthood had had there inscribe nearly fifty century before. 

"for that the external inscription was the work of the priesthood--and 
a hostile priesthood at that--there could be no living doubt. the 
inscription on the rock, written in hieroglyphic, ran thus: 

"'hither the gods come not at any summons. the "nameless one" has 
insult them and is for ever alone. go not nigh, lest their vengeance 
wither you away!' 

"the warning must have been a terribly potent one at the time it was 
written and for thousand of years afterwards; even when the language 
in which it was given had become a dead mystery to the people of the 
land. the tradition of such a terror last long than its cause. even 
in the symbol use there was an add significance of alliteration. 
'for ever' is given in the hieroglyphics as 'millions of years'. this 
symbol was repeated nine times, in three group of three; and after 
each group a symbol of the upper world, the under world, and the sky. 
so that for this lonely one there could be, through the vengeance of 
all the gods, resurrection in neither the world of sunlight, in the 
world of the dead, or for the soul in the region of the gods. 

"neither mr. trelawny nor i dare to tell any of our people what the 
writing meant. for though they did not believe in the religion whence 
the curse came, or in the gods whose vengeance was threatened, yet they 
were so superstitious that they would probably, had they known of it, 
have thrown up the whole task and run away. 

"their ignorance, however, and our discretion preserve us. we made an 
encampment close at hand, but behind a jut rock a little further 
along the valley, so that they might not have the inscription always 
before them. for even that traditional name of the place: 'the valley 
of the sorcerer', had a fear for them; and for us through them. with 
the timber which we had brought, we made a ladder up the face of the 
rock. we hung a pulley on a beam fixed to project from the top of the 
cliff. we found the great slab of rock, which form the door, placed 
clumsy in its place and secure by a few stones. its own weight kept 
it in safe position. in order to enter, we had to push it in; and we 
pass over it. we found the great coil of chain which van huyn had 
describe fasten into the rock. there were, however, abundant 
evidence amid the wreckage of the great stone door, which had revolve 
on iron hinge at top and bottom, that ample provision had been 
originally made for close and fastening it from within. 

"mr. trelawny and i went alone into the tomb. we had brought plenty of 
lights with us; and we fixed them as we went along. we wish to get a 
complete survey at first, and then make examination of all in detail. 
as we went on, we were fill with ever-increasing wonder and delight. 
the tomb was one of the most magnificent and beautiful which either of 
us had ever seen. from the elaborate nature of the sculpture and 
painting, and the perfection of the workmanship, it was evident that 
the tomb was prepared during the lifetime of her for whose 
resting-place it was intended. the drawing of the hieroglyph 
pictures was fine, and the colouring superb; and in that high cavern, 
far away from even the damp of the nile-flood, all was as fresh as when 
the artist had laid down their palettes. there was one thing which we 
could not avoid seeing. that although the cutting on the outside rock 
was the work of the priesthood, the smooth of the cliff face was 
probably a part of the tomb-builder's original design. the symbolism 
of the painting and cutting within all gave the same idea. the outer 
cavern, partly natural and partly hewn, was regard architecture as 
only an ante-chamber. at the end of it, so that it would face the east, 
was a pillar portico, hewn out of the solid rock. the pillar were 
massive and were seven-sided, a thing which we had not come across in 
any other tomb. sculpture on the architrave was the boat of the moon, 
contain hathor, cow-headed and bearing the disk and plumes, and the 
dog-headed hapi, the god of the north. it was steer by harpocrate 
towards the north, represent by the pole star surround by draco and 
ursa major. in the latter the stars that form what we call the 'plough' 
were cut large than any of the other stars; and were fill with gold 
so that, in the light of torches, they seem to flame with a special 
significance. passing within the portico, we found two of the 
architecture features of a rock tomb, the chamber, or chapel, and the 
pit, all complete as van huyn had noticed, though in his day the name 
given to these parts by the egypt of old were unknown. 

"the stele, or record, which had its place low down on the western 
wall, was so remarkable that we examine it minutely, even before go 
on our way to find the mummy which was the object of our search. this 
stele was a great slab of lapi lazuli, cut all over with hieroglyph 
figures of small size and of much beauty. the cutting was fill in 
with some cement of exceed fineness, and of the colour of pure 
vermilion. the inscription began: 

"'tera, queen of the egypts, daughter of antef, monarch of the north 
and the south.' 'daughter of the sun,' 'queen of the diadems'. 

"it then set out, in full record, the history of her life and reign. 

"the sign of sovereignty were given with a truly feminine profusion of 
adornment. the united crown of upper and lower egypt were, in 
especial, cut with exquisite precision. it was new to us both to find 
the hejet and the desher--the white and the red crown of upper and 
lower egypt--on the stele of a queen; for it was a rule, without 
exception in the records, that in ancient egypt either crown was worn 
only by a king; though they are to be found on goddesses. later on we 
found an explanation, of which i shall say more presently. 

"such an inscription was in itself a matter so startle as to arrest 
attention from anyone anywhere at any time; but you can have no 
conception of the effect which it had upon us. though our eyes were 
not the first which had seen it, they were the first which could see it 
with understanding since first the slab of rock was fixed in the cliff 
opening nearly five thousand years before. to us was given to read 
this message from the dead. this message of one who had war against 
the gods of old, and claim to have control them at a time when the 
hierarchy professed to be the only means of exciting their fear or 
gain their good will. 

"the wall of the upper chamber of the pit and the sarcophagus chamber 
were profuse inscribed; all the inscriptions, except that on the 
stele, being coloured with bluish-green pigment. the effect when seen 
sideways as the eye caught the green facets, was that of an old, 
discolour indian turquoise. 

"we descended the pit by the aid of the tackle we had brought with us. 
trelawny went first. it was a deep pit, more than seventy feet; but it 
had never been fill up. the passage at the bottom slope up to the 
sarcophagus chamber, and was long than is usually found. it had not 
been wall up. 

"within, we found a great sarcophagus of yellow stone. but that i need 
not describe; you have seen it in mr. trelawny's chamber. the cover of 
it lay on the ground; it had not been cemented, and was just as van 
huyn had describe it. needless to say, we were excited as we look 
within. there must, however, be one sense of disappointment. i could 
not help feeling how different must have been the sight which met the 
dutch traveller's eyes when he look within and found that white hand 
lie lifelike above the shroud mummy cloths. it is true that a 
part of the arm was there, white and ivory like. 

"but there was a thrill to us which came not to van huyn! 

"the end of the wrist was cover with dry blood! it was as though 
the body had bled after death! the jagged end of the broken wrist 
were rough with the clot blood; through this the white bone, 
stick out, look like the matrix of opal. the blood had stream 
down and stain the brown wrapping as with rust. here, then, was 
full confirmation of the narrative. with such evidence of the 
narrator's truth before us, we could not doubt the other matter which 
he had told, such as the blood on the mummy hand, or mark of the seven 
finger on the throat of the strangle sheik. 

"i shall not trouble you with detail of all we saw, or how we learned 
all we knew. part of it was from knowledge common to scholars; part we 
read on the stele in the tomb, and in the sculpture and hieroglyph 
painting on the walls. 

"queen tera was of the eleventh, or theban dynasty of egypt kings 
which held sway between the twenty-ninth and twenty-fifth century 
before christ. she succeed as the only child of her father, antef. 
she must have been a girl of extraordinary character as well as 
ability, for she was but a young girl when her father died. her youth 
and sex encourage the ambitious priesthood, which had then achieve 
immense power. by their wealth and numbers and learning they dominate 
all egypt, more especially the upper portion. they were then secret 
ready to make an effort for the achievement of their bold and 
long-considered design, that of transfer the governing power from a 
kingship to a hierarchy. but king antef had suspect some such 
movement, and had taken the precaution of secure to his daughter the 
allegiance of the army. he had also had her taught statecraft, and had 
even made her learned in the lore of the very priest themselves. he 
had use those of one cult against the other; each being hopeful of 
some present gain on its own part by the influence of the king, or of 
some ultimate gain from its own influence over his daughter. thus, the 
princess had been brought up amongst scribes, and was herself no mean 
artist. many of these things were told on the wall in pictures or in 
hieroglyph writing of great beauty; and we came to the conclusion 
that not a few of them had been done by the princess herself. it was 
not without cause that she was inscribe on the stele as 'protector of 
the arts'. 

"but the king had gone to further lengths, and had had his daughter 
taught magic, by which she had power over sleep and will. this was 
real magic--"black" magic; not the magic of the temples, which, i may 
explain, was of the harmless or "white" order, and was intended to 
impress rather than to effect. she had been an apt pupil; and had gone 
further than her teachers. her power and her resources had given her 
great opportunities, of which she had avail herself to the full. she 
had won secret from nature in strange ways; and had even gone to the 
length of go down into the tomb herself, have been swathe and 
coffin and left as dead for a whole month. the priest had try to 
make out that the real princess tera had die in the experiment, and 
that another girl had been substituted; but she had conclusive prove 
their error. all this was told in pictures of great merit. it was 
probably in her time that the impulse was given in the restore the 
artistic great of the fourth dynasty which had found its perfection 
in the days of chufu. 

"in the chamber of the sarcophagus were pictures and writings to show 
that she had achieve victory over sleep. indeed, there was everywhere 
a symbolism, wonderful even in a land and an age of symbolism. 
prominence was given to the fact that she, though a queen, claim all 
the privilege of kingship and masculinity. in one place she was 
picture in man's dress, and wearing the white and red crowns. in the 
following picture she was in female dress, but still wearing the crown 
of upper and lower egypt, while the discard male raiment lay at her 
feet. in every picture where hope, or aim, of resurrection was 
express there was the add symbol of the north; and in many 
places--always in representations of important events, past, present, 
or future--was a grouping of the stars of the plough. she evidently 
regard this constellation as in some way peculiarly associate with 
herself. 

"perhaps the most remarkable statement in the records, both on the 
stele and in the mural writings, was that queen tera had power to 
compel the gods. this, by the way, was not an isolated belief in 
egypt history; but was different in its cause. she had engrave on 
a ruby, carve like a scarab, and have seven stars of seven points, 
master words to compel all the gods, both of the upper and the under 
worlds. 

"in the statement it was plainly set forth that the hatred of the 
priest was, she knew, store up for her, and that they would after her 
death try to suppress her name. this was a terrible revenge, i may 
tell you, in egypt mythology; for without a name no one can after 
death be introduce to the gods, or have prayer said for him. 
therefore, she had intended her resurrection to be after a long time 
and in a more northern land, under the constellation whose seven stars 
had rule her birth. to this end, her hand was to be in the 
air--'unwrapped'--and in it the jewel of seven stars, so that wherever 
there was air she might move even as her ka could move! this, after 
thinking it over, mr. trelawny and i agree meant that her body could 
become astral at command, and so move, particle by particle, and become 
whole again when and where required. then there was a piece of writing 
in which allusion was made to a chest or casket in which were contained 
all the gods, and will, and sleep, the two latter being personify by 
symbols. the box was mention as with seven sides. it was not much of 
a surprise to us when, underneath the feet of the mummy, we found the 
seven-sided casket, which you have also seen in mr. trelawny's room. 
on the underneath part of the wrapping--linen of the left foot was 
painted, in the same vermilion colour as that use in the stele, the 
hieroglyph symbol for much water, and underneath the right foot the 
symbol of the earth. we made out the symbolism to be that her body, 
immortal and transfer at will, rule both the land and water, air 
and fire--the latter being exemplify by the light of the jewel stone, 
and further by the flint and iron which lay outside the mummy wrappings. 

"as we lift the casket from the sarcophagus, we notice on its side 
the strange protuberance which you have already seen; but we were 
unable at the time to account for them. there were a few amulet in 
the sarcophagus, but none of any special worth or significance. we 
took it that if there were such, they were within the wrappings; or 
more probably in the strange casket underneath the mummy's feet. this, 
however, we could not open. there were sign of there being a cover; 
certainly the upper portion and the lower were each in one piece. the 
fine line, a little way from the top, appear to be where the cover 
was fixed; but it was made with such exquisite fine and finish that 
the join could hardly be seen. certainly the top could not be moved. 
we took it, that it was in some way fasten from within. i tell you 
all this in order that you may understand things with which you may be 
in contact later. you must suspend your judgment entirely. such 
strange things have happen regarding this mummy and all around it, 
that there is a necessity for new belief somewhere. it is absolutely 
impossible to reconcile certain things which have happen with the 
ordinary current of life or knowledge. 

"we stay around the valley of the sorcerer, till we had copy 
roughly all the drawing and writings on the walls, ceiling and floor. 
we took with us the stele of lapi lazuli, whose graven record was 
coloured with vermilion pigment. we took the sarcophagus and the 
mummy; the stone chest with the alabaster jars; the table of 
bloodstone and alabaster and onyx and carnelian; and the ivory pillow 
whose arch rest on 'buckles', round each of which was twist an 
uraeu wrought in gold. we took all the articles which lay in the 
chapel, and the mummy pit; the wooden boat with crew and the ushaptiu 
figures, and the symbolic amulets. 

"when coming away we took down the ladders, and at a distance bury 
them in the sand under a cliff, which we noted so that if necessary we 
might find them again. then with our heavy baggage, we set out on our 
laborious journey back to the nile. it was no easy task, i tell you, to 
bring the case with that great sarcophagus over the desert. we had a 
rough cart and sufficient men to draw it; but the progress seem 
terribly slow, for we were anxious to get our treasure into a place of 
safety. the night was an anxious time with us, for we fear attack 
from some maraud band. but more still we fear some of those with 
us. they were, after all, but predatory, unscrupulous men; and we had 
with us a considerable bulk of precious things. they, or at least the 
dangerous one amongst them, did not know why it was so precious; they 
took it for grant that it was material treasure of some kind that we 
carried. we had taken the mummy from the sarcophagus, and packed it 
for safety of travel in a separate case. during the first night two 
attempt were made to steal things from the cart; and two men were 
found dead in the morning. 

"on the second night there came on a violent storm, one of those 
terrible simoom of the desert which make one feel his helplessness. 
we were overwhelm with drift sand. some of our bedouin had flee 
before the storm, hope to find shelter; the rest of us, wrap in 
our bournous, endure with what patience we could. in the morning, 
when the storm had passed, we recover from under the piles of sand 
what we could of our impedimenta. we found the case in which the mummy 
had been packed all broken, but the mummy itself could nowhere be 
found. we search everywhere around, and dug up the sand which had 
pile around us; but in vain. we did not know what to do, for trelawny 
had his heart set on taking home that mummy. we wait a whole day in 
hope that the bedouins, who had fled, would return; we had a blind 
hope that they might have in some way remove the mummy from the cart, 
and would restore it. that night, just before dawn, mr. trelawny woke 
me up and whisper in my ear: 

"'we must go back to the tomb in the valley of the sorcerer. show no 
hesitation in the morning when i give the orders! if you ask any 
question as to where we are go it will create suspicion, and will 
defeat our purpose." 

"'all right!" i answered. "but why shall we go there?' his answer 
seem to thrill through me as though it had struck some chord ready 
tune within: 

"'we shall find the mummy there! i am sure of it!' then anticipate 
doubt or argument he added: 

"'wait, and you shall see!' and he sank back into his blanket again. 

"the arab were surprise when we retrace our steps; and some of them 
were not satisfied. there was a good deal of friction, and there were 
several desertions; so that it was with a diminish following that we 
took our way eastward again. at first the sheik did not manifest any 
curiosity as to our definite destination; but when it became apparent 
that we were again making for the valley of the sorcerer, he too show 
concern. this grew as we drew near; till finally at the entrance of 
the valley he halt and refuse to go further. he said he would await 
our return if we chose to go on alone. that he would wait three days; 
but if by that time we had not return he would leave. no offer of 
money would tempt him to depart from this resolution. the only 
concession he would make was that he would find the ladder and bring 
them near the cliff. this he did; and then, with the rest of the 
troop, he went back to wait at the entrance of the valley. 

"mr. trelawny and i took ropes and torches, and again ascend to the 
tomb. it was evident that someone had been there in our absence, for 
the stone slab which protect the entrance to the tomb was lie flat 
inside, and a rope was dangle from the cliff summit. within, there 
was another rope hanging into the shaft of the mummy pit. we look at 
each other; but neither said a word. we fixed our own rope, and as 
arrange trelawny descended first, i following at once. it was not 
till we stood together at the foot of the shaft that the thought 
flash across me that we might be in some sort of a trap; that someone 
might descend the rope from the cliff, and by cutting the rope by which 
we had lower ourselves into the pit, bury us there alive. the 
thought was horrifying; but it was too late to do anything. i remain 
silent. we both had torches, so that there was ample light as we 
pass through the passage and enter the chamber where the 
sarcophagus had stood. the first thing noticeable was the empty of 
the place. despite all its magnificent adornment, the tomb was made a 
desolate by the absence of the great sarcophagus, to hold which it 
was hewn in the rock; of the chest with the alabaster jars; of the 
table which had held the implement and food for the use of the dead, 
and the ushaptiu figures. 

"it was made more infinite desolate still by the shroud figure of 
the mummy of queen tera which lay on the floor where the great 
sarcophagus had stood! beside it lay, in the strange contort 
attitude of violent death, three of the arab who had desert from 
our party. their face were black, and their hand and neck were 
smear with blood which had burst from mouth and nose and eyes. 

"on the throat of each were the marks, now blackening, of a hand of 
seven fingers. 

"trelawny and i drew close, and clutch each other in awe and fear as 
we looked. 

"for, most wonderful of all, across the breast of the mummy queen lay 
a hand of seven fingers, ivory white, the wrist only showing a scar 
like a jagged red line, from which seem to depend drops of blood." 




chapter xii 

the magic coffer 


"when we recover our amazement, which seem to last unduly long, we 
did not lose any time carry the mummy through the passage, and 
hoist it up the pit shaft. i went first, to receive it at the top. 
as i look down, i saw mr. trelawny lift the sever hand and put it 
in his breast, manifest to save it from being injure or lost. we 
left the dead arab where they lay. with our ropes we lower our 
precious burden to the ground; and then took it to the entrance of the 
valley where our escort was to wait. to our astonishment we found them 
on the move. when we remonstrate with the sheik, he answer that he 
had fulfill his contract to the letter; he had wait the three days 
as arranged. i thought that he was lie to cover up his base 
intention of desert us; and i found when we compare note that 
trelawny had the same suspicion. it was not till we arrive at cairo 
that we found he was correct. it was the 3rd of november 1884 when we 
enter the mummy pit for the second time; we had reason to remember 
the date. 

"we had lost three whole days of our reckoning--out of our 
lives--whilst we had stood wonder in that chamber of the dead. was 
it strange, then, that we had a superstitious feeling with regard to 
the dead queen tera and all belong to her? is it any wonder that it 
rest with us now, with a bewilder sense of some power outside 
ourselves or our comprehension? will it be any wonder if it go down to 
the grave with us at the appoint time? if, indeed, there be any 
grave for us who have rob the dead!" he was silent for quite a 
minute before he went on: 

"we got to cairo all right, and from there to alexandria, where we were 
to take ship by the messagerie service to marseilles, and go thence by 
express to london. but 

'the best-laid scheme o' mice and men gang aft agley.' 

at alexandria, trelawny found wait a cable state that mrs. 
trelawny had die in give birth to a daughter. 

"her stricken husband hurried off at once by the orient express; and i 
had to bring the treasure alone to the desolate house. i got to london 
all safe; there seem to be some special good fortune to our journey. 
when i got to this house, the funeral had long been over. the child 
had been put out to nurse, and mr. trelawny had so far recover from 
the shock of his loss that he had set himself to take up again the 
broken thread of his life and his work. that he had had a shock, and 
a bad one, was apparent. the sudden grey in his black hair was proof 
enough in itself; but in addition, the strong cast of his features had 
become set and stern. since he received that cable in the shipping 
office at alexandria i have never seen a happy smile on his face. 

"work is the best thing in such a case; and to his work he devoted 
himself heart and soul. the strange tragedy of his loss and gain--for 
the child was born after the mother's death--took place during the time 
that we stood in that trance in the mummy pit of queen tera. it seem 
to have become in some way associate with his egypt studies, and 
more especially with the mystery connected with the queen. he told 
me very little about his daughter; but that two forces struggle in his 
mind regarding her was apparent. i could see that he loved, almost 
idolise her. yet he could never forget that her birth had cost her 
mother's life. also, there was something whose existence seem to 
wring his father's heart, though he would never tell me what it was. 
again, he once said in a moment of relaxation of his purpose of silence: 

"'she is unlike her mother; but in both feature and colour she has a 
marvellous resemblance to the pictures of queen tera.' 

"he said that he had sent her away to people who would care for her as 
he could not; and that till she became a woman she should have all the 
simple pleasure that a young girl might have, and that were best for 
her. i would often have talk with him about her; but he would never 
say much. once he said to me: 'there are reason why i should not 
speak more than is necessary. some day you will know--and understand!' 
i respect his reticence; and beyond ask after her on my return 
after a journey, i have never spoken of her again. i had never seen 
her till i did so in your presence. 

"well, when the treasure which we had--ah!--taken from the tomb had 
been brought here, mr. trelawny arrange their disposition himself. 
the mummy, all except the sever hand, he placed in the great 
ironstone sarcophagus in the hall. this was wrought for the theban 
high priest uni, and is, as you may have remarked, all inscribe with 
wonderful invocation to the old gods of egypt. the rest of the things 
from the tomb he disposed about his own room, as you have seen. 
amongst them he placed, for special reason of his own, the mummy hand. 
i think he regards this as the most sacred of his possessions, with 
perhaps one exception. that is the carven ruby which he call the 
'jewel of seven stars', which he keeps in that great safe which is 
lock and guarded by various devices, as you know. 

"i dare say you find this tedious; but i have had to explain it, so 
that you should understand all up to the present. it was a long time 
after my return with the mummy of queen tera when mr. trelawny 
re-opened the subject with me. he had been several times to egypt, 
sometimes with me and sometimes alone; and i had been several trips, on 
my own account or for him. but in all that time, nearly sixteen years, 
he never mention the subject, unless when some pressing occasion 
suggested, if it did not necessitate, a reference. 

"one morning early he sent for me in a hurry; i was then study in 
the britain museum, and had rooms in hart street. when i came, he was 
all on fire with excitement. i had not seen him in such a glow since 
before the news of his wife's death. he took me at once into his room. 
the window blind were down and the shutter closed; not a ray of 
daylight came in. the ordinary lights in the room were not lit, but 
there were a lot of powerful electric lamps, fifty candle-power at 
least, arrange on one side of the room. the little bloodstone table 
on which the heptagon coffer stand was drawn to the centre of the 
room. the coffer look exquisite in the glare of light which shone on 
it. it actually seem to glow as if lit in some way from within. 

"'what do you think of it?' he asked. 

"'it is like a jewel,' i answered. 'you may well call it the 
'sorcerer's magic coffer', if it often looks like that. it almost 
seem to be alive.' 

"'do you know why it seem so?' 

"'from the glare of the light, i suppose?' 

"'light of course,' he answered, 'but it is rather the disposition of 
light.' as he spoke he turn up the ordinary lights of the room and 
switch off the special ones. the effect on the stone box was 
surprising; in a second it lost all its glowing effect. it was still a 
very beautiful stone, as always; but it was stone and no more. 

"'do you notice anything about the arrangement of the lamps?' he asked. 

"'no!' 

"'they were in the shape of the stars in the plough, as the stars are 
in the ruby!' the statement came to me with a certain sense of 
conviction. i do not know why, except that there had been so many 
mysterious association with the mummy and all belong to it that any 
new one seem enlightening. i listen as trelawny went on to explain: 

"'for sixteen years i have never cease to think of that adventure, or 
to try to find a clue to the mystery which came before us; but never 
until last night did i seem to find a solution. i think i must have 
dream of it, for i woke all on fire about it. i jump out of bed 
with a determination of do something, before i quite knew what it 
was that i wish to do. then, all at once, the purpose was clear 
before me. there were allusion in the writing on the wall of the tomb 
to the seven stars of the great bear that go to make up the plough; and 
the north was again and again emphasized. the same symbol were 
repeated with regard to the "magic box", as we call it. we had 
already notice those peculiar translucent space in the stone of the 
box. you remember the hieroglyph writing had told that the jewel 
came from the heart of an aerolite, and that the coffer was cut from it 
also. it might be, i thought, that the light of the seven stars, 
shining in the right direction, might have some effect on the box, or 
something within it. i raise the blind and look out. the plough was 
high in the heavens, and both its stars and the pole star were straight 
opposite the window. i pull the table with the coffer out into the 
light, and shift it until the translucent patch were in the 
direction of the stars. instantly the box began to glow, as you saw it 
under the lamps, though but slightly. i wait and waited; but the sky 
cloud over, and the light die away. so i got wire and lamps--you 
know how often i use them in experiments--and try the effect of 
electric light. it took me some time to get the lamp properly placed, 
so that they would correspond to the parts of the stone, but the moment 
i got them right the whole thing began to glow as you have seen it. 

"'i could get no further, however. there was evidently something 
wanting. all at once it came to me that if light could have some 
effect there should be in the tomb some means of produce light, for 
there could not be starlight in the mummy pit in the cavern. then the 
whole thing seem to become clear. on the bloodstone table, which has 
a hollow carve in its top, into which the bottom of the coffer fits, i 
laid the magic coffer; and i at once saw that the odd protuberance so 
careful wrought in the substance of the stone correspond in a way 
to the stars in the constellation. these, then, were to hold lights. 

"'eureka!' i cried. 'all we want now is the lamps.'" i try place 
the electric lights on, or close to, the protuberances. but the glow 
never came to the stone. so the conviction grew on me that there were 
special lamp made for the purpose. if we could find them, a step on 
the road to solve the mystery should be gained. 

"'but what about the lamps?' i asked. 'where are they? when are we to 
discover them? how are we to know them if we do find them? what--" 

"he stop me at once: 

"'one thing at a time!' he said quietly. 'your first question contain 
all the rest. where are these lamps? i shall tell you: in the tomb!' 

"'in the tomb!' i repeated in surprise. 'why you and i search the 
place ourselves from end to end; and there was not a sign of a lamp. 
not a sign of anything remain when we came away the first time; or 
on the second, except the body of the arabs.' 

"whilst i was speaking, he had uncoiled some large sheet of paper 
which he had brought in his hand from his own room. these he spread 
out on the great table, keeping their edge down with books and 
weights. i knew them at a glance; they were the careful copy which 
he had made of our first transcript from the writing in the tomb. 
when he had all ready, he turn to me and said slowly: 

"'do you remember wondering, when we examine the tomb, at the lack of 
one thing which is usually found in such a tomb?' 

"'yes! there was no serdab.' 

"the serdab, i may perhaps explain," said mr. corbeck to me, "is a sort 
of niche built or hewn in the wall of a tomb. those which have as yet 
been examine bear no inscriptions, and contain only effigy of the 
dead for whom the tomb was made." then he went on with his narrative: 

"trelawny, when he saw that i had caught his meaning, went on speak 
with something of his old enthusiasm: 

"'i have come to the conclusion that there must be a serdab--a secret 
one. we were dull not to have thought of it before. we might have 
known that the maker of such a tomb--a woman, who had shown in other 
ways such a sense of beauty and completeness, and who had finished 
every detail with a feminine richness of elaboration--would not have 
neglect such an architecture feature. even if it had not its own 
special significance in ritual, she would have had it as an adornment. 
other had had it, and she like her own work to be complete. depend 
upon it, there was--there is--a serdab; and that in it, when it is 
discovered, we shall find the lamps. of course, had we known then what 
we now know or at all event surmise, that there were lamps, we might 
have suspect some hidden spot, some cachet. i am go to ask you to 
go out to egypt again; to seek the tomb; to find the serdab; and to 
bring back the lamps!'" 

"'and if i find there is no serdab; or if discover it i find no 
lamp in it, what then?' he smile grim with that saturnine smile of 
his, so rarely seen for years past, as he spoke slowly: 

"'then you will have to hustle till you find them!' 

"'good!' i said. he pointed to one of the sheets. 

"'here are the transcript from the chapel at the south and the east. 
i have been look over the writings again; and i find that in seven 
place round this corner are the symbol of the constellation which we 
call the plough, which queen tera held to rule her birth and her 
destiny. i have examine them carefully, and i notice that they are 
all representations of the grouping of the stars, as the constellation 
appear in different parts of the heavens. they are all astronomical 
correct; and as in the real sky the pointer indicate the pole star, so 
these all point to one spot in the wall where usually the serdab is to 
be found!' 

"'bravo!' i shouted, for such a piece of reasoning demand applause. 
he seem pleased as he went on: 

"'when you are in the tomb, examine this spot. there is probably some 
spring or mechanical contrivance for opening the receptacle. what it 
may be, there is no use guessing. you will know what best to do, when 
you are on the spot.' 

"i start the next week for egypt; and never rest till i stood again 
in the tomb. i had found some of our old following; and was fairly 
well provided with help. the country was now in a condition very 
different to that in which it had been sixteen years before; there was 
no need for troops or armed men. 

"i climb the rock face alone. there was no difficulty, for in that 
fine climate the woodwork of the ladder was still dependable. it was 
easy to see that in the years that had elapse there had been other 
visitor to the tomb; and my heart sank within me when i thought that 
some of them might by chance have come across the secret place. it 
would be a bitter discovery indeed to find that they had forestall 
me; and that my journey had been in vain. 

"the bitter was realise when i lit my torches, and pass between 
the seven-sided column to the chapel of the tomb. 

"there, in the very spot where i had expect to find it, was the 
opening of a serdab. and the serdab was empty. 

"but the chapel was not empty; for the dried-up body of a man in arab 
dress lay close under the opening, as though he had been stricken down. 
i examine all round the wall to see if trelawny's surmise was 
correct; and i found that in all the position of the stars as given, 
the pointer of the plough indicate a spot to the left hand, or south 
side, of the opening of the serdab, where was a single star in gold. 

"i pressed this, and it gave way. the stone which had marked the front 
of the serdab, and which lay back against the wall within, move 
slightly. on further examine the other side of the opening, i found 
a similar spot, indicate by other representations of the 
constellation; but this was itself a figure of the seven stars, and 
each was wrought in burnish gold. i pressed each star in turn; but 
without result. then it struck me that if the opening spring was on 
the left, this on the right might have been intended for the 
simultaneous pressure of all the stars by one hand of seven fingers. 
by use both my hands, i manage to effect this. 

"with a loud click, a metal figure seem to dart from close to the 
opening of the serdab; the stone slow swung back to its place, and 
shut with a click. the glimpse which i had of the descend figure 
appall me for the moment. it was like that grim guardian which, 
according to the arabia historian ibn abd alhokin, the builder of the 
pyramids, king saurid ibn salhouk placed in the western pyramid to 
defend its treasure: 'a marble figure, upright, with lance in hand; 
with on his head a serpent wreathed. when any approached, the serpent 
would bite him on one side, and twin about his throat and killing 
him, would return again to his place.' 

"i knew well that such a figure was not wrought to pleasantry; and that 
to brave it was no child's play. the dead arab at my feet was proof of 
what could be done! so i examine again along the wall; and found here 
and there chipping as if someone had been tap with a heavy hammer. 
this then had been what happened: the grave-robber, more expert at his 
work than we had been, and suspect the presence of a hidden serdab, 
had made essay to find it. he had struck the spring by chance; had 
release the avenge 'treasurer', as the arabia writer designate 
him. the issue spoke for itself. i got a piece of wood, and, standing 
at a safe distance, pressed with the end of it upon the star. 

"instantly the stone flew back. the hidden figure within dart 
forward and thrust out its lance. then it rose up and disappeared. i 
thought i might now safe press on the seven stars; and did so. again 
the stone roll back; and the 'treasurer' flash by to his hidden 
lair. 

"i repeated both experiment several times; with always the same 
result. i should have like to examine the mechanism of that figure of 
such malignant mobility; but it was not possible without such tool as 
could not easily be had. it might be necessary to cut into a whole 
section of the rock. some day i hope to go back, properly equipped, 
and attempt it. 

"perhaps you do not know that the entrance to a serdab is almost always 
very narrow; sometimes a hand can hardly be inserted. two things i 
learned from this serdab. the first was that the lamps, if lamp at 
all there had been, could not have been of large size; and secondly, 
that they would be in some way associate with hathor, whose symbol, 
the hawk in a square with the right top corner form a small 
square, was cut in relief on the wall within, and coloured the bright 
vermilion which we had found on the stele. hath is the goddess who 
in egypt mythology answer to venus of the greeks, in as far as she 
is the preside deity of beauty and pleasure. in the egypt 
mythology, however, each god has many forms; and in some aspect hath 
has to do with the idea of resurrection. there are seven form or 
variant of the goddess; why should not these correspond in some way to 
the seven lamps! that there had been such lamps, i was convinced. the 
first grave-robber had met his death; the second had found the contents 
of the serdab. the first attempt had been made years since; the state 
of the body prove this. i had no clue to the second attempt. it 
might have been long ago; or it might have been recently. if, however, 
other had been to the tomb, it was probable that the lamp had been 
taken long ago. well! all the more difficult would be my search; for 
undertaken it must be! 

"that was nearly three years ago; and for all that time i have been 
like the man in the arabia nights, seek old lamps, not for new, but 
for cash. i dare not say what i was look for, or attempt to give 
any description; for such would have defeat my purpose. but i had in 
my own mind at the start a vague idea of what i must find. in process 
of time this grew more and more clear; till at last i almost overshot 
my mark by searching for something which might have been wrong. 

"the disappointment i suffered, and the wild-goose chase i made, 
would fill a volume; but i persevered. at last, not two month ago, i 
was shown by an old dealer in mossul one lamp such as i had look for. 
i had been tracing it for nearly a year, always suffering 
disappointment, but always buoy up to further endeavour by a grow 
hope that i was on the track. 

"i do not know how i restrained myself when i realise that, at last, i 
was at least close to success. i was skilled, however, in the finesse 
of eastern trade; and the jew-arab-portugee trader met his match. i 
want to see all his stock before buying; and one by one he produced, 
amongst masses of rubbish, seven different lamps. each of them had a 
distinguish mark; and each and all was some form of the symbol of 
hathor. i think i shook the imperturbable of my swarthy friend by 
the magnitude of my purchases; for in order to prevent him guess 
what form of goods i sought, i nearly clear out his shop. at the end 
he nearly wept, and said i had ruin him; for now he had nothing to 
sell. he would have torn his hair had he known what price i should 
ultimately have given for some of his stock, that perhaps he value 
least. 

"i part with most of my merchandise at normal price as i hurried 
home. i did not dare to give it away, or even lose it, lest i should 
incur suspicion. my burden was far too precious to be risk by any 
foolish now. i got on as fast as it is possible to travel in such 
countries; and arrive in london with only the lamp and certain 
portable curio and papyri which i had picked up on my travels. 

"now, mr. ross, you know all i know; and i leave it to your discretion 
how much, if any of it, you will tell miss trelawny." 

as he finished a clear young voice said behind us: 

"what about miss trelawny? she is here!" 

we turned, startled; and look at each other inquiringly. miss 
trelawny stood in the doorway. we did not know how long she had been 
present, or how much she had heard. 




chapter xiii 

awake from the trance 


the first unexpected words may always startle a hearer; but when the 
shock is over, the listener's reason has assert itself, and he can 
judge of the manner, as well as of the matter, of speech. thus it was 
on this occasion. with intelligence now alert, i could not doubt of 
the simple sincerity of margaret's next question. 

"what have you two men been talk about all this time, mr. ross? i 
suppose, mr. corbeck has been telling you all his adventure in finding 
the lamps. i hope you will tell me too, some day, mr. corbeck; but 
that must not be till my poor father is better. he would like, i am 
sure, to tell me all about these things himself; or to be present when 
i heard them." she glance sharp from one to the other. "oh, that 
was what you were saying as i came in? all right! i shall wait; but i 
hope it won't be long. the continuance of father's condition is, i 
feel, break me down. a little while ago i felt that my nerves were 
give out; so i determined to go out for a walk in the park. i am 
sure it will do me good. i want you, if you will, mr. ross, to be with 
father whilst i am away. i shall feel secure then." 

i rose with alacrity, rejoicing that the poor girl was go out, even 
for half an hour. she was look terribly weary and haggard; and the 
sight of her pale cheek made my heart ache. i went to the sick-room; 
and sat down in my usual place. mrs. grant was then on duty; we had 
not found it necessary to have more than one person in the room during 
the day. when i came in, she took occasion to go about some household 
duty. the blind were up, but the north aspect of the room soften the 
hot glare of the sunlight without. 

i sat for a long time thinking over all that mr. corbeck had told me; 
and weave its wonders into the tissue of strange things which had 
come to pass since i had enter the house. at times i was inclined to 
doubt; to doubt everything and every one; to doubt even the evidence 
of my own five senses. the warning of the skilled detective kept 
coming back to my mind. he had put down mr. corbeck as a clever liar, 
and a confederate of miss trelawny. of margaret! that settled it! 
face to face with such a proposition as that, doubt vanished. each 
time when her image, her name, the merest thought of her, came before 
my mind, each event stood out stark as a living fact. my life upon her 
faith! 

i was recall from my reverie, which was fast becoming a dream of 
love, in a startle manner. a voice came from the bed; a deep, 
strong, masterful voice. the first note of it call up like a clarion 
my eyes and my ears. the sick man was awake and speaking! 

"who are you? what are you do here?" 

whatever idea any of us had ever form of his waking, i am quite sure 
that none of us expect to see him start up all awake and full master 
of himself. i was so surprise that i answer almost mechanically: 

"ross is my name. i have been watch by you!" he look surprise 
for an instant, and then i could see that his habit of judge for 
himself came into play. 

"watching by me! how do you mean? why watch by me?" his eye had 
now lit on his heavy bandage wrist. he went on in a different tone; 
less aggressive, more genial, as of one accept facts: 

"are you a doctor?" i felt myself almost smile as i answered; the 
relief from the long pressure of anxiety regarding his life was 
beginning to tell: 

"no, sir!" 

"then why are you here? if you are not a doctor, what are you?" his 
tone was again more dictatorial. thought is quick; the whole train of 
reasoning on which my answer must be base flood through my brain 
before the words could leave my lips. margaret! i must think of 
margaret! this was her father, who as yet knew nothing of me; even of 
my very existence. he would be naturally curious, if not anxious, to 
know why i amongst men had been chosen as his daughter's friend on the 
occasion of his illness. father are naturally a little jealous in 
such matter as a daughter's choice, and in the undeclared state of my 
love for margaret i must do nothing which could ultimately embarrass 
her. 

"i am a barrister. it is not, however, in that capacity i am here; but 
simply as a friend of your daughter. it was probably her knowledge of 
my being a lawyer which first determined her to ask me to come when she 
thought you had been murdered. afterwards she was good enough to 
consider me to be a friend, and to allow me to remain in accordance 
with your express wish that someone should remain to watch." 

mr. trelawny was manifest a man of quick thought, and of few words. 
he gaze at me keen as i spoke, and his piercing eyes seem to read 
my thought. to my relief he said no more on the subject just then, 
seeming to accept my words in simple faith. there was evidently in his 
own mind some cause for the acceptance deep than my own knowledge. 
his eyes flashed, and there was an unconscious movement of the 
mouth--it could hardly be call a twitch--which betoken 
satisfaction. he was following out some train of reasoning in his own 
mind. sudden he said: 

"she thought i had been murdered! was that last night?" 

"no! four days ago." he seem surprised. whilst he had been speak 
the first time he had sat up in bed; now he made a movement as though 
he would jump out. with an effort, however, he restrained himself; 
leaning back on his pillow he said quietly: 

"tell me all about it! all you know! every detail! omit nothing! 
but stay; first lock the door! i want to know, before i see anyone, 
exactly how things stand." 

somehow his last words made my heart leap. "anyone!" he evidently 
accept me, then, as an exception. in my present state of feeling for 
his daughter, this was a comfort thought. i felt exultant as i went 
over to the door and soft turn the key. when i came back i found 
him sitting up again. he said: 

"go on!" 

accordingly, i told him every detail, even of the slightest which i 
could remember, of what had happen from the moment of my arrival at 
the house. of course i said nothing of my feeling towards margaret, 
and spoke only concerning those things already within his own 
knowledge. with regard to corbeck, i simply said that he had brought 
back some lamp of which he had been in quest. then i proceed to 
tell him fully of their loss, and of their re-discovery in the house. 

he listen with a self-control which, under the circumstances, was to 
me little less than marvellous. it was impassiveness, for at times his 
eyes would flash or blaze, and the strong finger of his uninjured hand 
would grip the sheet, pull it into far-extending wrinkles. this was 
most noticeable when i told him of the return of corbeck, and the 
finding of the lamp in the boudoir. at times he spoke, but only a few 
words, and as if unconscious in emotional comment. the mysterious 
parts, those which had most puzzle us, seem to have no special 
interest for him; he seem to know them already. the utmost concern 
he show was when i told him of daw's shooting. his mutter comment: 
"stupid ass!" together with a quick glance across the room at the 
injure cabinet, marked the measure of his disgust. as i told him of 
his daughter's harrowing anxiety for him, of her unend care and 
devotion, of the tender love which she had shown, he seem much moved. 
there was a sort of veiled surprise in his unconscious whisper: 

"margaret! margaret!" 

when i had finished my narration, bring matter up to the moment 
when miss trelawny had gone out for her walk--i thought of her as "miss 
trelawny', not as 'margaret' now, in the presence of her father--he 
remain silent for quite a long time. it was probably two or three 
minutes; but it seem interminable. all at once he turn and said to 
me briskly: 

"now tell me all about yourself!" this was something of a floorer; i 
felt myself grow red-hot. mr. trelawny's eyes were upon me; they were 
now calm and inquiring, but never cease in their soul-searching 
scrutiny. there was just a suspicion of a smile on the mouth which, 
though it add to my embarrassment, gave me a certain measure of 
relief. i was, however, face to face with difficulty; and the habit of 
my life stood me in good stead. i look him straight in the eyes as i 
spoke: 

"my name, as i told you, is ross, malcolm ross. i am by profession a 
barrister. i was made a q. c. in the last year of the queen's reign. 
i have been fairly successful in my work." to my relief he said: 

"yes, i know. i have always heard well of you! where and when did you 
meet margaret?" 

"first at the hay's in belgrave square, ten days ago. then at a picnic 
up the river with lady strathconnell. we went from windsor to cookham. 
mar--miss trelawny was in my boat. i scull a little, and i had my own 
boat at windsor. we had a good deal of conversation--naturally." 

"naturally!" there was just a suspicion of something sardonic in the 
tone of acquiescence; but there was no other intimate of his feeling. 
i began to think that as i was in the presence of a strong man, i 
should show something of my own strength. my friends, and sometimes my 
opponents, say that i am a strong man. in my present circumstances, 
not to be absolutely truthful would be to be weak. so i stood up to 
the difficulty before me; always bearing in mind, however, that my 
words might affect margaret's happiness through her love for her 
father. i went on: 

"in conversation at a place and time and amid surroundings so pleasing, 
and in a solitude inviting to confidence, i got a glimpse of her inner 
life. such a glimpse as a man of my years and experience may get from 
a young girl!" the father's face grew grave as i went on; but he said 
nothing. i was committed now to a definite line of speech, and went on 
with such mastery of my mind as i could exercise. the occasion might 
be fraught with serious consequence to me too. 

"i could not but see that there was over her spirit a sense of 
lonely which was habitual to her. i thought i understood it; i am 
myself an only child. i venture to encourage her to speak to me 
freely; and was happy enough to succeed. a sort of confidence became 
establish between us." there was something in the father's face 
which made me add hurriedly: 

"nothing was said by her, sir, as you can well imagine, which was not 
right and proper. she only told me in the impulsive way of one longing 
to give voice to thought long careful concealed, of her yearning to 
be close to the father whom she loved; more en rapport with him; more 
in his confidence; close within the circle of his sympathies. oh, 
believe me, sir, that it was all good! all that a father's heart could 
hope or wish for! it was all loyal! that she spoke it to me was 
perhaps because i was almost a stranger with whom there was no previous 
barrier to confidence." 

here i paused. it was hard to go on; and i fear lest i might, in my 
zeal, do margaret a disservice. the relief of the strain came from her 
father. 

"and you?" 

"sir, miss trelawny is very sweet and beautiful! she is young; and her 
mind is like crystal! her sympathy is a joy! i am not an old man, and 
my affection were not engaged. they never had been till then. i hope 
i may say as much, even to a father!" my eyes involuntary dropped. 
when i raise them again mr. trelawny was still gaze at me keenly. 
all the kindly of his nature seem to wreath itself in a smile as 
he held out his hand and said: 

"malcolm ross, i have always heard of you as a fearless and honourable 
gentleman. i am glad my girl has such a friend! go on!" 

my heart leaped. the first step to the winning of margaret's father 
was gained. i dare say i was somewhat more effusive in my words and my 
manner as i went on. i certainly felt that way. 

"one thing we gain as we grow older: to use our age judiciously! i 
have had much experience. i have fought for it and work for it all 
my life; and i felt that i was justified in use it. i venture to 
ask miss trelawny to count on me as a friend; to let me serve her 
should occasion arise. she promise me that she would. i had little 
idea that my chance of serving her should come so soon or in such a 
way; but that very night you were stricken down. in her desolate and 
anxiety she sent for me!" i paused. he continue to look at me as i 
went on: 

"when your letter of instruction was found, i offer my services. 
they were accepted, as you know." 

"and these days, how did they pass for you?" the question startle me. 
there was in it something of margaret's own voice and manner; something 
so greatly resemble her lighter moments that it brought out all the 
masculinity in me. i felt more sure of my ground now as i said: 

"these days, sir, despite all their harrowing anxiety, despite all the 
pain they held for the girl whom i grew to love more and more with each 
passing hour, have been the happiest of my life!" he kept silence for 
a long time; so long that, as i wait for him to speak, with my heart 
beating, i began to wonder if my frank had been too effusive. at 
last he said: 

"i suppose it is hard to say so much vicariously. her poor mother 
should have heard you; it would have made her heart glad!" then a 
shadow swept across his face; and he went on more hurriedly. 

"but are you quite sure of all this?" 

"i know my own heart, sir; or, at least, i think i do!" 

"no! no!" he answered, "i don't mean you. that is all right! but you 
spoke of my girl's affection for me ... and yet...! and yet she has 
been living here, in my house, a whole year... still, she spoke to you 
of her loneliness--her desolation. i never--it grieve me to say it, 
but it is true--i never saw sign of such affection towards myself in 
all the year!..." his voice tremble away into sad, reminiscent 
introspection. 

"then, sir," i said, "i have been privileged to see more in a few days 
than you in her whole lifetime!" my words seem to call him up from 
himself; and i thought that it was with pleasure as well as surprise 
that he said: 

"i had no idea of it. i thought that she was indifferent to me. that 
what seem like the neglect of her youth was revenge itself on me. 
that she was cold of heart.... it is a joy unspeakable to me that her 
mother's daughter love me too!" unconscious he sank back upon his 
pillow, lost in memory of the past. 

how he must have love her mother! it was the love of her mother's 
child, rather than the love of his own daughter, that appeal to him. 
my heart went out to him in a great wave of sympathy and kindliness. i 
began to understand. to understand the passion of these two great, 
silent, reserved natures, that successful conceal the burning 
hunger for the other's love! it did not surprise me when presently he 
murmur to himself: 

"margaret, my child! tender, and thoughtful, and strong, and true, and 
brave! like her dear mother! like her dear mother!" 

and then to the very depths of my heart i rejoice that i had spoken so 
frankly. 

presently mr. trelawny said: 

"four days! the sixteenth! then this is the twentieth of july?" i 
nod affirmation; he went on: 

"so i have been lie in a trance for four days. it is not the first 
time. i was in a trance once under strange conditions for three days; 
and never even suspect it till i was told of the lapse of time. i 
shall tell you all about it some day, if you care to hear." 

that made me thrill with pleasure. that he, margaret's father, would 
so take me into his confidence made it possible.... the business-like, 
every-day alert of his voice as he spoke next quite recall me: 

"i had better get up now. when margaret come in, tell her yourself 
that i am all right. it will avoid any shock! and will you tell 
corbeck that i would like to see him as soon as i can. i want to see 
those lamps, and hear all about them!" 

his attitude towards me fill me with delight. there was a possible 
father-in-law aspect that would have raise me from a death-bed. i was 
hurry away to carry out his wishes; when, however, my hand was on 
the key of the door, his voice recall me: 

"mr. ross!" 

i did not like to hear him say "mr." after he knew of my friendship 
with his daughter he had call me malcolm ross; and this obvious 
return to formality not only pained, but fill me with apprehension. 
it must be something about margaret. i thought of her as "margaret" 
and not as "miss trelawny", now that there was danger of lose her. i 
know now what i felt then: that i was determined to fight for her 
rather than lose her. i came back, unconscious holding myself erect. 
mr. trelawny, the keen observer of men, seem to read my thought; his 
face, which was set in a new anxiety, relax as he said: 

"sit down a minute; it is better that we speak now than later. we are 
both men, and men of the world. all this about my daughter is very new 
to me, and very sudden; and i want to know exactly how and where i 
stand. mind, i am making no objection; but as a father i have duty 
which are grave, and may prove to be painful. i--i"--he seem 
slightly at a loss how to begin, and this gave me hope--"i suppose i am 
to take it, from what you have said to me of your feelings towards my 
girl, that it is in your mind to be a suitor for her hand, later on?" 
i answer at once: 

"absolutely! firm and fixed; it was my intention the evening after i 
had been with her on the river, to seek you, of course after a proper 
and respectful interval, and to ask you if i might approach her on the 
subject. event forced me into close relationship more quick than i 
had to hope would be possible; but that first purpose has remain 
fresh in my heart, and has grown in intensity, and multiply itself 
with every hour which has pass since then." his face seem to 
soften as he look at me; the memory of his own youth was coming back 
to him instinctively. after a pause he said: 

"i suppose i may take it, too, malcolm ross"--the return to the 
familiarity of address swept through me with a glorious thrill--"that 
as yet you have not made any protestation to my daughter?" 

"not in words, sir." the arriere pensee of my phrase struck me, not by 
its own humour, but through the grave, kindly smile on the father's 
face. there was a pleasant sarcasm in his comment: 

"not in words! that is dangerous! she might have doubt words, or 
even disbelieve them." 

i felt myself blush to the roots of my hair as i went on: 

"the duty of delicacy in her defenceless position; my respect for her 
father--i did not know you then, sir, as yourself, but only as her 
father--restrained me. but even had not these barrier existed, i 
should not have dare in the presence of such grief and anxiety to have 
declared myself. mr. trelawny, i assure you on my word of honour that 
your daughter and i are as yet, on her part, but friends and nothing 
more!" once again he held out his hands, and we clasp each other 
warmly. then he said heartily: 

"i am satisfied, malcolm ross. of course, i take it that until i have 
seen her and have given you permission, you will not make any 
declaration to my daughter--in words," he added, with an indulgent 
smile. but his face became stern again as he went on: 

"time presses; and i have to think of some matter so urgent and so 
strange that i dare not lose an hour. otherwise i should not have been 
prepared to enter, at so short a notice and to so new a friend, on the 
subject of my daughter's settlement in life, and of her future 
happiness." there was a dignity and a certain proud in his manner 
which impress me much. 

"i shall respect your wishes, sir!" i said as i went back and open 
the door. i heard him lock it behind me. 

when i told mr. corbeck that mr. trelawny had quite recovered, he began 
to dance about like a wild man. but he sudden stopped, and ask me 
to be careful not to draw any inferences, at all event at first, when 
in the future speak of the finding of the lamps, or of the first 
visit to the tomb. this was in case mr. trelawny should speak to me 
on the subject; "as, of course, he will," he added, with a sidelong 
look at me which meant knowledge of the affair of my heart. i agree 
to this, feeling that it was quite right. i did not quite understand 
why; but i knew that mr. trelawny was a peculiar man. in no case could 
one make a mistake by being reticent. reticence is a quality which a 
strong man always respects. 

the manner in which the other of the house took the news of the 
recovery varied much. mrs. grant wept with emotion; then she hurried 
off to see if she could do anything personally, and to set the house in 
order for "master", as she always call him. the nurse's face fell: 
she was deprived of an interesting case. but the disappointment was 
only momentary; and she rejoice that the trouble was over. she was 
ready to come to the patient the moment she should be wanted; but in 
the meantime she occupy herself in packing her portmanteau. 

i took sergeant daw into the study, so that we should be alone when i 
told him the news. it surprise even his iron self-control when i told 
him the method of the waking. i was myself surprise in turn by his 
first words: 

"and how did he explain the first attack? he was unconscious when the 
second was made." 

up to that moment the nature of the attack, which was the cause of my 
coming to the house, had never even cross my mind, except when i had 
simply narrate the various occurrence in sequence to mr. trelawny. 
the detective did not seem to think much of my answer: 

"do you know, it never occur to me to ask him!" the professional 
instinct was strong in the man, and seem to supersede everything else. 

"that is why so few case are ever follow out," he said, "unless our 
people are in them. your amateur detective neer hunt down to the 
death. as for ordinary people, the moment things begin to mend, and 
the strain of suspense is off them, they drop the matter in hand. it 
is like sea-sickness," he add philosophical after a pause; "the 
moment you touch the shore you never give it a thought, but run off to 
the buffet to feed! well, mr. ross, i'm glad the case is over; for 
over it is, so far as i am concerned. i suppose that mr. trelawny 
know his own business; and that now he is well again, he will take it 
up himself. perhaps, however, he will not do anything. as he seem to 
expect something to happen, but did not ask for protection from the 
police in any way, i take it that he don't want them to interfere with 
an eye to punishment. we'll be told officially, i suppose, that it was 
an accident, or sleep-walking, or something of the kind, to satisfy the 
conscience of our record department; and that will be the end. as for 
me, i tell you frankly, sir, that it will be the saving of me. i 
verily believe i was beginning to get dotty over it all. there were 
too many mysteries, that aren't in my line, for me to be really 
satisfy as to either fact or the cause of them. now i'll be able 
to wash my hand of it, and get back to clean, wholesome, criminal 
work. of course, sir, i'll be glad to know if you ever do light on a 
cause of any kind. and i'll be grateful if you can ever tell me how 
the man was drag out of bed when the cat bit him, and who use the 
knife the second time. for master silvio could never have done it by 
himself. but there! i keep thinking of it still. i must look out and 
keep a check on myself, or i shall think of it when i have to keep my 
mind on other things!" 

when margaret return from her walk, i met her in the hall. she was 
still pale and sad; somehow, i had expect to see her radiant after 
her walk. the moment she saw me her eyes brightened, and she look at 
me keenly. 

"you have some good news for me?" she said. "is father better?" 

"he is! why did you think so?" 

"i saw it in your face. i must go to him at once." she was hurry 
away when i stop her. 

"he said he would send for you the moment he was dressed." 

"he said he would send for me!" she repeated in amazement. "then he is 
awake again, and conscious? i had no idea he was so well as that! o 
malcolm!" 

she sat down on the nearest chair and began to cry. i felt overcome 
myself. the sight of her joy and emotion, the mention of my own name 
in such a way and at such a time, the rush of glorious possibility 
all coming together, quite unmann me. she saw my emotion, and seem 
to understand. she put out her hand. i held it hard, and kiss it. 
such moments as these, the opportunity of lovers, are gift of the 
gods! up to this instant, though i knew i love her, and though i 
believe she return my affection, i had had only hope. now, however, 
the self-surrender manifest in her willing to let me squeeze her 
hand, the ardour of her pressure in return, and the glorious flush of 
love in her beautiful, deep, dark eyes as she lift them to mine, were 
all the eloquence which the most impatient or exacting lover could 
expect or demand. 

no word was spoken; none was needed. even had i not been pledge to 
verbal silence, words would have been poor and dull to express what we 
felt. hand in hand, like two little children, we went up the staircase 
and wait on the landing, till the summons from mr. trelawny should 
come. 

i whisper in her ear--it was nice than speak aloud and at a 
greater distance--how her father had awakened, and what he had said; 
and all that had pass between us, except when she herself had been 
the subject of conversation. 

presently a bell rang from the room. margaret slip from me, and 
look back with warning finger on lip. she went over to her father's 
door and knock softly. 

"come in!" said the strong voice. 

"it is i, father!" the voice was tremulous with love and hope. 

there was a quick step inside the room; the door was hurried thrown 
open, and in an instant margaret, who had sprung forward, was clasp 
in her father's arms. there was little speech; only a few broken 
phrases. 

"father! dear, dear father!" 

"my child! margaret! my dear, dear child!" 

"o father, father! at last! at last!" 

here the father and daughter went into the room together, and the door 
closed. 




chapter xiv 

the birth-mark 


during my wait for the summons to mr. trelawny's room, which i knew 
would come, the time was long and lonely. after the first few moments 
of emotional happiness at margaret's joy, i somehow felt apart and 
alone; and for a little time the selfish of a lover possessed me. 
but it was not for long. margaret's happiness was all to me; and in 
the conscious sense of it i lost my base self. margaret's last words 
as the door closed on them gave the key to the whole situation, as it 
had been and as it was. these two proud, strong people, though father 
and daughter, had only come to know each other when the girl was grown 
up. margaret's nature was of that kind which mature early. 

the pride and strength of each, and the reticence which was their 
corollary, made a barrier at the beginning. each had respect the 
other's reticence too much thereafter; and the misunderstanding grew to 
habit. and so these two loving hearts, each of which yearn for 
sympathy from the other, were kept apart. but now all was well, and in 
my heart of heart i rejoice that at last margaret was happy. whilst 
i was still muse on the subject, and dream dream of a personal 
nature, the door was opened, and mr. trelawny beckon to me. 

"come in, mr. ross!" he said cordially, but with a certain formality 
which i dreaded. i enter the room, and he closed the door again. he 
held out his hand, and i put mine in it. he did not let it go, but 
still held it as he drew me over toward his daughter. margaret look 
from me to him, and back again; and her eyes fell. when i was close to 
her, mr. trelawny let go my hand, and, look his daughter straight in 
the face, said: 

"if things are as i fancy, we shall not have any secret between us. 
malcolm ross know so much of my affair already, that i take it he 
must either let matter stop where they are and go away in silence, or 
else he must know more. margaret! are you willing to let mr. ross see 
your wrist?" 

she threw one swift look of appeal in his eyes; but even as she did so 
she seem to make up her mind. without a word she raise her right 
hand, so that the bracelet of spread wings which cover the wrist 
fell back, leave the flesh bare. then an icy chill shot through me. 

on her wrist was a thin red jagged line, from which seem to hang red 
stain like drops of blood! 

she stood there, a veritable figure of patient pride. 

oh! but she look proud! through all her sweetness, all her dignity, 
all her high-souled negate of self which i had known, and which never 
seem more marked than now--through all the fire that seem to shine 
from the dark depths of her eyes into my very soul, pride shone 
conspicuously. the pride that has faith; the pride that is born of 
conscious purity; the pride of a veritable queen of old time, when to 
be royal was to be the first and greatest and bravest in all high 
things. as we stood thus for some seconds, the deep, grave voice of her 
father seem to sound a challenge in my ears: 

"what do you say now?" 

my answer was not in words. i caught margaret's right hand in mine as 
it fell, and, holding it tight, whilst with the other i pushed back the 
golden cincture, stoop and kiss the wrist. as i look up at her, 
but never letting go her hand, there was a look of joy on her face such 
as i dream of when i think of heaven. then i face her father. 

"you have my answer, sir!" his strong face look grave sweet. he 
only said one word as he laid his hand on our clasp ones, whilst he 
bent over and kiss his daughter: 

"good!" 

we were interrupt by a knock at the door. in answer to an impatient 
"come in!" from mr. trelawny, mr. corbeck entered. when he saw us 
group he would have drawn back; but in an instant mr. trelawny had 
sprung forth and drag him forward. as he shook him by both hands, 
he seem a transform man. all the enthusiasm of his youth, of which 
mr. corbeck had told us, seem to have come back to him in an instant. 

"so you have got the lamps!" he almost shouted. "my reasoning was 
right after all. come to the library, where we will be alone, and tell 
me all about it! and while he do it, ross," said he, turning to me, 
"do you, like a good fellow, get the key from the safe deposit, so that 
i may have a look at the lamps!" 

then the three of them, the daughter loving holding her father's arm, 
went into the library, whilst i hurried off to chancery lane. 

when i return with the key, i found them still engaged in the 
narrative; but doctor winchester, who had arrive soon after i left, 
was with them. mr. trelawny, on hearing from margaret of his great 
attention and kindness, and how he had, under much pressure to the 
contrary, steadfast obey his written wishes, had ask him to 
remain and listen. "it will interest you, perhaps," he said, "to learn 
the end of the story!" 

we all had an early dinner together. we sat after it a good while, and 
then mr. trelawny said: 

"now, i think we had all better separate and go quiet to bed early. 
we may have much to talk about tomorrow; and tonight i want to think." 

doctor winchester went away, taking, with a courteous forethought, mr. 
corbeck with him, and leave me behind. when the other had gone mr. 
trelawny said: 

"i think it will be well if you, too, will go home for tonight. i want 
to be quite alone with my daughter; there are many things i wish to 
speak of to her, and to her alone. perhaps, even tomorrow, i will be 
able to tell you also of them; but in the meantime there will be less 
distraction to us both if we are alone in the house." i quite 
understood and sympathise with his feelings; but the experience of 
the last few days were strong on me, and with some hesitation i said: 

"but may it not be dangerous? if you knew as we do--" to my surprise 
margaret interrupt me: 

"there will be no danger, malcolm. i shall be with father!" as she 
spoke she clung to him in a protective way. i said no more, but stood 
up to go at once. mr. trelawny said heartily: 

"come as early as you please, ross. come to breakfast. after it, you 
and i will want to have a word together." he went out of the room 
quietly, leave us together. i clasp and kiss margaret's hands, 
which she held out to me, and then drew her close to me, and our lip 
met for the first time. 

i did not sleep much that night. happiness on the one side of my bed 
and anxiety on the other kept sleep away. but if i had anxious care, i 
had also happiness which had not equal in my life--or ever can have. 
the night went by so quick that the dawn seem to rush on me, not 
steal as is its wont. 

before nine o'clock i was at kensington. all anxiety seem to float 
away like a cloud as i met margaret, and saw that already the pallor of 
her face had given to the rich bloom which i knew. she told me that 
her father had slept well, and that he would be with us soon. 

"i do believe," she whispered, "that my dear and thoughtful father has 
kept back on purpose, so that i might meet you first, and alone!" 

after breakfast mr. trelawny took us into the study, saying as he 
pass in: 

"i have ask margaret to come too." when we were seated, he said 
gravely: 

"i told you last night that we might have something to say to each 
other. i dare say that you may have thought that it was about margaret 
and yourself. isn't that so?" 

"i thought so." 

"well, my boy, that is all right. margaret and i have been talking, 
and i know her wishes." he held out his hand. when i wrung it, and 
had kiss margaret, who drew her chair close to mine, so that we could 
hold hand as we listened, he went on, but with a certain 
hesitation--it could hardly be call nervousness--which was new to me. 

"you know a good deal of my hunt after this mummy and her belongings; 
and i dare say you have guess a good deal of my theories. but these 
at any rate i shall explain later, concise and categorically, if it 
be necessary. what i want to consult you about now is this: margaret 
and i disagree on one point. i am about to make an experiment; the 
experiment which is to crown all that i have devoted twenty years of 
research, and danger, and labour to prepare for. through it we may 
learn things that have been hidden from the eyes and the knowledge of 
men for centuries; for score of centuries. i do not want my daughter 
to be present; for i cannot blind myself to the fact that there may be 
danger in it--great danger, and of an unknown kind. i have, however, 
already face very great dangers, and of an unknown kind; and so has 
that brave scholar who has help me in the work. as to myself, i am 
willing to run any risk. for science, and history, and philosophy may 
benefit; and we may turn one old page of a wisdom unknown in this 
prosaic age. but for my daughter to run such a risk i am loth. her 
young bright life is too precious to throw lightly away; now especially 
when she is on the very threshold of new happiness. i do not wish to 
see her life given, as her dear mother's was--" 

he broke down for a moment, and cover his eyes with his hands. in an 
instant margaret was beside him, clasp him close, and kiss him, 
and comfort him with loving words. then, standing erect, with one 
hand on his head, she said: 

"father! mother did not bid you stay beside her, even when you want 
to go on that journey of unknown danger to egypt; though that country 
was then upset from end to end with war and the danger that follow 
war. you have told me how she left you free to go as you wished; though 
that she thought of danger for you and and fear it for you, is prove 
by this!" she held up her wrist with the scar that seem to run 
blood. "now, mother's daughter do as mother would have done herself!" 
then she turn to me: 

"malcolm, you know i love you! but love is trust; and you must trust 
me in danger as well as in joy. you and i must stand beside father in 
this unknown peril. together we shall come through it; or together we 
shall fail; together we shall die. that is my wish; my first wish to my 
husband that is to be! do you not think that, as a daughter, i am 
right? tell my father what you think!" 

she look like a queen stoop to plead. my love for her grew and 
grew. i stood up beside her; and took her hand and said: 

"mr. trelawny! in this margaret and i are one!" 

he took both our hand and held them hard. presently he said with deep 
emotion: 

"it is as her mother would have done!" 

mr. corbeck and doctor winchester came exactly at the time appointed, 
and join us in the library. despite my great happiness i felt our 
meeting to be a very solemn function. for i could never forget the 
strange things that had been; and the idea of the strange things which 
might be, was with me like a cloud, pressing down on us all. from the 
gravity of my companion i gather that each of them also was rule by 
some such dominate thought. 

instinctive we gather our chair into a circle round mr. trelawny, 
who had taken the great armchair near the window. margaret sat by him 
on his right, and i was next to her. mr. corbeck was on his left, with 
doctor winchester on the other side. after a few seconds of silence mr. 
trelawny said to mr. corbeck: 

"you have told doctor winchester all up to the present, as we arranged?" 

"yes," he answered; so mr. trelawny said: 

"and i have told margaret, so we all know!" then, turning to the 
doctor, he asked: 

"and am i to take it that you, knowing all as we know it who have 
follow the matter for years, wish to share in the experiment which we 
hope to make?" his answer was direct and uncompromising: 

"certainly! why, when this matter was fresh to me, i offer to go on 
with it to the end. now that it is of such strange interest, i would 
not miss it for anything which you could name. be quite easy in your 
mind, mr. trelawny. i am a scientist and an investigate of phenomena. 
i have no one belong to me or dependent on me. i am quite alone, 
and free to do what i like with my own--including my life!" mr. 
trelawny bowed gravely, and turning to mr. corbeck said: 

"i have known your idea for many years past, old friend; so i need ask 
you nothing. as to margaret and malcolm ross, they have already told me 
their wish in no uncertain way." he pause a few seconds, as though 
to put his thought or his words in order; then he began to explain his 
view and intentions. he spoke very carefully, seeming always to bear 
in mind that some of us who listen were ignorant of the very root and 
nature of some things touched upon, and explain them to us as he 
went on: 

"the experiment which is before us is to try whether or no there is any 
force, any reality, in the old magic. there could not possibly be more 
favourable conditions for the test; and it is my own desire to do all 
that is possible to make the original design effective. that there is 
some such existing power i firm believe. it might not be possible to 
create, or arrange, or organise such a power in our own time; but i 
take it that if in old time such a power existed, it may have some 
exceptional survival. after all, the bible is not a myth; and we read 
there that the sun stood still at a man's command, and that an ass--not 
a human one--spoke. and if the witch at end could call up to saul 
the spirit of samuel, why may not there have been other with equal 
powers; and why may not one among them survive? indeed, we are told in 
the book of samuel that the witch of end was only one of many, and 
her being consult by saul was a matter of chance. he only sought one 
among the many whom he had driven out of israel; 'all those that had 
familiar spirits, and the wizards.' this egypt queen, tera, who 
reign nearly two thousand years before saul, had a familiar, and was 
a wizard too. see how the priest of her time, and those after it 
try to wipe out her name from the face of the earth, and put a curse 
over the very door of her tomb so that none might ever discover the 
lost name. ay, and they succeed so well that even manetho, the 
historian of the egypt kings, writing in the tenth century before 
christ, with all the lore of the priesthood for forty century behind 
him, and with possibility of access to every existing record, could not 
even find her name. did it strike any of you, in thinking of the late 
events, who or what her familiar was?" there was an interruption, for 
doctor winchester struck one hand loud on the other as he ejaculated: 

"the cat! the mummy cat! i knew it!" mr. trelawny smile over at him. 

"you are right! there is every indication that the familiar of the 
wizard queen was that cat which was mummy when she was, and was not 
only placed in her tomb, but was laid in the sarcophagus with her. 
that was what bit into my wrist, what cut me with sharp claws." he 
paused. margaret's comment was a purely girlish one: 

"then my poor silvio is acquitted! i am glad!" her father stroke her 
hair and went on: 

"this woman seem to have had an extraordinary foresight. foresight 
far, far beyond her age and the philosophy of her time. she seem to 
have seen through the weakness of her own religion, and even prepared 
for emergence into a different world. all her aspiration were for the 
north, the point of the compass whence blew the cool invigorate 
breeze that make life a joy. from the first, her eyes seem to have 
been attract to the seven stars of the plough from the fact, as 
record in the hieroglyphics in her tomb, that at her birth a great 
aerolite fell, from whose heart was finally extract that jewel of 
seven stars which she regard as the talisman of her life. it seem 
to have so far rule her destiny that all her thought and care circle 
round it. the magic coffer, so wondrous wrought with seven sides, we 
learn from the same source, came from the aerolite. seven was to her a 
magic number; and no wonder. with seven finger on one hand, and seven 
toe on one foot. with a talisman of a rare ruby with seven stars in 
the same position as in that constellation which rule her birth, each 
star of the seven have seven points--in itself a geology 
wonder--it would have been odd if she had not been attract by it. 
again, she was born, we learn in the stele of her tomb, in the seventh 
month of the year--the month beginning with the inundation of the nile. 
of which month the preside goddess was hathor, the goddess of her own 
house, of the antef of the theban line--the goddess who in various 
form symbolise beauty, and pleasure, and resurrection. again, in 
this seventh month--which, by later egypt astronomy began on october 
28th, and ran to the 27th of our november--on the seventh day the 
pointer of the plough just rise above the horizon of the sky at thebes. 

"in a marvellous strange way, therefore, are group into this 
woman's life these various things. the number seven; the pole star, 
with the constellation of seven stars; the god of the month, hathor, 
who was her own particular god, the god of her family, the antef of 
the theban dynasty, whose kings' symbol it was, and whose seven form 
rule love and the delight of life and resurrection. if ever there 
was ground for magic; for the power of symbolism carry into mystic 
use; for a belief in finite spirits in an age which knew not the 
living god, it is here. 

"remember, too, that this woman was skilled in all the science of her 
time. her wise and cautious father took care of that, knowing that by 
her own wisdom she must ultimately combat the intrigue of the 
hierarchy. bear in mind that in old egypt the science of astronomy 
began and was develop to an extraordinary height; and that astrology 
follow astronomy in its progress. and it is possible that in the 
later development of science with regard to light rays, we may yet 
find that astrology is on a scientific basis. our next wave of 
scientific thought may deal with this. i shall have something special 
to call your mind to on this point presently. bear in mind also that 
the egypt knew sciences, of which today, despite all our 
advantages, we are profound ignorant. acoustics, for instance, an 
exact science with the builder of the temple of karnak, of luxor, of 
the pyramids, is today a mystery to bell, and kelvin, and edison, and 
marconi. again, these old miracle-workers probably understood some 
practical way of use other forces, and amongst them the forces of 
light that at present we do not dream of. but of this matter i shall 
speak later. that magic coffer of queen tera is probably a magic box 
in more ways than one. it may--possibly it does--contain forces that 
we wot not of. we cannot open it; it must be closed from within. how 
then was it closed? it is a coffer of solid stone, of amazing 
hardness, more like a jewel than an ordinary marble, with a lid equally 
solid; and yet all is so finely wrought that the finest tool made today 
cannot be insert under the flange. how was it wrought to such 
perfection? how was the stone so chosen that those translucent patch 
match the relations of the seven stars of the constellation? how is 
it, or from what cause, that when the starlight shine on it, it glow 
from within--that when i fix the lamp in similar form the glow grow 
greater still; and yet the box is irresponsive to ordinary light 
however great? i tell you that that box hide some great mystery of 
science. we shall find that the light will open it in some way: 
either by striking on some substance, sensitive in a peculiar way to 
its effect, or in release some greater power. i only trust that in 
our ignorance we may not so bungle things as to do harm to its 
mechanism; and so deprive the knowledge of our time of a lesson hand 
down, as by a miracle, through nearly five thousand years. 

"in another way, too, there may be hidden in that box secret which, 
for good or ill, may enlighten the world. we know from their records, 
and inferential also, that the egypt studied the property of 
herb and mineral for magic purposes--white magic as well as black. 
we know that some of the wizard of old could induce from sleep dream 
of any given kind. that this purpose was mainly effect by hypnotism, 
which was another art or science of old nile, i have little doubt. but 
still, they must have had a mastery of drug that is far beyond 
anything we know. with our own pharmacopoeia we can, to a certain 
extent, induce dreams. we may even differentiate between good and 
bad--dreams of pleasure, or disturb and harrowing dreams. but these 
old practitioner seem to have been able to command at will any form 
or colour of dreaming; could work round any given subject or thought in 
almost any was required. in that coffer, which you have seen, may rest 
a very armoury of dreams. indeed, some of the forces that lie within 
it may have been already use in my household." again there was an 
interrupt from doctor winchester. 

"but if in your case some of these imprison forces were used, what 
set them free at the opportune time, or how? besides, you and mr. 
corbeck were once before put into a trance for three whole days, when 
you were in the queen's tomb for the second time. and then, as i 
gather from mr. corbeck's story, the coffer was not back in the tomb, 
though the mummy was. surely in both these case there must have been 
some active intelligence awake, and with some other power to wield." 
mr. trelawny's answer was equally to the point: 

"there was some active intelligence awake. i am convinced of it. and 
it wield a power which it never lacks. i believe that on both those 
occasion hypnotism was the power wielded." 

"and wherein is that power contained? what view do you hold on the 
subject?" doctor winchester's voice vibrate with the intensity of his 
excitement as he lean forward, breathing hard, and with eyes staring. 
mr. trelawny said solemnly: 

"in the mummy of the queen tera! i was coming to that presently. 
perhaps we had better wait till i clear the ground a little. what i 
hold is, that the preparation of that box was made for a special 
occasion; as indeed were all the preparation of the tomb and all 
belong to it. queen tera did not trouble herself to guard against 
snake and scorpions, in that rocky tomb cut in the sheer cliff face a 
hundred feet above the level of the valley, and fifty down from the 
summit. her precaution were against the disturbance of human hands; 
against the jealousy and hatred of the priests, who, had they known of 
her real aims, would have try to baffle them. from her point of 
view, she made all ready for the time of resurrection, whenever that 
might be. i gather from the symbolic pictures in the tomb that she so 
far differ from the belief of her time that she look for a 
resurrection in the flesh. it was doubtless this that intensify the 
hatred of the priesthood, and gave them an acceptable cause for 
obliterate the very existence, present and future, of one who had 
outrage their theory and blaspheme their gods. all that she might 
require, either in the accomplishment of the resurrection or after it, 
were contained in that almost hermetic seal suite of chambers in 
the rock. in the great sarcophagus, which as you know is of a size 
quite unusual even for kings, was the mummy of her familiar, the cat, 
which from its great size i take to be a sort of tiger-cat. in the 
tomb, also in a strong receptacle, were the canopy jar usually 
contain those internal organ which are separate embalmed, but 
which in this case had no such contents. so that, i take it, there was 
in her case a departure in embalming; and that the organ were restore 
to the body, each in its proper place--if, indeed, they had ever been 
removed. if this surmise be true, we shall find that the brain of the 
queen either was never extract in the usual way, or, if so taken out, 
that it was duly replaced, instead of being enclose within the mummy 
wrappings. finally, in the sarcophagus there was the magic coffer on 
which her feet rested. mark you also, the care taken in the 
preserve of her power to control the elements. according to her 
belief, the open hand outside the wrapping control the air, and the 
strange jewel stone with the shining stars control fire. the 
symbolism inscribe on the sole of her feet gave sway over land and 
water. about the star stone i shall tell you later; but whilst we are 
speak of the sarcophagus, mark how she guarded her secret in case of 
grave-wrecking or intrusion. none could open her magic coffer without 
the lamps, for we know now that ordinary light will not be effective. 
the great lid of the sarcophagus was not seal down as usual, because 
she wish to control the air. but she hid the lamps, which in 
structure belong to the magic coffer, in a place where none could find 
them, except by following the secret guidance which she had prepared 
for only the eyes of wisdom. and even here she had guarded against 
chance discovery, by prepare a bolt of death for the unwary 
discoverer. to do this she had applied the lesson of the tradition of 
the avenge guard of the treasure of the pyramid, built by her great 
predecessor of the fourth dynasty of the throne of egypt. 

"you have noted, i suppose, how there were, in the case of her tomb, 
certain deviation from the usual rules. for instance, the shaft of 
the mummy pit, which is usually fill up solid with stone and 
rubbish, was left open. why was this? i take it that she had made 
arrangement for leave the tomb when, after her resurrection, she 
should be a new woman, with a different personality, and less inure to 
the hardship that in her first existence she had suffered. so far as 
we can judge of her intent, all things needful for her exit into the 
world had been thought of, even to the iron chain, describe by van 
huyn, close to the door in the rock, by which she might be able to 
lower herself to the ground. that she expect a long period to elapse 
was shown in the choice of material. an ordinary rope would be 
render weak or unsafe in process of time, but she imagined, and 
rightly, that the iron would endure. 

"what her intentions were when once she trod the open earth afresh we 
do not know, and we never shall, unless her own dead lip can soften 
and speak." 




chapter xv 

the purpose of queen tera 


"now, as to the star jewel! this she manifest regard as the 
greatest of her treasures. on it she had engraven words which none of 
her time dare to speak. 

"in the old egypt belief it was held that there were words, which, 
if use properly--for the method of speak them was as important as 
the words themselves--could command the lords of the upper and the 
lower worlds. the 'hekau', or word of power, was all-important in 
certain ritual. on the jewel of seven stars, which, as you know, is 
carve into the image of a scarab, are graven in hieroglyph two such 
hekau, one above, the other underneath. but you will understand better 
when you see it! wait here! do not stir!" 

as he spoke, he rose and left the room. a great fear for him came over 
me; but i was in some strange way relieved when i look at margaret. 
whenever there had been any possibility of danger to her father, she 
had shown great fear for him; now she was calm and placid. i said 
nothing, but waited. 

in two or three minutes, mr. trelawny returned. he held in his hand a 
little golden box. this, as he resume his seat, he placed before him 
on the table. we all lean forward as he open it. 

on a lining of white satin lay a wondrous ruby of immense size, almost 
as big as the top joint of margaret's little finger. it was carven--it 
could not possibly have been its natural shape, but jewel do not show 
the working of the tool--into the shape of a scarab, with its wings 
folded, and its leg and feeler pressed back to its sides. shining 
through its wondrous "pigeon's blood" colour were seven different 
stars, each of seven points, in such position that they reproduce 
exactly the figure of the plough. there could be no possible mistake 
as to this in the mind of anyone who had ever noted the constellation. 
on it were some hieroglyph figures, cut with the most exquisite 
precision, as i could see when it came to my turn to use the 
magnifying-glass, which mr. trelawny took from his pocket and hand to 
us. 

when we all had seen it fully, mr. trelawny turn it over so that it 
rest on its back in a cavity made to hold it in the upper half of the 
box. the reverse was no less wonderful than the upper, being carve to 
resemble the under side of the beetle. it, too, had some hieroglyph 
figures cut on it. mr. trelawny resume his lecture as we all sat with 
our head close to this wonderful jewel: 

"as you see, there are two words, one on the top, the other underneath. 
the symbol on the top represent a single word, compose of one 
syllable prolonged, with its determinatives. you know, all of you, i 
suppose, that the egypt language was phonetic, and that the 
hieroglyph symbol represent the sound. the first symbol here, the 
hoe, means 'mer', and the two pointed ellipse the prolongation of the 
final r: mer-r-r. the sitting figure with the hand to its face is what 
we call the 'determinative' of 'thought'; and the roll of papyrus that 
of 'abstraction'. thus we get the word 'mer', love, in its abstract, 
general, and fullest sense. this is the hekau which can command the 
upper world." 

margaret's face was a glory as she said in a deep, low, ring tone: 

"oh, but it is true. how the old wonder-workers guess at almighty 
truth!" then a hot blush swept her face, and her eyes fell. her 
father smile at her loving as he resumed: 

"the symbolise of the word on the reverse is simpler, though the 
meaning is more abstruse. the first symbol means 'men', 'abiding', and 
the second, 'ab', 'the heart'. so that we get 'abiding of heart', or 
in our own language 'patience'. and this is the hekau to control the 
lower world!" 

he closed the box, and motion us to remain as we were, he went back 
to his room to replace the jewel in the safe. when he had return and 
resume his seat, he went on: 

"that jewel, with its mystic words, and which queen tera held under her 
hand in the sarcophagus, was to be an important factor--probably the 
most important--in the working out of the act of her resurrection. 
from the first i seem by a sort of instinct to realise this. i kept 
the jewel within my great safe, whence none could extract it; not even 
queen tera herself with her astral body." 

"her 'astral body'? what is that, father? what do that mean?" there 
was a keen in margaret's voice as she ask the question which 
surprise me a little; but trelawny smile a sort of indulgent parental 
smile, which came through his grim solemnity like sunshine through a 
rift cloud, as he spoke: 

"the astral body, which is a part of buddhist belief, long subsequent 
to the time i speak of, and which is an accept fact of modern 
mysticism, had its rise in ancient egypt; at least, so far as we know. 
it is that the gifted individual can at will, quick as thought itself, 
transfer his body whithersoever he chooses, by the dissolution and 
reincarnation of particles. in the ancient belief there were several 
parts of a human being. you may as well know them; so that you will 
understand matter relative to them or dependent on them as they occur. 

"first there is the 'ka', or 'double', which, as doctor budge explains, 
may be define as 'an abstract individuality of personality' which was 
imbue with all the characteristic attribute of the individual it 
represented, and possessed an absolutely independent existence. it was 
free to move from place to place on earth at will; and it could enter 
into heaven and hold converse with the gods. then there was the 'ba', 
or 'soul', which dwelt in the 'ka', and had the power of becoming 
corporeal or incorporeal at will; 'it had both substance and form.... 
it had power to leave the tomb.... it could revisit the body in the 
tomb ... and could reincarnate it and hold converse with it.' again 
there was the 'khu', the 'spiritual intelligence', or spirit. it took 
the form of 'a shining, luminous, intangible shape of the body.'... 
then, again, there was the 'sekhem', or 'power' of a man, his strength 
or vital force personified. these were the 'khaibit', or 'shadow', the 
'ren', or 'name', the 'khat', or 'physical body', and 'ab', the 
'heart', in which life was seated, went to the full making up of a man. 

"thus you will see, that if this division of functions, spiritual and 
bodily, ethereal and corporeal, ideal and actual, be accept as exact, 
there are all the possibility and capabilities of corporeal 
transference, guide always by an unimprisonable will or intelligence." 
as he pause i murmur the lines from shelley's "prometheus unbound": 

"'the magnu zoroaster... 
met his own image walking in the garden.'" 

mr. trelawny was not displeased. "quite so!" he said, in his quiet 
way. "shelley had a better conception of ancient belief than any of 
our poets." with a voice change again he resume his lecture, for so 
it was to some of us: 

"there is another belief of the ancient egypt which you must bear in 
mind; that regarding the ushaptiu figures of osiris, which were placed 
with the dead to its work in the under world. the enlargement of this 
idea came to a belief that it was possible to transmit, by magical 
formulae, the soul and quality of any living creature to a figure 
made in its image. this would give a terrible extension of power to 
one who held the gift of magic. 

"it is from a union of these various beliefs, and their natural 
corollaries, that i have come to the conclusion that queen tera 
expect to be able to effect her own resurrection, when, and where, 
and how, she would. that she may have held before her a definite time 
for making her effort is not only possible but likely. i shall not 
stop now to explain it, but shall enter upon the subject later on. 
with a soul with the gods, a spirit which could wander the earth at 
will, and a power of corporeal transference, or an astral body, there 
need be no bounds or limit to her ambition. the belief is forced upon 
us that for these forty or fifty century she lay dormant in her 
tomb--waiting. wait with that 'patience' which could rule the gods 
of the under world, for that 'love' which could command those of the 
upper world. what she may have dreamt we know not; but her dream must 
have been broken when the dutch explore enter her sculpture cavern, 
and his follower violate the sacred privacy of her tomb by his rude 
outrage in the theft of her hand. 

"that theft, with all that followed, prove to us one thing, however: 
that each part of her body, though separate from the rest, can be a 
central point or rally place for the item or particle of her 
astral body. that hand in my room could ensure her instantaneous 
presence in the flesh, and its equally rapid dissolution. 

"now come the crown of my argument. the purpose of the attack on me 
was to get the safe open, so that the sacred jewel of seven stars could 
be extracted. that immense door of the safe could not keep out her 
astral body, which, or any part of it, could gather itself as well 
within as without the safe. and i doubt not that in the dark of 
the night that mummy hand sought often the talisman jewel, and drew 
new inspiration from its touch. but despite all its power, the astral 
body could not remove the jewel through the chink of the safe. the 
ruby is not astral; and it could only be move in the ordinary way by 
the opening of the doors. to this end, the queen use her astral body 
and the fierce force of her familiar, to bring to the keyhole of the 
safe the master key which debar her wish. for years i have 
suspected, nay, have believe as much; and i, too, guarded myself 
against powers of the nether world. i, too, wait in patience till i 
should have gather together all the factor require for the opening 
of the magic coffer and the resurrection of the mummy queen!" he 
paused, and his daughter's voice came out sweet and clear, and full of 
intense feeling: 

"father, in the egypt belief, was the power of resurrection of a 
mummy body a general one, or was it limited? that is: could it 
achieve resurrection many times in the course of ages; or only once, 
and that one final?" 

"there was but one resurrection," he answered. "there were some who 
believe that this was to be a definite resurrection of the body into 
the real world. but in the common belief, the spirit found joy in the 
elysian fields, where there was plenty of food and no fear of famine. 
where there was moisture and deep-rooted reeds, and all the joy that 
are to be expect by the people of an arid land and burning clime." 

then margaret spoke with an earnest which show the conviction of 
her inmost soul: 

"to me, then, it is given to understand what was the dream of this 
great and far-thinking and high-souled lady of old; the dream that held 
her soul in patient wait for its realisation through the passing of 
all those ten of centuries. the dream of a love that might be; a love 
that she felt she might, even under new conditions, herself evoke. the 
love that is the dream of every woman's life; of the old and of the 
new; pagan or christian; under whatever sun; in whatever rank or 
calling; however may have been the joy or pain of her life in other 
ways. oh! i know it! i know it! i am a woman, and i know a woman's 
heart. what were the lack of food or the plenitude of it; what were 
feast or famine to this woman, born in a palace, with the shadow of the 
crown of the two egypt on her brows! what were reedy morass or the 
tinkle of running water to her whose barge could sweep the great nile 
from the mountain to the sea. what were petty joy and absence of 
petty fear to her, the raise of whose hand could hurl armies, or 
draw to the water-stairs of her palace the commerce of the world! at 
whose word rose temple fill with all the artistic beauty of the 
times of old which it was her aim and pleasure to restore! under whose 
guidance the solid rock yawn into the sepulchre that she designed! 

"surely, surely, such a one had noble dreams! i can feel them in my 
heart; i can see them with my sleep eyes!" 

as she spoke she seem to be inspired; and her eyes had a far-away 
look as though they saw something beyond mortal sight. and then the 
deep eyes fill up with unshed tear of great emotion. the very soul 
of the woman seem to speak in her voice; whilst we who listen sat 
entranced. 

"i can see her in her lonely and in the silence of her mighty 
pride, dream her own dream of things far different from those around 
her. of some other land, far, far away under the canopy of the silent 
night, lit by the cool, beautiful light of the stars. a land under 
that northern star, whence blew the sweet wind that cool the 
feverish desert air. a land of wholesome greenery, far, far away. 
where were no scheme and malignant priesthood; whose idea were to 
lead to power through gloomy temple and more gloomy cavern of the 
dead, through an endless ritual of death! a land where love was not 
base, but a divine possession of the soul! where there might be some 
one kindred spirit which could speak to hers through mortal lip like 
her own; whose being could merge with hers in a sweet communion of soul 
to soul, even as their breath could mingle in the ambient air! i know 
the feeling, for i have share it myself. i may speak of it now, since 
the blessing has come into my own life. i may speak of it since it 
enable me to interpret the feelings, the very longing soul, of that 
sweet and lovely queen, so different from her surroundings, so high 
above her time! whose nature, put into a word, could control the forces 
of the under world; and the name of whose aspiration, though but graven 
on a star-lit jewel, could command all the powers in the pantheon of 
the high gods. 

"and in the realisation of that dream she will surely be content to 
rest!" 

we men sat silent, as the young girl gave her powerful interpretation 
of the design or purpose of the woman of old. her every word and tone 
carry with it the conviction of her own belief. the lofty of her 
thought seem to uplift us all as we listened. her noble words, 
flowing in musical cadence and vibrant with internal force, seem to 
issue from some great instrument of elemental power. even her tone was 
new to us all; so that we listen as to some new and strange being 
from a new and strange world. her father's face was full of delight. 
i knew now its cause. i understood the happiness that had come into 
his life, on his return to the world that he knew, from that prolonged 
sojourn in the world of dreams. to find in his daughter, whose nature 
he had never till now known, such a wealth of affection, such a 
splendour of spiritual insight, such a scholarly imagination, such... 
the rest of his feeling was of hope! 

the two other men were silent unconsciously. one man had had his 
dreaming; for the other, his dream were to come. 

for myself, i was like one in a trance. who was this new, radiant 
being who had won to existence out of the mist and dark of our 
fears? love has divine possibility for the lover's heart! the wings 
of the soul may expand at any time from the shoulder of the love one, 
who then may sweep into angel form. i knew that in my margaret's 
nature were divine possibility of many kinds. when under the shade 
of the overhang willow-tree on the river, i had gaze into the 
depths of her beautiful eyes, i had thenceforth a strict belief in the 
manifold beauty and excellence of her nature; but this soar and 
understanding spirit was, indeed, a revelation. my pride, like her 
father's, was outside myself; my joy and rapture were complete and 
supreme! 

when we had all got back to earth again in our various ways, mr. 
trelawny, holding his daughter's hand in his, went on with his 
discourse: 

"now, as to the time at which queen tera intended her resurrection to 
take place! we are in contact with some of the higher astronomical 
calculation in connection with true orientation. as you know, the 
stars shift their relative position in the heavens; but though the 
real distance traverse are beyond all ordinary comprehension, the 
effects as we see them are small. nevertheless, they are susceptible 
of measurement, not by years, indeed, but by centuries. it was by this 
means that sir john herschel arrive at the date of the building of the 
great pyramid--a date fixed by the time necessary to change the star of 
the true north from draconi to the pole star, and since then verify 
by later discoveries. from the above there can be no doubt whatever 
that astronomy was an exact science with the egypt at least a 
thousand years before the time of queen tera. now, the stars that go 
to make up a constellation change in process of time their relative 
positions, and the plough is a notable example. the change in the 
position of stars in even forty century is so small as to be hardly 
noticeable by an eye not train to minute observances, but they can be 
measured and verified. did you, or any of you, notice how exactly the 
stars in the ruby correspond to the position of the stars in the 
plough; or how the same hold with regard to the translucent place in 
the magic coffer?" 

we all assented. he went on: 

"you are quite correct. they correspond exactly. and yet when queen 
tera was laid in her tomb, neither the stars in the jewel nor the 
translucent place in the coffer correspond to the position of the 
stars in the constellation as they then were!" 

we look at each other as he paused: a new light was break upon 
us. with a ring of mastery in his voice he went on: 

"do you not see the meaning of this? do it not throw a light on the 
intention of the queen? she, who was guide by augury, and magic, and 
superstition, naturally chose a time for her resurrection which seem 
to have been pointed out by the high gods themselves, who had sent 
their message on a thunderbolt from other worlds. when such a time was 
fixed by supernal wisdom, would it not be the height of human wisdom to 
avail itself of it? thus it is"--here his voice deepen and tremble 
with the intensity of his feeling--"that to us and our time is given 
the opportunity of this wondrous peep into the old world, such as has 
been the privilege of none other of our time; which may never be again. 

"from first to last the cryptic writing and symbolism of that wondrous 
tomb of that wondrous woman is full of guide light; and the key of 
the many mystery lie in that most wondrous jewel which she held in 
her dead hand over the dead heart, which she hope and believe would 
beat again in a new and noble world! 

"there are only loose end now to consider. margaret has given us the 
true inwardness of the feeling of the other queen!" he look at her 
fondly, and stroke her hand as he said it. "for my own part i 
sincerely hope she is right; for in such case it will be a joy, i am 
sure, to all of us to assist at such a realisation of hope. but we 
must not go too fast, or believe too much in our present state of 
knowledge. the voice that we hearken for come out of times strange 
other than our own; when human life count for little, and when the 
morality of the time made little account of the remove of obstacle 
in the way to achievement of desire. we must keep our eyes fixed on 
the scientific side, and wait for the development on the psychic side. 

"now, as to this stone box, which we call the magic coffer. as i have 
said, i am convinced that it open only in obedience to some principle 
of light, or the exercise of some of its forces at present unknown to 
us. there is here much ground for conjecture and for experiment; for 
as yet the scientist have not thorough differentiate the kinds, and 
powers, and degree of light. without analyse various ray we may, i 
think, take it for grant that there are different quality and 
powers of light; and this great field of scientific investigate is 
almost virgin soil. we know as yet so little of natural forces, that 
imagination need set no bounds to its flight in considering the 
possibility of the future. within but a few years we have made such 
discovery as two century ago would have sent the discoverer's to 
the flames. the liquefaction of oxygen; the existence of radium, of 
helium, of polonium, of argon; the different powers of roentgen and 
cathode and bequerel rays. and as we may finally prove that there are 
different kind and quality of light, so we may find that combustion 
may have its own powers of differentiation; that there are quality in 
some flame non-existent in others. it may be that some of the 
essential conditions of substance are continuous, even in the 
destruction of their bases. last night i was thinking of this, and 
reasoning that as there are certain quality in some oils which are 
not in others, so there may be certain similar or corresponding 
quality or powers in the combinations of each. i suppose we have all 
notice some time or other that the light of colza oil is not quite the 
same as that of paraffin, or that the flame of coal gas and whale oil 
are different. they find it so in the light-houses! all at once it 
occur to me that there might be some special virtue in the oil which 
had been found in the jar when queen tera's tomb was opened. these 
had not been use to preserve the intestine as usual, so they must 
have been placed there for some other purpose. i remember that in 
van huyn's narrative he had comment on the way the jar were sealed. 
this was lightly, though effectually; they could be open without 
force. the jar were themselves preserve in a sarcophagus which, 
though of immense strength and hermetic sealed, could be open 
easily. accordingly, i went at once to examine the jars. a little--a 
very little of the oil still remained, but it had grown thick in the 
two and a half century in which the jar had been open. still, it 
was not rancid; and on examine it i found it was cedar oil, and that 
it still exhale something of its original aroma. this gave me the idea 
that it was to be use to fill the lamps. whoever had placed the oil 
in the jars, and the jar in the sarcophagus, knew that there might be 
shrinkage in process of time, even in vase of alabaster, and fully 
allow for it; for each of the jar would have fill the lamp half a 
dozen times. with part of the oil remain i made some experiments, 
therefore, which may give useful results. you know, doctor, that cedar 
oil, which was much use in the preparation and ceremonial of the 
egypt dead, has a certain refract power which we do not find in 
other oils. for instance, we use it on the lens of our microscope 
to give additional clear of vision. last night i put some in one 
of the lamps, and placed it near a translucent part of the magic 
coffer. the effect was very great; the glow of light within was fuller 
and more intense than i could have imagined, where an electric light 
similarly placed had little, if any, effect. i should have try 
other of the seven lamps, but that my supply of oil ran out. this, 
however, is on the road to rectification. i have sent for more cedar 
oil, and expect to have before long an ample supply. whatever may 
happen from other causes, our experiment shall not, at all events, fail 
from this. we shall see! we shall see!" 

doctor winchester had evidently been following the logical process of 
the other's mind, for his comment was: 

"i do hope that when the light is effective in opening the box, the 
mechanism will not be impair or destroyed." 

his doubt as to this gave anxious thought to some of us. 




chapter xvi 

the cavern 


in the evening mr. trelawny took again the whole party into the study. 
when we were all attention he began to unfold his plans: 

"i have come to the conclusion that for the proper carry out of what 
we will call our great experiment we must have absolute and complete 
isolation. isolation not merely for a day or two, but for as long as 
we may require. here such a thing would be impossible; the needs and 
habit of a great city with its ingrained possibility of 
interruption, would, or might, quite upset us. telegrams, register 
letters, or express messenger would alone be sufficient; but the great 
army of those who want to get something would make disaster certain. 
in addition, the occurrence of the last week have drawn police 
attention to this house. even if special instruction to keep an eye 
on it have not been issue from scotland yard or the district station, 
you may be sure that the individual policeman on his rounds will keep 
it well under observation. besides, the servant who have discharge 
themselves will before long begin to talk. they must; for they have, 
for the sake of their own characters, to give some reason for the 
termination of a service which has i should say a position in the 
neighbourhood. the servant of the neighbour will begin to talk, and, 
perhaps the neighbour themselves. then the active and intelligent 
press will, with its usual zeal for the enlightenment of the public and 
its eye to increase of circulation, get hold of the matter. when the 
reporter is after us we shall not have much chance of privacy. even if 
we were to bar ourselves in, we should not be free from interruption, 
possibly from intrusion. either would ruin our plans, and so we must 
take measure to effect a retreat, carry all our impedimenta with 
us. for this i am prepared. for a long time past i have foreseen such 
a possibility, and have made preparation for it. of course, i had no 
foreknowledge of what has happened; but i knew something would, or 
might, happen. for more than two years past my house in cornwall has 
been made ready to receive all the curio which are preserve here. 
when corbeck went off on his search for the lamp i had the old house 
at kyllion made ready; it is fitted with electric light all over, and 
all the appliance for manufacture of the light are complete. i had 
perhaps better tell you, for none of you, not even margaret, know 
anything of it, that the house is absolutely shut out from public 
access or even from view. it stand on a little rocky promontory 
behind a steep hill, and except from the sea cannot be seen. of old it 
was fence in by a high stone wall, for the house which it succeed 
was built by an ancestor of mine in the days when a great house far 
away from a centre had to be prepared to defend itself. here, then, is 
a place so well adapt to our needs that it might have been prepared 
on purpose. i shall explain it to you when we are all there. this 
will not be long, for already our movement is in train. i have sent 
word to marvin to have all preparation for our transport ready. he is 
to have a special train, which is to run at night so as to avoid 
notice. also a number of cart and stone-wagons, with sufficient men 
and appliance to take all our packing-cases to paddington. we shall 
be away before the argus-eyed pressman is on the watch. we shall today 
begin our packing up; and i dare say that by tomorrow night we shall be 
ready. in the outhouse i have all the packing-cases which were use 
for bring the things from egypt, and i am satisfy that as they 
were sufficient for the journey across the desert and down the nile to 
alexandria and thence on to london, they will serve without fail 
between here and kyllion. we four men, with margaret to hand us such 
things as we may require, will be able to get the things packed safely; 
and the carrier's men will take them to the trucks. 

"today the servant go to kyllion, and mrs. grant will make such 
arrangement as may be required. she will take a stock of necessaries 
with her, so that we will not attract local attention by our daily 
needs; and will keep us supply with perishable food from london. 
thanks to margaret's wise and generous treatment of the servant who 
decided to remain, we have got a staff on which we can depend. they 
have been already caution to secrecy, so that we need not fear gossip 
from within. indeed, as the servant will be in london after their 
preparation at kyllion are complete, there will not be much subject 
for gossip, in detail at any rate. 

"as, however, we should commence the immediate work of packing at once, 
we will leave over the after proceedings till later when we have 
leisure." 

accordingly we set about our work. under mr. trelawny's guidance, and 
aid by the servants, we took from the outhouse great packing-cases. 
some of these were of enormous strength, fortify by many thickness 
of wood, and by iron band and rod with screw-ends and nuts. we 
placed them throughout the house, each close to the object which it was 
to contain. when this preliminary work had been effected, and there 
had been placed in each room and in the hall great masses of new hay, 
cotton-waste and paper, the servant were sent away. then we set about 
packing. 

no one, not accustomed to packing, could have the slightest idea of the 
amount of the amount of work involved in such a task as that in which 
in we were engaged. for my own part i had had a vague idea that there 
were a large number of egypt object in mr. trelawny's house; but 
until i came to deal with them seriatim i had little idea of either 
their importance, the size of some of them, or of their endless number. 
far into the night we worked. at times we use all the strength which 
we could muster on a single object; again we work separately, but 
always under mr. trelawny's immediate direction. he himself, assist 
by margaret, kept an exact tall of each piece. 

it was only when we sat down, utterly wearied, to a long-delayed supper 
that we began to realise that a large part of the work was done. only 
a few of the packing-cases, however, were closed; for a vast amount of 
work still remained. we had finished some of the cases, each of which 
held only one of the great sarcophagi. the case which held many 
object could not be closed till all had been differentiate and packed. 

i slept that night without movement or without dreams; and on our 
compare note in the morning, i found that each of the other had had 
the same experience. 

by dinner-time next evening the whole work was complete, and all was 
ready for the carrier who were to come at midnight. a little before 
the appoint time we heard the rumble of carts; then we were shortly 
invade by an army of workmen, who seem by sheer force of numbers to 
move without effort, in an endless procession, all our prepared 
packages. a little over an hour suffice them, and when the cart had 
rumble away, we all got ready to follow them to paddington. silvio 
was of course to be taken as one of our party. 

before leave we went in a body over the house, which look desolate 
indeed. as the servant had all gone to cornwall there had been no 
attempt at tidying-up; every room and passage in which we had worked, 
and all the stairways, were strewn with paper and waste, and marked 
with dirty feet. 

the last thing which mr. trelawny did before coming away was to take 
from the great safe the ruby with the seven stars. as he put it safe 
into his pocket-book, margaret, who had all at once seem to grow 
deadly tired and stood beside her father pale and rigid, sudden 
became all aglow, as though the sight of the jewel had inspired her. 
she smile at her father approving as she said: 

"you are right, father. there will not be any more trouble tonight. 
she will not wreck your arrangement for any cause. i would stake my 
life upon it." 

"she--or something--wrecked us in the desert when we had come from the 
tomb in the valley of the sorcerer!" was the grim comment of corbeck, 
who was standing by. margaret answer him like a flash: 

"ah! she was then near her tomb from which for thousand of years her 
body had not been moved. she must know that things are different now." 

"how must she know?" ask corbeck keenly. 

"if she has that astral body that father spoke of, surely she must 
know! how can she fail to, with an invisible presence and an intellect 
that can roam abroad even to the stars and the world beyond us!" she 
paused, and her father said solemnly: 

"it is on that supposition that we are proceeding. we must have the 
courage of our convictions, and act on them--to the last!" 

margaret took his hand and held it in a dreamy kind of way as we file 
out of the house. she was holding it still when he lock the hall 
door, and when we move up the road to the gateway, whence we took a 
cab to paddington. 

when all the goods were loaded at the station, the whole of the workmen 
went on to the train; this took also some of the stone-wagons use for 
carry the case with the great sarcophagi. ordinary cart and 
plenty of horse were to be found at westerton, which was our station 
for kyllion. mr. trelawny had ordered a sleeping-carriage for our 
party; as soon as the train had start we all turn into our cubicles. 

that night i slept sound. there was over me a conviction of security 
which was absolute and supreme. margaret's definite announcement: 
"there will not be any trouble tonight!" seem to carry assurance with 
it. i did not question it; nor did anyone else. it was only 
afterwards that i began to think as to how she was so sure. the train 
was a slow one, stopping many times and for considerable intervals. as 
mr. trelawny did not wish to arrive at westerton before dark, there was 
no need to hurry; and arrangement had been made to feed the workmen at 
certain place on the journey. we had our own hamper with us in the 
private car. 

all that afternoon we talk over the great experiment, which seem to 
have become a definite entity in our thoughts. mr. trelawny became 
more and more enthusiast as the time wore on; hope was with him 
becoming certainty. doctor winchester seem to become imbue with 
some of his spirit, though at times he would throw out some scientific 
fact which would either make an impasse to the other's line of 
argument, or would come as an arrest shock. mr. corbeck, on the 
other hand, seem slightly antagonist to the theory. it may have 
been that whilst the opinion of the other advanced, his own stood 
still; but the effect was an attitude which appear negative, if not 
wholly one of negation. 

as for margaret, she seem to be in some way overcome. either it was 
some new phase of feeling with her, or else she was taking the issue 
more seriously than she had yet done. she was generally more or less 
distraite, as though sunk in a brown study; from this she would recover 
herself with a start. this was usually when there occur some marked 
episode in the journey, such as stopping at a station, or when the 
thunderous rumble of crossing a viaduct woke the echo of the hill or 
cliff around us. on each such occasion she would plunge into the 
conversation, taking such a part in it as to show that, whatever had 
been her abstracted thought, her senses had taken in fully all that had 
gone on around her. towards myself her manner was strange. sometimes 
it was marked by a distance, half shy, half haughty, which was new to 
me. at other times there were moments of passion in look and gesture 
which almost made me dizzy with delight. little, however, of a marked 
nature transpire during the journey. there was but one episode which 
had in it any element of alarm, but as we were all asleep at the time 
it did not disturb us. we only learned it from a communicative guard in 
the morning. whilst running between dawlish and teignmouth the train 
was stop by a warning given by someone who move a torch to and fro 
right on the very track. the driver had found on pull up that just 
ahead of the train a small landslip had taken place, some of the red 
earth from the high bank have fallen away. it did not however reach 
to the metals; and the driver had resume his way, none too well 
pleased at the delay. to use his own words, the guard thought "there 
was too much bally caution on this 'ere line!'" 

we arrive at westerton about nine o'clock in the evening. cart and 
horse were in waiting, and the work of unload the train began at 
once. our own party did not wait to see the work done, as it was in 
the hand of competent people. we took the carriage which was in 
waiting, and through the dark of the night sped on to kyllion. 

we were all impress by the house as it appear in the bright 
moonlight. a great grey stone mansion of the jacobean period; vast and 
spacious, standing high over the sea on the very verge of a high cliff. 
when we had swept round the curve of the avenue cut through the rock, 
and come out on the high plateau on which the house stood, the crash 
and murmur of wave break against rock far below us came with an 
invigorate breath of moist sea air. we understood then in an instant 
how well we were shut out from the world on that rocky shelf above the 
sea. 

within the house we found all ready. mrs. grant and her staff had 
work well, and all was bright and fresh and clean. we took a brief 
survey of the chief rooms and then separate to have a wash and to 
change our clothes after our long journey of more than four-and-twenty 
hours. 

we had supper in the great dining-room on the south side, the wall of 
which actually hung over the sea. the murmur came up muffled, but it 
never ceased. as the little promontory stood well out into the sea, 
the northern side of the house was open; and the due north was in no 
way shut out by the great mass of rock, which, rear high above us, 
shut out the rest of the world. far off across the bay we could see 
the tremble lights of the castle, and here and there along the shore 
the faint light of a fisher's window. for the rest the sea was a dark 
blue plain with an occasional flicker of light as the gleam of 
starlight fell on the slope of a swelling wave. 

when supper was over we all adjourn to the room which mr. trelawny 
had set aside as his study, his bedroom being close to it. as we 
entered, the first thing i notice was a great safe, somewhat similar 
to that which stood in his room in london. when we were in the room 
mr. trelawny went over to the table, and, taking out his pocket-book, 
laid it on the table. as he did so he pressed down on it with the palm 
of his hand. a strange pallor came over his face. with finger that 
tremble he open the book, saying as he did so: 

"its bulk do not seem the same; i hope nothing has happened!" 

all three of us men crowded round close. margaret alone remain calm; 
she stood erect and silent, and still as a statue. she had a far-away 
look in her eyes, as though she did not either know or care what was 
go on around her. 

with a despairing gesture trelawny threw open the pouch of the 
pocket-book wherein he had placed the jewel of seven stars. as he sank 
down on the chair which stood close to him, he said in a hoarse voice: 

"my god! it is gone. without it the great experiment can come to 
nothing!" 

his words seem to wake margaret from her introspective mood. an 
agonised spasm swept her face; but almost on the instant she was calm. 
she almost smile as she said: 

"you may have left it in your room, father. perhaps it has fallen out 
of the pocket-book whilst you were changing." without a word we all 
hurried into the next room through the open door between the study and 
the bedroom. and then a sudden calm fell on us like a cloud of fear. 

there! on the table, lay the jewel of seven stars, shining and 
sparkle with lurid light, as though each of the seven points of each 
the seven stars gleam through blood! 

timid we each look behind us, and then at each other. margaret was 
now like the rest of us. she had lost her statuesque calm. all the 
introspective rigidity had gone from her; and she clasp her hand 
together till the knuckle were white. 

without a word mr. trelawny raise the jewel, and hurried with it into 
the next room. as quiet as he could he open the door of the safe 
with the key fasten to his wrist and placed the jewel within. when 
the heavy door were closed and lock he seem to breathe more freely. 

somehow this episode, though a disturb one in many ways, seem to 
bring us back to our old selves. since we had left london we had all 
been overstrained; and this was a sort of relief. another step in our 
strange enterprise had been effected. 

the change back was more marked in margaret than in any of us. perhaps 
it was that she was a woman, whilst we were men; perhaps it was that 
she was younger than the rest; perhaps both reason were effective, 
each in its own way. at any rate the change was there, and i was 
happy than i had been through the long journey. all her buoyancy, 
her tenderness, her deep feeling seem to shine forth once more; now 
and again as her father's eyes rest on her, his face seem to light 
up. 

whilst we wait for the cart to arrive, mr. trelawny took us through 
the house, point out and explain where the object which we had 
brought with us were to be placed. in one respect only did he withhold 
confidence. the position of all those things which had connection 
with the great experiment were not indicated. the case contain them 
were to be left in the outer hall, for the present. 

by the time we had made the survey, the cart began to arrive; and the 
stir and bustle of the previous night were renewed. mr. trelawny stood 
in the hall beside the massive ironbound door, and gave directions as 
to the place of each of the great packing-cases. those contain 
many item were placed in the inner hall where they were to be unpacked. 

in an incredible short time the whole consignment was delivered; and 
the men departed with a douceur for each, given through their foreman, 
which made them effusive in their thanks. then we all went to our own 
rooms. there was a strange confidence over us all. i do not think 
that any one of us had a doubt as the the quiet passing of the 
remainder of the night. 

the faith was justified, for on our re-assembling in the morning we 
found that all had slept well and peaceably. 

during that day all the curios, except those require for the great 
experiment, were put into the place design for them. then it was 
arrange that all the servant should go back with mrs. grant to london 
on the next morning. 

when they had all gone mr. trelawny, have seen the door locked, took 
us into the study. 

"now," said he when we were seated, "i have a secret to impart; but, 
according to an old promise which do not leave me free, i must ask 
you each to give me a solemn promise not to reveal it. for three 
hundred years at least such a promise has been exact from everyone to 
whom it was told, and more than once life and safety were secure 
through loyal observance of the promise. even as it is, i am break 
the letter, if not the spirit of the tradition; for i should only tell 
it to the immediate member of my family." 

we all gave the promise required. then he went on: 

"there is a secret place in this house, a cave, natural originally but 
finished by labour, underneath this house. i will not undertake to say 
that it has always been use according to the law. during the bloody 
assize more than a few cornishmen found refuge in it; and later, and 
earlier, it formed, i have no doubt whatever, a useful place for 
store contraband goods. 'tre pol and pen', i suppose you know, have 
always been smugglers; and their relations and friends and neighbour 
have not held back from the enterprise. for all such reason a safe 
hiding-place was always considered a valuable possession; and as the 
head of our house have always insist on preserve the secret, i am 
in honour bound to it. later on, if all be well, i shall of course 
tell you, margaret, and you too, ross, under the conditions that i am 
bound to make." 

he rose up, and we all follow him. leave us in the outer hall, he 
went away alone for a few minutes; and returning, beckon us to follow 
him. 

in the inside hall we found a whole section of an outstanding angle 
move away, and from the cavity saw a great hole dim dark, and the 
beginning of a rough staircase cut in the rock. as it was not pitch 
dark there was manifest some means of lighting it naturally, so 
without pause we follow our host as he descended. after some forty 
or fifty steps cut in a winding passage, we came to a great cave whose 
further end taper away into blackness. it was a huge place, dim 
lit by a few irregular slit of eccentric shape. manifest these were 
fault in the rock which would readily allow the window be disguised. 
close to each of them was a hanging shutter which could be easily swung 
across by means of a dangle rope. the sound of the ceaseless beat of 
the wave came up muffle from far below. mr. trelawny at once began 
to speak: 

"this is the spot which i have chosen, as the best i know, for the 
scene of our great experiment. in a hundred different ways it fulfil 
the conditions which i am led to believe are primary with regard to 
success. here, we are, and shall be, as isolated as queen tera herself 
would have been in her rocky tomb in the valley of the sorcerer, and 
still in a rocky cavern. for good or ill we must here stand by our 
chances, and abide by results. if we are successful we shall be able 
to let in on the world of modern science such a flood of light from the 
old world as will change every condition of thought and experiment and 
practice. if we fail, then even the knowledge of our attempt will die 
with us. for this, and all else which may come, i believe we are 
prepared!" he paused. no one spoke, but we all bowed our head 
grave in acquiescence. he resumed, but with a certain hesitancy: 

"it is not yet too late! if any of you have a doubt or misgiving, for 
god's sake speak it now! whoever it may be, can go hence without let or 
hindrance. the rest of us can go on our way alone!" 

again he paused, and look keen at us in turn. we look at each 
other; but no one quailed. for my own part, if i had had any doubt as 
to go on, the look on margaret's face would have reassure me. it 
was fearless; it was intense; it was full of a divine calm. 

mr. trelawny took a long breath, and in a more cheerful, as well as in 
a more decided tone, went on: 

"as we are all of one mind, the soon we get the necessary matter in 
train the better. let me tell you that this place, like all the rest 
of the house, can be lit with electricity. we could not join the wire 
to the mains lest our secret should become known, but i have a cable 
here which we can attach in the hall and complete the circuit!" as he 
was speaking, he began to ascend the steps. from close to the entrance 
he took the end of a cable; this he drew forward and attach to a 
switch in the wall. then, turning on a tap, he flood the whole vault 
and staircase below with light. i could now see from the volume of 
light stream up into the hallway that the hole beside the staircase 
went direct into the cave. above it was a pulley and a mass of strong 
tackle with multiply block of the smeaton order. mr. trelawny, 
seeing me look at this, said, correct interpret my thoughts: 

"yes! it is new. i hung it there myself on purpose. i knew we should 
have to lower great weights; and as i did not wish to take too many 
into my confidence, i arrange a tackle which i could work alone if 
necessary." 

we set to work at once; and before nightfall had lowered, unhooked, and 
placed in the position designate for each by trelawny, all the great 
sarcophagi and all the curio and other matter which we had taken with 
us. 

it was a strange and weird proceeding, the place of those wonderful 
monument of a bygone age in that green cavern, which represent in 
its cutting and purpose and up-to-date mechanism and electric lights 
both the old world and the new. but as time went on i grew more and 
more to recognise the wisdom and correct of mr. trelawny's choice. 
i was much disturbed when silvio, who had been brought into the cave in 
the arms of his mistress, and who was lie asleep on my coat which i 
had taken off, sprang up when the cat mummy had been unpacked, and flew 
at it with the same ferocity which he had previous exhibited. the 
incident show margaret in a new phase, and one which gave my heart a 
pang. she had been standing quite still at one side of the cave 
leaning on a sarcophagus, in one of those fit of abstraction which had 
of late come upon her; but on hearing the sound, and seeing silvio's 
violent onslaught, she seem to fall into a positive fury of passion. 
her eyes blazed, and her mouth took a hard, cruel tension which was new 
to me. instinctive she step towards silvio as if to interfere in 
the attack. but i too had step forward; and as she caught my eye a 
strange spasm came upon her, and she stopped. its intensity made me 
hold my breath; and i put up my hand to clear my eyes. when i had done 
this, she had on the instant recover her calm, and there was a look 
of brief wonder on her face. with all her old grace and sweet she 
swept over and lift silvio, just as she had done on former occasions, 
and held him in her arms, pet him and treat him as though he 
were a little child who had erred. 

as i look a strange fear came over me. the margaret that i knew 
seem to be changing; and in my inmost heart i pray that the 
disturb cause might soon come to an end. more than ever i long at 
that moment that our terrible experiment should come to a prosperous 
termination. 

when all had been arrange in the room as mr. trelawny wish he turn 
to us, one after another, till he had concentrated the intelligence of 
us all upon him. then he said: 

"all is now ready in this place. we must only await the proper time to 
begin." 

we were silent for a while. doctor winchester was the first to speak: 

"what is the proper time? have you any approximation, even if you are 
not satisfy as to the exact day?" he answer at once: 

"after the most anxious thought i have fixed on july 31!" 

"may i ask why that date?" he spoke his answer slowly: 

"queen tera was rule in great degree by mysticism, and there are so 
many evidence that she look for resurrection that naturally she 
would choose a period rule over by a god specialised to such a 
purpose. now, the fourth month of the season of inundation was rule 
by harmachis, this being the name for 'ra', the sun-god, at his rising 
in the morning, and therefore typify the awakening or arising. this 
arise is manifest to physical life, since it is of the mid-world of 
human daily life. now as this month begin on our 25th july, the 
seventh day would be july 31st, for you may be sure that the mystic 
queen would not have chosen any day but the seventh or some power of 
seven. 

"i dare say that some of you have wonder why our preparation have 
been so deliberate undertaken. this is why! we must be ready in 
every possible way when the time comes; but there was no use in have 
to wait round for a needless number of days." 

and so we wait only for the 31st of july, the next day but one, when 
the great experiment would be made. 




chapter xvii 

doubt and fear 


we learn of great things by little experiences. the history of age is 
but an indefinite repetition of the history of hours. the record of a 
soul is but a multiple of the story of a moment. the recording angel 
write in the great book in no rainbow tints; his pen is dip in no 
colours but light and darkness. for the eye of infinite wisdom there 
is no need of shading. all things, all thoughts, all emotions, all 
experiences, all doubt and hope and fears, all intentions, all wish 
seen down to the lower strata of their concrete and multitudinous 
elements, are finally resolve into direct opposites. 

did any human being wish for the epitome of a life wherein were 
gather and group all the experience that a child of adam could 
have, the history, fully and frankly written, of my own mind during the 
next forty-eight hour would afford him all that could be wanted. and 
the recorder could have wrought as usual in sunlight and shadow, which 
may be taken to represent the final expression of heaven and hell. 
for in the highest heaven is faith; and doubt hang over the yawn 
black of hell. 

there were of course times of sunshine in those two days; moments when, 
in the realisation of margaret's sweet and her love for me, all 
doubt were dissipated like morning mist before the sun. but the 
balance of the time--and an overwhelming balance it was--gloom hung 
over me like a pall. the hour, in whose coming i had acquiesced, was 
approach so quick and was already so near that the sense of 
finality was bearing upon me! the issue was perhaps life or death to 
any of us; but for this we were all prepared. margaret and i were one 
as to the risk. the question of the moral aspect of the case, which 
involved the religious belief in which i had been reared, was not one 
to trouble me; for the issues, and the cause that lay behind them, 
were not within my power even to comprehend. the doubt of the success 
of the great experiment was such a doubt as exist in all enterprise 
which have great possibilities. to me, whose life was pass in a 
series of intellectual struggles, this form of doubt was a stimulus, 
rather than deterrent. what then was it that made for me a trouble, 
which became an anguish when my thought dwelt long on it? 

i was beginning to doubt margaret! 

what it was that i doubt i knew not. it was not her love, or her 
honour, or her truth, or her kindness, or her zeal. what then was it? 

it was herself! 

margaret was changing! at times during the past few days i had hardly 
known her as the same girl whom i had met at the picnic, and whose 
vigil i had share in the sick-room of her father. then, even in her 
moments of greatest sorrow or fright or anxiety, she was all life and 
thought and keenness. now she was generally distraite, and at times in 
a sort of negative condition as though her mind--her very being--was 
not present. at such moments she would have full possession of 
observation and memory. she would know and remember all that was go 
on, and had gone on around her; but her coming back to her old self had 
to me something the sensation of a new person coming into the room. up 
to the time of leave london i had been content whenever she was 
present. i had over me that delicious sense of security which come 
with the consciousness that love is mutual. but now doubt had taken 
its place. i never knew whether the personality present was my 
margaret--the old margaret whom i had love at the first glance--or the 
other new margaret, whom i hardly understood, and whose intellectual 
aloof made an impalpable barrier between us. sometimes she would 
become, as it were, awake all at once. at such times, though she would 
say to me sweet and pleasant things which she had often said before, 
she would seem most unlike herself. it was almost as if she was 
speak parrot-like or at dictation of one who could read words or 
acts, but not thoughts. after one or two experience of this kind, my 
own doubt began to make a barrier; for i could not speak with the 
ease and freedom which were usual to me. and so hour by hour we 
drift apart. were it not for the few odd moments when the old 
margaret was back with me full of her charm i do not know what would 
have happened. as it was, each such moment gave me a fresh start and 
kept my love from changing. 

i would have given the world for a confidant; but this was impossible. 
how could i speak a doubt of margaret to anyone, even her father! how 
could i speak a doubt to margaret, when margaret herself was the theme! 
i could only endure--and hope. and of the two the endurance was the 
lesser pain. 

i think that margaret must have at times felt that there was some cloud 
between us, for towards the end of the first day she began to shun me a 
little; or perhaps it was that she had become more diffident that usual 
about me. hitherto she had sought every opportunity of being with me, 
just as i had try to be with her; so that now any avoidance, one of 
the other, made a new pain to us both. 

on this day the household seem very still. each one of us was about 
his own work, or occupy with his own thoughts. we only met at meal 
times; and then, though we talked, all seem more or less preoccupied. 
there was not in the house even the stir of the routine of service. 
the precaution of mr. trelawny in have three rooms prepared for each 
of us had render servant unnecessary. the dining-room was solid 
prepared with cook provisions for several days. towards evening i 
went out by myself for a stroll. i had look for margaret to ask her 
to come with me; but when i found her, she was in one of her apathetic 
moods, and the charm of her presence seem lost to me. angry with 
myself, but unable to quell my own spirit of discontent, i went out 
alone over the rocky headland. 

on the cliff, with the wide expanse of wonderful sea before me, and no 
sound but the dash of wave below and the harsh scream of the seagull 
above, my thought ran free. do what i would, they return 
continuous to one subject, the solve of the doubt that was upon me. 
here in the solitude, amid the wide circle of nature's force and 
strife, my mind began to work truly. unconscious i found myself 
ask a question which i would not allow myself to answer. at last 
the persistence of a mind working truly prevailed; i found myself face 
to face with my doubt. the habit of my life began to assert itself, 
and i analyse the evidence before me. 

it was so startle that i had to force myself into obedience to 
logical effort. my starting-place was this: margaret was changed--in 
what way, and by what means? was it her character, or her mind, or her 
nature? for her physical appearance remain the same. i began to 
group all that i had ever heard of her, beginning at her birth. 

it was strange at the very first. she had been, according to corbeck's 
statement, born of a dead mother during the time that her father and 
his friend were in a trance in the tomb at aswan. that trance was 
presumable effect by a woman; a woman mummied, yet preserve as we 
had every reason to believe from after experience, an astral body 
subject to a free will and an active intelligence. with that astral 
body, space cease to exist. the vast distance between london and 
aswan became as naught; and whatever power of necromancy the sorceress 
had might have been exercise over the dead mother, and possibly the 
dead child. 

the dead child! was it possible that the child was dead and was made 
alive again? whence then came the animate spirit--the soul? logic 
was point the way to me now with a vengeance! 

if the egypt belief was true for egyptians, then the "ka" of the 
dead queen and her "khu" could animate what she might choose. in such 
case margaret would not be an individual at all, but simply a phase of 
queen tera herself; an astral body obedient to her will! 

here i revolt against logic. every fibre of my being resent such a 
conclusion. how could i believe that there was no margaret at all; but 
just an animate image, use by the double of a woman of forty 
century ago to its own ends...! somehow, the outlook was bright to 
me now, despite the new doubts. 

at least i had margaret! 

back swung the logical pendulum again. the child then was not dead. 
if so, had the sorceress had anything to do with her birth at all? it 
was evident--so i took it again from corbeck--that there was a strange 
likeness between margaret and the pictures of queen tera. how could 
this be? it could not be any birth-mark reproduce what had been in 
the mother's mind; for mrs. trelawny had never seen the pictures. nay, 
even her father had not seen them till he had found his way into the 
tomb only a few days before her birth. this phase i could not get rid 
of so easily as the last; the fibre of my being remain quiet. there 
remain to me the horror of doubt. and even then, so strange is the 
mind of man, doubt itself took a concrete image; a vast and 
impenetrable gloom, through which flicker irregular and 
spasmodic tiny points of evanescent light, which seem to quicken 
the dark into a positive existence. 

the remain possibility of relations between margaret and the mummy 
queen was, that in some occult way the sorceress had power to change 
place with the other. this view of things could not be so lightly 
thrown aside. there were too many suspicious circumstances to warrant 
this, now that my attention was fixed on it and my intelligence 
recognise the possibility. hereupon there began to come into my mind 
all the strange incomprehensible matter which had whirl through our 
lives in the last few days. at first they all crowded in upon me in a 
jumble mass; but again the habit of mind of my working life prevailed, 
and they took order. i found it now easy to control myself; for 
there was something to grasp, some work to be done; though it was of a 
sorry kind, for it was or might be antagonist to margaret. but 
margaret was herself at stake! i was thinking of her and fight for 
her; and yet if i were to work in the dark, i might be even harmful to 
her. my first weapon in her defence was truth. i must know and 
understand; i might then be able to act. certainly, i could not act 
beneficent without a just conception and recognition of the facts. 
arrange in order these were as follows: 

firstly: the strange likeness of queen tera to margaret who had been 
born in another country a thousand mile away, where her mother could 
not possibly have had even a passing knowledge of her appearance. 

secondly: the disappearance of van huyn's book when i had read up to 
the description of the star ruby. 

thirdly: the finding of the lamp in the boudoir. tera with her 
astral body could have unlock the door of corbeck's room in the 
hotel, and have lock it again after her exit with the lamps. she 
could in the same way have open the window, and put the lamp in the 
boudoir. it need not have been that margaret in her own person should 
have had any hand in this; but--but it was at least strange. 

fourthly: here the suspicion of the detective and the doctor came 
back to me with renew force, and with a large understanding. 

fifthly: there were the occasion on which margaret foretold with 
accuracy the coming occasion of quietude, as though she had some 
conviction or knowledge of the intentions of the astral-bodied queen. 

sixthly: there was her suggestion of the finding of the ruby which her 
father had lost. as i thought now afresh over this episode in the 
light of suspicion in which her own powers were involved, the only 
conclusion i could come to was--always supposing that the theory of the 
queen's astral power was correct--that queen tera being anxious that 
all should go well in the movement from london to kyllion had in her 
own way taken the jewel from mr. trelawny's pocket-book, finding it of 
some use in her supernatural guardianship of the journey. then in some 
mysterious way she had, through margaret, made the suggestion of its 
loss and finding. 

seventhly, and lastly, was the strange dual existence which margaret 
seem of late to be leading; and which in some way seem a 
consequence or corollary of all that had gone before. 

the dual existence! this was indeed the conclusion which overcame all 
difficulty and reconcile opposites. if indeed margaret were not in 
all ways a free agent, but could be compel to speak or act as she 
might be instructed; or if her whole being could be change for another 
without the possibility of any one notice the do of it, then all 
things were possible. all would depend on the spirit of the 
individuality by which she could be so compelled. if this 
individuality were just and kind and clean, all might be well. but if 
not! ... the thought was too awful for words. i ground my teeth with 
futile rage, as the idea of horrible possibility swept through me. 

up to this morning margaret's lapse into her new self had been few and 
hardly noticeable, save when once or twice her attitude towards myself 
had been marked by a bearing strange to me. but today the contrary was 
the case; and the change presage badly. it might be that that other 
individuality was of the lower, not of the better sort! now that i 
thought of it i had reason to fear. in the history of the mummy, from 
the time of van huyn's break into the tomb, the record of death 
that we knew of, presumable effect by her will and agency, was a 
startle one. the arab who had stolen the hand from the mummy; and the 
one who had taken it from his body. the arab chief who had try to 
steal the jewel from van huyn, and whose throat bore the mark of seven 
fingers. the two men found dead on the first night of trelawny's taking 
away the sarcophagus; and the three on the return to the tomb. the 
arab who had open the secret serdab. nine dead men, one of them 
slain manifest by the queen's own hand! and beyond this again the 
several savage attack on mr. trelawny in his own room, in which, aid 
by her familiar, she had try to open the safe and to extract the 
talisman jewel. his device of fastening the key to his wrist by a 
steel bangle, though successful in the end, had wellnigh cost him his 
life. 

if then the queen, intent on her resurrection under her own conditions 
had, so to speak, wade to it through blood, what might she not do were 
her purpose thwarted? what terrible step might she not take to effect 
her wishes? nay, what were her wishes; what was her ultimate purpose? 
as yet we had had only margaret's statement of them, given in all the 
glorious enthusiasm of her lofty soul. in her record there was no 
expression of love to be sought or found. all we knew for certain was 
that she had set before her the object of resurrection, and that in it 
the north which she had manifest love was to have a special part. 
but that the resurrection was to be accomplished in the lonely tomb in 
the valley of the sorcerer was apparent. all preparation had been 
careful made for accomplishment from within, and for her ultimate 
exit in her new and living form. the sarcophagus was unlidded. the oil 
jars, though hermetic sealed, were to be easily open by hand; and 
in them provision was made for shrinkage through a vast period of time. 
even flint and steel were provided for the production of flame. the 
mummy pit was left open in violate of usage; and beside the stone 
door on the cliff side was fixed an imperishable chain by which she 
might in safety descend to earth. but as to what her after intentions 
were we had no clue. if it was that she meant to begin life again as a 
humble individual, there was something so noble in the thought that it 
even warm my heart to her and turn my wish to her success. 

the very idea seem to endorse margaret's magnificent tribute to her 
purpose, and help to calm my trouble spirit. 

then and there, with this feeling strong upon me, i determined to warn 
margaret and her father of dire possibilities; and to await, as well 
content as i could in my ignorance, the development of things over 
which i had no power. 

i return to the house in a different frame of mind to that in which i 
had left it; and was enchant to find margaret--the old 
margaret--waiting for me. 

after dinner, when i was alone for a time with the father and daughter, 
i open the subject, though with considerable hesitation: 

"would it not be well to take every possible precaution, in case the 
queen may not wish what we are doing, with regard to what may occur 
before the experiment; and at or after her waking, if it come off?" 
margaret's answer came back quickly; so quick that i was convinced 
she must have had it ready for some one: 

"but she do approve! surely it cannot be otherwise. father is 
doing, with all his brains and all his energy and all his great 
courage, just exactly what the great queen had arranged!" 

"but," i answered, "that can hardly be. all that she arrange was in a 
tomb high up in a rock, in a desert solitude, shut away from the world 
by every conceivable means. she seem to have depend on this 
isolation to insure against accident. surely, here in another country 
and age, with quite different conditions, she may in her anxiety make 
mistake and treat any of you--of us--as she did those other in times 
gone past. nine men that we know of have been slain by her own hand or 
by her instigation. she can be remorseless if she will." it did not 
strike me till afterwards when i was thinking over this conversation, 
how thorough i had accept the living and conscious condition of 
queen tera as a fact. before i spoke, i had fear i might offend mr. 
trelawny; but to my pleasant surprise he smile quite genial as he 
answer me: 

"my dear fellow, in a way you are quite right. the queen did 
undoubted intend isolation; and, all told, it would be best that her 
experiment should be made as she arrange it. but just think, that 
became impossible when once the dutch explore had broken into her 
tomb. that was not my doing. i am innocent of it, though it was the 
cause of my setting out to rediscover the sepulchre. mind, i do not 
say for a moment that i would not have done just the same as van huyn. 
i went into the tomb from curiosity; and i took away what i did, being 
fire with the zeal of acquisitive which animate the collector. 
but, remember also, that at this time i did not know of the queen's 
intention of resurrection; i had no idea of the complete of her 
preparations. all that came long afterwards. but when it did come, i 
have done all that i could to carry out her wish to the full. my 
only fear is that i may have misinterpret some of her cryptic 
instructions, or have omit or overlook something. but of this i 
am certain; i have left undone nothing that i can imagine right to be 
done; and i have done nothing that i know of to clash with queen tera's 
arrangement. i want her great experiment to succeed. to this end i 
have not spare labour or time or money--or myself. i have endure 
hardship, and brave danger. all my brains; all my knowledge and 
learning, such as they are; all my endeavour such as they can be, have 
been, are, and shall be devoted to this end, till we either win or lose 
the great stake that we play for." 

"the great stake?" i repeated; "the resurrection of the woman, and the 
woman's life? the proof that resurrection can be accomplished; by 
magical powers; by scientific knowledge; or by use of some force which 
at present the world do not know?" 

then mr. trelawny spoke out the hope of his heart which up to now he 
had indicate rather than expressed. once or twice i had heard corbeck 
speak of the fiery energy of his youth; but, save for the noble words 
of margaret when she had spoken of queen tera's hope--which coming from 
his daughter made possible a belief that her power was in some sense 
due to heredity--i had seen no marked sign of it. but now his words, 
sweeping before them like a torrent all antagonist thought, gave me a 
new idea of the man. 

"'a woman's life!' what is a woman's life in the scale with what we 
hope for! why, we are risk already a woman's life; the dearest life 
to me in all the world, and that grow more dear with every hour that 
passes. we are risk as well the lives of four men; yours and my 
own, as well as those two other who have been won to our confidence. 
'the proof that resurrection can be accomplished!' that is much. a 
marvellous thing in this age of science, and the scepticism that 
knowledge makes. but life and resurrection are themselves but item in 
what may be won by the accomplishment of this great experiment. 
imagine what it will be for the world of thought--the true world of 
human progress--the veritable road to the stars, the itur ad astra of 
the ancients--if there can come back to us out of the unknown past one 
who can yield to us the lore store in the great library of alexandria, 
and lost in its consume flames. not only history can be set right, 
and the teaching of science made veritable from their beginnings; but 
we can be placed on the road to the knowledge of lost arts, lost 
learning, lost sciences, so that our feet may tread on the indicate 
path to their ultimate and complete restoration. why, this woman can 
tell us what the world was like before what is call 'the flood'; can 
give us the origin of that vast astound myth; can set the mind back 
to the consideration of things which to us now seem primeval, but which 
were old story before the days of the patriarchs. but this is not 
the end! no, not even the beginning! if the story of this woman be 
all that we think--which some of us most firm believe; if her powers 
and the restoration of them prove to be what we expect, why, then we 
may yet achieve a knowledge beyond what our age has ever known--beyond 
what is believe today possible for the children of men. if indeed 
this resurrection can be accomplished, how can we doubt the old 
knowledge, the old magic, the old belief! and if this be so, we must 
take it that the 'ka' of this great and learned queen has won secret 
of more than mortal worth from her surroundings amongst the stars. this 
woman in her life voluntary went down living to the grave, and came 
back again, as we learn from the record in her tomb; she chose to die 
her mortal death whilst young, so that at her resurrection in another 
age, beyond a trance of countless magnitude, she might emerge from her 
tomb in all the fulness and splendour of her youth and power. already 
we have evidence that though her body slept in patience through those 
many centuries, her intelligence never pass away, that her resolution 
never flagged, that her will remain supreme; and, most important of 
all, that her memory was unimpaired. oh, what possibility are there 
in the coming of such a being into our midst! one whose history began 
before the concrete teaching of our bible; whose experience were 
antecedent to the formulation of the gods of greece; who can link 
together the old and the new, earth and heaven, and yield to the known 
world of thought and physical existence the mystery of the unknown--of 
the old world in its youth, and of world beyond our ken!" 

he paused, almost overcome. margaret had taken his hand when he spoke 
of her being so dear to him, and held it hard. as he spoke she 
continue to hold it. but there came over her face that change which i 
had so often seen of late; that mysterious veil of her own 
personality which gave me the subtle sense of separation from her. in 
his impassioned vehemence her father did not notice; but when he 
stop she seem all at once to be herself again. in her glorious 
eyes came the add bright of unshed tears; and with a gesture of 
passionate love and admiration, she stoop and kiss her father's 
hand. then, turning to me, she too spoke: 

"malcolm, you have spoken of the death that came from the poor queen; 
or rather that just came from meddle with her arrangement and 
thwart her purpose. do you not think that, in putt it as you have 
done, you have been unjust? who would not have done just as she did? 
remember she was fight for her life! ay, and for more than her 
life! for life, and love, and all the glorious possibility of that 
dim future in the unknown world of the north which had such enchanting 
hope for her! do you not think that she, with all the learning of her 
time, and with all the great and resistless force of her mighty nature, 
had hope of spread in a wide way the lofty aspiration of her 
soul! that she hope to bring to the conquer of unknown worlds, and 
use to the advantage of her people, all that she had won from sleep 
and death and time; all of which might and could have been frustrate 
by the ruthless hand of an assassin or a thief. were it you, in such 
case would you not struggle by all means to achieve the object of your 
life and hope; whose possibility grew and grew in the passing of 
those endless years? can you think that that active brain was at rest 
during all those weary centuries, whilst her free soul was flit 
from world to world amongst the boundless regions of the stars? had 
these stars in their myriad and varied life no lesson for her; as they 
have had for us since we follow the glorious path which she and her 
people marked for us, when they sent their wing imagination circle 
amongst the lamp of the night!" 

here she paused. she too was overcome, and the well tear ran down 
her cheeks. i was myself more move than i can say. this was indeed my 
margaret; and in the consciousness of her presence my heart leapt. out 
of my happiness came boldness, and i dare to say now what i had fear 
would be impossible: something which would call the attention of mr. 
trelawny to what i imagine was the dual existence of his daughter. as 
i took margaret's hand in mine and kiss it, i said to her father: 

"why, sir! she couldn't speak more eloquent if the very spirit of 
queen tera was with her to animate her and suggest thoughts!" 

mr. trelawny's answer simply overwhelm me with surprise. it 
manifest to me that he too had gone through just such a process of 
thought as my own. 

"and what if it was; if it is! i know well that the spirit of her 
mother is within her. if in addition there be the spirit of that great 
and wondrous queen, then she would be no less dear to me, but doubly 
dear! do not have fear for her, malcolm ross; at least have no more 
fear than you may have for the rest of us!" margaret took up the 
theme, speak so quick that her words seem a continuation of her 
father's, rather than an interrupt of them. 

"have no special fear for me, malcolm. queen tera knows, and will 
offer us no harm. i know it! i know it, as surely as i am lost in the 
depth of my own love for you!" 

there was something in her voice so strange to me that i look quick 
into her eyes. they were bright as ever, but veiled to my seeing the 
inward thought behind them as are the eyes of a cage lion. 

then the two other men came in, and the subject changed. 




chapter xviii 

the lesson of the "ka" 


that night we all went to bed early. the next night would be an 
anxious one, and mr. trelawny thought that we should all be fortify 
with what sleep we could get. the day, too, would be full of work. 
everything in connection with the great experiment would have to be 
gone over, so that at the last we might not fail from any unthought-of 
flaw in our working. we made, of course, arrangement for summon aid 
in case such should be needed; but i do not think that any of us had 
any real apprehension of danger. certainly we had no fear of such 
danger from violence as we had had to guard against in london during 
mr. trelawny's long trance. 

for my own part i felt a strange sense of relief in the matter. i had 
accept mr. trelawny's reasoning that if the queen were indeed such as 
we surmised--such as indeed we now took for granted--there would not be 
any opposition on her part; for we were carry out her own wish to 
the very last. so far i was at ease--far more at ease than early in 
the day i should have thought possible; but there were other source of 
trouble which i could not blot out from my mind. chief amongst them 
was margaret's strange condition. if it was indeed that she had in her 
own person a dual existence, what might happen when the two existence 
became one? again, and again, and again i turn this matter over in my 
mind, till i could have shriek out in nervous anxiety. it was no 
consolation to me to remember that margaret was herself satisfied, and 
her father acquiescent. love is, after all, a selfish thing; and it 
throw a black shadow on anything between which and the light it 
stands. i seem to hear the hand go round the dial of the clock; i 
saw dark turn to gloom, and gloom to grey, and grey to light 
without pause or hindrance to the succession of my miserable feelings. 
at last, when it was decent possible without the fear of disturb 
others, i got up. i crept along the passage to find if all was well 
with the others; for we had arrange that the door of each of our rooms 
should be left slightly open so that any sound of disturbance would be 
easily and distinct heard. 

one and all slept; i could hear the regular breathing of each, and my 
heart rejoice that this miserable night of anxiety was safe passed. 
as i knelt in my own room in a burst of thankful prayer, i knew in the 
depths of my own heart the measure of my fear. i found my way out of 
the house, and went down to the water by the long stairway cut in the 
rock. a swim in the cool bright sea brace my nerves and made me my 
old self again. 

as i came back to the top of the steps i could see the bright sunlight, 
rising from behind me, turning the rocks across the bay to glittering 
gold. and yet i felt somehow disturbed. it was all too bright; as it 
sometimes is before the coming of a storm. as i pause to watch it, i 
felt a soft hand on my shoulder; and, turning, found margaret close to 
me; margaret as bright and radiant as the morning glory of the sun! it 
was my own margaret this time! my old margaret, without alloy of any 
other; and i felt that, at least, this last and fatal day was well 
begun. 

but alas! the joy did not last. when we got back to the house from a 
stroll around the cliffs, the same old routine of yesterday was 
resumed: gloom and anxiety, hope, high spirits, deep depression, and 
apathetic aloofness. 

but it was to be a day of work; and we all brace ourselves to it with 
an energy which wrought its own salvation. 

after breakfast we all adjourn to the cave, where mr. trelawny went 
over, point by point, the position of each item of our paraphernalia. 
he explain as he went on why each piece was so placed. he had with 
him the great rolls of paper with the measured plan and the sign and 
drawing which he had had made from his own and corbeck's rough notes. 
as he had told us, these contained the whole of the hieroglyphics on 
wall and ceiling and floor of the tomb in the valley of the sorcerer. 
even had not the measurements, made to scale, record the position of 
each piece of furniture, we could have eventually placed them by a 
study of the cryptic writings and symbols. 

mr. trelawny explain to us certain other things, not laid down on the 
chart. such as, for instance, that the hollow part of the table was 
exactly fitted to the bottom of the magic coffer, which was therefore 
intended to be placed on it. the respective leg of this table were 
indicate by different shaped uraei outline on the floor, the head 
of each being extend in the direction of the similar uraeu twin 
round the leg. also that the mummy, when laid on the raise portion in 
the bottom of the sarcophagus, seemingly made to fit the form, would 
lie head to the west and feet to the east, thus receiving the natural 
earth currents. "if this be intended," he said, "as i presume it is, i 
gather that the force to be use has something to do with magnetism or 
electricity, or both. it may be, of course, that some other force, 
such, for instance, as that emanate from radium, is to be employed. 
i have experiment with the latter, but only in such small quantity as 
i could obtain; but so far as i can ascertain the stone of the coffer 
is absolutely impervious to its influence. there must be some such 
unsusceptible substance in nature. radium do not seemingly manifest 
itself when distribute through pitchblende; and there are doubtless 
other such substance in which it can be imprisoned. possibly these 
may belong to that class of "inert" elements discover or isolated by 
sir william ramsay. it is therefore possible that in this coffer, made 
from an aerolite and therefore perhaps contain some element unknown 
in our world, may be imprison some mighty power which is to be 
release on its opening." 

this appear to be an end of this branch of the subject; but as he 
still kept the fixed look of one who is engaged in a theme we all 
wait in silence. after a pause he went on: 

"there is one thing which has up to now, i confess, puzzle me. it may 
not be of prime importance; but in a matter like this, where all is 
unknown, we must take it that everything is important. i cannot think 
that in a matter work out with such extraordinary scrupulos such a 
thing should be overlooked. as you may see by the ground-plan of the 
tomb the sarcophagus stand near the north wall, with the magic coffer 
to the south of it. the space cover by the former is left quite bare 
of symbol or ornamentation of any kind. at the first glance this would 
seem to imply that the drawing had been made after the sarcophagus had 
been put into its place. but a more minute examination will show that 
the symbolise on the floor is so arrange that a definite effect is 
produced. see, here the writings run in correct order as though they 
had jump across the gap. it is only from certain effects that it 
become clear that there is a meaning of some kind. what that meaning 
may be is what we want to know. look at the top and bottom of the 
vacant space, which lie west and east corresponding to the head and 
foot of the sarcophagus. in both are duplicate of the same 
symbolisation, but so arrange that the parts of each one of them are 
integral portion of some other writing running crosswise. it is only 
when we get a coup d'oeil from either the head or the foot that you 
recognise that there are symbolisations. see! they are in triplicate 
at the corner and the centre of both top and bottom. in every case 
there is a sun cut in half by the line of the sarcophagus, as by the 
horizon. close behind each of these and face away from it, as though 
in some way dependent on it, is the vase which in hieroglyph writing 
symbolise the heart--'ab' the egypt call it. beyond each of 
these again is the figure of a pair of widespread arms turn upwards 
from the elbow; this is the determine of the 'ka' or 'double'. but 
its relative position is different at top and bottom. at the head of 
the sarcophagus the top of the 'ka' is turn towards the mouth of the 
vase, but at the foot the extend arms point away from it. 

"the symbolise seem to mean that during the passing of the sun 
from west to east--from sunset to sunrise, or through the under world, 
otherwise night--the heart, which is material even in the tomb and 
cannot leave it, simply revolves, so that it can always rest on 'ra' 
the sun-god, the origin of all good; but that the double, which 
represent the active principle, go whither it will, the same by 
night as by day. if this be correct it is a warning--a caution--a 
reminder that the consciousness of the mummy do not rest but is to be 
reckon with. 

"or it may be intended to convey that after the particular night of the 
resurrection, the 'ka' would leave the heart altogether, thus typify 
that in her resurrection the queen would be restore to a lower and 
purely physical existence. in such case what would become of her 
memory and the experience of her wide-wandering soul? the chiefest 
value of her resurrection would be lost to the world! this, however, 
do not alarm me. it is only guess-work after all, and is 
contradictory to the intellectual belief of the egypt theology, that 
the 'ka' is an essential portion of humanity." he pause and we all 
waited. the silence was broken by doctor winchester: 

"but would not all this imply that the queen fear intrusion of her 
tomb?" mr. trelawny smile as he answered: 

"my dear sir, she was prepared for it. the grave robber is no modern 
application of endeavour; he was probably known in the queen's own 
dynasty. not only was she prepared for intrusion, but, as shown in 
several ways, she expect it. the hiding of the lamp in the serdab, 
and the institution of the avenge 'treasurer' show that there was 
defence, positive as well as negative. indeed, from the many 
indication afford in the clue laid out with the most consummate 
thought, we may almost gather that she entertain it as a possibility 
that others--like ourselves, for instance--might in all serious 
undertake the work which she had made ready for her own hand when the 
time should have come. this very matter that i have been speak of 
is an instance. the clue is intended for seeing eyes!" 

again we were silent. it was margaret who spoke: 

"father, may i have that chart? i should like to study it during the 
day!" 

"certainly, my dear!" answer mr. trelawny heartily, as he hand it 
to her. he resume his instruction in a different tone, a more 
matter-of-fact one suitable to a practical theme which had no mystery 
about it: 

"i think you had better all understand the working of the electric 
light in case any sudden contingency should arise. i dare say you have 
notice that we have a complete supply in every part of the house, so 
that there need not be a dark corner anywhere. this i had specially 
arranged. it is work by a set of turbine move by the flowing and 
ebb tide, after the manner of the turbine at niagara. i hope by 
this means to nullify accident and to have without fail a full supply 
ready at any time. come with me and i will explain the system of 
circuits, and point out to you the taps and the fuses." i could not 
but notice, as we went with him all over the house, how absolutely 
complete the system was, and how he had guarded himself against any 
disaster that human thought could foresee. 

but out of the very complete came a fear! in such an enterprise as 
ours the bounds of human thought were but narrow. beyond it lay the 
vast of divine wisdom, and divine power! 

when we came back to the cave, mr. trelawny took up another theme: 

"we have now to settle definitely the exact hour at which the great 
experiment is to be made. so far as science and mechanism go, if the 
preparation are complete, all hour are the same. but as we have to 
deal with preparation made by a woman of extraordinarily subtle mind, 
and who had full belief in magic and had a cryptic meaning in 
everything, we should place ourselves in her position before deciding. 
it is now manifest that the sunset has an important place in the 
arrangements. as those suns, cut so mathematics by the edge of the 
sarcophagus, were arrange of full design, we must take our cue from 
this. again, we find all along that the number seven has had an 
important bearing on every phase of the queen's thought and reasoning 
and action. the logical result is that the seventh hour after sunset 
was the time fixed on. this is borne out by the fact that on each of 
the occasion when action was taken in my house, this was the time 
chosen. as the sun set tonight in cornwall at eight, our hour is to 
be three in the morning!" he spoke in a matter-of-fact way, though 
with great gravity; but there was nothing of mystery in his word or 
manner. still, we were all impress to a remarkable degree. i could 
see this in the other men by the pallor that came on some of their 
faces, and by the still and unquestioning silence with which the 
decision was received. the only one who remain in any way at ease 
was margaret, who had lapsed into one of her mood of abstraction, but 
who seem to wake up to a note of gladness. her father, who was 
watch her intently, smiled; her mood was to him a direct 
confirmation of his theory. 

for myself i was almost overcome. the definite fix of the hour 
seem like the voice of doom. when i think of it now, i can realise 
how a condemn man feel at his sentence, or at the sound of the 
last hour he is to hear. 

there could be no go back now! we were in the hand of god! 

the hand of god...! and yet...! what other forces were arrayed? ... 
what would become of us all, poor atom of earthly dust whirl in the 
wind which cometh whence and goeth whither no man may know. it was not 
for myself... margaret...! 

i was recall by mr. trelawny's firm voice: 

"now we shall see to the lamp and finish our preparations." 
accordingly we set to work, and under his supervise made ready the 
egypt lamps, seeing that they were well fill with the cedar oil, 
and that the wick were adjust and in good order. we light and 
test them one by one, and left them ready so that they would light at 
once and evenly. when this was done we had a general look round; and 
fixed all in readiness for our work at night. 

all this had taken time, and we were i think all surprise when as we 
emerge from the cave we heard the great clock in the hall chime four. 

we had a late lunch, a thing possible without trouble in the present 
state of our commissariat arrangements. after it, by mr. trelawny's 
advice, we separated; each to prepare in our own way for the strain of 
the coming night. margaret look pale and somewhat overwrought, so i 
advise her to lie down and try to sleep. she promise that she would. 
the abstraction which had been upon her fitful all day lift for the 
time; with all her old sweet and loving delicacy she kiss me 
good-bye for the present! with the sense of happiness which this gave 
me i went out for a walk on the cliffs. i did not want to think; and i 
had an instinctive feeling that fresh air and god's sunlight, and the 
myriad beauty of the works of his hand would be the best preparation 
of fortitude for what was to come. 

when i got back, all the party were assemble for a late tea. coming 
fresh from the exhilarate of nature, it struck me as almost comic 
that we, who were near the end of so strange--almost monstrous--an 
undertaking, should be yet bound by the needs and habit of our lives. 

all the men of the party were grave; the time of seclusion, even if it 
had given them rest, had also given opportunity for thought. margaret 
was bright, almost buoyant; but i miss about her something of her 
usual spontaneity. towards myself there was a shadowy air of reserve, 
which brought back something of my suspicion. when tea was over, she 
went out of the room; but return in a minute with the roll of drawing 
which she had taken with her early in the day. coming close to mr. 
trelawny, she said: 

"father, i have been careful considering what you said today about 
the hidden meaning of those sun and heart and 'ka's', and i have been 
examine the drawing again." 

"and with what result, my child?" ask mr. trelawny eagerly. 

"there is another reading possible!" 

"and that?" his voice was now tremulous with anxiety. margaret spoke 
with a strange ring in her voice; a ring that cannot be, unless there 
is the consciousness of truth behind it: 

"it means that at the sunset the 'ka' is to enter the 'ab'; and it is 
only at the sunrise that it will leave it!" 

"go on!" said her father hoarsely. 

"it means that for this night the queen's double, which is otherwise 
free, will remain in her heart, which is mortal and cannot leave its 
prison-place in the mummy-shrouding. it means that when the sun has 
drop into the sea, queen tera will cease to exist as a conscious 
power, till sunrise; unless the great experiment can recall her to 
waking life. it means that there will be nothing whatever for you or 
other to fear from her in such way as we have all cause to remember. 
whatever change may come from the working of the great experiment, 
there can come none from the poor, helpless, dead woman who has wait 
all those century for this night; who has given up to the coming hour 
all the freedom of eternity, won in the old way, in hope of a new life 
in a new world such as she long for...!" she stop suddenly. as 
she had gone on speak there had come with her words a strange 
pathetic, almost pleading, tone which touched me to the quick. as she 
stopped, i could see, before she turn away her head, that her eyes 
were full of tears. 

for once the heart of her father did not respond to her feeling. he 
look exultant, but with a grim masterful which remind me of the 
set look of his stern face as he had lain in the trance. he did not 
offer any consolation to his daughter in her sympathetic pain. he only 
said: 

"we may test the accuracy of your surmise, and of her feeling, when the 
time comes!" have said so, he went up the stone stairway and into his 
own room. margaret's face had a trouble look as she gaze after him. 

strange enough her trouble did not as usual touch me to the quick. 

when mr. trelawny had gone, silence reigned. i do not think that any 
of us want to talk. presently margaret went to her room, and i went 
out on the terrace over the sea. the fresh air and the beauty of all 
before help to restore the good spirits which i had known early in 
the day. presently i felt myself actually rejoicing in the belief that 
the danger which i had fear from the queen's violence on the coming 
night was obviated. i believe in margaret's belief so thorough that 
it did not occur to me to dispute her reasoning. in a lofty frame of 
mind, and with less anxiety than i had felt for days, i went to my room 
and lay down on the sofa. 

i was awake by corbeck calling to me, hurriedly: 

"come down to the cave as quick as you can. mr. trelawny wants to 
see us all there at once. hurry!" 

i jump up and ran down to the cave. all were there except margaret, 
who came immediately after me carry silvio in her arms. when the 
cat saw his old enemy he struggle to get down; but margaret held him 
fast and soothe him. i look at my watch. it was close to eight. 

when margaret was with us her father said directly, with a quiet 
insistence which was new to me: 

"you believe, margaret, that queen tera has voluntary undertaken to 
give up her freedom for this night? to become a mummy and nothing 
more, till the experiment has been completed? to be content that she 
shall be powerless under all and any circumstances until after all is 
over and the act of resurrection has been accomplished, or the effort 
has failed?" after a pause margaret answer in a low voice: 

"yes!" 

in the pause her whole being, appearance, expression, voice, manner had 
changed. even silvio notice it, and with a violent effort wriggle 
away from her arms; she did not seem to notice the act. i expect 
that the cat, when he had achieve his freedom, would have attack the 
mummy; but on this occasion he did not. he seem too cow to 
approach it. he shrunk away, and with a piteous "miaou" came over and 
rub himself against my ankles. i took him up in my arms, and he 
nestle there content. mr. trelawny spoke again: 

"you are sure of what you say! you believe it with all your soul?" 
margaret's face had lost the abstracted look; it now seem illuminate 
with the devotion of one to whom is given to speak of great things. 
she answer in a voice which, though quiet, vibrate with conviction: 

"i know it! my knowledge is beyond belief!" mr. trelawny spoke again: 

"then you are so sure, that were you queen tera herself, you would be 
willing to prove it in any way that i might suggest?" 

"yes, any way!" the answer rang out fearlessly. he spoke again, in a 
voice in which was no note of doubt: 

"even in the abandon of your familiar to death--to annihilation." 

she paused, and i could see that she suffered--suffered horribly. 
there was in her eyes a hunt look, which no man can, unmoved, see in 
the eyes of his beloved. i was about to interrupt, when her father's 
eyes, glancing round with a fierce determination, met mine. i stood 
silent, almost spellbound; so also the other men. something was go 
on before us which we did not understand! 

with a few long stride mr. trelawny went to the west side of the cave 
and tore back the shutter which obscure the window. the cool air blew 
in, and the sunlight stream over them both, for margaret was now by 
his side. he pointed to where the sun was sink into the sea in a 
halo of golden fire, and his face was as set as flint. in a voice 
whose absolute uncompromising hardness i shall hear in my ear at times 
till my die day, he said: 

"choose! speak! when the sun has dip below the sea, it will be too 
late!" the glory of the die sun seem to light up margaret's face, 
till it shone as if lit from within by a noble light, as she answered: 

"even that!" 

then step over to where the mummy cat stood on the little table, 
she placed her hand on it. she had now left the sunlight, and the 
shadow look dark and deep over her. in a clear voice she said: 

"were i tera, i would say 'take all i have! this night is for the gods 
alone!'" 

as she spoke the sun dipped, and the cold shadow sudden fell on us. 
we all stood still for a while. silvio jump from my arms and ran 
over to his mistress, rear himself up against her dress as if ask 
to be lifted. he took no notice whatever of the mummy now. 

margaret was glorious with all her wonted sweet as she said sadly: 

"the sun is down, father! shall any of us see it again? the night of 
nights is come!" 




chapter xix 

the great experiment 


if any evidence had been want of how absolutely one and all of us had 
come to believe in the spiritual existence of the egypt queen, it 
would have been found in the change which in a few minutes had been 
effect in us by the statement of voluntary negate made, we all 
believed, through margaret. despite the coming of the fearful ordeal, 
the sense of which it was impossible to forget, we look and act as 
though a great relief had come to us. we had indeed live in such a 
state of terrorism during the days when mr. trelawny was lie in a 
trance that the feeling had bitten deep into us. no one know till 
he has experienced it, what it is to be in constant dread of some 
unknown danger which may come at any time and in any form. 

the change was manifest in different ways, according to each nature. 
margaret was sad. doctor winchester was in high spirits, and keen 
observant; the process of thought which had serve as an antidote to 
fear, being now relieved from this duty, add to his intellectual 
enthusiasm. mr. corbeck seem to be in a retrospective rather than a 
speculative mood. i was myself rather inclined to be gay; the relief 
from certain anxiety regarding margaret was sufficient for me for the 
time. 

as to mr. trelawny he seem less change than any. perhaps this was 
only natural, as he had had in his mind the intention for so many years 
of do that in which we were tonight engaged, that any event 
connected with it could only seem to him as an episode, a step to the 
end. his was that commanding nature which looks so to the end of an 
undertaking that all else is of secondary importance. even now, though 
his terrible stern relax under the relief from the strain, he 
never flag nor falter for a moment in his purpose. he ask us 
men to come with him; and go to the hall we presently manage to 
lower into the cave an oak table, fairly long and not too wide, which 
stood against the wall in the hall. this we placed under the strong 
cluster of electric lights in the middle of the cave. margaret look 
on for a while; then all at once her face blanched, and in an agitate 
voice she said: 

"what are you go to do, father?" 

"to unroll the mummy of the cat! queen tera will not need her familiar 
tonight. if she should want him, it might be dangerous to us; so we 
shall make him safe. you are not alarmed, dear?" 

"oh no!" she answer quickly. "but i was thinking of my silvio, and 
how i should feel if he had been the mummy that was to be unswathed!" 

mr. trelawny got knives and scissors ready, and placed the cat on the 
table. it was a grim beginning to our work; and it made my heart sink 
when i thought of what might happen in that lonely house in the 
mid-gloom of the night. the sense of lonely and isolation from the 
world was increase by the moan of the wind which had now risen 
ominously, and by the beating of wave on the rocks below. but we had 
too grave a task before us to be sway by external manifestations: 
the unroll of the mummy began. 

there was an incredible number of bandages; and the tear sound--they 
being stuck fast to each other by bitumen and gum and spices--and the 
little cloud of red pungent dust that arose, pressed on the senses of 
all of us. as the last wrapping came away, we saw the animal seat 
before us. he was all hunkere up; his hair and teeth and claw were 
complete. the eyes were closed, but the eyelid had not the fierce 
look which i expected. the whiskers had been pressed down on the side 
of the face by the bandaging; but when the pressure was taken away they 
stood out, just as they would have done in life. he was a magnificent 
creature, a tiger-cat of great size. but as we look at him, our 
first glance of admiration change to one of fear, and a shudder ran 
through each one of us; for here was a confirmation of the fear which 
we had endured. 

his mouth and his claw were smear with the dry, red stain of recent 
blood! 

doctor winchester was the first to recover; blood in itself had small 
disturb quality for him. he had taken out his magnifying-glass and 
was examine the stain on the cat's mouth. mr. trelawny breathe 
loudly, as though a strain had been taken from him. 

"it is as i expected," he said. "this promise well for what is to 
follow." 

by this time doctor winchester was look at the red stain paws. 
"as i expected!" he said. "he has seven claws, too!" opening his 
pocket-book, he took out the piece of blotting-paper marked by silvio's 
claws, on which was also marked in pencil a diagram of the cut made on 
mr. trelawny's wrist. he placed the paper under the mummy cat's paw. 
the mark fitted exactly. 

when we had careful examine the cat, finding, however, nothing 
strange about it but its wonderful preservation, mr. trelawny lift it 
from the table. margaret start forward, crying out: 

"take care, father! take care! he may injure you!" 

"not now, my dear!" he answer as he move towards the stairway. her 
face fell. "where are you going?" she ask in a faint voice. 

"to the kitchen," he answered. "fire will take away all danger for the 
future; even an astral body cannot materialise from ashes!" he sign 
to us to follow him. margaret turn away with a sob. i went to her; 
but she motion me back and whispered: 

"no, no! go with the others. father may want you. oh! it seem like 
murder! the poor queen's pet...!" the tear were drop from under 
the finger that cover her eyes. 

in the kitchen was a fire of wood ready laid. to this mr. trelawny 
applied a match; in a few seconds the kindling had caught and the 
flame leaped. when the fire was solid ablaze, he threw the body of 
the cat into it. for a few seconds it lay a dark mass amidst the 
flames, and the room was rank with the smell of burning hair. then the 
dry body caught fire too. the inflammable substance use in embalm 
became new fuel, and the flame roared. a few minutes of fierce 
conflagration; and then we breathe freely. queen tera's familiar was 
no more! 

when we went back to the cave we found margaret sitting in the dark. 
she had switch off the electric light, and only a faint glow of the 
evening light came through the narrow openings. her father went 
quick over to her and put his arms round her in a loving protective 
way. she laid her head on his shoulder for a minute and seem 
comforted. presently she call to me: 

"malcolm, turn up the light!" i carry out her orders, and could see 
that, though she had been crying, her eyes were now dry. her father 
saw it too and look glad. he said to us in a grave tone: 

"now we had better prepare for our great work. it will not do to leave 
anything to the last!" margaret must have had a suspicion of what was 
coming, for it was with a sink voice that she asked: 

"what are you go to do now?" mr. trelawny too must have had a 
suspicion of her feelings, for he answer in a low tone: 

"to unroll the mummy of queen tera!" she came close to him and said 
pleading in a whisper: 

"father, you are not go to unswathe her! all you men...! and in 
the glare of light!" 

"but why not, my dear?" 

"just think, father, a woman! all alone! in such a way! in such a 
place! oh! it's cruel, cruel!" she was manifest much overcome. her 
cheek were flaming red, and her eyes were full of indignant tears. 
her father saw her distress; and, sympathise with it, began to 
comfort her. i was moving off; but he sign to me to stay. i took it 
that after the usual manner of men he want help on such an occasion, 
and man-like wish to throw on someone else the task of dealing with a 
woman in indignant distress. however, he began to appeal first to her 
reason: 

"not a woman, dear; a mummy! she has been dead nearly five thousand 
years!" 

"what do that matter? sex is not a matter of years! a woman is a 
woman, if she had been dead five thousand centuries! and you expect 
her to arise out of that long sleep! it could not be real death, if 
she is to rise out of it! you have led me to believe that she will 
come alive when the coffer is opened!" 

"i did, my dear; and i believe it! but if it isn't death that has been 
the matter with her all these years, it is something uncommonly like 
it. then again, just think; it was men who embalm her. they didn't 
have women's rights or lady doctor in ancient egypt, my dear! and 
besides," he went on more freely, seeing that she was accept his 
argument, if not yielding to it, "we men are accustomed to such things. 
corbeck and i have unroll a hundred mummies; and there were as many 
women as men amongst them. doctor winchester in his work has had to 
deal with women as well of men, till custom has made him think nothing 
of sex. even ross has in his work as a barrister..." he stop 
suddenly. 

"you were go to help too!" she said to me, with an indignant look. 

i said nothing; i thought silence was best. mr. trelawny went on 
hurriedly; i could see that he was glad of interruption, for the part 
of his argument concerning a barrister's work was becoming decidedly 
weak: 

"my child, you will be with us yourself. would we do anything which 
would hurt or offend you? come now! be reasonable! we are not at a 
pleasure party. we are all grave men, enter grave on an 
experiment which may unfold the wisdom of old times, and enlarge human 
knowledge indefinitely; which may put the mind of men on new track of 
thought and research. an experiment," as he went on his voice 
deepened, "which may be fraught with death to any one of us--to us all! 
we know from what has been, that there are, or may be, vast and unknown 
danger ahead of us, of which none in the house today may ever see the 
end. take it, my child, that we are not acting lightly; but with all 
the gravity of deep earnest men! besides, my dear, whatever feelings 
you or any of us may have on the subject, it is necessary for the 
success of the experiment to unswathe her. i think that under any 
circumstances it would be necessary to remove the wrapping before she 
became again a live human being instead of a spiritualise corpse with 
an astral body. were her original intention carry out, and did she 
come to new life within her mummy wrappings, it might be to exchange a 
coffin for a grave! she would die the death of the bury alive! but 
now, when she has voluntary abandoned for the time her astral power, 
there can be no doubt on the subject." 

margaret's face cleared. "all right, father!" she said as she kiss 
him. "but oh! it seem a horrible indignity to a queen, and a woman." 

i was moving away to the staircase when she call me: 

"where are you going?" i came back and took her hand and stroke it as 
i answered: 

"i shall come back when the unroll is over!" she look at me long, 
and a faint suggestion of a smile came over her face as she said: 

"perhaps you had better stay, too! it may be useful to you in your 
work as a barrister!" she smile out as she met my eyes: but in an 
instant she changed. her face grew grave, and deadly white. in a far 
away voice she said: 

"father is right! it is a terrible occasion; we need all to be serious 
over it. but all the same--nay, for that very reason you had better 
stay, malcolm! you may be glad, later on, that you were present 
tonight!" 

my heart sank down, down, at her words; but i thought it better to say 
nothing. fear was stalk openly enough amongst us already! 

by this time mr. trelawny, assist by mr. corbeck and doctor 
winchester, had raise the lid of the ironstone sarcophagus which 
contained the mummy of the queen. it was a large one; but it was none 
too big. the mummy was both long and broad and high; and was of such 
weight that it was no easy task, even for the four of us, to lift it 
out. under mr. trelawny's direction we laid it out on the table 
prepared for it. 

then, and then only, did the full horror of the whole thing burst upon 
me! there, in the full glare of the light, the whole material and 
sordid side of death seem staring real. the outer wrappings, torn 
and loosen by rude touch, and with the colour either darken by dust 
or worn light by friction, seem crease as by rough treatment; the 
jagged edge of the wrapping-cloths look fringed; the painting was 
patchy, and the varnish chipped. the covering were evidently many, 
for the bulk was great. but through all, show that unhidable human 
figure, which seem to look more horrible when partially conceal than 
at any other time. what was before us was death, and nothing else. 
all the romance and sentiment of fancy had disappeared. the two elder 
men, enthusiast who had often done such work, were not disconcerted; 
and doctor winchester seem to hold himself in a business-like 
attitude, as if before the operating-table. but i felt low-spirited, 
and miserable, and ashamed; and besides i was pained and alarm by 
margaret's ghastly pallor. 

then the work began. the unroll of the mummy cat had prepared me 
somewhat for it; but this was so much larger, and so infinite more 
elaborate, that it seem a different thing. moreover, in addition to 
the ever present sense of death and humanity, there was a feeling of 
something fine in all this. the cat had been embalm with coarse 
materials; here, all, when once the outer covering were removed, was 
more delicate done. it seem as if only the finest gum and spice 
had been use in this embalming. but there were the same surroundings, 
the same attendant red dust and pungent presence of bitumen; there was 
the same sound of rend which marked the tear away of the 
bandages. there were an enormous number of these, and their bulk when 
open was great. as the men unroll them, i grew more and more 
excited. i did not take a part in it myself; margaret had look at me 
grateful as i drew back. we clasp hands, and held each other hard. 
as the unroll went on, the wrapping became finer, and the smell 
less laden with bitumen, but more pungent. we all, i think, began to 
feel it as though it caught or touched us in some special way. this, 
however, did not interfere with the work; it went on uninterruptedly. 
some of the inner wrapping bore symbol or pictures. these were done 
sometimes wholly in pale green colour, sometimes in many colours; but 
always with a prevalence of green. now and again mr. trelawny or mr. 
corbeck would point out some special drawing before lay the bandage 
on the pile behind them, which kept grow to a monstrous height. 

at last we knew that the wrapping were coming to an end. already the 
proportions were reduce to those of a normal figure of the manifest 
height of the queen, who was more than average height. and as the end 
drew nearer, so margaret's pallor grew; and her heart beat more and 
more wildly, till her breast heave in a way that frightened me. 

just as her father was taking away the last of the bandages, he 
happen to look up and caught the pained and anxious look of her pale 
face. he paused, and taking her concern to be as to the outrage on 
modesty, said in a comfort way: 

"do not be uneasy, dear! see! there is nothing to harm you. the queen 
has on a robe.--ay, and a royal robe, too!" 

the wrapping was a wide piece the whole length of the body. it being 
removed, a profuse full robe of white linen had appeared, covering 
the body from the throat to the feet. 

and such linen! we all bent over to look at it. 

margaret lost her concern, in her woman's interest in fine stuff. then 
the rest of us look with admiration; for surely such linen was never 
seen by the eyes of our age. it was as fine as the finest silk. but 
never was spun or woven silk which lay in such gracious folds, 
constrict though they were by the close wrapping of the mummy cloth, 
and fixed into hardness by the passing of thousand of years. 

round the neck it was delicate embroider in pure gold with tiny 
spray of sycamore; and round the feet, similarly worked, was an 
endless line of lotus plant of unequal height, and with all the 
graceful abandon of natural growth. 

across the body, but manifest not surrounding it, was a girdle of 
jewels. a wondrous girdle, which shone and glow with all the form 
and phase and colours of the sky! 

the buckle was a great yellow stone, round of outline, deep and curved, 
as if a yielding globe had been pressed down. it shone and glowed, as 
though a veritable sun lay within; the ray of its light seem to 
strike out and illumine all round. flank it were two great 
moonstone of lesser size, whose glowing, beside the glory of the 
sunstone, was like the silvery sheen of moonlight. 

and then on either side, link by golden clasp of exquisite shape, 
was a line of flaming jewels, of which the colours seem to glow. 
each of these stone seem to hold a living star, which twinkle in 
every phase of change light. 

margaret raise her hand in ecstasy. she bent over to examine more 
closely; but sudden drew back and stood fully erect at her grand 
height. she seem to speak with the conviction of absolute knowledge 
as she said: 

"that is no cerement! it was not meant for the clothing of death! it 
is a marriage robe!" 

mr. trelawny lean over and touched the linen robe. he lift a fold 
at the neck, and i knew from the quick intake of his breath that 
something had surprise him. he lift yet a little more; and then he, 
too, stood back and pointed, saying: 

"margaret is right! that dress is not intended to be worn by the dead! 
see! her figure is not robe in it. it is but laid upon her." he 
lift the zone of jewel and hand it to margaret. then with both 
hand he raise the ample robe, and laid it across the arms which she 
extend in a natural impulse. things of such beauty were too precious 
to be handle with any but the greatest care. 

we all stood awed at the beauty of the figure which, save for the face 
cloth, now lay completely nude before us. mr. trelawny bent over, and 
with hand that tremble slightly, raise this linen cloth which was of 
the same fine as the robe. as he stood back and the whole glorious 
beauty of the queen was revealed, i felt a rush of shame sweep over me. 
it was not right that we should be there, gaze with irreverent eyes 
on such unclad beauty: it was indecent; it was almost sacrilegious! 
and yet the white wonder of that beautiful form was something to dream 
of. it was not like death at all; it was like a statue carven in ivory 
by the hand of a praxiteles. there was nothing of that horrible 
shrinkage which death seem to effect in a moment. there was none of 
the wrinkle tough which seem to be a leading characteristic of 
most mummies. there was not the shrunken attenuate of a body dry in 
the sand, as i had seen before in museums. all the pore of the body 
seem to have been preserve in some wonderful way. the flesh was 
full and round, as in a living person; and the skin was as smooth as 
satin. the colour seem extraordinary. it was like ivory, new ivory; 
except where the right arm, with shattered, bloodstain wrist and 
missing hand had lain bare to exposure in the sarcophagus for so many 
ten of centuries. 

with a womanly impulse; with a mouth that droop with pity, with eyes 
that flash with anger, and cheek that flamed, margaret threw over 
the body the beautiful robe which lay across her arm. only the face 
was then to be seen. this was more startle even than the body, for 
it seem not dead, but alive. the eyelid were closed; but the long, 
black, curling lash lay over on the cheeks. the nostrils, set in 
grave pride, seem to have the repose which, when it is seen in life, 
is greater than the repose of death. the full, red lips, though the 
mouth was not open, show the tiniest white line of pearly teeth 
within. her hair, glorious in quantity and glossy black as the raven's 
wing, was pile in great masses over the white forehead, on which a few 
curling tresses stray like tendrils. i was amaze at the likeness to 
margaret, though i had had my mind prepared for this by mr. corbeck's 
quotation of her father's statement. this woman--i could not think of 
her as a mummy or a corpse--was the image of margaret as my eyes had 
first lit on her. the likeness was increase by the jewelled ornament 
which she wore in her hair, the "disk and plumes", such as margaret, 
too, had worn. it, too, was a glorious jewel; one noble pearl of 
moonlight lustre, flank by carven pieces of moonstone. 

mr. trelawny was overcome as he looked. he quite broke down; and when 
margaret flew to him and held him close in her arms and comfort him, 
i heard him murmur brokenly: 

"it looks as if you were dead, my child!" 

there was a long silence. i could hear without the roar of the wind, 
which was now risen to a tempest, and the furious dashing of the wave 
far below. mr. trelawny's voice broke the spell: 

"later on we must try and find out the process of embalming. it is not 
like any that i know. there do not seem to have been any opening cut 
for the withdraw of the viscera and organs, which apparently remain 
intact within the body. then, again, there is no moisture in the 
flesh; but its place is supply with something else, as though wax or 
stearine had been convey into the vein by some subtle process. i 
wonder could it be possible that at that time they could have use 
paraffin. it might have been, by some process that we know not, pump 
into the veins, where it hardened!" 

margaret, have thrown a white sheet over the queen's body, ask us 
to bring it to her own room, where we laid it on her bed. then she 
sent us away, saying: 

"leave her alone with me. there are still many hour to pass, and i do 
not like to leave her lie there, all stark in the glare of light. 
this may be the bridal she prepared for--the bridal of death; and at 
least she shall wear her pretty robes." 

when presently she brought me back to her room, the dead queen was 
dress in the robe of fine linen with the embroidery of gold; and all 
her beautiful jewel were in place. candle were lit around her, and 
white flower lay upon her breast. 

hand in hand we stood look at her for a while. then with a sigh, 
margaret cover her with one of her own snowy sheets. she turn 
away; and after soft close the door of the room, went back with me 
to the other who had now come into the dine room. here we all began 
to talk over the things that had been, and that were to be. 

now and again i could feel that one or other of us was force 
conversation, as if we were not sure of ourselves. the long wait was 
beginning to tell on our nerves. it was apparent to me that mr. 
trelawny had suffer in that strange trance more than we suspected, or 
than he care to show. true, his will and his determination were as 
strong as ever; but the purely physical side of him had been weaken 
somewhat. it was indeed only natural that it should be. no man can go 
through a period of four days of absolute negate of life without 
being weaken by it somehow. 

as the hour crept by, the time pass more and more slowly. the other 
men seem to get unconscious a little drowsy. i wonder if in the 
case of mr. trelawny and mr. corbeck, who had already been under the 
hypnotic influence of the queen, the same dormance was manifest 
itself. doctor winchester had periods of distraction which grew long 
and more frequent as the time wore on. 

as to margaret, the suspense told on her exceedingly, as might have 
been expect in the case of a woman. she grew pale and pale still; 
till at last about midnight, i began to be seriously alarm about her. 
i got her to come into the library with me, and try to make her lie 
down on a sofa for a little while. as mr. trelawny had decided that 
the experiment was to be made exactly at the seventh hour after sunset, 
it would be as nearly as possible three o'clock in the morning when the 
great trial should be made. even allow a whole hour for the final 
preparations, we had still two hour of wait to go through, and i 
promise faithfully to watch her and to awake her at any time she might 
name. she would not hear of it, however. she thank me sweet and 
smile at me as she did so; but she assured me that she was not sleepy, 
and that she was quite able to bear up. that it was only the suspense 
and excitement of wait that made her pale. i agree perforce; but i 
kept her talk of many things in the library for more than an hour; 
so that at last, when she insist on go back to her father's room i 
felt that i had at least done something to help her pass the time. 

we found the three men sitting patient in silence. with manlike 
fortitude they were content to be still when they felt they had done 
all in their power. and so we waited. 

the striking of two o'clock seem to freshen us all up. whatever 
shadow had been settle over us during the long hour preceding 
seem to lift at once; and we went about our separate duty alert and 
with alacrity. we look first to the window to see that they were 
closed, and we got ready our respirator to put them on when the time 
should be close at hand. we had from the first arrange to use them 
for we did not know whether some noxious fume might not come from the 
magic coffer when it should be opened. somehow, it never seem to 
occur to any of us that there was any doubt as to its opening. 

then, under margaret's guidance, we carry the mummy body of queen 
tera from her room into her father's, and laid it on a couch. we put 
the sheet lightly over it, so that if she should wake she could at once 
slip from under it. the sever hand was placed in its true position 
on her breast, and under it the jewel of seven stars which mr. trelawny 
had taken from the great safe. it seem to flash and blaze as he put 
it in its place. 

it was a strange sight, and a strange experience. the group of grave 
silent men carry the white still figure, which look like an ivory 
statue when through our moving the sheet fell back, away from the 
light candle and the white flowers. we placed it on the couch in 
that other room, where the blaze of the electric lights shone on the 
great sarcophagus fixed in the middle of the room ready for the final 
experiment, the great experiment consequent on the research during a 
lifetime of these two travelled scholars. again, the startle 
likeness between margaret and the mummy, intensify by her own 
extraordinary pallor, heighten the strange of it all. when all 
was finally fixed three-quarters of an hour had gone, for we were 
deliberate in all our doings. margaret beckon me, and i went out 
with her to bring in silvio. he came to her purring. she took him up 
and hand him to me; and then did a thing which move me strange and 
brought home to me keen the desperate nature of the enterprise on 
which we were embarked. one by one, she blew out the candle careful 
and placed them back in their usual places. when she had finished she 
said to me: 

"they are done with now. whatever comes--life or death--there will be 
no purpose in their use now." then taking silvio into her arms, and 
pressing him close to her bosom where he purr loudly, we went back to 
the room. i closed the door careful behind me, feeling as i did so a 
strange thrill as of finality. there was to be no go back now. 
then we put on our respirators, and took our place as had been 
arranged. i was to stand by the taps of the electric lights beside the 
door, ready to turn them off or on as mr. trelawny should direct. 
doctor winchester was to stand behind the couch so that he should not 
be between the mummy and the sarcophagus; he was to watch careful 
what should take place with regard to the queen. margaret was to be 
beside him; she held silvio ready to place him upon the couch or beside 
it when she might think right. mr. trelawny and mr. corbeck were to 
attend to the lighting of the lamps. when the hand of the clock were 
close to the hour, they stood ready with their linstocks. 

the striking of the silver bell of the clock seem to smite on our 
heart like a knell of doom. one! two! three! 

before the third stroke the wick of the lamp had caught, and i had 
turn out the electric light. in the dim of the struggle lamps, 
and after the bright glow of the electric light, the room and all 
within it took weird shapes, and all seem in an instant to change. 
we wait with our heart beating. i know mine did, and i fancy i 
could hear the pulsation of the others. 

the seconds seem to pass with leaden wings. it were as though all 
the world were standing still. the figures of the other stood out 
dimly, margaret's white dress alone showing clearly in the gloom. the 
thick respirator which we all wore add to the strange appearance. 
the thin light of the lamp show mr. trelawny's square jaw and strong 
mouth and the brown shaven face of mr. corbeck. their eyes seem to 
glare in the light. across the room doctor winchester's eyes twinkle 
like stars, and margaret's blaze like black suns. silvio's eyes were 
like emeralds. 

would the lamp never burn up! 

it was only a few seconds in all till they did blaze up. a slow, 
steady light, grow more and more bright, and change in colour from 
blue to crystal white. so they stay for a couple of minutes without 
change in the coffer; till at last there began to appear all over it a 
delicate glow. this grew and grew, till it became like a blazing 
jewel, and then like a living thing whose essence of life was light. 
we wait and waited, our heart seeming to stand still. 

all at once there was a sound like a tiny muffle explosion and the 
cover lift right up on a level plane a few inches; there was no 
mistake anything now, for the whole room was full of a blaze of 
light. then the cover, stay fast at one side rose slow up on the 
other, as though yielding to some pressure of balance. the coffer 
still continue to glow; from it began to steal a faint greenish smoke. 
i could not smell it fully on account of the respirator; but, even 
through that, i was conscious of a strange pungent odour. then this 
smoke began to grow thicker, and to roll out in volumes of ever 
increase density till the whole room began to get obscure. i had a 
terrible desire to rush over to margaret, whom i saw through the smoke 
still standing erect behind the couch. then, as i looked, i saw doctor 
winchester sink down. he was not unconscious; for he wave his hand 
back and forward, as though to forbid any one to come to him. at this 
time the figures of mr. trelawny and mr. corbeck were becoming 
indistinct in the smoke which roll round them in thick billowy 
clouds. finally i lost sight of them altogether. the coffer still 
continue to glow; but the lamp began to grow dim. at first i thought 
that their light was being overpower by the thick black smoke; but 
presently i saw that they were, one by one, burning out. they must 
have burn quick to produce such fierce and vivid flames. 

i wait and waited, expect every instant to hear the command to 
turn up the light; but none came. i wait still, and look with 
harrowing intensity at the rolling billow of smoke still pour out 
of the glowing casket, whilst the lamp sank down and went out one by 
one. 

finally there was but one lamp alight, and that was dim blue and 
flickering. the only effective light in the room was from the glowing 
casket. i kept my eyes fixed toward margaret; it was for her now that 
all my anxiety was claimed. i could just see her white frock beyond 
the still white shroud figure on the couch. silvio was troubled; his 
piteous mew was the only sound in the room. deep and dense grew 
the black mist and its pungent began to assail my nostril as well as 
my eyes. now the volume of smoke coming from the coffer seem to 
lessen, and the smoke itself to be less dense. across the room i saw 
something white move where the couch was. there were several 
movements. i could just catch the quick glint of white through the 
dense smoke in the fade light; for now the glow of the coffer began 
quick to subside. i could still hear silvio, but his mew came 
from close under; a moment later i could feel him piteous crouch 
on my foot. 

then the last spark of light disappeared, and through the egypt 
dark i could see the faint line of white around the window blinds. 
i felt that the time had come to speak; so i pull off my respirator 
and call out: 

"shall i turn up the light?" there was no answer; so before the thick 
smoke choke me, i call again but more loudly: 

"mr. trelawny, shall i turn up the light?" he did not answer; but from 
across the room i heard margaret's voice, sound as sweet and clear 
as a bell: 

"yes, malcolm!" i turn the tap and the lamp flash out. but they 
were only dim points of light in the midst of that murky ball of smoke. 
in that thick atmosphere there was little possibility of illumination. 
i ran across to margaret, guide by her white dress, and caught hold of 
her and held her hand. she recognise my anxiety and said at once: 

"i am all right." 

"thank god!" i said. "how are the others? quick, let us open all the 
window and get rid of this smoke!" to my surprise, she answer in a 
sleepy way: 

"they will be all right. they won't get any harm." i did not stop to 
inquire how or on what ground she form such an opinion, but threw up 
the lower sash of all the windows, and pull down the upper. then i 
threw open the door. 

a few seconds made a perceptible change as the thick, black smoke began 
to roll out of the windows. then the lights began to grow into 
strength and i could see the room. all the men were overcome. beside 
the couch doctor winchester lay on his back as though he had sunk down 
and roll over; and on the farther side of the sarcophagus, where they 
had stood, lay mr. trelawny and mr. corbeck. it was a relief to me to 
see that, though they were unconscious, all three were breathing 
heavy as though in a stupor. margaret still stood behind the couch. 
she seem at first to be in a partially daze condition; but every 
instant appear to get more command of herself. she step forward 
and help me to raise her father and drag him close to a window. 
together we placed the other similarly, and she flew down to the 
dining-room and return with a decanter of brandy. this we proceed 
to administer to them all in turn. it was not many minutes after we 
had open the window when all three were struggle back to 
consciousness. during this time my entire thought and effort had 
been concentrated on their restoration; but now that this strain was 
off, i look round the room to see what had been the effect of the 
experiment. the thick smoke had nearly clear away; but the room was 
still misty and was full of a strange pungent acrid odour. 

the great sarcophagus was just as it had been. the coffer was open, 
and in it, scattered through certain division or partition wrought in 
its own substance, was a scatter of black ashes. over all, 
sarcophagus, coffer and, indeed, all in the room, was a sort of black 
film of greasy soot. i went over to the couch. the white sheet still 
lay over part of it; but it had been thrown back, as might be when one 
is step out of bed. 

but there was no sign of queen tera! i took margaret by the hand and 
led her over. she reluctantly left her father to whom she was 
administering, but she came docile enough. i whisper to her as i 
held her hand: 

"what has become of the queen? tell me! you were close at hand, and 
must have seen if anything happened!" she answer me very softly: 

"there was nothing that i could see. until the smoke grew too dense i 
kept my eyes on the couch, but there was no change. then, when all 
grew so dark that i could not see, i thought i heard a movement close 
to me. it might have been doctor winchester who had sunk down overcome; 
but i could not be sure. i thought that it might be the queen waking, 
so i put down poor silvio. i did not see what became of him; but i 
felt as if he had desert me when i heard him mew over by the door. 
i hope he is not offend with me!" as if in answer, silvio came 
running into the room and rear himself against her dress, pull it 
as though clamour to be taken up. she stoop down and took him up 
and began to pet and comfort him. 

i went over and examine the couch and all around it most carefully. 
when mr. trelawny and mr. corbeck recover sufficiently, which they 
did quickly, though doctor winchester took long to come round, we 
went over it afresh. but all we could find was a sort of ridge of 
impalpable dust, which gave out a strange dead odour. on the couch lay 
the jewel of the disk and plume which the queen had worn in her hair, 
and the star jewel which had words to command the gods. 

other than this we never got clue to what had happened. there was just 
one thing which confirmed our idea of the physical annihilate of the 
mummy. in the sarcophagus in the hall, where we had placed the mummy 
of the cat, was a small patch of similar dust. 

* * * * * 

in the autumn margaret and i were married. on the occasion she wore 
the mummy robe and zone and the jewel which queen tera had worn in her 
hair. on her breast, set in a ring of gold make like a twist lotus 
stalk, she wore the strange jewel of seven stars which held words to 
command the god of all the worlds. at the marriage the sunlight 
stream through the chancel window fell on it, and it seem to glow 
like a living thing. 

the graven words may have been of efficacy; for margaret hold to them, 
and there is no other life in all the world so happy as my own. 

we often think of the great queen, and we talk of her freely. once, 
when i said with a sigh that i was sorry she could not have wake into 
a new life in a new world, my wife, putt both her hand in mine and 
look into my eyes with that far-away eloquent dreamy look which 
sometimes come into her own, said lovingly: 

"do not grieve for her! who knows, but she may have found the joy she 
sought? love and patience are all that make for happiness in this 
world; or in the world of the past or of the future; of the living or 
the dead. she dream her dream; and that is all that any of us can 
ask!" 



the end 








end of the project gutenberg ebook of the jewel of seven stars, by bram stoker 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the jewel of seven stars *** 

***** this file should be name 3781.txt or 3781.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/8/3781/ 

produce by sue asscher. html version by al haines. 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
