the project gutenberg ebook of four weird tales, by algernon blackwood 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: four weird tale 

author: algernon blackwood 

release date: september 20, 2005 [ebook #16726] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook four weird tale *** 




produce by suzanne shell, geetu melwani and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 








four weird tale 

by 

algernon blackwood 


including: 

"the insanity of jones" 
"the man who found out" 
"the glamour of the snow" and 
"sand" 




a note on the text 

these story first appear in blackwood's story collections: 
"the insanity of jones" in _the listener and other stories_ (1907); 
"the man who found out" in _the wolf of god and other fey stories_ 
(1921); 
"the glamour of the snow," and "sand" in _pan's garden_ (1912). 

* * * * * 




_the insanity of jones_ 

(a study in reincarnation) 


adventure come to the adventurous, and mysterious things fall in the 
way of those who, with wonder and imagination, are on the watch for 
them; but the majority of people go past the door that are half ajar, 
thinking them closed, and fail to notice the faint stirring of the 
great curtain that hang ever in the form of appearances between them 
and the world of cause behind. 

for only to the few whose inner senses have been quickened, perchance 
by some strange suffering in the depths, or by a natural temperament 
bequeath from a remote past, come the knowledge, not too welcome, 
that this greater world lie ever at their elbow, and that any moment a 
chance combination of mood and forces may invite them to cross the 
shift frontier. 

some, however, are born with this awful certainty in their hearts, and 
are call to no apprenticeship, and to this select company jones 
undoubted belonged. 

all his life he had realise that his senses brought to him merely a 
more or less interesting set of sham appearances; that space, as men 
measure it, was utterly misleading; that time, as the clock tick it 
in a succession of minutes, was arbitrary nonsense; and, in fact, that 
all his sensory perception were but a clumsy representation of _real_ 
things behind the curtain--things he was for ever try to get at, and 
that sometimes he actually did get at. 

he had always been trembling aware that he stood on the borderland 
of another region, a region where time and space were merely form of 
thought, where ancient memory lay open to the sight, and where the 
forces behind each human life stood plainly reveal and he could see 
the hidden spring at the very heart of the world. moreover, the fact 
that he was a clerk in a fire insurance office, and did his work with 
strict attention, never allow him to forget for one moment that, just 
beyond the dingy brick wall where the hundred men scribble with 
pointed pen beneath the electric lamps, there exist this glorious 
region where the important part of himself dwelt and move and had its 
being. for in this region he picture himself play the part of a 
spectator to his ordinary workaday life, watching, like a king, the 
stream of events, but untouched in his own soul by the dirt, the noise, 
and the vulgar commotion of the outer world. 

and this was no poetic dream merely. jones was not play prettily with 
idealism to amuse himself. it was a living, working belief. so convinced 
was he that the external world was the result of a vast deception 
practised upon him by the gross senses, that when he stare at a great 
building like st. paul's he felt it would not very much surprise him to 
see it sudden quiver like a shape of jelly and then melt utterly away, 
while in its place stood all at once reveal the mass of colour, or the 
great intricate vibrations, or the splendid sound--the spiritual 
idea--which it represent in stone. 

for something in this way it was that his mind worked. 

yet, to all appearances, and in the satisfaction of all business claims, 
jones was normal and unenterprising. he felt nothing but contempt for 
the wave of modern psychism. he hardly knew the meaning of such words as 
"clairvoyance" and "clairaudience." he had never felt the least desire 
to join the theosophy society and to speculate in theory of 
astral-plane life, or elementals. he attend no meeting of the 
psychic research society, and knew no anxiety as to whether his "aura" 
was black or blue; nor was he conscious of the slightest wish to mix in 
with the revival of cheap occult which prove so attractive to weak 
mind of mystical tendency and unleash imaginations. 

there were certain things he _knew_, but none he care to argue about; 
and he shrank instinctive from attempt to put name to the contents 
of this other region, knowing well that such name could only limit and 
define things that, according to any standard in use in the ordinary 
world, were simply undefinable and illusive. 

so that, although this was the way his mind worked, there was clearly a 
very strong leaven of common sense in jones. in a word, the man the 
world and the office knew as jones _was_ jones. the name sum him up 
and label him correctly--john enderby jones. 

among the things that he _knew_, and therefore never care to speak or 
speculate about, one was that he plainly saw himself as the inherit 
of a long series of past lives, the net result of painful evolution, 
always as himself, of course, but in numerous different body each 
determined by the behaviour of the preceding one. the present john jones 
was the last result to date of all the previous thinking, feeling, 
and do of john jones in early body and in other centuries. he 
pretended to no details, nor claim distinguished ancestry, for he 
realise his past must have been utterly commonplace and insignificant 
to have produce his present; but he was just as sure he had been at 
this weary game for age as that he breathed, and it never occur to 
him to argue, to doubt, or to ask questions. and one result of this 
belief was that his thought dwelt upon the past rather than upon the 
future; that he read much history, and felt specially drawn to certain 
periods whose spirit he understood instinctive as though he had live 
in them; and that he found all religion uninterest because, almost 
without exception, they start from the present and speculate ahead as to 
what men shall become, instead of look back and speculate why men 
have got here as they are. 

in the insurance office he did his work exceedingly well, but without 
much personal ambition. men and women he regard as the impersonal 
instrument for inflict upon him the pain or pleasure he had earn 
by his past workings, for chance had no place in his scheme of things at 
all; and while he recognise that the practical world could not get 
along unless every man did his work thorough and conscientiously, he 
took no interest in the accumulation of fame or money for himself, and 
simply, therefore, did his plain duty, with indifference as to results. 

in common with other who lead a strict impersonal life, he possessed 
the quality of utter bravery, and was always ready to face any 
combination of circumstances, no matter how terrible, because he saw in 
them the just working-out of past cause he had himself set in motion 
which could not be dodge or modified. and whereas the majority of 
people had little meaning for him, either by way of attraction or 
repulsion, the moment he met some one with whom he felt his past had 
been _vitally_ interwoven his whole inner being leapt up instantly and 
shout the fact in his face, and he regulate his life with the utmost 
skill and caution, like a sentry on watch for an enemy whose feet could 
already be heard approaching. 

thus, while the great majority of men and women left him 
uninfluenced--since he regard them as so many soul merely passing 
with him along the great stream of evolution--there were, here and 
there, individual with whom he recognise that his smallest intercourse 
was of the gravest importance. these were person with whom he knew 
in every fibre of his being he had account to settle, pleasant or 
otherwise, arise out of dealings in past lives; and into his relations 
with these few, therefore, he concentrated as it were the effort that 
most people spread over their intercourse with a far greater number. by 
what means he picked out these few individual only those conversant 
with the startle process of the subconscious memory may say, but the 
point was that jones believe the main purpose, if not quite the entire 
purpose, of his present incarnation lay in his faithful and thorough 
settle of these accounts, and that if he sought to evade the least 
detail of such settling, no matter how unpleasant, he would have live 
in vain, and would return to his next incarnation with this add duty 
to perform. for according to his belief there was no chance, and could 
be no ultimate shirking, and to avoid a problem was merely to waste time 
and lose opportunity for development. 

and there was one individual with whom jones had long understood clearly 
he had a very large account to settle, and towards the accomplishment 
of which all the main current of his being seem to bear him with 
unswerving purpose. for, when he first enter the insurance office as a 
junior clerk ten years before, and through a glass door had caught sight 
of this man seat in an inner room, one of his sudden overwhelming 
flash of intuitive memory had burst up into him from the depths, and 
he had seen, as in a flame of blind light, a symbolic picture of 
the future rising out of a dreadful past, and he had, without any act of 
definite volition, marked down this man for a real account to be 
settled. 

"with _that_ man i shall have much to do," he said to himself, as he 
noted the big face look up and meet his eye through the glass. "there is 
something i cannot shirk--a vital relation out of the past of both of 
us." 

and he went to his desk tremble a little, and with shake knees, as 
though the memory of some terrible pain had sudden laid its icy hand 
upon his heart and touched the scar of a great horror. it was a moment 
of genuine terror when their eyes had met through the glass door, and 
he was conscious of an inward shrink and loathing that seize upon 
him with great violence and convinced him in a single second that the 
settle of this account would be almost, perhaps, more than he could 
manage. 

the vision pass as swift as it came, drop back again into the 
submerge region of his consciousness; but he never forgot it, and 
the whole of his life thereafter became a sort of natural though 
undeliberate preparation for the fulfilment of the great duty when the 
time should be ripe. 

in those days--ten years ago--this man was the assistant manager, 
but had since been promote as manager to one of the company's local 
branches; and soon afterwards jones had likewise found himself 
transfer to this same branch. a little later, again, the branch 
at liverpool, one of the most important, had been in peril owe to 
mismanage and defalcation, and the man had gone to take charge of 
it, and again, by mere chance apparently, jones had been promote to the 
same place. and this pursuit of the assistant manager had continue for 
several years, often, too, in the most curious fashion; and though jones 
had never exchange a single word with him, or been so much as notice 
indeed by the great man, the clerk understood perfectly well that these 
move in the game were all part of a definite purpose. never for one 
moment did he doubt that the invisible behind the veil were slow and 
surely arrange the detail of it all so as to lead up suitable to the 
climax demand by justice, a climax in which himself and the manager 
would play the leading _roles_. 

"it is inevitable," he said to himself, "and i feel it may be terrible; 
but when the moment come i shall be ready, and i pray god that i may 
face it properly and act like a man." 

moreover, as the years passed, and nothing happened, he felt the horror 
close in upon him with steady increase, for the fact was jones hate 
and loathe the manager with an intensity of feeling he had never before 
experienced towards any human being. he shrank from his presence, and 
from the glance of his eyes, as though he remember to have suffer 
nameless cruelty at his hands; and he slow began to realise, 
moreover, that the matter to be settled between them was one of very 
ancient standing, and that the nature of the settlement was a discharge 
of accumulate punishment which would probably be very dreadful in the 
manner of its fulfilment. 

when, therefore, the chief cashier one day informed him that the man 
was to be in london again--this time as general manager of the head 
office--and said that he was charged to find a private secretary for him 
from among the best clerks, and further intimate that the selection 
had fallen upon himself, jones accept the promotion quietly, 
fatalistically, yet with a degree of inward loathing hardly to be 
described. for he saw in this merely another move in the evolution of 
the inevitable nemesis which he simply dare not seek to frustrate by 
any personal consideration; and at the same time he was conscious of a 
certain feeling of relief that the suspense of wait might soon be 
mitigated. a secret sense of satisfaction, therefore, accompany the 
unpleasant change, and jones was able to hold himself perfectly well in 
hand when it was carry into effect and he was formal introduce as 
private secretary to the general manager. 

now the manager was a large, fat man, with a very red face and bags 
beneath his eyes. being short-sighted, he wore glasses that seem to 
magnify his eyes, which were always a little bloodshot. in hot weather a 
sort of thin slime cover his cheeks, for he perspire easily. his head 
was almost entire bald, and over his turn-down collar his great neck 
fold in two distinct reddish collop of flesh. his hand were big and 
his finger almost massive in thickness. 

he was an excellent business man, of sane judgment and firm will, 
without enough imagination to confuse his course of action by showing 
him possible alternatives; and his integrity and ability cause him to 
be held in universal respect by the world of business and finance. in 
the important regions of a man's character, however, and at heart, he 
was coarse, brutal almost to savagery, without consideration for others, 
and as a result often cruel unjust to his helpless subordinates. 

in moments of temper, which were not infrequent, his face turn a dull 
purple, while the top of his bald head shone by contrast like white 
marble, and the bags under his eyes swell till it seem they would 
presently explode with a pop. and at these times he present a 
distinct repulsive appearance. 

but to a private secretary like jones, who did his duty regardless of 
whether his employer was beast or angel, and whose mainspring was 
principle and not emotion, this made little difference. within the 
narrow limit in which any one _could_ satisfy such a man, he pleased 
the general manager; and more than once his piercing intuitive faculty, 
amount almost to clairvoyance, assist the chief in a fashion that 
serve to bring the two close together than might otherwise have 
been the case, and cause the man to respect in his assistant a power 
of which he possessed not even the germ himself. it was a curious 
relationship that grew up between the two, and the cashier, who enjoy 
the credit of have made the selection, profit by it indirect as 
much as any one else. 

so for some time the work of the office continue normally and very 
prosperously. john enderby jones received a good salary, and in the 
outward appearance of the two chief character in this history there 
was little change noticeable, except that the manager grew fat and 
redder, and the secretary observe that his own hair was beginning to 
show rather greyish at the temples. 

there were, however, two change in progress, and they both had to do 
with jones, and are important to mention. 

one was that he began to dream evilly. in the region of deep sleep, 
where the possibility of significant dream first develop itself, he 
was torment more and more with vivid scene and pictures in which a 
tall thin man, dark and sinister of countenance, and with bad eyes, was 
close associate with himself. only the setting was that of a past 
age, with costume of century gone by, and the scene had to do with 
dreadful cruelty that could not belong to modern life as he knew it. 

the other change was also significant, but is not so easy to describe, 
for he had in fact become aware that some new portion of himself, 
hitherto unawakened, had stir slow into life out of the very depths 
of his consciousness. this new part of himself amount almost to 
another personality, and he never observe its least manifestation 
without a strange thrill at his heart. 

for he understood that it had begun to _watch_ the manager! 




ii 


it was the habit of jones, since he was compel to work among 
conditions that were utterly distasteful, to withdraw his mind wholly 
from business once the day was over. during office hour he kept the 
strictest possible watch upon himself, and turn the key on all inner 
dreams, lest any sudden uprush from the deep should interfere with his 
duty. but, once the working day was over, the gate flew open, and he 
began to enjoy himself. 

he read no modern books on the subject that interested him, and, as 
already said, he follow no course of training, nor belong to any 
society that dabble with half-told mysteries; but, once release from 
the office desk in the manager's room, he simply and naturally enter 
the other region, because he was an old inhabitant, a rightful denizen, 
and because he belong there. it was, in fact, really a case of 
dual personality; and a careful drawn agreement exist between 
jones-of-the-fire-insurance-office and jones-of-the-mysteries, by the 
terms of which, under heavy penalties, neither region claim him out of 
hours. 

for the moment he reach his rooms under the roof in bloomsbury, and 
had change his city coat to another, the iron door of the office 
clang far behind him, and in front, before his very eyes, roll up 
the beautiful gate of ivory, and he enter into the place of flower 
and singing and wonderful veiled forms. sometimes he quite lost touch 
with the outer world, forget to eat his dinner or go to bed, and lay 
in a state of trance, his consciousness working far out of the body. and 
on other occasion he walk the street on air, half-way between the 
two regions, unable to distinguish between incarnate and discarnate 
forms, and not very far, probably, beyond the strata where poets, 
saints, and the greatest artist have move and thought and found their 
inspiration. but this was only when some insistent bodily claim 
prevent his full release, and more often than not he was entire 
independent of his physical portion and free of the real region, without 
let or hindrance. 

one evening he reach home utterly exhaust after the burden of the 
day's work. the manager had been more than usually brutal, unjust, 
ill-tempered, and jones had been almost persuade out of his settled 
policy of contempt into answer back. everything seem to have gone 
amiss, and the man's coarse, underbred nature had been in the ascendant 
all day long: he had thump the desk with his great fists, abused, 
found fault unreasonably, utter outrageous things, and behave 
generally as he actually was--beneath the thin veneer of acquire 
business varnish. he had done and said everything to wound all that was 
wound in an ordinary secretary, and though jones fortunately dwelt 
in a region from which he look down upon such a man as he might look 
down on the blunder of a savage animal, the strain had nevertheless 
told severe upon him, and he reach home wonder for the first time 
in his life whether there was perhaps a point beyond which he would be 
unable to restrain himself any longer. 

for something out of the usual had happened. at the close of a passage 
of great stress between the two, every nerve in the secretary's body 
tingle from undeserved abuse, the manager had sudden turn full 
upon him, in the corner of the private room where the safe stood, in 
such a way that the glare of his red eyes, magnify by the glasses, 
look straight into his own. and at this very second that other 
personality in jones--the one that was ever _watching_--rose up swift 
from the deep within and held a mirror to his face. 

a moment of flame and vision rush over him, and for one single 
second--one merciless second of clear sight--he saw the manager as the 
tall dark man of his evil dreams, and the knowledge that he had suffer 
at his hand some awful injury in the past crash through his mind like 
the report of a cannon. 

it all flash upon him and was gone, change him from fire to ice, 
and then back again to fire; and he left the office with the certain 
conviction in his heart that the time for his final settlement with the 
man, the time for the inevitable retribution, was at last drawing very 
near. 

according to his invariable custom, however, he succeed in putt 
the memory of all this unpleasant out of his mind with the change 
of his office coat, and after doze a little in his leather chair 
before the fire, he start out as usual for dinner in the soho france 
restaurant, and began to dream himself away into the region of flower 
and singing, and to commune with the invisible that were the very 
source of his real life and being. 

for it was in this way that his mind worked, and the habit of years had 
crystallise into rigid lines along which it was now necessary and 
inevitable for him to act. 

at the door of the little restaurant he stop short, a half-remembered 
appointment in his mind. he had made an engagement with some one, but 
where, or with whom, had entire slip his memory. he thought it was 
for dinner, or else to meet just after dinner, and for a second it came 
back to him that it had something to do with the office, but, whatever 
it was, he was quite unable to recall it, and a reference to his pocket 
engagement book show only a blank page. evidently he had even omit 
to enter it; and after standing a moment vain try to recall either 
the time, place, or person, he went in and sat down. 

but though the detail had escape him, his subconscious memory seem 
to know all about it, for he experienced a sudden sink of the heart, 
accompany by a sense of foreboding anticipation, and felt that 
beneath his exhaustion there lay a centre of tremendous excitement. the 
emotion cause by the engagement was at work, and would presently cause 
the actual detail of the appointment to reappear. 

inside the restaurant the feeling increased, instead of passing: some 
one was wait for him somewhere--some one whom he had definitely 
arrange to meet. he was expect by a person that very night and just 
about that very time. but by whom? where? a curious inner tremble came 
over him, and he made a strong effort to hold himself in hand and to be 
ready for anything that might come. 

and then sudden came the knowledge that the place of appointment was 
this very restaurant, and, further, that the person he had promise to 
meet was already here, wait somewhere quite close beside him. 

he look up nervous and began to examine the face round him. the 
majority of the diner were frenchmen, chatter loud with much 
gesticulate and laughter; and there was a fair sprinkling of clerk 
like himself who came because the price were low and the food good, but 
there was no single face that he recognise until his glance fell upon 
the occupant of the corner seat opposite, generally fill by himself. 

"there's the man who's wait for me!" thought jones instantly. 

he knew it at once. the man, he saw, was sitting well back into the 
corner, with a thick overcoat button tight up to the chin. his skin 
was very white, and a heavy black beard grew far up over his cheeks. at 
first the secretary took him for a stranger, but when he look up and 
their eyes met, a sense of familiarity flash across him, and for a 
second or two jones imagine he was staring at a man he had known years 
before. for, barring the beard, it was the face of an elderly clerk who 
had occupy the next desk to his own when he first enter the service 
of the insurance company, and had shown him the most painstaking 
kindness and sympathy in the early difficulty of his work. but a 
moment later the illusion passed, for he remember that thorpe had been 
dead at least five years. the similarity of the eyes was obviously a 
mere suggestive trick of memory. 

the two men stare at one another for several seconds, and then jones 
began to act _instinctively_, and because he had to. he cross over and 
took the vacant seat at the other's table, facing him; for he felt it 
was somehow imperative to explain why he was late, and how it was he had 
almost forgotten the engagement altogether. 

no honest excuse, however, came to his assistance, though his mind had 
begun to work furiously. 

"yes, you _are_ late," said the man quietly, before he could find a 
single word to utter. "but it doesn't matter. also, you had forgotten 
the appointment, but that make no difference either." 

"i knew--that there was an engagement," jones stammered, passing his 
hand over his forehead; "but somehow--" 

"you will recall it presently," continue the other in a gentle voice, 
and smile a little. "it was in deep sleep last night we arrange this, 
and the unpleasant occurrence of to-day have for the moment obliterate 
it." 

a faint memory stir within him as the man spoke, and a grove of tree 
with moving form hover before his eyes and then vanish again, while 
for an instant the stranger seem to be capable of self-distortion and 
to have assume vast proportions, with wonderful flaming eyes. 

"oh!" he gasped. "it was there--in the other region?" 

"of course," said the other, with a smile that illumine his whole face. 
"you will remember presently, all in good time, and meanwhile you have 
no cause to feel afraid." 

there was a wonderful soothe quality in the man's voice, like the 
whisper of a great wind, and the clerk felt calm at once. they sat 
a little while longer, but he could not remember that they talk much 
or ate anything. he only recall afterwards that the head waiter came 
up and whisper something in his ear, and that he glance round and saw 
the other people were look at him curiously, some of them laughing, 
and that his companion then got up and led the way out of the 
restaurant. 

they walk hurried through the streets, neither of them speaking; and 
jones was so intent upon get back the whole history of the affair 
from the region of deep sleep, that he barely notice the way they took. 
yet it was clear he knew where they were bound for just as well as his 
companion, for he cross the street often ahead of him, dive down 
alley without hesitation, and the other follow always without 
correction. 

the pavement were very full, and the usual night crowd of london were 
surge to and fro in the glare of the shop lights, but somehow no one 
impede their rapid movements, and they seem to pass through the 
people as if they were smoke. and, as they went, the pedestrian and 
traffic grew less and less, and they soon pass the mansion house and 
the desert space in front of the royal exchange, and so on down 
fenchurch street and within sight of the tower of london, rising dim and 
shadowy in the smoky air. 

jones remember all this perfectly well, and thought it was his intense 
preoccupation that made the distance seem so short. but it was when the 
tower was left behind and they turn northwards that he began to notice 
how alter everything was, and saw that they were in a neighbourhood 
where house were sudden scarce, and lane and field beginning, 
and that their only light was the stars overhead. and, as the deep 
consciousness more and more assert itself to the exclusion of the 
surface happening of his mere body during the day, the sense of 
exhaustion vanished, and he realise that he was moving somewhere in the 
region of cause behind the veil, beyond the gross deception of the 
senses, and release from the clumsy spell of space and time. 

without great surprise, therefore, he turn and saw that his companion 
had altered, had shed his overcoat and black hat, and was moving beside 
him absolutely _without sound_. for a brief second he saw him, tall as a 
tree, extend through space like a great shadow, misty and waver of 
outline, follow by a sound like wings in the darkness; but, when he 
stopped, fear clutch at his heart, the other resume his former 
proportions, and jones could plainly see his normal outline against the 
green field behind. 

then the secretary saw him fumble at his neck, and at the same moment 
the black beard came away from the face in his hand. 

"then you _are_ thorpe!" he gasped, yet somehow without overwhelming 
surprise. 

they stood facing one another in the lonely lane, tree meeting overhead 
and hiding the stars, and a sound of mournful sigh among the 
branches. 

"i am thorpe," was the answer in a voice that almost seem part of the 
wind. "and i have come out of our far past to help you, for my debt to 
you is large, and in this life i had but small opportunity to repay." 

jones thought quick of the man's kindness to him in the office, and a 
great wave of feeling surge through him as he began to remember dim 
the friend by whose side he had already climbed, perhaps through vast 
age of his soul's evolution. 

"to help me _now_?" he whispered. 

"you will understand me when you enter into your real memory and recall 
how great a debt i have to pay for old faithful kindness of long ago," 
sigh the other in a voice like fall wind. 

"between us, though, there can be no question of _debt_," jones heard 
himself saying, and remember the reply that float to him on the air 
and the smile that lighten for a moment the stern eyes facing him. 

"not of debt, indeed, but of privilege." 

jones felt his heart leap out towards this man, this old friend, try 
by century and still faithful. he made a movement to seize his hand. 
but the other shift like a thing of mist, and for a moment the clerk's 
head swam and his eyes seem to fail. 

"then you are _dead_?" he said under his breath with a slight shiver. 

"five years ago i left the body you knew," reply thorpe. "i try to 
help you then instinctively, not fully recognise you. but now i can 
accomplish far more." 

with an awful sense of foreboding and dread in his heart, the secretary 
was beginning to understand. 

"it has to do with--with--?" 

"your past dealings with the manager," came the answer, as the wind rose 
loud among the branch overhead and carry off the remainder of the 
sentence into the air. 

jones's memory, which was just beginning to stir among the deepest 
layer of all, shut down sudden with a snap, and he follow his 
companion over field and down sweet-smelling lane where the air was 
fragrant and cool, till they came to a large house, standing gaunt and 
lonely in the shadow at the edge of a wood. it was wrap in utter 
stillness, with window heavy drape in black, and the clerk, as he 
looked, felt such an overpowering wave of sad invade him that his 
eyes began to burn and smart, and he was conscious of a desire to shed 
tears. 

the key made a harsh noise as it turn in the lock, and when the door 
swung open into a lofty hall they heard a confuse sound of rustling and 
whispering, as of a great throng of people pressing forward to meet 
them. the air seem full of sway movement, and jones was certain he 
saw hand held aloft and dim face claim recognition, while in his 
heart, already oppress by the approach burden of vast accumulate 
memories, he was aware of the _uncoiling of something_ that had been 
asleep for ages. 

as they advanced he heard the door close with a muffle thunder behind 
them, and saw that the shadow seem to retreat and shrink away towards 
the interior of the house, carry the hand and face with them. he 
heard the wind singing round the wall and over the roof, and its 
wail voice mingle with the sound of deep, collective breathing that 
fill the house like the murmur of a sea; and as they walk up the 
broad staircase and through the vaulted rooms, where pillar rose like 
the stem of trees, he knew that the building was crowded, row upon row, 
with the throng memory of his own long past. 

"this is the _house of the past_," whisper thorpe beside him, as they 
move silent from room to room; "the house of _your_ past. it is full 
from cellar to roof with the memory of what you have done, thought, 
and felt from the earliest stage of your evolution until now. 

"the house climb up almost to the clouds, and stretch back into the 
heart of the wood you saw outside, but the remote hall are fill with 
the ghost of age ago too many to count, and even if we were able to 
waken them you could not remember them now. some day, though, they will 
come and claim you, and you must know them, and answer their questions, 
for they can never rest till they have exhaust themselves again 
through you, and justice has been perfectly work out. 

"but now follow me closely, and you shall see the particular memory 
for which i am permit to be your guide, so that you may know and 
understand a great force in your present life, and may use the sword of 
justice, or rise to the level of a great forgiveness, according to your 
degree of power." 

icy thrill ran through the tremble clerk, and as he walk slow 
beside his companion he heard from the vault below, as well as from 
more distant regions of the vast building, the stirring and sigh of 
the serried ranks of sleepers, sound in the still air like a chord 
swept from unseen strings stretch somewhere among the very foundations 
of the house. 

stealthily, pick their way among the great pillars, they move up the 
sweeping staircase and through several dark corridor and halls, and 
presently stop outside a small door in an archway where the shadow 
were very deep. 

"remain close by my side, and remember to utter no cry," whisper the 
voice of his guide, and as the clerk turn to reply he saw his face was 
stern to white and even shone a little in the darkness. 

the room they enter seem at first to be pitchy black, but gradual 
the secretary perceive a faint reddish glow against the farther end, 
and thought he saw figures moving silent to and fro. 

"now watch!" whisper thorpe, as they pressed close to the wall near 
the door and waited. "but remember to keep absolute silence. it is a 
torture scene." 

jones felt utterly afraid, and would have turn to fly if he dared, for 
an indescribable terror seize him and his knee shook; but some power 
that made escape impossible held him remorseless there, and with eyes 
glue on the spot of light he crouch against the wall and waited. 

the figures began to move more swiftly, each in its own dim light that 
shed no radiance beyond itself, and he heard a soft clank of chain 
and the voice of a man groan in pain. then came the sound of a door 
closing, and thereafter jones saw but one figure, the figure of an old 
man, naked entirely, and fasten with chain to an iron framework on 
the floor. his memory gave a sudden leap of fear as he looked, for the 
features and white beard were familiar, and he recall them as though 
of yesterday. 

the other figures had disappeared, and the old man became the centre of 
the terrible picture. slowly, with ghastly groans; as the heat below him 
increase into a steady glow, the age body rose in a curve of agony, 
rest on the iron frame only where the chain held wrist and ankle 
fast. cries and gasp fill the air, and jones felt exactly as though 
they came from his own throat, and as if the chain were burning into 
his own wrist and ankles, and the heat scorching the skin and flesh 
upon his own back. he began to writhe and twist himself. 

"spain!" whisper the voice at his side, "and four hundred years ago." 

"and the purpose?" gasp the perspire clerk, though he knew quite 
well what the answer must be. 

"to extort the name of a friend, to his death and betrayal," came the 
reply through the darkness. 

a slide panel open with a little rattle in the wall immediately 
above the rack, and a face, frame in the same red glow, appear and 
look down upon the die victim. jones was only just able to choke 
a scream, for he recognise the tall dark man of his dreams. with 
horrible, gloat eyes he gaze down upon the writhe form of the old 
man, and his lip move as in speaking, though no words were actually 
audible. 

"he ask again for the name," explain the other, as the clerk 
struggle with the intense hatred and loathing that threaten every 
moment to result in scream and action. his ankle and wrist pained him 
so that he could scarcely keep still, but a merciless power held him to 
the scene. 

he saw the old man, with a fierce cry, raise his torture head and spit 
up into the face at the panel, and then the shutter slid back again, and 
a moment later the increase glow beneath the body, accompany by awful 
writhing, told of the application of further heat. there came the odour 
of burning flesh; the white beard curl and burn to a crisp; the body 
fell back limp upon the red-hot iron, and then shot up again in fresh 
agony; cry after cry, the most awful in the world, rang out with 
deaden sound between the four walls; and again the panel slid back 
creaking, and reveal the dreadful face of the torturer. 

again the name was ask for, and again it was refused; and this time, 
after the close of the panel, a door opened, and the tall thin man 
with the evil face came slow into the chamber. his features were 
savage with rage and disappointment, and in the dull red glow that fell 
upon them he look like a very prince of devils. in his hand he held a 
pointed iron at white heat. 

"now the murder!" came from thorpe in a whisper that sound as if it 
was outside the building and far away. 

jones knew quite well what was coming, but was unable even to close his 
eyes. he felt all the fearful pains himself just as though he were 
actually the sufferer; but now, as he stared, he felt something more 
besides; and when the tall man deliberate approach the rack and 
plunge the heated iron first into one eye and then into the other, he 
heard the faint fizz of it, and felt his own eyes burst in frightful 
pain from his head. at the same moment, unable long to control 
himself, he utter a wild shriek and dashed forward to seize the 
torture and tear him to a thousand pieces. instantly, in a flash, the 
entire scene vanished; dark rush in to fill the room, and he felt 
himself lift off his feet by some force like a great wind and borne 
swift away into space. 

when he recover his senses he was standing just outside the house and 
the figure of thorpe was beside him in the gloom. the great door were 
in the act of close behind him, but before they shut he fancy he 
caught a glimpse of an immense veiled figure standing upon the 
threshold, with flaming eyes, and in his hand a bright weapon like a 
shining sword of fire. 

"come quick now--all is over!" thorpe whispered. 

"and the dark man--?" gasp the clerk, as he move swift by the 
other's side. 

"in this present life is the manager of the company." 

"and the victim?" 

"was yourself!" 

"and the friend he--_i_ refuse to betray?" 

"i was that friend," answer thorpe, his voice with every moment 
sound more and more like the cry of the wind. "you gave your life in 
agony to save mine." 

"and again, in this life, we have all three been together?" 

"yes. such forces are not soon or easily exhausted, and justice is not 
satisfy till all have reap what they sowed." 

jones had an odd feeling that he was slip away into some other state 
of consciousness. thorpe began to seem unreal. presently he would be 
unable to ask more questions. he felt utterly sick and faint with it 
all, and his strength was ebbing. 

"oh, quick!" he cried, "now tell me more. why did i see this? what must 
i do?" 

the wind swept across the field on their right and enter the wood 
beyond with a great roar, and the air round him seem fill with 
voice and the rush of hurried movement. 

"to the end of justice," answer the other, as though speak out 
of the centre of the wind and from a distance, "which sometimes is 
entrust to the hand of those who suffer and were strong. one wrong 
cannot be put right by another wrong, but your life has been so worthy 
that the opportunity is given to--" 

the voice grew faint and fainter, already it was far overhead with the 
rush wind. 

"you may punish or--" here jones lost sight of thorpe's figure 
altogether, for he seem to have vanish and melt away into the 
wood behind him. his voice sound far across the trees, very weak, and 
ever rising. 

"or if you can rise to the level of a great forgiveness--" 

the voice became inaudible.... the wind came crying out of the wood 
again. 

* * * * * 

jones shiver and stare about him. he shook himself violent and 
rub his eyes. the room was dark, the fire was out; he felt cold and 
stiff. he got up out of his armchair, still trembling, and lit the gas. 
outside the wind was howling, and when he look at his watch he saw 
that it was very late and he must go to bed. 

he had not even change his office coat; he must have fallen asleep in 
the chair as soon as he came in, and he had slept for several hours. 
certainly he had eaten no dinner, for he felt ravenous. 




iii 


next day, and for several week thereafter, the business of the office 
went on as usual, and jones did his work well and behave outwardly with 
perfect propriety. no more vision trouble him, and his relations with 
the manager became, if anything, somewhat smooth and easier. 

true, the man _looked_ a little different, because the clerk kept seeing 
him with his inner and outer eye promiscuously, so that one moment he 
was broad and red-faced, and the next he was tall, thin, and dark, 
enveloped, as it were, in a sort of black atmosphere tinge with red. 
while at times a confusion of the two sight took place, and jones saw 
the two face mingle in a composite countenance that was very horrible 
indeed to contemplate. but, beyond this occasional change in the outward 
appearance of the manager, there was nothing that the secretary notice 
as the result of his vision, and business went on more or less as 
before, and perhaps even with a little less friction. 

but in the rooms under the roof in bloomsbury it was different, for 
there it was perfectly clear to jones that thorpe had come to take up 
his abode with him. he never saw him, but he knew all the time he was 
there. every night on return from his work he was greet by the 
well-known whisper, "be ready when i give the sign!" and often in the 
night he woke up sudden out of deep sleep and was aware that thorpe 
had that minute move away from his bed and was standing wait and 
watch somewhere in the dark of the room. often he follow him 
down the stairs, though the dim gas jet on the landing never reveal 
his outline; and sometimes he did not come into the room at all, but 
hover outside the window, peer through the dirty panes, or send 
his whisper into the chamber in the whistle of the wind. 

for thorpe had come to stay, and jones knew that he would not get rid of 
him until he had fulfill the end of justice and accomplished the 
purpose for which he was waiting. 

meanwhile, as the days passed, he went through a tremendous struggle 
with himself, and came to the perfectly honest decision that the "level 
of a great forgiveness" was impossible for him, and that he must 
therefore accept the alternative and use the secret knowledge placed 
in his hands--and execute justice. and once this decision was arrive 
at, he notice that thorpe no long left him alone during the day as 
before, but now accompany him to the office and stay more or less at 
his side all through business hour as well. his whisper made itself 
heard in the street and in the train, and even in the manager's room 
where he worked; sometimes warning, sometimes urging, but never for a 
moment suggest the abandon of the main purpose, and more than 
once so plainly audible that the clerk felt certain other must have 
heard it as well as himself. 

the obsession was complete. he felt he was always under thorpe's eye day 
and night, and he knew he must acquit himself like a man when the moment 
came, or prove a failure in his own sight as well in the sight of the 
other. 

and now that his mind was made up, nothing could prevent the carry 
out of the sentence. he bought a pistol, and spent his saturday 
afternoons practise at a target in lonely place along the essex 
shore, marking out in the sand the exact measurement of the manager's 
room. sunday he occupy in like fashion, putt up at an inn 
overnight for the purpose, spend the money that usually went into the 
savings bank on travel expenses and cartridges. everything was done 
very thoroughly, for there must be no possibility of failure; and at the 
end of several week he had become so expert with his six-shooter that 
at a distance of 25 feet, which was the greatest length of the manager's 
room, he could pick the inside out of a halfpenny nine times out of a 
dozen, and leave a clean, unbroken rim. 

there was not the slightest desire to delay. he had thought the matter 
over from every point of view his mind could reach, and his purpose was 
inflexible. indeed, he felt proud to think that he had been chosen as 
the instrument of justice in the infliction of so well-deserved and so 
terrible a punishment. vengeance may have had some part in his decision, 
but he could not help that, for he still felt at times the hot chain 
burning his wrist and ankle with fierce agony through to the bone. 
he remember the hideous pain of his slow roasting back, and the 
point when he thought death _must_ intervene to end his suffering, but 
instead new powers of endurance had surge up in him, and awful further 
stretch of pain had open up, and unconscious seem farther off 
than ever. then at last the hot irons in his eyes.... it all came back 
to him, and cause him to break out in icy perspiration at the mere 
thought of it ... the vile face at the panel ... the expression of the 
dark face.... his finger worked. his blood boiled. it was utterly 
impossible to keep the idea of vengeance altogether out of his mind. 

several times he was temporary baulk of his prey. odd things 
happen to stop him when he was on the point of action. the first day, 
for instance, the manager faint from the heat. another time when he 
had decided to do the deed, the manager did not come down to the office 
at all. and a third time, when his hand was actually in his hip pocket, 
he sudden heard thorpe's horrid whisper telling him to wait, and 
turning, he saw that the head cashier had enter the room noiseless 
without his notice it. thorpe evidently knew what he was about, and 
did not intend to let the clerk bungle the matter. 

he fancied, moreover, that the head cashier was watch him. he was 
always meeting him in unexpected corner and places, and the cashier 
never seem to have an adequate excuse for being there. his movements 
seem sudden of particular interest to other in the office as well, 
for clerk were always being sent to ask him unnecessary questions, 
and there was apparently a general design to keep him under a sort of 
surveillance, so that he was never much alone with the manager in the 
private room where they worked. and once the cashier had even gone so 
far as to suggest that he could take his holiday early than usual if 
he liked, as the work had been very arduous of late and the heat 
exceedingly trying. 

he noticed, too, that he was sometimes follow by a certain individual 
in the streets, a careless-looking sort of man, who never came face to 
face with him, or actually ran into him, but who was always in his train 
or omnibus, and whose eye he often caught observing him over the top of 
his newspaper, and who on one occasion was even wait at the door of 
his lodgings when he came out to dine. 

there were other indication too, of various sorts, that led him to 
think something was at work to defeat his purpose, and that he must act 
at once before these hostile forces could prevent. 

and so the end came very swiftly, and was thorough approve by thorpe. 

it was towards the close of july, and one of the hottest days london had 
ever known, for the city was like an oven, and the particle of dust 
seem to burn the throat of the unfortunate toil in street and 
office. the portly manager, who suffer cruel owe to his size, came 
down perspire and gasp with the heat. he carry a light-coloured 
umbrella to protect his head. 

"he'll want something more than that, though!" jones laugh quiet to 
himself when he saw him enter. 

the pistol was safe in his hip pocket, every one of its six chambers 
loaded. 

the manager saw the smile on his face, and gave him a long steady look 
as he sat down to his desk in the corner. a few minutes later he touched 
the bell for the head cashier--a single ring--and then ask jones to 
fetch some papers from another safe in the room upstairs. 

a deep inner tremble seize the secretary as he notice these 
precautions, for he saw that the hostile forces were at work against 
him, and yet he felt he could delay no long and must act that very 
morning, interference or no interference. however, he went obedient up 
in the lift to the next floor, and while fumble with the combination 
of the safe, known only to himself, the cashier, and the manager, he 
again heard thorpe's horrid whisper just behind him: 

"you must do it to-day! you must do it to-day!" 

he came down again with the papers, and found the manager alone. the 
room was like a furnace, and a wave of dead heated air met him in the 
face as he went in. the moment he pass the doorway he realise that he 
had been the subject of conversation between the head cashier and his 
enemy. they had been discuss him. perhaps an inkling of his secret 
had somehow got into their minds. they had been watch him for days 
past. they had become suspicious. 

clearly, he must act now, or let the opportunity slip by perhaps for 
ever. he heard thorpe's voice in his ear, but this time it was no mere 
whisper, but a plain human voice, speak out loud. 

"now!" it said. "do it now!" 

the room was empty. only the manager and himself were in it. 

jones turn from his desk where he had been standing, and lock the 
door leading into the main office. he saw the army of clerk scribble 
in their shirt-sleeves, for the upper half of the door was of glass. he 
had perfect control of himself, and his heart was beating steadily. 

the manager, hearing the key turn in the lock, look up sharply. 

"what's that you're doing?" he ask quickly. 

"only lock the door, sir," reply the secretary in a quite even 
voice. 

"why? who told you to--?" 

"the voice of justice, sir," reply jones, look steady into the 
hate face. 

the manager look black for a moment, and stare angry across the 
room at him. then sudden his expression change as he stared, and he 
try to smile. it was meant to be a kind smile evidently, but it only 
succeed in being frightened. 

"that _is_ a good idea in this weather," he said lightly, "but it would 
be much better to lock it on the _outside_, wouldn't it, mr. jones?" 

"i think not, sir. you might escape me then. now you can't." 

jones took his pistol out and pointed it at the other's face. down the 
barrel he saw the features of the tall dark man, evil and sinister. then 
the outline tremble a little and the face of the manager slip back 
into its place. it was white as death, and shining with perspiration. 

"you torture me to death four hundred years ago," said the clerk in the 
same steady voice, "and now the dispenser of justice have chosen me to 
punish you." 

the manager's face turn to flame, and then back to chalk again. he 
made a quick movement towards the telephone bell, stretch out a hand 
to reach it, but at the same moment jones pull the trigger and the 
wrist was shattered, splash the wall behind with blood. 

"that's _one_ place where the chain burnt," he said quiet to himself. 
his hand was absolutely steady, and he felt that he was a hero. 

the manager was on his feet, with a scream of pain, support himself 
with his right hand on the desk in front of him, but jones pressed the 
trigger again, and a bullet flew into the other wrist, so that the big 
man, deprived of support, fell forward with a crash on to the desk. 

"you damn madman!" shriek the manager. "drop that pistol!" 

"that's _another_ place," was all jones said, still taking careful aim 
for another shot. 

the big man, scream and blundering, scramble beneath the desk, 
making frantic effort to hide, but the secretary took a step forward 
and fire two shot in quick succession into his project legs, 
hit first one ankle and then the other, and smashing them horribly. 

"two more place where the chain burnt," he said, go a little 
nearer. 

the manager, still shrieking, try desperate to squeeze his bulk 
behind the shelter of the opening beneath the desk, but he was far too 
large, and his bald head protrude through on the other side. jones 
caught him by the scruff of his great neck and drag him yelp out 
on to the carpet. he was cover with blood, and flop helpless upon 
his broken wrists. 

"be quick now!" cry the voice of thorpe. 

there was a tremendous commotion and bang at the door, and jones 
grip his pistol tightly. something seem to crash through his brain, 
clearing it for a second, so that he thought he saw beside him a great 
veiled figure, with drawn sword and flaming eyes, and stern approve 
attitude. 

"remember the eyes! remember the eyes!" hiss thorpe in the air above 
him. 

jones felt like a god, with a god's power. vengeance disappear from 
his mind. he was acting impersonal as an instrument in the hand of 
the invisible who dispense justice and balance accounts. he bent down 
and put the barrel close into the other's face, smile a little as he 
saw the childish effort of the arms to cover his head. then he pull 
the trigger, and a bullet went straight into the right eye, blacken 
the skin. moving the pistol two inch the other way, he sent another 
bullet crashing into the left eye. then he stood upright over his victim 
with a deep sigh of satisfaction. 

the manager wriggle convulsive for the space of a single second, and 
then lay still in death. 

there was not a moment to lose, for the door was already broken in and 
violent hand were at his neck. jones put the pistol to his temple and 
once more pressed the trigger with his finger. 

but this time there was no report. only a little dead click answer the 
pressure, for the secretary had forgotten that the pistol had only six 
chambers, and that he had use them all. he threw the useless weapon 
on to the floor, laugh a little out loud, and turned, without a 
struggle, to give himself up. 

"i _had_ to do it," he said quietly, while they tie him. "it was simply 
my duty! and now i am ready to face the consequences, and thorpe will be 
proud of me. for justice has been done and the gods are satisfied." 

he made not the slightest resistance, and when the two policemen march 
him off through the crowd of shudder little clerk in the office, he 
again saw the veiled figure moving majestic in front of him, making 
slow sweeping circle with the flaming sword, to keep back the host of 
face that were throng in upon him from the other region. 


* * * * * 




_the man who found out_ 

(a nightmare) 

1 


professor mark ebor, the scientist, led a double life, and the only 
person who knew it were his assistant, dr. laidlaw, and his publishers. 
but a double life need not always be a bad one, and, as dr. laidlaw and 
the gratify publisher well knew, the parallel lives of this 
particular man were equally good, and indefinitely produce would 
certainly have end in a heaven somewhere that can suitable contain 
such strange opposite characteristic as his remarkable personality 
combined. 

for mark ebor, f.r.s., etc., etc., was that unique combination hardly 
ever met with in actual life, a man of science and a mystic. 

as the first, his name stood in the gallery of the great, and as the 
second--but there came the mystery! for under the pseudonym of "pilgrim" 
(the author of that brilliant series of books that appeal to so many), 
his identity was as well conceal as that of the anonymous writer of 
the weather report in a daily newspaper. thousand read the sanguine, 
optimistic, stimulate little books that issue annual from the pen 
of "pilgrim," and thousand bore their daily burden better for have 
read; while the press generally agree that the author, besides being an 
incorrigible enthusiast and optimist, was also--a woman; but no one ever 
succeed in penetrating the veil of anonymity and discover that 
"pilgrim" and the biologist were one and the same person. 

mark ebor, as dr. laidlaw knew him in his laboratory, was one man; but 
mark ebor, as he sometimes saw him after work was over, with rapt eyes 
and ecstatic face, discuss the possibility of "union with god" and 
the future of the human race, was quite another. 

"i have always held, as you know," he was saying one evening as he 
sat in the little study beyond the laboratory with his assistant and 
intimate, "that vision should play a large part in the life of the 
awaken man--not to be regard as infallible, of course, but to be 
observe and made use of as a guide-post to possibilities--" 

"i am aware of your peculiar views, sir," the young doctor put in 
deferentially, yet with a certain impatience. 

"for vision come from a region of the consciousness where observation 
and experiment are out of the question," pursue the other with 
enthusiasm, not notice the interruption, "and, while they should be 
checked by reason afterwards, they should not be laugh at or ignored. 
all inspiration, i hold, is of the nature of interior vision, and all 
our best knowledge has come--such is my confirmed belief--as a sudden 
revelation to the brain prepared to receive it--" 

"prepared by hard work first, by concentration, by the closest possible 
study of ordinary phenomena," dr. laidlaw allow himself to observe. 

"perhaps," sigh the other; "but by a process, none the less, of 
spiritual illumination. the best match in the world will not light a 
candle unless the wick be first suitable prepared." 

it was laidlaw's turn to sigh. he knew so well the impossible of 
argue with his chief when he was in the regions of the mystic, but at 
the same time the respect he felt for his tremendous attainment was so 
sincere that he always listen with attention and deference, wonder 
how far the great man would go and to what end this curious combination 
of logic and "illumination" would eventually lead him. 

"only last night," continue the elder man, a sort of light coming into 
his rugged features, "the vision came to me again--the one that has 
haunt me at interval ever since my youth, and that will not be 
denied." 

dr. laidlaw fidget in his chair. 

"about the tablet of the gods, you mean--and that they lie somewhere 
hidden in the sands," he said patiently. a sudden gleam of interest came 
into his face as he turn to catch the professor's reply. 

"and that i am to be the one to find them, to decipher them, and to give 
the great knowledge to the world--" 

"who will not believe," laugh laidlaw shortly, yet interested in spite 
of his thinly-veiled contempt. 

"because even the keenest minds, in the right sense of the word, are 
hopelessly--unscientific," reply the other gently, his face positively 
aglow with the memory of his vision. "yet what is more likely," he 
continue after a moment's pause, peer into space with rapt eyes that 
saw things too wonderful for exact language to describe, "than that 
there should have been given to man in the first age of the world some 
record of the purpose and problem that had been set him to solve? in a 
word," he cried, fix his shining eyes upon the face of his perplexed 
assistant, "that god's messenger in the far-off age should have given 
to his creature some full statement of the secret of the world, of the 
secret of the soul, of the meaning of life and death--the explanation of 
our being here, and to what great end we are destined in the ultimate 
full of things?" 

dr. laidlaw sat speechless. these outburst of mystical enthusiasm he 
had witness before. with any other man he would not have listen to 
a single sentence, but to professor ebor, man of knowledge and profound 
investigator, he listen with respect, because he regard this 
condition as temporary and pathological, and in some sense a reaction 
from the intense strain of the prolonged mental concentration of many 
days. 

he smiled, with something between sympathy and resignation as he met the 
other's rapt gaze. 

"but you have said, sir, at other times, that you consider the ultimate 
secret to be screen from all possible--" 

"the _ultimate_ secrets, yes," came the unperturbed reply; "but that 
there lie bury somewhere an indestructible record of the secret 
meaning of life, originally known to men in the days of their pristine 
innocence, i am convinced. and, by this strange vision so often 
vouchsafe to me, i am equally sure that one day it shall be given to me 
to announce to a weary world this glorious and terrific message." 

and he continue at great length and in glowing language to describe the 
species of vivid dream that had come to him at interval since earliest 
childhood, showing in detail how he discover these very tablet of the 
gods, and proclaim their splendid contents--whose precise nature was 
always, however, withheld from him in the vision--to a patient and 
suffering humanity. 

"the _scrutator_, sir, well describe 'pilgrim' as the apostle of 
hope," said the young doctor gently, when he had finished; "and now, if 
that reviewer could hear you speak and realize from what strange depths 
come your simple faith--" 

the professor held up his hand, and the smile of a little child broke 
over his face like sunshine in the morning. 

"half the good my books do would be instantly destroyed," he said sadly; 
"they would say that i wrote with my tongue in my cheek. but wait," he 
add significantly; "wait till i find these tablet of the gods! wait 
till i hold the solution of the old world-problems in my hands! wait 
till the light of this new revelation break upon confuse humanity, and 
it wake to find its bravest hope justified! ah, then, my dear 
laidlaw--" 

he broke off suddenly; but the doctor, clever guess the thought in 
his mind, caught him up immediately. 

"perhaps this very summer," he said, try hard to make the suggestion 
keep pace with honesty; "in your exploration in assyria--your digging 
in the remote civilization of what was once chaldea, you may find--what 
you dream of--" 

the professor held up his hand, and the smile of a fine old face. 

"perhaps," he murmur softly, "perhaps!" 

and the young doctor, thank the gods of science that his leader's 
aberration were of so harmless a character, went home strong in the 
certitude of his knowledge of externals, proud that he was able to refer 
his vision to self-suggestion, and wonder complaisant whether in 
his old age he might not after all suffer himself from visitation of 
the very kind that afflict his respect chief. 

and as he got into bed and thought again of his master's rugged face, 
and finely shaped head, and the deep lines trace by years of work and 
self-discipline, he turn over on his pillow and fell asleep with a 
sigh that was half of wonder, half of regret. 




2 


it was in february, nine month later, when dr. laidlaw made his way to 
char cross to meet his chief after his long absence of travel and 
exploration. the vision about the so-called tablet of the gods had 
meanwhile pass almost entire from his memory. 

there were few people in the train, for the stream of traffic was now 
running the other way, and he had no difficulty in finding the man he 
had come to meet. the shock of white hair beneath the low-crowned felt 
hat was alone enough to distinguish him by easily. 

"here i am at last!" exclaim the professor, somewhat wearily, clasp 
his friend's hand as he listen to the young doctor's warm greeting 
and questions. "here i am--a little older, and _much_ dirty than when 
you last saw me!" he glance down laughing at his travel-stained 
garments. 

"and _much_ wiser," said laidlaw, with a smile, as he bustle about the 
platform for porter and gave his chief the latest scientific news. 

at last they came down to practical considerations. 

"and your luggage--where is that? you must have ton of it, i suppose?" 
said laidlaw. 

"hardly anything," professor ebor answered. "nothing, in fact, but what 
you see." 

"nothing but this hand-bag?" laugh the other, thinking he was joking. 

"and a small portmanteau in the van," was the quiet reply. "i have no 
other luggage." 

"you have no other luggage?" repeated laidlaw, turning sharp to see if 
he were in earnest. 

"why should i need more?" the professor add simply. 

something in the man's face, or voice, or manner--the doctor hardly knew 
which--suddenly struck him as strange. there was a change in him, a 
change so profound--so little on the surface, that is--that at first he 
had not become aware of it. for a moment it was as though an utterly 
alien personality stood before him in that noisy, bustle throng. here, 
in all the homely, friendly turmoil of a char cross crowd, a curious 
feeling of cold pass over his heart, touching his life with icy 
finger, so that he actually tremble and felt afraid. 

he look up quick at his friend, his mind working with startle and 
unwelcome thoughts. 

"only this?" he repeated, indicate the bag. "but where's all the stuff 
you went away with? and--have you brought nothing home--no treasures?" 

"this is all i have," the other said briefly. the pale smile that went 
with the words cause the doctor a second indescribable sensation of 
uneasiness. something was very wrong, something was very queer; he 
wonder now that he had not notice it sooner. 

"the rest follows, of course, by slow freight," he add tactfully, and 
as naturally as possible. "but come, sir, you must be tired and in want 
of food after your long journey. i'll get a taxi at once, and we can see 
about the other luggage afterwards." 

it seem to him he hardly knew quite what he was saying; the change in 
his friend had come upon him so sudden and now grew upon him more and 
more distressingly. yet he could not make out exactly in what it 
consisted. a terrible suspicion began to take shape in his mind, 
trouble him dreadfully. 

"i am neither very tired, nor in need of food, thank you," the professor 
said quietly. "and this is all i have. there is no luggage to follow. i 
have brought home nothing--nothing but what you see." 

his words convey finality. they got into a taxi, tip the porter, 
who had been staring in amaze at the venerable figure of the 
scientist, and were convey slow and noisy to the house in the 
north of london where the laboratory was, the scene of their labour of 
years. 

and the whole way professor ebor utter no word, nor did dr. laidlaw 
find the courage to ask a single question. 

it was only late that night, before he took his departure, as the two 
men were standing before the fire in the study--that study where they 
had discuss so many problem of vital and absorbing interest--that 
dr. laidlaw at last found strength to come to the point with direct 
questions. the professor had been give him a superficial and desultory 
account of his travels, of his journey by camel, of his encampment 
among the mountain and in the desert, and of his exploration among the 
bury temples, and, deeper, into the waste of the pre-historic sands, 
when sudden the doctor came to the desire point with a kind of 
nervous rush, almost like a frightened boy. 

"and you found--" he began stammering, look hard at the other's 
dreadfully alter face, from which every line of hope and cheerful 
seem to have been obliterate as a sponge wipe marking from a 
slate--"you found--" 

"i found," reply the other, in a solemn voice, and it was the voice of 
the mystic rather than the man of science--"i found what i went to seek. 
the vision never once fail me. it led me straight to the place like a 
star in the heavens. i found--the tablet of the gods." 

dr. laidlaw caught his breath, and steady himself on the back of a 
chair. the words fell like particle of ice upon his heart. for the 
first time the professor had utter the well-known phrase without the 
glow of light and wonder in his face that always accompany it. 

"you have--brought them?" he faltered. 

"i have brought them home," said the other, in a voice with a ring like 
iron; "and i have--deciphered them." 

profound despair, the bloom of outer darkness, the dead sound of a 
hopeless soul freezing in the utter cold of space seem to fill in the 
pause between the brief sentences. a silence followed, during which dr. 
laidlaw saw nothing but the white face before him alternate fade and 
return. and it was like the face of a dead man. 

"they are, alas, indestructible," he heard the voice continue, with its 
even, metallic ring. 

"indestructible," laidlaw repeated mechanically, hardly knowing what he 
was saying. 

again a silence of several minutes passed, during which, with a creep 
cold about his heart, he stood and stare into the eyes of the man he 
had known and love so long--aye, and worshipped, too; the man who had 
first open his own eyes when they were blind, and had led him to the 
gate of knowledge, and no little distance along the difficult path 
beyond; the man who, in another direction, had pass on the strength of 
his faith into the heart of thousand by his books. 

"i may see them?" he ask at last, in a low voice he hardly recognize 
as his own. "you will let me know--their message?" 

professor ebor kept his eyes fixedly upon his assistant's face as he 
answered, with a smile that was more like the grin of death than a 
living human smile. 

"when i am gone," he whispered; "when i have pass away. then you 
shall find them and read the translate i have made. and then, too, in 
your turn, you must try, with the latest resources of science at your 
disposal to aid you, to compass their utter destruction." he pause 
a moment, and his face grew pale as the face of a corpse. "until 
that time," he add presently, without look up, "i must ask 
you not to refer to the subject again--and to keep my confidence 
meanwhile--_ab--so--lute--ly_." 




3 


a year pass slow by, and at the end of it dr. laidlaw had found it 
necessary to sever his working connexion with his friend and one-time 
leader. professor ebor was no long the same man. the light had gone 
out of his life; the laboratory was closed; he no long put pen to 
paper or applied his mind to a single problem. in the short space of 
a few month he had pass from a hale and hearty man of late middle 
life to the condition of old age--a man collapse and on the edge of 
dissolution. death, it was plain, lay wait for him in the shadow of 
any day--and he knew it. 

to describe faithfully the nature of this profound alteration in his 
character and temperament is not easy, but dr. laidlaw sum it up to 
himself in three words: _loss of hope_. the splendid mental powers 
remain indeed undimmed, but the incentive to use them--to use them for 
the help of others--had gone. the character still held to its fine and 
unselfish habit of years, but the far goal to which they had been the 
leading strings had fade away. the desire for knowledge--knowledge for 
its own sake--had died, and the passionate hope which hitherto had 
animate with tireless energy the heart and brain of this splendid 
equip intellect had suffer total eclipse. the central fire had 
gone out. nothing was worth doing, thinking, working for. there _was_ 
nothing to work for any longer! 

the professor's first step was to recall as many of his books as 
possible; his second to close his laboratory and stop all research. he 
gave no explanation, he invite no questions. his whole personality 
crumble away, so to speak, till his daily life became a mere mechanical 
process of clothing the body, feed the body, keeping it in good 
health so as to avoid physical discomfort, and, above all, do nothing 
that could interfere with sleep. the professor did everything he could 
to lengthen the hour of sleep, and therefore of forgetfulness. 

it was all clear enough to dr. laidlaw. a weak man, he knew, would 
have sought to lose himself in one form or another of sensual 
indulgence--sleeping-draughts, drink, the first pleasure that came to 
hand. self-destruction would have been the method of a little bold 
type; and deliberate evil-doing, poison with his awful knowledge all 
he could, the means of still another kind of man. mark ebor was none of 
these. he held himself under fine control, facing silent and without 
complaint the terrible fact he honestly believe himself to have been 
unfortunate enough to discover. even to his intimate friend and 
assistant, dr. laidlaw, he vouchsafe no word of true explanation or 
lament. he went straight forward to the end, knowing well that the end 
was not very far away. 

and death came very quiet one day to him, as he was sitting in the 
arm-chair of the study, directly facing the door of the laboratory--the 
door that no long opened. dr. laidlaw, by happy chance, was with him 
at the time, and just able to reach his side in response to the sudden 
painful effort for breath; just in time, too, to catch the murmur 
words that fell from the pallid lip like a message from the other side 
of the grave. 

"read them, if you must; and, if you can--destroy. but"--his 
voice sank so low that dr. laidlaw only just caught the die 
syllables--"but--never, never--give them to the world." 

and like a grey bundle of dust loose gather up in an old garment the 
professor sank back into his chair and expired. 

but this was only the death of the body. his spirit had die two years 
before. 




4 


the estate of the dead man was small and uncomplicated, and dr. laidlaw, 
as sole executor and residuary legatee, had no difficulty in settle 
it up. a month after the funeral he was sitting alone in his upstairs 
library, the last sad duty completed, and his mind full of poignant 
memory and regrets for the loss of a friend he had revere and loved, 
and to whom his debt was so incalculable great. the last two years, 
indeed, had been for him terrible. to watch the swift decay of the 
greatest combination of heart and brain he had ever known, and to 
realize he was powerless to help, was a source of profound grief to him 
that would remain to the end of his days. 

at the same time an insatiable curiosity possessed him. the study of 
dementia was, of course, outside his special province as a specialist, 
but he knew enough of it to understand how small a matter might be the 
actual cause of how great an illusion, and he had been devour from the 
very beginning by a ceaseless and increase anxiety to know what the 
professor had found in the sands of "chaldea," what these precious 
tablet of the gods might be, and particularly--for this was the real 
cause that had sap the man's sanity and hope--what the inscription 
was that he had believe to have decipher thereon. 

the curious feature of it all to his own mind was, that whereas his 
friend had dream of finding a message of glorious hope and comfort, he 
had apparently found (so far as he had found anything intelligible at 
all, and not invent the whole thing in his dementia) that the secret 
of the world, and the meaning of life and death, was of so terrible a 
nature that it rob the heart of courage and the soul of hope. what, 
then, could be the contents of the little brown parcel the professor had 
bequeath to him with his pregnant die sentences? 

actually his hand was tremble as he turn to the writing-table and 
began slow to unfasten a small old-fashioned desk on which the small 
gilt initial "m.e." stood forth as a melancholy memento. he put the key 
into the lock and half turn it. then, suddenly, he stop and look 
about him. was that a sound at the back of the room? it was just as 
though someone had laugh and then try to smother the laugh with a 
cough. a slight shiver ran over him as he stood listening. 

"this is absurd," he said aloud; "too absurd for belief--that i should 
be so nervous! it's the effect of curiosity unduly prolonged." he smile 
a little sadly and his eyes wander to the blue summer sky and the 
plane tree sway in the wind below his window. "it's the reaction," 
he continued. "the curiosity of two years to be quench in a single 
moment! the nervous tension, of course, must be considerable." 

he turn back to the brown desk and open it without further delay. 
his hand was firm now, and he took out the paper parcel that lay inside 
without a tremor. it was heavy. a moment later there lay on the table 
before him a couple of weather-worn plaque of grey stone--they look 
like stone, although they felt like metal--on which he saw marking of 
a curious character that might have been the mere tracing of natural 
forces through the ages, or, equally well, the half-obliterated 
hieroglyphics cut upon their surface in past century by the more or 
less untutored hand of a common scribe. 

he lift each stone in turn and examine it carefully. it seem to him 
that a faint glow of heat pass from the substance into his skin, and 
he put them down again suddenly, as with a gesture of uneasiness. 

"a very clever, or a very imaginative man," he said to himself, "who 
could squeeze the secret of life and death from such broken lines as 
those!" 

then he turn to a yellow envelope lie beside them in the desk, with 
the single word on the outside in the writing of the professor--the word 
_translation_. 

"now," he thought, taking it up with a sudden violence to conceal his 
nervousness, "now for the great solution. now to learn the meaning of 
the worlds, and why mankind was made, and why discipline is worth while, 
and sacrifice and pain the true law of advancement." 

there was the shadow of a sneer in his voice, and yet something in him 
shiver at the same time. he held the envelope as though weigh it in 
his hand, his mind ponder many things. then curiosity won the day, 
and he sudden tore it open with the gesture of an actor who tear open 
a letter on the stage, knowing there is no real writing inside at all. 

a page of finely written script in the late scientist's handwriting lay 
before him. he read it through from beginning to end, missing no word, 
utter each syllable distinct under his breath as he read. 

the pallor of his face grew ghastly as he near the end. he began to 
shake all over as with ague. his breath came heavy in gasps. he still 
grip the sheet of paper, however, and deliberately, as by an intense 
effort of will, read it through a second time from beginning to end. and 
this time, as the last syllable drop from his lips, the whole face of 
the man flame with a sudden and terrible anger. his skin became deep, 
deep red, and he clench his teeth. with all the strength of his 
vigorous soul he was struggle to keep control of himself. 

for perhaps five minutes he stood there beside the table without 
stirring a muscle. he might have been carve out of stone. his eyes were 
shut, and only the heave of the chest betray the fact that he was a 
living being. then, with a strange quietness, he lit a match and applied 
it to the sheet of paper he held in his hand. the ashes fell slow 
about him, piece by piece, and he blew them from the window-sill into 
the air, his eyes following them as they float away on the summer wind 
that breathe so warm over the world. 

he turn back slow into the room. although his action and movements 
were absolutely steady and controlled, it was clear that he was on the 
edge of violent action. a hurricane might burst upon the still room any 
moment. his muscle were tense and rigid. then, suddenly, he whitened, 
collapsed, and sank backwards into a chair, like a tumble bundle of 
inert matter. he had fainted. 

in less than half an hour he recover consciousness and sat up. as 
before, he made no sound. not a syllable pass his lips. he rose 
quiet and look about the room. 

then he did a curious thing. 

taking a heavy stick from the rack in the corner he approach the 
mantlepiece, and with a heavy shatter blow he smashed the clock to 
pieces. the glass fell in shiver atoms. 

"cease your lie voice for ever," he said, in a curious still, even 
tone. "there is no such thing as _time_!" 

he took the watch from his pocket, swung it round several times by the 
long gold chain, smashed it into smithereens against the wall with a 
single blow, and then walk into his laboratory next door, and hung its 
broken body on the bone of the skeleton in the corner of the room. 

"let one damn mockery hang upon another," he said smile oddly. 
"delusions, both of you, and cruel as false!" 

he slow move back to the front room. he stop opposite the bookcase 
where stood in a row the "scriptures of the world," choice bound and 
exquisite printed, the late professor's most treasure possession, and 
next to them several books sign "pilgrim." 

one by one he took them from the shelf and hurl them through the open 
window. 

"a devil's dreams! a devil's foolish dreams!" he cried, with a vicious 
laugh. 

presently he stop from sheer exhaustion. he turn his eyes slow to 
the wall opposite, where hung a weird array of eastern sword and 
daggers, scimitar and spears, the collection of many journeys. he 
cross the room and ran his finger along the edge. his mind seem to 
waver. 

"no," he mutter presently; "not that way. there are easy and better 
ways than that." 

he took his hat and pass downstairs into the street. 




5 


it was five o'clock, and the june sun lay hot upon the pavement. he felt 
the metal door-knob burn the palm of his hand. 

"ah, laidlaw, this is well met," cry a voice at his elbow; "i was in 
the act of coming to see you. i've a case that will interest you, and 
besides, i remember that you flavour your tea with orange 
leaves!--and i admit--" 

it was alexis stephen, the great hypnotic doctor. 

"i've had no tea to-day," laidlaw said, in a daze manner, after staring 
for a moment as though the other had struck him in the face. a new idea 
had enter his mind. 

"what's the matter?" ask dr. stephen quickly. "something's wrong with 
you. it's this sudden heat, or overwork. come, man, let's go inside." 

a sudden light broke upon the face of the younger man, the light of a 
heaven-sent inspiration. he look into his friend's face, and told a 
direct lie. 

"odd," he said, "i myself was just coming to see you. i have something 
of great importance to test your confidence with. but in _your_ house, 
please," as stephen urge him towards his own door--"in your house. it's 
only round the corner, and i--i cannot go back there--to my rooms--till 
i have told you. 

"i'm your patient--for the moment," he add stammering as soon as 
they were seat in the privacy of the hypnotist's sanctum, "and i 
want--er--" 

"my dear laidlaw," interrupt the other, in that soothe voice of 
command which had suggest to many a suffering soul that the cure for 
its pain lay in the powers of its own reawakene will, "i am always at 
your service, as you know. you have only to tell me what i can do for 
you, and i will do it." he show every desire to help him out. his 
manner was indescribable tactful and direct. 

dr. laidlaw look up into his face. 

"i surrender my will to you," he said, already calm by the other's 
heal presence, "and i want you to treat me hypnotically--and at once. 
i want you to suggest to me"--his voice became very tense--"that i shall 
forget--forget till i die--everything that has occur to me during the 
last two hours; till i die, mind," he added, with solemn emphasis, "till 
i die." 

he flounder and stammer like a frightened boy. alexis stephen 
look at him fixedly without speaking. 

"and further," laidlaw continued, "i want you to ask me no questions. i 
wish to forget for ever something i have recently discovered--something 
so terrible and yet so obvious that i can hardly understand why it 
is not patent to every mind in the world--for i have had a moment of 
absolute _clear vision_--of merciless clairvoyance. but i want no one 
else in the whole world to know what it is--least of all, old friend, 
yourself." 

he talk in utter confusion, and hardly knew what he was saying. but 
the pain on his face and the anguish in his voice were an instant 
passport to the other's heart. 

"nothing is easier," reply dr. stephen, after a hesitation so slight 
that the other probably did not even notice it. "come into my other room 
where we shall not be disturbed. i can heal you. your memory of the last 
two hour shall be wipe out as though it had never been. you can trust 
me absolutely." 

"i know i can," laidlaw said simply, as he follow him in. 




6 


an hour later they pass back into the front room again. the sun was 
already behind the house opposite, and the shadow began to gather. 

"i went off easily?" laidlaw asked. 

"you were a little obstinate at first. but though you came in like a 
lion, you went out like a lamb. i let you sleep a bit afterwards." 

dr. stephen kept his eyes rather steady upon his friend's face. 

"what were you do by the fire before you came here?" he asked, 
pausing, in a casual tone, as he lit a cigarette and hand the case to 
his patient. 

"i? let me see. oh, i know; i was worry my way through poor old 
ebor's papers and things. i'm his executor, you know. then i got weary 
and came out for a whiff of air." he spoke lightly and with perfect 
naturalness. obviously he was telling the truth. "i prefer specimen to 
papers," he laugh cheerily. 

"i know, i know," said dr. stephen, holding a light match for the 
cigarette. his face wore an expression of content. the experiment had 
been a complete success. the memory of the last two hour was wipe out 
utterly. laidlaw was already chat gaily and easily about a dozen 
other things that interested him. together they went out into the 
street, and at his door dr. stephen left him with a joke and a wry face 
that made his friend laugh heartily. 

"don't dine on the professor's old papers by mistake," he cried, as he 
vanish down the street. 

dr. laidlaw went up to his study at the top of the house. half way down 
he met his housekeeper, mrs. fewings. she was fluster and excited, and 
her face was very red and perspiring. 

"there've been burglar here," she cry excitedly, "or something funny! 
all your things is just any'ow, sir. i found everything all about 
everywhere!" she was very confused. in this orderly and very precise 
establishment it was unusual to find a thing out of place. 

"oh, my specimens!" cry the doctor, dashing up the rest of the stairs 
at top speed. "have they been touched or--" 

he flew to the door of the laboratory. mrs. few pant up heavy 
behind him. 

"the labatry ain't been touched," she explained, breathlessly, "but they 
smashed the libry clock and they've 'ung your gold watch, sir, on the 
skelinton's hands. and the books that weren't no value they flung out er 
the window just like so much rubbish. they must have been wild drunk, 
dr. laidlaw, sir!" 

the young scientist made a hurried examination of the rooms. nothing of 
value was missing. he began to wonder what kind of burglar they were. 
he look up sharp at mrs. few standing in the doorway. for a 
moment he seem to cast about in his mind for something. 

"odd," he said at length. "i only left here an hour ago and everything 
was all right then." 

"was it, sir? yes, sir." she glance sharp at him. her room look out 
upon the courtyard, and she must have seen the books come crashing down, 
and also have heard her master leave the house a few minutes later. 

"and what's this rubbish the brute have left?" he cried, taking up 
two slab of worn gray stone, on the writing-table. "bath brick, or 
something, i do declare." 

he look very sharp again at the confuse and trouble housekeeper. 

"throw them on the dust heap, mrs. fewings, and--and let me know if 
anything is missing in the house, and i will notify the police this 
evening." 

when she left the room he went into the laboratory and took his watch 
off the skeleton's fingers. his face wore a trouble expression, but 
after a moment's thought it clear again. his memory was a complete 
blank. 

"i suppose i left it on the writing-table when i went out to take the 
air," he said. and there was no one present to contradict him. 

he cross to the window and blew careless some ashes of burn paper 
from the sill, and stood watch them as they float away lazy over 
the tops of the trees. 


* * * * * 




_the glamour of the snow_ 

i 


hibbert, always conscious of two worlds, was in this mountain village 
conscious of three. it lay on the slope of the valai alps, and he had 
taken a room in the little post office, where he could be at peace to 
write his book, yet at the same time enjoy the winter sports and find 
companionship in the hotel when he want it. 

the three world that met and mingle here seem to his imaginative 
temperament very obvious, though it is doubtful if another mind less 
intuitive equip would have seen them so well-defined. there was 
the world of tourist english, civilised, quasi-educated, to which he 
belong by birth, at any rate; there was the world of peasant to which 
he felt himself drawn by sympathy--for he love and admire their 
toiling, simple life; and there was this other--which he could only call 
the world of nature. to this last, however, in virtue of a vehement 
poetic imagination, and a tumultuous pagan instinct fed by his very 
blood, he felt that most of him belonged. the other borrow from it, 
as it were, for visits. here, with the soul of nature, hid his central 
life. 

between all three was conflict--potential conflict. on the skating-rink 
each sunday the tourist regard the native as intruders; in the 
church the peasant plainly questioned: "why do you come? we are here 
to worship; you to stare and whisper!" for neither of these two world 
accept the other. and neither did nature accept the tourists, for it 
took advantage of their least mistakes, and indeed, even of the 
peasant-world "accepted" only those who were strong and bold enough to 
invade her savage domain with sufficient skill to protect themselves 
from several form of--death. 

now hibbert was keen aware of this potential conflict and want of 
harmony; he felt outside, yet caught by it--torn in the three directions 
because he was partly of each world, but wholly in only one. there 
grew in him a constant, subtle effort--or, at least, desire--to unify 
them and decide positively to which he should belong and live in. 
the attempt, of course, was largely subconscious. it was the natural 
instinct of a richly imaginative nature seek the point of 
equilibrium, so that the mind could feel at peace and his brain be free 
to do good work. 

among the guest no one especially claim his interest. the men were 
nice but undistinguished--athletic schoolmasters, doctor snatch a 
holiday, good fellow all; the women, equally various--the clever, the 
would-be-fast, the dare-to-be-dull, the women "who understood," and the 
usual pack of jolly dance girl and "flappers." and hibbert, with his 
forty odd years of thick experience behind him, got on well with the 
lot; he understood them all; they belong to definite, predigest 
type that are the same the world over, and that he had met the world 
over long ago. 

but to none of them did he belong. his nature was too "multiple" to 
subscribe to the set of shibboleth of any one class. and, since all 
like him, and felt that somehow he seem outside of them--spectator, 
looker-on--all sought to claim him. 

in a sense, therefore, the three world fought for him: natives, 
tourists, nature.... 

it was thus began the singular conflict for the soul of hibbert. _in_ 
his own soul, however, it took place. neither the peasant nor the 
tourist were conscious that they fought for anything. and nature, they 
say, is merely blind and automatic. 

the assault upon him of the peasant may be left out of account, for it 
is obvious that they stood no chance of success. the tourist world, 
however, made a gallant effort to subdue him to themselves. but the 
evenings in the hotel, when dance was not in order, were--english. the 
provincial imagination was set upon a throne and worship heavy 
through incense of the stupidest convention possible. hibbert use to 
go back early to his room in the post office to work. 

"it is a mistake on my part to have _realised_ that there is any 
conflict at all," he thought, as he crunch home over the snow at 
midnight after one of the dances. "it would have been better to have 
kept outside it all and done my work. better," he added, look back 
down the silent village street to the church tower, "and--safer." 

the adjective slip from his mind before he was aware of it. he 
turn with an involuntary start and look about him. he knew perfectly 
well what it meant--this thought that had thrust its head up from the 
instinctive region. he understood, without being able to express it 
fully, the meaning that betray itself in the choice of the adjective. 
for if he had ignore the existence of this conflict he would at the 
same time, have remain outside the arena. whereas now he had enter 
the lists. now this battle for his soul must have issue. and he knew 
that the spell of nature was greater for him than all other spell in 
the world combined--greater than love, revelry, pleasure, greater even 
than study. he had always been afraid to let himself go. his pagan soul 
dread her terrific powers of witchery even while he worshipped. 

the little village already slept. the world lay smother in snow. the 
chalet roof shone white beneath the moon, and pitch-black shadow 
gather against the wall of the church. his eye rest a moment on the 
square stone tower with its frost cross that pointed to the sky: then 
travelled with a leap of many thousand feet to the enormous mountain 
that brush the brilliant stars. like a forest rose the huge peak 
above the slumber village, measure the night and heavens. they 
beckon him. and something born of the snowy desolation, born of the 
midnight and the silent grandeur, born of the great listen hollow of 
the night, something that lay 'twixt terror and wonder, drop from the 
vast wintry space down into his heart--and call him. very softly, 
unrecorded in any word or thought his brain could compass, it laid its 
spell upon him. finger of snow brush the surface of his heart. the 
power and quiet majesty of the winter's night appall him.... 

fumble a moment with the big unwieldy key, he let himself in and went 
upstairs to bed. two thought went with him--apparently quite ordinary 
and sensible ones: 

"what fool these peasant are to sleep through such a night!" and the 
other: 

"those dance tire me. i'll never go again. my work only suffer in the 
morning." the claim of peasant and tourist upon him seem thus in a 
single instant weakened. 

the clash of battle trouble half his dreams. nature had sent her beauty 
of the night and won the first assault. the others, route and dismayed, 
flee far away. 




ii 


"don't go back to your dreary old post office. we're go to have 
supper in my room--something hot. come and join us. hurry up!" 

there had been an ice carnival, and the last party, tail up the 
snow-slope to the hotel, call him. the china lantern smoke and 
sputter on the wires; the band had long since gone. the cold was 
bitter and the moon came only momentarily between high, driving clouds. 
from the shed where the people change from skate to snow-boots he 
shout something to the effect that he was "following"; but no answer 
came; the moving shadow of those who had call were already merge 
high up against the village darkness. the voice die away. door 
slammed. hibbert found himself alone on the desert rink. 

and it was then, quite suddenly, the impulse came to--stay and skate 
alone. the thought of the stuffy hotel room, and of those noisy people 
with their obvious joke and laughter, oppress him. he felt a longing 
to be alone with the night; to taste her wonder all by himself there 
beneath the stars, gliding over the ice. it was not yet midnight, and he 
could skate for half an hour. that supper party, if they notice his 
absence at all, would merely think he had change his mind and gone to 
bed. 

it was an impulse, yes, and not an unnatural one; yet even at the time 
it struck him that something more than impulse lay conceal behind it. 
more than invitation, yet certainly less than command, there was a vague 
queer feeling that he stay because he had to, almost as though there 
was something he had forgotten, overlooked, left undone. imaginative 
temperament are often thus; and impulse is ever weakness. for with such 
ill-considered opening of the door to hasty action may come an invasion 
of other forces at the same time--forces merely wait their 
opportunity perhaps! 

he caught the fugitive warning even while he dismiss it as absurd, and 
the next minute he was whirl over the smooth ice in delightful curve 
and loop beneath the moon. there was no fear of collision. he could 
take his own speed and space as he willed. the shadow of the towering 
mountain fell across the rink, and a wind of ice came from the forests, 
where the snow lay ten feet deep. the hotel lights wink and went out. 
the village slept. the high wire netting could not keep out the wonder 
of the winter night that grew about him like a presence. he skate on 
and on, keen exhilarating pleasure in his tingle blood, and weary 
all forgotten. 

and then, midway in the delight of rush movement, he saw a figure 
gliding behind the wire netting, watch him. with a start that almost 
made him lose his balance--for the abrupt of the new arrival was so 
unlooked for--he pause and stared. although the light was dim he made 
out that it was the figure of a woman and that she was feeling her way 
along the netting, try to get in. against the white background of the 
snow-field he watch her rather stealthy effort as she pass with a 
silent step over the banked-up snow. she was tall and slim and graceful; 
he could see that even in the dark. and then, of course, he understood. 
it was another adventurous skate like himself, stolen down unawares 
from hotel or chalet, and searching for the opening. at once, making a 
sign and point with one hand, he turn swift and skate over to 
the little entrance on the other side. 

but, even before he got there, there was a sound on the ice behind him 
and, with an exclamation of amaze he could not suppress, he turn 
to see her swerve up to his side across the width of the rink. she had 
somehow found another way in. 

hibbert, as a rule, was punctilious, and in these free-and-easy places, 
perhaps, especially so. if only for his own protection he did not seek 
to make advances unless some kind of introduction paved the way. but for 
these two to skate together in the semi-darkness without speech, often 
of necessity brush shoulder almost, was too absurd to think of. 
accordingly he raise his cap and spoke. his actual words he seem 
unable to recall, nor what the girl said in reply, except that she 
answer him in accent english with some commonplace about do 
figures at midnight on an empty rink. quite natural it was, and right. 
she wore grey clothes of some kind, though not the customary long glove 
or sweater, for indeed her hand were bare, and presently when he skate 
with her, he wonder with something like astonishment at their dry and 
icy coldness. 

and she was delicious to skate with--supple, sure, and light, fast as a 
man yet with the freedom of a child, sinuous and steady at the same 
time. her flexible made him wonder, and when he ask where she had 
learned she murmured--he caught the breath against his ear and recall 
later that it was singularly cold--that she could hardly tell, for she 
had been accustomed to the ice ever since she could remember. 

but her face he never properly saw. a muffler of white fur bury her 
neck to the ears, and her cap came over the eyes. he only saw that she 
was young. nor could he gather her hotel or chalet, for she pointed 
vaguely, when he ask her, up the slopes. "just over there--" she said, 
quick taking his hand again. he did not press her; no doubt she wish 
to hide her escapade. and the touch of her hand thrill him more than 
anything he could remember; even through his thick glove he felt the 
soft of that cold and delicate softness. 

the cloud thicken over the mountains. it grew darker. they talk 
very little, and did not always skate together. often they separated, 
curve about in corner by themselves, but always coming together again 
in the centre of the rink; and when she left him thus hibbert was 
conscious of--yes, of missing her. he found a peculiar satisfaction, 
almost a fascination, in skate by her side. it was quite an 
adventure--these two stranger with the ice and snow and night! 

midnight had long since sound from the old church tower before they 
parted. she gave the sign, and he skate quick to the shed, meaning to 
find a seat and help her take her skate off. yet when he turned--she 
had already gone. he saw her slim figure gliding away across the snow 
... and hurry for the last time round the rink alone he search in 
vain for the opening she had twice use in this curious way. 

"how very queer!" he thought, refer to the wire netting. "she must 
have lift it and wriggle under ...!" 

wonder how in the world she manage it, what in the world had 
possessed him to be so free with her, and who in the world she was, he 
went up the steep slope to the post office and so to bed, her promise to 
come again another night still ring delightful in his ears. and 
curious were the thought and sensation that accompany him. most of 
all, perhaps, was the half suggestion of some dim memory that he had 
known this girl before, had met her somewhere, more--that she knew him. 
for in her voice--a low, soft, windy little voice it was, tender and 
soothe for all its quiet coldness--there lay some faint reminder of 
two other he had known, both long since gone: the voice of the woman he 
had loved, and--the voice of his mother. 

but this time through his dream there ran no clash of battle. he was 
conscious, rather, of something cold and clinging that made him think of 
sift snowflake climb slow with entangle touch and thickness 
round his feet. the snow, coming without noise, each flake so light 
and tiny none can mark the spot whereon it settles, yet the mass of it 
able to smother whole villages, wove through the very texture of his 
mind--cold, bewildering, deaden effort with its clinging network of 
ten million feathery touches. 




iii 


in the morning hibbert realise he had done, perhaps, a foolish thing. 
the brilliant sunshine that drench the valley made him see this, and 
the sight of his work-table with its typewriter, books, papers, and the 
rest, brought additional conviction. to have skate with a girl alone 
at midnight, no matter how innocent the thing had come about, was 
unwise--unfair, especially to her. gossip in these little winter resort 
was worse than in a provincial town. he hope no one had seen them. 
lucky the night had been dark. most likely none had heard the ring of 
skates. 

decide that in future he would be more careful, he plunge into work, 
and sought to dismiss the matter from his mind. 

but in his times of leisure the memory return persistent to haunt 
him. when he "ski-d," "luged," or dance in the evenings, and especially 
when he skate on the little rink, he was aware that the eyes of his 
mind forever sought this strange companion of the night. a hundred times 
he fancy that he saw her, but always sight deceive him. her face he 
might not know, but he could hardly fail to recognise her figure. yet 
nowhere among the other did he catch a glimpse of that slim young 
creature he had skate with alone beneath the cloud stars. he search 
in vain. even his inquiry as to the occupant of the private chalet 
brought no results. he had lost her. but the queer thing was that he 
felt as though she were somewhere close; he _knew_ she had not really 
gone. while people came and left with every day, it never once occur 
to him that she had left. on the contrary, he felt assured that they 
would meet again. 

this thought he never quite acknowledged. perhaps it was the wish that 
father it only. and, even when he did meet her, it was a question how 
he would speak and claim acquaintance, or whether _she_ would recognise 
himself. it might be awkward. he almost came to dread a meeting, though 
"dread," of course, was far too strong a word to describe an emotion 
that was half delight, half wonder anticipation. 

meanwhile the season was in full swing. hibbert felt in perfect health, 
work hard, ski-d, skated, luged, and at night dance fairly often--in 
spite of his decision. this dance was, however, an act of subconscious 
surrender; it really meant he hope to find her among the whirl 
couples. he was searching for her without quite acknowledge it to 
himself; and the hotel-world, meanwhile, thinking it had won him over, 
tease and chaff him. he made excuse in a similar vein; but all the 
time he watch and search and--waited. 

for several days the sky held clear and bright and frosty, bitter 
cold, everything crisp and sparkle in the sun; but there was no sign 
of fresh snow, and the ski-ers began to grumble. on the mountain was an 
icy crust that made "running" dangerous; they want the frozen, dry, 
and powdery snow that make for speed, render steer easy and 
fall less severe. but the keen east wind show no sign of change 
for a whole ten days. then, suddenly, there came a touch of soft air 
and the weather-wise began to prophesy. 

hibbert, who was delicate sensitive to the least change in earth or 
sky, was perhaps the first to feel it. only he did not prophesy. he knew 
through every nerve in his body that moisture had crept into the air, 
was accumulating, and that presently a fall would come. for he respond 
to the mood of nature like a fine barometer. 

and the knowledge, this time, brought into his heart a strange little 
wayward emotion that was hard to account for--a feeling of unexplained 
uneasy and disquiet joy. for behind it, woven through it rather, 
ran a faint exhilarate that connected remotely somewhere with that 
touch of delicious alarm, that tiny anticipate "dread," that so 
puzzle him when he thought of his next meeting with his skate 
companion of the night. it lay beyond all words, all telling, this queer 
relationship between the two; but somehow the girl and snow ran in a 
pair across his mind. 

perhaps for imaginative writing-men, more than for other workers, the 
smallest change of mood betray itself at once. his work at any rate 
reveal this slight shift of emotional value in his soul. not that 
his writing suffered, but that it altered, subtle as those change of 
sky or sea or landscape that come with the passing of afternoon into 
evening--imperceptibly. a subconscious excitement sought to push 
outwards and express itself ... and, knowing the uneven effect such 
mood produce in his work, he laid his pen aside and took instead to 
reading that he had to do. 

meanwhile the brilliance pass from the sunshine, the sky grew slow 
overcast; by dusk the mountain tops came singularly close and sharp; the 
distant valley rose into absurd near perspective. the moisture 
increased, rapid approach saturation point, when it must fall in 
snow. hibbert watch and waited. 

and in the morning the world lay smother beneath its fresh white 
carpet. it snow heavy till noon, thickly, incessantly, chokingly, a 
foot or more; then the sky cleared, the sun came out in splendour, the 
wind shift back to the east, and frost came down upon the mountain 
with its keenest and most biting tooth. the drop in the temperature was 
tremendous, but the ski-ers were jubilant. next day the "running" would 
be fast and perfect. already the mass was settling, and the surface 
freezing into those moss-like, powdery crystal that make the ski run 
almost of their own accord with the faint "sishing" as of a bird's wings 
through the air. 




iv 


that night there was excitement in the little hotel-world, first because 
there was a _bal costume_, but chiefly because the new snow had come. 
and hibbert went--felt drawn to go; he did not go in costume, but he 
want to talk about the slope and ski-ing with the other men, and at 
the same time.... 

ah, there was the truth, the deep necessity that called. for the 
singular connection between the stranger and the snow again betray 
itself, utterly beyond explanation as before, but vital and insistent. 
some hidden instinct in his pagan soul--heaven know how he phrase it 
even to himself, if he phrase it at all--whispered that with the snow 
the girl would be somewhere about, would emerge from her hiding place, 
would even look for him. 

absolutely unwarranted it was. he laugh while he stood before the 
little glass and trim his moustache, try to make his black tie sit 
straight, and shook down his dinner jacket so that it should lie upon 
the shoulder without a crease. his brown eyes were very bright. "i 
look younger than i usually do," he thought. it was unusual, even 
significant, in a man who had no vanity about his appearance and 
certainly never question his age or try to look younger than he was. 
affair of the heart, with one tumultuous exception that left no fuel 
for lesser subsequent fires, had never trouble him. the forces of his 
soul and mind not call upon for "work" and obvious duties, all went to 
nature. the desolate, wild place of the earth were what he loved; 
night, and the beauty of the stars and snow. and this evening he felt 
their claim upon him mightily stirring. a rising wild caught his 
blood, quicken his pulse, woke longing and passion too. but chiefly 
snow. the snow whirr soft through his thought like white, seductive 
dreams.... for the snow had come; and she, it seemed, had somehow come 
with it--into his mind. 

and yet he stood before that twist mirror and pull his tie and coat 
askew a dozen times, as though it mattered. "what in the world is up 
with me?" he thought. then, laugh a little, he turn before leave 
the room to put his private papers in order. the green morocco desk that 
held them he took down from the shelf and laid upon the table. tie to 
the lid was the visiting card with his brother's london address "in case 
of accident." on the way down to the hotel he wonder why he had done 
this, for though imaginative, he was not the kind of man who dealt in 
presentiments. mood with him were strong, but ever held in leash. 

"it's almost like a warning," he thought, smiling. he drew his thick 
coat tight round the throat as the freezing air bit at him. "those 
warning one read of in story sometimes ...!" 

a delicious happiness was in his blood. over the edge of the hill 
across the valley rose the moon. he saw her silver sheet the world of 
snow. snow cover all. it smother sound and distance. it smother 
houses, streets, and human beings. it smothered--life. 




v 


in the hall there was light and bustle; people were already arrive 
from the other hotel and chalets, their costume hidden beneath many 
wraps. group of men in evening dress stood about smoking, talk 
"snow" and "ski-ing." the band was tune up. the claim of the 
hotel-world clash about him faint as of old. at the big glass 
window of the verandah, peasant stop a moment on their way home 
from the _cafe_ to peer. hibbert thought laughing of that conflict he 
use to imagine. he laugh because it sudden seem so unreal. he 
belong so utterly to nature and the mountains, and especially to those 
desolate slope where now the snow lay thick and fresh and sweet, that 
there was no question of a conflict at all. the power of the newly 
fallen snow had caught him, prove it without effort. out there, upon 
those lonely reach of the moonlit ridges, the snow lay ready--masses 
and masses of it--cool, soft, inviting. he long for it. it await 
him. he thought of the intoxicate delight of ski-ing in the 
moonlight.... 

thus, somehow, in vivid flash vision, he thought of it while he stood 
there smoking with the other men and talk all the "shop" of ski-ing. 

and, ever mysterious blend with this power of the snow, pour also 
through his inner being the power of the girl. he could not disabuse his 
mind of the insinuate presence of the two together. he remember that 
queer skating-impulse of ten days ago, the impulse that had let her in. 
that any mind, even an imaginative one, could pass beneath the sway of 
such a fancy was strange enough; and hibbert, while fully aware of the 
disorder, yet found a curious joy in yielding to it. this insubordinate 
centre that drew him towards old pagan belief had assume command. with 
a kind of sensuous pleasure he let himself be conquered. 

and snow that night seem in everybody's thoughts. the dance couple 
talk of it; the hotel proprietor congratulate one another; it meant 
good sport and satisfy their guests; every one was plan trip and 
expeditions, talk of slope and telemarks, of flying speed and 
distance, of drift and crust and frost. vitality and enthusiasm pulse 
in the very air; all were alert and active, positive, radiate current 
of creative life even into the stuffy atmosphere of that crowded 
ball-room. and the snow had cause it, the snow had brought it; all this 
discharge of eager sparkle energy was due primarily to the--snow. 

but in the mind of hibbert, by some swift alchemy of his pagan 
yearnings, this energy became transmuted. it rarefied itself, gleam 
in white and crystal current of passionate anticipation, which he 
transferred, as by a species of electrical imagination, into the 
personality of the girl--the girl of the snow. she somewhere was wait 
for him, expect him, calling to him soft from those league of 
moonlit mountain. he remember the touch of that cool, dry hand; the 
soft and icy breath against his cheek; the hush and soft of her 
presence in the way she came and the way she had gone again--like a 
flurry of snow the wind sent gliding up the slopes. she, like himself, 
belong out there. he fancy that he heard her little windy voice come 
sift to him through the snowy branch of the trees, calling his name 
... that haunting little voice that dive straight to the centre of his 
life as once, long years ago, two other voice use to do.... 

but nowhere among the costume dance did he see her slender figure. he 
dance with one and all, distrait and absent, a stupid partner as each 
girl discovered, his eyes ever turning towards the door and windows, 
hope to catch the lure face, the vision that did not come ... and at 
length, hope even against hope. for the ball-room thinned; group left 
one by one, go home to their hotel and chalets; the band tired 
obviously; people sat drink lemon-squashes at the little tables, the 
men mop their foreheads, everybody ready for bed. 

it was close on midnight. as hibbert pass through the hall to get his 
overcoat and snow-boots, he saw men in the passage by the "sport-room," 
grease their ski against an early start. knapsack luncheon were being 
ordered by the kitchen swing doors. he sighed. lighting a cigarette a 
friend offer him, he return a confuse reply to some question as to 
whether he could join their party in the morning. it seem he did not 
hear it properly. he pass through the outer vestibule between the 
double glass doors, and went into the night. 

the man who ask the question watch him go, an expression of anxiety 
momentarily in his eyes. 

"don't think he heard you," said another, laughing. "you've got to shout 
to hibbert, his mind's so full of his work." 

"he works too hard," suggest the first, "full of queer idea and 
dreams." 

but hibbert's silence was not rudeness. he had not caught the 
invitation, that was all. the call of the hotel-world had faded. he no 
long heard it. another wild call was sound in his ears. 

for up the street he had seen a little figure moving. close against the 
shadow of the baker's shop it glided--white, slim, enticing. 




vi 


and at once into his mind pass the hush and soft of the snow--yet 
with it a searching, crying wild for the heights. he knew by some 
incalculable, swift instinct she would not meet him in the village 
street. it was not there, amid crowd houses, she would speak to him. 
indeed, already she had disappeared, melt from view up the white vista 
of the moonlit road. yonder, he divined, she wait where the highway 
narrow abrupt into the mountain path beyond the chalets. 

it did not even occur to him to hesitate; mad though it seemed, and 
was--this sudden craving for the heights with her, at least for open 
space where the snow lay thick and fresh--it was too imperious to be 
denied. he do not remember go up to his room, putt the sweater 
over his evening clothes, and get into the fur gauntlet glove and 
the helmet cap of wool. most certainly he has no recollection of 
fastening on his ski; he must have done it automatically. some faculty 
of normal observation was in abeyance, as it were. his mind was out 
beyond the village--out with the snowy mountain and the moon. 

henri defago, putt up the shutter over his _cafe_ windows, saw him 
pass, and wonder mildly: "un monsieur qui fait du ski a cette heure! 
il est anglais, done ...!" he shrug his shoulders, as though a man had 
the right to choose his own way of death. and marthe perotti, the 
hunchback wife of the shoemaker, look by chance from her window, 
caught his figure moving swift up the road. she had other thoughts, 
for she knew and believe the old tradition of the witch and 
snow-beings that steal the soul of men. she had even heard, 'twas said, 
the dread "synagogue" pass roaring down the street at night, and now, 
as then, she hid her eyes. "they've call to him ... and he must go," 
she murmured, making the sign of the cross. 

but no one sought to stop him. hibbert recall only a single incident 
until he found himself beyond the houses, searching for her along the 
fringe of forest where the moonlight met the snow in a bewilder 
frieze of fantastic shadows. and the incident was simply this--that he 
remember passing the church. catching the outline of its tower against 
the stars, he was aware of a faint sense of hesitation. a vague 
uneasy came and went--jarred unpleasant across the flow of his 
excited feelings, chill exhilaration. he caught the instant's 
discord, dismiss it, and--passed on. the seduction of the snow 
smother the hint before he realise that it had brush the skirt of 
warning. 

and then he saw her. she stood there wait in a little clear space of 
shining snow, dress all in white, part of the moonlight and the 
glisten background, her slender figure just discernible. 

"i waited, for i knew you would come," the silvery little voice of windy 
beauty float down to him. "you _had_ to come." 

"i'm ready," he answered, "i knew it too." 

the world of nature caught him to its heart in those few words--the 
wonder and the glory of the night and snow. life leap within him. the 
passion of his pagan soul exulted, rose in joy, flow out to her. he 
neither reflect nor considered, but let himself go like the veriest 
schoolboy in the wild of first love. 

"give me your hand," he cried, "i'm coming ...!" 

"a little farther on, a little higher," came her delicious answer. "here 
it is too near the village--and the church." 

and the words seem wholly right and natural; he did not dream of 
questioning them; he understood that, with this little touch of 
civilisation in sight, the familiarity he suggest was impossible. once 
out upon the open mountains, 'mid the freedom of huge slope and 
towering peaks, the stars and moon to witness and the wilderness of snow 
to watch, they could taste an innocence of happy intercourse free from 
the dead convention that imprison literal minds. 

he urge his pace, yet did not quite overtake her. the girl kept always 
just a little bit ahead of his best efforts.... and soon they left the 
tree behind and pass on to the enormous slope of the sea of snow 
that roll in mountainous terror and beauty to the stars. the wonder of 
the white world caught him away. under the steady moonlight it was more 
than haunting. it was a living, white, bewilder power that 
delicious confuse the senses and laid a spell of wild perplexity upon 
the heart. it was a personality that cloaked, and yet revealed, itself 
through all this sheet white of snow. it rose, went with him, flee 
before, and follow after. slow it drop lithe, gleam arms about 
his neck, gathering him in.... 

certainly some soft persuasion coax his very soul, urge him ever 
forwards, upwards, on towards the higher icy slopes. judgment and 
reason left their throne, it seemed, completely, as in the madness of 
intoxication. the girl, slim and seductive, kept always just ahead, so 
that he never quite came up with her. he saw the white enchantment of 
her face and figure, something that stream about her neck flying like 
a wreath of snow in the wind, and heard the allure accent of her 
whisper voice that call from time to time: "a little farther on, a 
little higher.... then we'll run home together!" 

sometimes he saw her hand stretch out to find his own, but each time, 
just as he came up with her, he saw her still in front, the hand and arm 
withdrawn. they took a gentle angle of ascent. the toil seem nothing. 
in this crystal, wine-like air fatigue vanished. the sish of the ski 
through the powdery surface of the snow was the only sound that broke 
the stillness; this, with his breathing and the rustle of her skirts, 
was all he heard. cold moonshine, snow, and silence held the world. the 
sky was black, and the peak beyond cut into it like frost wedge of 
iron and steel. far below the valley slept, the village long since 
hidden out of sight. he felt that he could never tire.... the sound of 
the church clock rose from time to time faint through the air--more 
and more distant. 

"give me your hand. it's time now to turn back." 

"just one more slope," she laughed. "that ridge above us. then we'll 
make for home." and her low voice mingle pleasant with the purr of 
their ski. his own seem harsh and ugly by comparison. 

"but i have never come so high before. it's glorious! this world of 
silent snow and moonlight--and _you_. you're a child of the snow, i 
swear. let me come up--closer--to see your face--and touch your little 
hand." 

her laughter answer him. 

"come on! a little higher. here we're quite alone together." 

"it's magnificent," he cried. "but why did you hide away so long? i've 
look and search for you in vain ever since we skated--" he was go 
to say "ten days ago," but the accurate memory of time had gone from 
him; he was not sure whether it was days or years or minutes. his 
thought of earth were scattered and confused. 

"you look for me in the wrong places," he heard her murmur just above 
him. "you look in place where i never go. hotel and house kill me. 
i avoid them." she laughed--a fine, shrill, windy little laugh. 

"i loathe them too--" 

he stopped. the girl had sudden come quite close. a breath of ice 
pass through his very soul. she had touched him. 

"but this awful cold!" he cry out, sharply, "this freezing cold that 
take me. the wind is rising; it's a wind of ice. come, let us turn ...!" 

but when he plunge forward to hold her, or at least to look, the girl 
was gone again. and something in the way she stood there a few feet 
beyond, and stare down into his eyes so steadfast in silence, made 
him shiver. the moonlight was behind her, but in some odd way he could 
not focus sight upon her face, although so close. the gleam of eyes he 
caught, but all the rest seem white and snowy as though he look 
beyond her--out into space.... 

the sound of the church bell came up faint from the valley far below, 
and he count the strokes--five. a sudden, curious weakness seize him 
as he listened. deep within it was, deadly yet somehow sweet, and hard 
to resist. he felt like sink down upon the snow and lie there.... 
they had been climb for five hours.... it was, of course, the warning 
of complete exhaustion. 

with a great effort he fought and overcame it. it pass away as 
sudden as it came. 

"we'll turn," he said with a decision he hardly felt. "it will be dawn 
before we reach the village again. come at once. it's time for home." 

the sense of exhilarate had utterly left him. an emotion that was akin 
to fear swept cold through him. but her whisper answer turn it 
instantly to terror--a terror that grip him horrible and turn him 
weak and unresisting. 

"our home is--_here_!" a burst of wild, high laughter, loud and shrill, 
accompany the words. it was like a whistle wind. the wind _had_ 
risen, and cloud obscure the moon. "a little higher--where we cannot 
hear the wicked bells," she cried, and for the first time seize him 
deliberate by the hand. she moved, was sudden close against his 
face. again she touched him. 

and hibbert try to turn away in escape, and so trying, found for the 
first time that the power of the snow--that other power which do not 
exhilarate but deaden effort--was upon him. the suffocate weakness 
that it bring to exhaust men, lure them to the sleep of death in 
her clinging soft embrace, lull the will and conquer all desire 
for life--this was awfully upon him. his feet were heavy and entangled. 
he could not turn or move. 

the girl stood in front of him, very near; he felt her chilly breath 
upon his cheeks; her hair pass blinding across his eyes; and that 
icy wind came with her. he saw her white close; again, it seemed, 
his sight pass through her into space as though she had no face. her 
arms were round his neck. she drew him soft downwards to his knees. he 
sank; he yield utterly; he obeyed. her weight was upon him, 
smothering, delicious. the snow was to his waist.... she kiss him 
soft on the lips, the eyes, all over his face. and then she spoke his 
name in that voice of love and wonder, the voice that held the accent of 
two others--both taken over long ago by death--the voice of his mother, 
and of the woman he had loved. 

he made one more feeble effort to resist. then, realise even while he 
struggle that this soft weight about his heart was sweet than 
anything life could ever bring, he let his muscle relax, and sank back 
into the soft oblivion of the covering snow. her wintry kiss bore him 
into sleep. 




vii 


they say that men who know the sleep of exhaustion in the snow find no 
awakening on the hither side of death.... the hour pass and the moon 
sank down below the white world's rim. then, suddenly, there came a 
little crash upon his breast and neck, and hibbert--woke. 

he slow turn bewildered, heavy eyes upon the desolate mountains, 
stare dizzy about him, try to rise. at first his muscle would not 
act; a numbing, ache pain possessed him. he utter a long, thin cry 
for help, and heard its faint swallow by the wind. and then he 
understood vague why he was only warm--not dead. for this very wind 
that took his cry had built up a shelter mound of driven snow against 
his body while he slept. like a curve wave it ran beside him. it was 
the break of its over-toppling edge that cause the crash, and the 
cold of the mass against his neck that woke him. 

dawn kiss the eastern sky; pale gleam of gold shot every peak with 
splendour; but ice was in the air, and the dry and frozen snow blew like 
powder from the surface of the slopes. he saw the points of his ski 
project just below him. then he--remembered. it seem he had just 
strength enough to realise that, could he but rise and stand, he might 
fly with terrific impetus towards the wood and village far beneath. the 
ski would carry him. but if he fail and fell ...! 

how he contrived it hibbert never knew; this fear of death somehow 
call out his whole available reserve force. he rose slowly, balanced a 
moment, then, taking the angle of an immense zigzag, start down the 
awful slope like an arrow from a bow. and automatic the splendid 
muscle of the practised ski-er and athlete save and guide him, for he 
was hardly conscious of control either speed or direction. the snow 
stung face and eyes like fine steel shot; ridge after ridge flew past; 
the summit race across the sky; the valley leap up with bounds to 
meet him. he scarcely felt the ground beneath his feet as the huge 
slope and distance melt before the lightning speed of that descent 
from death to life. 

he took it in four mile-long zigzags, and it was the turning at each 
corner that nearly finished him, for then the strain of balance tax 
to the verge of collapse the remnant of his strength. 

slope that have taken hour to climb can be descended in a short 
half-hour on ski, but hibbert had lost all count of time. quite other 
thought and feelings master him in that wild, swift drop through 
the air that was like the flight of a bird. for ever close upon his 
heel came following form and voice with the whirl snow-dust. he 
heard that little silvery voice of death and laughter at his back. 
shrill and wild, with the whistle of the wind past his ears, he caught 
its pursue tones; but in anger now, no long soft and coaxing. and it 
was accompanied; she did not follow alone. it seem a host of these 
flying figures of the snow chase madly just behind him. he felt them 
furiously smite his neck and cheeks, snatch at his hand and try to 
entangle his feet and ski in drifts. his eyes they blinded, and they 
caught his breath away. 

the terror of the heights and snow and winter desolate urge him 
forward in the maddest race with death a human being ever knew; and so 
terrific was the speed that before the gold and crimson had left the 
summit to touch the ice-lips of the lower glaciers, he saw the friendly 
forest far beneath swing up and welcome him. 

and it was then, moving slow along the edge of the woods, he saw a 
light. a man was carry it. a procession of human figures was passing 
in a dark line laborious through the snow. and--he heard the sound of 
chanting. 

instinctively, without a second's hesitation, he change his course. no 
long flying at an angle as before, he pointed his ski straight down 
the mountain-side. the dreadful steep did not frighten him. he knew 
full well it meant a crashing tumble at the bottom, but he also knew it 
meant a double of his speed--with safety at the end. for, though no 
definite thought pass through his mind, he understood that it was the 
village _cure_ who carry that little gleam lantern in the dawn, and 
that he was taking the host to a chalet on the lower slopes--to some 
peasant _in extremis_. he remember her terror of the church and bells. 
she fear the holy symbols. 

there was one last wild cry in his ear as he started, a shriek of the 
wind before his face, and a rush of sting snow against closed 
eyelids--and then he drop through empty space. speed took sight from 
him. it seem he flew off the surface of the world. 

* * * * * 

indistinct he recall the murmur of men's voices, the touch of strong 
arms that lift him, and the shoot pains as the ski were unfastened 
from the twist ankle ... for when he open his eyes again to normal 
life he found himself lie in his bed at the post office with the 
doctor at his side. but for years to come the story of "mad hibbert's" 
ski-ing at night is recount in that mountain village. he went, it 
seems, up slopes, and to a height that no man in his senses ever try 
before. the tourist were agog about it for the rest of the season, and 
the very same day two of the bold men went over the actual ground and 
photograph the slopes. later hibbert saw these photographs. he notice 
one curious thing about them--though he did not mention it to any one: 

there was only a single track. 



* * * * * 




_sand_ 

i 


as felix henriot came through the street that january night the fog was 
stifling, but when he reach his little flat upon the top floor there 
came a sound of wind. wind was stirring about the world. it blew against 
his windows, but at first so faint that he hardly notice it. then, 
with an abrupt rise and fall like a wail voice that sought to claim 
attention, it call him. he peer through the window into the blur 
darkness, listening. 

there is no cry in the world like that of the homeless wind. a vague 
excitement, scarcely to be analysed, ran through his blood. the curtain 
of fog wave momentarily aside. henriot fancy a star peep down at 
him. 

"it will change things a bit--at last," he sighed, settle back into 
his chair. "it will bring movement!" 

already something in himself had changed. a restlessness, as of that 
wandering wind, woke in his heart--the desire to be off and away. other 
things could rouse this wild too: fall water, the singing of a 
bird, an odour of wood-fire, a glimpse of winding road. but the cry of 
wind, always searching, questioning, travel the world's great 
routes, remain ever the master-touch. high longing took his mood in 
hand. mid seven million he felt suddenly--lonely. 


"i will arise and go now, for always night and day 
i hear lake water lap with low sound by the shore; 
while i stand on the roadway, or on the pavement gray, 
i hear it in the deep heart's core." 


he murmur the words over soft to himself. the emotion that produce 
innisfree pass strong through him. he too would be over the hill 
and far away. he crave movement, change, adventure--somewhere far from 
shop and crowd and motor-'busses. for a week the fog had stifle 
london. this wind brought life. 

where should he go? desire was long; his purse was short. 

he glance at his books, letters, newspapers. they had no interest now. 
instead he listened. the panorama of other journey roll in colour 
through the little room, flying on one another's heels. henriot enjoy 
this remember essence of his travels more than the travels themselves. 
the crying wind brought so many voices, all of them seductive: 

there was a soft crashing of wave upon the black sea shores, where the 
huge caucasu beckon in the sky beyond; a rustling in the umbrella 
pine and cactus at marseilles, whence magic steamer start about the 
world like flying dreams. he heard the plash of fountain upon mount 
ida's slopes, and the whisper of the tamarisk on marathon. it was dawn 
once more upon the ionian sea, and he smelt the perfume of the cyclades. 
blue-veiled island melt in the sunshine, and across the dewy lawn of 
tempe, moisten by the spray of many waterfalls, he saw--great heaven 
above!--the dance of white form ... or was it only mist the sunshine 
paint against pelion?... "methought, among the lawn together, we 
wander underneath the young grey dawn. and multitude of dense white 
fleecy cloud shepherd by the slow, unwill wind...." 

and then, into his stuffy room, slip the singing perfume of a 
wall-flower on a ruin tower, and with it the sweet of hot ivy. he 
heard the "yellow bee in the ivy bloom." wind whip over the open 
hills--this very wind that labour dreary through the london fog. 

and--he was caught. the dark melt from the city. the fog whisk 
off into an azure sky. the roar of traffic turn into boom of the 
sea. there was a whistle among cordage, and the floor sway to and 
fro. he saw a sailor touch his cap and pocket the two-franc piece. the 
syren hooted--ominous sound that had start him on many a journey of 
adventure--and the roar of london became mere insignificant clatter of a 
child's toy carriages. 

he love that syren's call; there was something deep and pitiless in it. 
it drew the wanderer forth from city everywhere: "leave your known 
world behind you, and come with me for better or for worse! the anchor 
is up; it is too late to change. only--beware! you shall know curious 
things--and alone!" 

henriot stir uneasy in his chair. he turn with sudden energy to 
the shelf of guide-books, map and time-tables--possessions he most 
value in the whole room. he was a happy-go-lucky, adventure-loving 
soul, careless of common standards, athirst ever for the new and 
strange. 

"that's the best of have a cheap flat," he laughed, "and no tie in 
the world. i can turn the key and disappear. no one care or knows--no 
one but the thieving caretaker. and he's long ago found out that there's 
nothing here worth taking!" 

there follow then no lengthy indecision. preparation was even short 
still. he was always ready for a move, and his sojourn in city was but 
breathing-space while he gather penny for further wanderings. an 
enormous kit-bag--sack-shaped, very worn and dirty--emerged speedy 
from the bottom of a cupboard in the wall. it was of limitless capacity. 
the key and padlock rattle in its depths. cigarette ashes cover 
everything while he stuff it full of ancient, indescribable garments. 
and his voice, singing of those "yellow bee in the ivy bloom," mingle 
with the crying of the rising wind about his windows. his restless 
had disappear by magic. 

this time, however, there could be no haunt pelion, nor shady grove 
of tempe, for he live in sophisticated times when money market 
regulate movement sternly. travel was only for the rich; mere 
wanderer must pig it. he remember instead an opportune invitation to 
the desert. "objective" invitation, his genial host had call it, 
knowing his hatred of convention. and helouan dance into letters of 
brilliance upon the inner map of his mind. for egypt had ever held his 
spirit in thrall, though as yet he had try in vain to touch the great 
bury soul of her. the excavators, the egyptologists, the 
archaeologist most of all, plastered her grey ancient face with label 
like hotel advertisement on travellers' portmanteaux. they told where 
she had come from last, but nothing of what she dream and thought and 
loved. the heart of egypt lay beneath the sand, and the trifling robbery 
of little detail that poke forth from tomb and temple brought no 
true revelation of her stupendous spiritual splendour. henriot, in his 
youth, had search and dive among what material he could find, 
believe once--or half believing--that the ceremonial of that ancient 
system veiled a weight of symbol that was reflect from genuine 
supersensual knowledge. the rituals, now taken literally, and so 
pitying explain away, had once been genuine pathway of approach. 
but never yet, and least of all in his previous visit to egypt itself, 
had he discover one single person, worthy of speech, who caught at his 
idea. "curious," they said, then turn away--to go on digging in the 
sand. sand smother her world to-day. excavator discover skeletons. 
museum everywhere store them--grinning, literal relics that told 
nothing. 

but now, while he packed and sang, these hope of enthusiast younger 
days stir again--because the emotion that gave them birth was real 
and true in him. through the morning mists upon the nile an old pyramid 
bowed hugely at him across london roofs: "come," he heard its awful 
whisper beneath the ceiling, "i have things to show you, and to tell." 
he saw the flock of them sailing the desert like weird grey solemn ship 
that make no earthly port. and he imagine them as one: multiple 
expression of some single unearthly portent they adumbrate in mighty 
form--dead symbol of some spiritual conception long vanish from the 
world. 

"i mustn't dream like this," he laughed, "or i shall get absent-minded 
and pack fire-tongs instead of boots. it looks like a jumble sale 
already!" and he stood on a heap of things to wedge them down still 
tighter. 

but the pictures would not cease. he saw the kite circle high in the 
blue air. a couple of white vulture flap lazy away over shining 
miles. felucca sails, like giant wings emerge from the ground, curve 
towards him from the nile. the palm-trees drop long shadow over 
memphis. he felt the delicious, drench heat, and the khamasin, that 
over-wind from nubia, brush his very cheeks. in the little garden the 
mish-mish was in bloom.... he smelt the desert ... grey sepulchre of 
cancel cycles.... the still of her interminable reach drop 
down upon old london.... 

the magic of the sand stole round him in its silent-footed tempest. 

and while he struggle with that strange, capacious sack, the piles of 
clothing ran into shape of gleam bedouin faces; london garment 
settled down with the mournful sound of camels' feet, half drop 
wind, half water flowing underground--sound that old time has brought 
over into modern life and left a moment for our wonder and perhaps our 
tears. 

he rose at length with the excitement of some deep enchantment in his 
eyes. the thought of egypt plunge ever so deep into him, carry 
him into depths where he found it difficult to breathe, so strange far 
away it seemed, yet indefinable familiar. he lost his way. a touch of 
fear came with it. 

"a sack like that is the wonder of the world," he laugh again, kick 
the unwieldy, sausage-shaped monster into a corner of the room, and 
sitting down to write the thrill labels: "felix henriot, alexandria 
_via_ marseilles." but his pen blot the letters; there was sand in 
it. he rewrote the words. then he remember a dozen things he had left 
out. impatiently, yet with confusion somewhere, he stuff them in. they 
ran away into shift heaps; they disappeared; they emerge sudden 
again. it was like packing hot, dry, flowing sand. from the pocket of a 
coat--he had worn it last summer down dorset way--out trickle sand. 
there was sand in his mind and thoughts. 

and his dream that night were full of winds, the old sad wind of 
egypt, and of moving, sift sand. arab and afreet dance amazing 
together across dune he could never reach. for he could not follow fast 
enough. something infinite old than these ever caught his feet and 
held him back. a million tiny finger stung and prick him. something 
flung a veil before his eyes. once it touched him--his face and hand 
and neck. "stay here with us," he heard a host of muffle voice crying, 
but their sound was smothered, buried, rising through the ground. a 
myriad throat were choked. till, at last, with a violent effort he 
turn and seize it. and then the thing he grasp at slip between 
his finger and ran easily away. it had a grey and yellow face, and it 
move through all its parts. it flow as water flows, and yet was 
solid. it was century old. 

he cry out to it. "who are you? what is your name? i surely know you 
... but i have forgotten ...?" 

and it stopped, turning from far away its great uncover countenance of 
nameless colouring. he caught a voice. it roll and boom and 
whisper like the wind. and then he woke, with a curious shake in his 
heart, and a little touch of chilly perspiration on the skin. 

but the voice seem in the room still--close beside him: 

"i am the sand," he heard, before it die away. 

* * * * * 

and next he realise that the glitter of paris lay behind him, and a 
steamer was taking him with much unnecessary motion across a sparkle 
sea towards alexandria. gladly he saw the riviera fade below the 
horizon, with its hard bright sunshine, treacherous winds, and its smear 
of rich, conventional english. all restless now had left him. true 
vagabond still at forty, he only felt the unrest and discomfort of life 
when caught in the network of routine and rigid streets, no chance of 
break loose. he was off again at last, money scarce enough indeed, 
but the joy of wandering express itself in happy emotion of release. 
every warning of calculation was stifled. he thought of the america 
woman who walk out of her long island house one summer's day to look 
at a passing sail--and was gone eight years before she walk in again. 
eight years of rove travel! he had always felt respect and admiration 
for that woman. 

for felix henriot, with his admixture of foreign blood, was philosopher 
as well as vagabond, a strong poetic and religious strain sometimes 
break out through fissure in his complex nature. he had seen much 
life; had read many books. the passionate desire of youth to solve the 
world's big riddle had given place to a resignation fill to the brim 
with wonder. anything _might_ be true. nothing surprise him. the most 
outlandish beliefs, for all he knew, might fringe truth somewhere. he 
had escape that cheap cynicism with which disappointed men soothe their 
vanity when they realise that an intelligible explanation of the 
universe lie beyond their powers. he no long expect final answers. 

for him, even the smallest journey held the spice of some adventure; 
all minutes were loaded with entice potentialities. and they shaped 
for themselves somehow a dramatic form. "it's like a story," his friends 
said when he told his travels. it always was a story. 

but the adventure that lay wait for him where the silent street of 
little helouan kiss the great desert's lips, was of a different kind to 
any henriot had yet encountered. look back, he has often ask 
himself, "how in the world can i accept it?" 

and, perhaps, he never yet has accept it. it was sand that brought it. 
for the desert, the stupendous thing that mother little helouan, 
produce it. 




ii 


he slip through cairo with the same relief that he left the riviera, 
resent its social vulgarity so close to the imperial aristocracy of 
the desert; he settled down into the peace of soft and silent little 
helouan. the hotel in which he had a room on the top floor had been 
formerly a khedivial palace. it had the air of a palace still. he felt 
himself in a country-house, with lofty ceilings, cool and airy 
corridors, spacious halls. soft-footed arab attend to his wants; 
white wall let in light and air without a sign of heat; there was a 
feeling of a large, spread tent pitch on the very sand; and the wind 
that stir the oleander in the shady garden also crept in to rustle 
the palm leaves of his favourite corner seat. through the large window 
where once the khedive held high court, the sunshine blaze upon vista 
league of desert. 

and from his bedroom window he watch the sun dip into gold and 
crimson behind the swelling libya sands. this side of the pyramid he 
saw the nile meander among palm grove and till fields. across his 
balcony railing the egypt stars troop down beside his very bed, 
shape old constellation for his dreams; while, to the south, he 
look out upon the vast untamable body of the sands that carpet the 
world for thousand of mile towards upper egypt, nubia, and the dread 
sahara itself. he wonder again why people thought it necessary to go 
so far afield to know the desert. here, within half an hour of cairo, it 
lay breathing solemn at his very doors. 

for little helouan, caught thus between the shoulder of the libya and 
arabia deserts, is utterly sand-haunted. the desert lie all round it 
like a sea. henriot felt he never could escape from it, as he move 
about the island whose coast are wash with sand. down each broad and 
shining street the two end house frame a vista of its dim 
immensity--glimpses of shimmer blue, or flame-touched purple. there 
were stretch of deep sea-green as well, far off upon its bosom. the 
street were open channel of approach, and the eye ran down them as 
along the tube of a telescope laid to catch incredible distance out of 
space. through them the desert reach in with long, thin feeler 
towards the village. its being flood into helouan, and over it. past 
wall and houses, church and hotels, the sea of desert pressed in 
silent with its myriad soft feet of sand. it pour in everywhere, 
through crack and slit and crannie. these were reminder of possession 
and ownership. and every passing wind that lift eddy of dust at the 
street corner were message from the quiet, powerful thing that 
permit helouan to lie and dream so peaceful in the sunshine. mere 
artificial oasis, its existence was temporary, held on lease, just for 
ninety-nine century or so. 

this sea idea became insistent. for, in certain lights, and especially 
in the brief, bewilder dusk, the desert rose--swaying towards the 
small white houses. the wave of it ran for fifty mile without a break. 
it was too deep for foam or surface agitation, yet it knew the swell of 
tides. and underneath flow resolute currents, link distance to the 
centre. these many deserts were really one. a storm, just retreated, had 
toss helouan upon the shore and left it there to dry; but any morning 
he would wake to find it had been carry off again into the depths. 
some fragment, at least, would disappear. the grim mokattam hill were 
roller that ever threaten to topple down and submerge the sandy bar 
that men call helouan. 

being soundless, and devoid of perfume, the desert's message reach him 
through two senses only--sight and touch; chiefly, of course, the 
former. its invasion was concentrated through the eyes. and vision, thus 
uncorrected, went what pace it pleased. the desert play with him. sand 
stole into his being--through the eyes. 

and so obsess was this majesty of its close presence, that henriot 
sometimes wonder how people dare their little social activity 
within its very sight and hearing; how they play golf and tennis upon 
reclaim edge of its face, picnicke so blithe hard upon its 
frontiers, and dance at night while this stern, unfathomable thing lay 
breathing just beyond the trumpery wall that kept it out. the challenge 
of their shallow admiration seem presumptuous, almost provocative. 
their pursuit of pleasure suggest insolent indifference. they ran 
fool-hardy hazards, he felt; for there was no worship in their vulgar 
hearts. with a mental shudder, sometimes he watch the cheap tourist 
horde go laughing, chatter past within view of its ancient, 
half-closed eyes. it was like defy deity. 

for, to his stir imagination the sublime of the desert dwarf 
humanity. these people had been wise to choose another place for the 
flaunt of their tawdry insignificance. any minute this wilderness, 
"huddled in grey annihilation," might awake and notice them ...! 

in his own hotel were several "smart," so-called "society" people who 
emphasise the protest in him to the point of definite contempt. 
overdressed, the latest worldly novel under their arms, they strut 
the narrow pavement of their tiny world, immensely pleased with 
themselves. their vacuous mind express themselves in the slang of 
their exclusive circle--value being the element excluded. the petty 
of their outlook hardly distress him--he was too familiar with it at 
home--but their essential vulgarity, their innate ugliness, seem more 
than usually offensive in the grandeur of its present setting. into the 
mighty sands they took the latest london scandal, gabble it over even 
among the tomb and temples. and "it was to laugh," the pains they spent 
wonder whom they might condescend to know, never dream that they 
themselves were not worth knowing. against the background of the noble 
desert their title seem the cap and bell of clowns. 

and henriot, knowing some of them personally, could not always escape 
their insipid company. yet he was the gainer. they little guess how 
their common heighten contrast, set merciless thus beside the 
strange, eternal beauty of the sand. 

occasional the protest in his soul betray itself in words, which 
of course they did not understand. "he is so clever, isn't he?" 
and then, have relieved his feelings, he would comfort himself 
characteristically: 

"the desert has not notice them. the sand is not aware of their 
existence. how should the sea take note of rubbish that lie above its 
tide-line?" 

for henriot drew near to its great shift altar in an attitude of 
worship. the wilderness made him kneel in heart. its shining reach led 
to the oldest temple in the world, and every journey that he made was 
like a sacrament. for him the desert was a consecrate place. it was 
sacred. 

and his tactful hosts, knowing his peculiarities, left their house open 
to him when he care to come--they live upon the northern edge of the 
oasis--and he was as free as though he were absolutely alone. he blessed 
them; he rejoice that he had come. little helouan accept him. the 
desert knew that he was there. 

* * * * * 

from his corner of the big dining-room he could see the other guests, 
but his rove eye always return to the figure of a solitary man who 
sat at an adjoin table, and whose personality stir his interest. 
while affecting to look elsewhere, he studied him as close as might 
be. there was something about the stranger that touched his 
curiosity--a certain air of expectation that he wore. but it was more 
than that: it was anticipation, apprehension in it somewhere. the man 
was nervous, uneasy. his restless way of sudden look about him 
prove it. henriot try every one else in the room as well; but, though 
his thought settled on other too, he always came back to the figure of 
this solitary being opposite, who ate his dinner as if afraid of being 
seen, and glance up sometimes as if fearful of being watched. henriot's 
curiosity, before he knew it, became suspicion. there was mystery here. 
the table, he noticed, was laid for two. 

"is he an actor, a priest of some strange religion, an enquiry agent, or 
just--a crank?" was the thought that first occur to him. and the 
question suggest itself without amusement. the impression of 
subterfuge and caution he convey left his observer unsatisfied. 

the face was clean shaven, dark, and strong; thick hair, straight yet 
bushy, was slightly unkempt; it was streak with grey; and an 
unexpected mobility when he smile ran over the features that he seem 
to hold rigid by deliberate effort. the man was cut to no quite common 
measure. henriot jump to an intuitive conclusion: "he's not here for 
pleasure or merely sight-seeing. something serious has brought him out 
to egypt." for the face combine too ill-assorted qualities: an 
obstinate tenacity that might even mean brutality, and was certainly 
repulsive, yet, with it, an undecipherable dreamy betray by lines 
of the mouth, but above all in the very light blue eyes, so rarely 
raised. those eyes, he felt, had look upon unusual things; 
"dreaminess" was not an adequate description; "searching" convey it 
better. the true source of the queer impression remain elusive. and 
hence, perhaps, the incongruous marriage in the face--mobility laid upon 
a matter-of-fact foundation underneath. the face show conflict. 

and henriot, watch him, felt decidedly intrigued. "i'd like to know 
that man, and all about him." his name, he learned later, was richard 
vance; from birmingham; a business man. but it was not the birmingham he 
wish to know; it was the--other: cause of the elusive, dreamy 
searching. though facing one another at so short a distance, their eyes, 
however, did not meet. and this, henriot well knew, was a sure sign that 
he himself was also under observation. richard vance, from birmingham, 
was equally taking careful note of felix henriot, from london. 

thus, he could wait his time. they would come together later. an 
opportunity would certainly present itself. the first links in a curious 
chain had already caught; soon the chain would tighten, pull as though 
by chance, and bring their lives into one and the same circle. wonder 
in particular for what kind of a companion the second cover was laid, 
henriot felt certain that their eventual coming together was inevitable. 
he possessed this kind of divination from first impressions, and not 
uncommonly it prove correct. 

following instinct, therefore, he took no steps towards acquaintance, 
and for several days, owe to the fact that he dine frequent with 
his hosts, he saw nothing more of richard vance, the business man from 
birmingham. then, one night, coming home late from his friend's house, 
he had pass along the great corridor, and was actually a step or so 
into his bedroom, when a drawl voice sound close behind him. it was 
an unpleasant sound. it was very near him too-- 

"i beg your pardon, but have you, by any chance, such a thing as a 
compass you could lend me?" 

the voice was so close that he started. vance stood within touching 
distance of his body. he had stolen up like a ghostly arab, must have 
follow him, too, some little distance, for further down the passage 
the light of an open door--he had pass it on his way--showed where he 
came from. 

"eh? i beg your pardon? a--compass, did you say?" he felt disconcert 
for a moment. how short the man was, now that he saw him standing. broad 
and powerful too. henriot look down upon his thick head of hair. the 
personality and voice repel him. possibly his face, caught unawares, 
betray this. 

"forgive my startle you," said the other apologetically, while the 
soft expression dance in for a moment and disorganise the rigid set 
of the face. "the soft carpet, you know. i'm afraid you didn't hear my 
tread. i wondered"--he smile again slightly at the nature of the 
request--"if--by any chance--you had a pocket compass you could lend 
me?" 

"ah, a compass, yes! please don't apologise. i believe i have one--if 
you'll wait a moment. come in, won't you? i'll have a look." 

the other thank him but wait in the passage. henriot, it so 
happened, had a compass, and produce it after a moment's search. 

"i am greatly indebted to you--if i may return it in the morning. you 
will forgive my disturb you at such an hour. my own is broken, and i 
wanted--er--to find the true north." 

henriot stammer some reply, and the man was gone. it was all over in a 
minute. he lock his door and sat down in his chair to think. the 
little incident had upset him, though for the life of him he could not 
imagine why. it ought by rights to have been almost ludicrous, yet 
instead it was the exact reverse--half threatening. why should not a man 
want a compass? but, again, why should he? and at midnight? the voice, 
the eyes, the near presence--what did they bring that set his nerves 
thus ask unusual questions? this strange impression that something 
grave was happening, something unearthly--how was it born exactly? the 
man's proximity came like a shock. it had made him start. he 
brought--thus the idea came unbidden to his mind--something with him 
that galvanise him quite absurdly, as fear does, or delight, or great 
wonder. there was a music in his voice too--a certain--well, he could 
only call it lilt, that remind him of plainsong, intoning, chanting. 
drawl was _not_ the word at all. 

he try to dismiss it as imagination, but it would not be dismissed. 
the disturbance in himself was cause by something not imaginary, but 
real. and then, for the first time, he discover that the man had 
brought a faint, elusive suggestion of perfume with him, an aromatic 
odour, that made him think of priest and churches. the ghost of it 
still linger in the air. ah, here then was the origin of the notion 
that his voice had chanted: it was surely the suggestion of incense. but 
incense, intoning, a compass to find the true north--at midnight in a 
desert hotel! 

a touch of uneasy ran through the curiosity and excitement that he 
felt. 

and he undressed for bed. "confound my old imagination," he thought, 
"what trick it play me! it'll keep me awake!" 

but the questions, once start in his mind, continued. he must find 
explanation of one kind or another before he could lie down and sleep, 
and he found it at length in--the stars. the man was an astronomer of 
sorts; possibly an astrologer into the bargain! why not? the stars were 
wonderful above helouan. was there not an observatory on the mokattam 
hills, too, where tourist could use the telescope on privileged days? 
he had it at last. he even stole out on to his balcony to see if the 
stranger perhaps was look through some wonderful apparatus at the 
heavens. their rooms were on the same side. but the shutter window 
reveal no stoop figure with eyes glue to a telescope. the stars 
blink in their many thousand down upon the silent desert. the night 
held neither sound nor movement. there was a cool breeze blow across 
the nile from the lybian sands. it nipped; and he step back quick 
into the room again. drawing the mosquito curtains careful about the 
bed, he put the light out and turn over to sleep. 

and sleep came quickly, contrary to his expectations, though it was a 
light and surface sleep. that last glimpse of the darken desert lie 
beneath the egypt stars had touched him with some hand of awful power 
that oust the first, lesser excitement. it calm and soothe him in 
one sense, yet in another, a sense he could not understand, it caught 
him in a net of deep, deep feelings whose mesh, while infinite 
delicate, was utterly stupendous. his nerves this deep emotion left 
alone: it reach instead to something infinite in him that mere nerves 
could neither deal with nor interpret. the soul awoke and whisper in 
him while his body slept. 

and the little, foolish dream that ran to and fro across this veil of 
surface sleep brought oddly tangle pictures of things quite tiny and at 
the same time of other that were mighty beyond words. with these two 
counter nightmare played. they interwove. there was the figure of this 
dark-faced man with the compass, measure the sky to find the true 
north, and there were hint of giant presence that hover just outside 
some curious outline that he trace upon the ground, copy in some 
nightmare fashion from the heavens. the excitement cause by his 
visitor's singular request mingle with the profound sensation his 
final look at the stars and desert stirred. the two were somehow 
inter-related. 

some hour later, before this surface sleep pass into genuine slumber, 
henriot woke--with an appalling feeling that the desert had come 
creep into his room and now stare down upon him where he lay in bed. 
the wind was crying audible about the wall outside. a faint, sharp 
tap came against the window panes. 

he sprang instantly out of bed, not yet awake enough to feel actual 
alarm, yet with the nightmare touch still close enough to cause a sort 
of feverish, loose bewilderment. he switch the lights on. a moment 
later he knew the meaning of that curious tapping, for the rising wind 
was fling tiny speck of sand against the glass. the idea that they 
had summon him belonged, of course, to dream. 

he open the window, and step out on to the balcony. the stone was 
very cold under his bare feet. there was a wash of wind all over him. he 
saw the sheet of glimmering, pale desert near and far; and something 
stung his skin below the eyes. 

"the sand," he whispered, "again the sand; always the sand. waking or 
sleeping, the sand is everywhere--nothing but sand, sand, sand...." 

he rub his eyes. it was like talk in his sleep, talk to someone 
who had question him just before he woke. but was he really properly 
awake? it seem next day that he had dream it. something enormous, 
with rustling skirt of sand, had just retreat far into the desert. 
sand went with it--flowing, trailing, smother the world. the wind 
die down. 

and henriot went back to sleep, caught instantly away into 
unconsciousness; covered, blinded, swept over by this spread thing of 
reddish brown with the great, grey face, whose being was colossal yet 
quite tiny, and whose fingers, wings and eyes were countless as the 
stars. 

but all night long it watch and waited, rising to peer above the 
little balcony, and sometimes enter the room and pile up beside his 
very pillow. he dream of sand. 




iii 


for some days henriot saw little of the man who came from birmingham and 
pushed curiosity to a climax by ask for a compass in the middle of 
the night. for one thing, he was a good deal with his friends upon the 
other side of helouan, and for another, he slept several nights in the 
desert. 

he love the gigantic peace the desert gave him. the world was forgotten 
there; and not the world merely, but all memory of it. everything fade 
out. the soul turn inwards upon itself. 

an arab boy and donkey took out sleeping-bag, food and water to the wadi 
hof, a desolate gorge about an hour eastwards. it wind between cliff 
whose summit rise some thousand feet above the sea. it open suddenly, 
cut deep into the sway world of level plateaux and undulate hills. 
it move about too; he never found it in the same place twice--like an 
arm of the desert that shift with the change lights. here he watch 
dawn and sunsets, slept through the mid-day heat, and enjoy the 
unearthly colouring that swept day and night across the huge horizons. 
in solitude the desert soaked down into him. at night the jackal cry 
in the dark round his cautiously-fed camp fire--small, because wood 
had to be carried--and in the day-time kite circle overhead to inspect 
him, and an occasional white vulture flap across the blue. the weird 
desolate of this rocky valley, he thought, was like the scenery of the 
moon. he took no watch with him, and the arrival of the donkey boy an 
hour after sunrise came almost from another planet, bring things of 
time and common life out of some distant gulf where they had lain 
forgotten among lost ages. 

the short hour of twilight brought, too, a bewitch into the silence 
that was a little less than comfortable. full light or dark he could 
manage, but this time of half things made him want to shut his eyes and 
hide. its effect step over imagination. the mind got lost. he could 
not understand it. for the cliff and boulder of discolour limestone 
shone then with an inward glow that signal to the desert with veiled 
lanterns. the misshappen hills, carve by wind and rain into ominous 
outlines, stir and nodded. in the morning light they retired into 
themselves, asleep. but at dusk the tide retreated. they rose from the 
sea, emerge naked, threatening. they ran together and join 
shoulders, the entire army of them. and the glow of their sandy bodies, 
self-luminous, continue even beneath the stars. only the moonlight 
drown it. for the moonrise over the mokattam hill brought a white, 
grand lovely that drench the entire desert. it drew a marvellous 
sweet from the sand. it shone across a world as yet unfinished, 
whereon no life might show itself for age yet to come. he was alone 
then upon an empty star, before the creation of things that breathe and 
moved. 

what impress him, however, more than everything else was the enormous 
vitality that rose out of all this apparent death. there was no hint of 
the melancholy that belong commonly to flatness; the sad of wide, 
monotonous landscape was not here. the endless repetition of sweeping 
vale and plateau brought infinity within measurable comprehension. he 
grasp a definite meaning in the phrase "world without end": the 
desert had no end and no beginning. it gave him a sense of eternal 
peace, the silent peace that star-fields know. instead of subdue the 
soul with bewilderment, it inspired with courage, confidence, hope. 
through this sand which was the wreck of countless geology ages, 
rush life that was terrific and uplifting, too huge to include 
melancholy, too deep to betray itself in movement. here was the 
still of eternity. behind the spread grey masque of apparent death 
lay stores of accumulate life, ready to break forth at any point. in 
the desert he felt himself absolutely royal. 

and this contrast of life, veil itself in death, was a contradiction 
that somehow intoxicated. the desert exhilarate never left him. he was 
never alone. a companionship of million went with him, and he _felt_ 
the desert close, as stars are close to one another, or grain of sand. 

it was the khamasin, the hot wind bring sand, that drove him in--with 
the feeling that these few days and nights had been immeasurable, and 
that he had been away a thousand years. he came back with the magic of 
the desert in his blood, hotel-life tasteless and insipid by comparison. 
to human impression thus he was fresh and vivid sensitive. his being, 
clean and sensitize by pure grandeur, "felt" people--for a time at 
any rate--with an uncommon sharp of receptive judgment. he return 
to a life somehow mean and meagre, resume insignificance with his 
dinner jacket. out with the sand he had been regal; now, like a slave, 
he strut self-conscious and reduced. 

but this imperial standard of the desert stay a little time beside 
him, its purity focus judgment like a lens. the speck of small 
emotion left it clear at first, and as his eye wander vague over 
the people assemble in the dining-room, it was arrest with a vivid 
shock upon two figures at the little table facing him. 

he had forgotten vance, the birmingham man who sought the north at 
midnight with a pocket compass. he now saw him again, with an intuitive 
discernment entire fresh. before memory brought up her cloud 
associations, some brilliance flash a light upon him. "that man," 
henriot thought, "might have come with me. he would have understood and 
love it!" but the thought was really this--a moment's reflection spread 
it, rather: "he belong somewhere to the desert; the desert brought him 
out here." and, again, hidden swift behind it like a movement running 
below water--"what do he want with it? what is the deep motive he 
conceals? for there is a deep motive; and it _is_ concealed." 

but it was the woman seat next him who absorb his attention really, 
even while this thought flash and went its way. the empty chair was 
occupy at last. unlike his first encounter with the man, she look 
straight at him. their eyes met fully. for several seconds there was 
steady mutual inspection, while her penetrating stare, intent without 
being rude, pass searching all over his face. it was disconcerting. 
crumble his bread, he look equally hard at her, unable to turn away, 
determined not to be the first to shift his gaze. and when at length she 
lower her eyes he felt that many things had happened, as in a long 
period of intimate conversation. her mind had judge him through and 
through. question and answer flashed. they were no long strangers. 
for the rest of dinner, though he was careful to avoid direct 
inspection, he was aware that she felt his presence and was secret 
speak with him. she ask question beneath her breath. the answer 
rose with the quicken pulse in his blood. moreover, she explain 
richard vance. it was this woman's power that shone reflect in the 
man. she was the one who knew the big, unusual things. vance merely 
echo the rush of her vital personality. 

this was the first impression that he got--from the most striking, 
curious face he had ever seen in a woman. it remain very near him all 
through the meal: she had move to his table, it seem she sat beside 
him. their mind certainly knew contact from that moment. 

it is never difficult to credit stranger with the quality and 
knowledge that oneself crave for, and no doubt henriot's active fancy 
went busy to work. but, none the less, this thing remain and grew: 
that this woman was aware of the hidden things of egypt he had always 
long to know. there was knowledge and guidance she could impart. her 
soul was searching among ancient things. her face brought the desert 
back into his thoughts. and with it came--the sand. 

here was the flash. the sight of her restore the peace and splendour he 
had left behind him in his desert camps. the rest, of course, was what 
his imagination construct upon this slender basis. only,--not all of 
it was imagination. 

now, henriot knew little enough of women, and had no pose of 
"understanding" them. his experience was of the slightest; the love and 
venerate felt for his own mother had set the entire sex upon the 
heights. his affair with women, if so they may be called, had been 
transient--all but those of early youth, which have never known the 
devastating test of fulfilment, still remain ideal and superb. there 
was unconscious humour in his attitude--from a distance; for he regard 
women with wonder and respect, as puzzle that sweeten but complicated 
life, might even endanger it. he certainly was not a marry man! but 
now, as he felt the presence of this woman so deliberate possess him, 
there came over him two clear, strong messages, each vivid with 
certainty. one was that banal suggestion of familiarity claim by 
lovers and the like--he had often heard of it--"i have known that woman 
before; i have met her age ago somewhere; she is strange familiar to 
me"; and the other, grow out of it almost: "have nothing to do with 
her; she will bring you trouble and confusion; avoid her, and be 
warned";--in fact, a distinct presentiment. 

yet, although henriot dismiss both impression as have no shred of 
evidence to justify them, the original clear judgment, as he studied her 
extraordinary countenance, persist through all denial the 
familiarity, and the presentiment, remained. there also remain this 
other--an enormous imaginative leap!--that she could teach him "egypt." 

he watch her carefully, in a sense fascinated. he could only describe 
the face as black, so dark it was with the dark of great age. 
elderly was the obvious, natural word; but elderly describe the 
features only. the expression of the face wore centuries. nor was it 
merely the coal-black eyes that betray an ancient, age-travelled soul 
behind them. the entire present mysterious convey it. this 
woman's heart knew long-forgotten things--the thought kept beating up 
against him. there were cheek-bones, oddly high, that made him think 
involuntary of the well-advertised pharaoh, ramases; a square, deep 
jaw; and an aquiline nose that gave the final touch of power. for the 
power undeniable was there, and while the general effect had grim in 
it, there was neither harsh nor any forbidding touch about it. there 
was an implacable stern in the set of lip and jaw, and, most 
curious of all, the eyelid over the steady eyes of black were level as 
a ruler. this level frame made the woman's stare remarkable beyond 
description. henriot thought of an idol carve in stone, stone hard and 
black, with eyes that stare across the sand into a world of things 
non-human, very far away, forgotten of men. the face was finely ugly. 
this strange dark beauty flash flame about it. 

and, as the way ever was with him, henriot next fell to construct the 
possible lives of herself and her companion, though without much 
success. imagination soon stop dead. she was not old enough to be 
vance's mother, and assured she was not his wife. his interest was 
more than merely piqued--it was puzzle uncommonly. what was the 
contrast that made the man seem beside her--vile? whence came, too, the 
impression that she exercise some strong authority, though never 
directly exercised, that held him at her mercy? how did he guess that 
the man resent it, yet did not dare oppose, and that, apparently 
acquiesce good-humouredly, his will was deliberate held in abeyance, 
and that he wait sulkily, bide his time? there was furtive in 
every gesture and expression. a hidden motive lurk in him; 
unworthy somewhere; he was determined yet ashamed. he watch her 
ceaseless and with such uncanny closeness. 

henriot imagine he divine all this. he leap to the guess that his 
expenses were being paid. a good deal more was being paid besides. she 
was a rich relation, from whom he had expectations; he was serving his 
seven years, ashamed of his servitude, ever calculating escape--but, 
perhaps, no ordinary escape. a faint shudder ran over him. he drew in 
the reins of imagination. 

of course, the probability were that he was hopeless astray--one 
usually is on such occasions--but this time, it so happened, he was 
singularly right. before one thing only his ready invention stop 
every time. this vileness, this notion of unworthy in vance, could 
not be negative merely. a man with that face was no inactive weakling. 
the motive he was at such pains to conceal, betray its existence by 
that very fact, moved, surely, towards aggressive action. disguised, it 
never slept. vance was sharp on the alert. he had a plan deep out of 
sight. and henriot remember how the man's soft approach along the 
carpet corridor had made him start. he recall the quasi shock it 
gave him. he thought again of the feeling of discomfort he had 
experienced. 

next, his eager fancy sought to plumb the business these two had 
together in egypt--in the desert. for the desert, he felt convinced, had 
brought them out. but here, though he construct numerous explanations, 
another barrier stop him. because he _knew_. this woman was in touch 
with that aspect of ancient egypt he himself had ever sought in vain; 
and not merely with stone the sand had bury so deep, but with the 
meaning they once represented, bury so utterly by the sands of later 
thought. 

and here, being ignorant, he found no clue that could lead to any 
satisfactory result, for he possessed no knowledge that might guide him. 
he floundered--until fate help him. and the instant fate help him, 
the warning and presentiment he had dismiss as fanciful, became real 
again. he hesitated. caution acted. he would think twice before taking 
steps to form acquaintance. "better not," thought whispered. "better 
leave them alone, this queer couple. they're after things that won't do 
you any good." this idea of mischief, almost of danger, in their 
purpose was oddly insistent; for what could possibly convey it? but, 
while he hesitated, fate, who sent the warning, pushed him at the same 
time into the circle of their lives: at first tentatively--he might 
still have escaped; but soon urgently--curiosity led him inexorable 
towards the end. 




iv 


it was so simple a manoeuvre by which fate began the innocent game. the 
woman left a couple of books behind her on the table one night, and 
henriot, after a moment's hesitation, took them out after her. he knew 
the titles--_the house of the master_, and _the house of the hidden 
places_, both singular interpretation of the pyramid that once had 
held his own mind spellbound. their idea had been since disproved, if 
he remember rightly, yet the title were a clue--a clue to that 
imaginative part of his mind that was so busy construct theory and 
had found its stride. loose sheet of paper, cover with note in a 
minute handwriting, lay between the pages; but these, of course, he did 
not read, notice only that they were written round designs of various 
kinds--intricate designs. 

he discover vance in a corner of the smoking-lounge. the woman had 
disappeared. 

vance thank him politely. "my aunt is so forgetful sometimes," he 
said, and took them with a covert eager that did not escape the 
other's observation. he fold up the sheet and put them careful in 
his pocket. on one there was an ink-sketched map, cram with detail, 
that might well have refer to some portion of the desert. the points 
of the compass stood out bold at the bottom. there were involved 
geometric designs again. henriot saw them. they exchanged, then, the 
commonplace of conversation, but these led to nothing further. vance 
was nervous and betray impatience. he presently excuse himself and 
left the lounge. ten minutes later he pass through the outer hall, the 
woman beside him, and the pair of them, wrap up in cloak and ulster, 
went out into the night. at the door, vance turn and threw a quick, 
investigate glance in his direction. there seem a hint of 
questioning in that glance; it might almost have been a tentative 
invitation. but, also, he want to see if their exit had been 
particularly noticed--and by whom. 

this, brief told, was the first manoeuvre by which fate introduce 
them. there was nothing in it. the detail were so insignificant, so 
slight the conversation, so meagre the pieces thus add to henriot's 
imaginative structure. yet they somehow built it up and made it solid; 
the outline in his mind began to stand foursquare. that writing, those 
designs, the manner of the man, their go out together, the final 
curious look--each and all betray points of a hidden thing. 
subconscious he was excavate their bury purposes. the sand was 
shifting. the concentration of his mind incessant upon them remove it 
grain by grain and speck by speck. tip of the smother thing emerged. 
presently a subsidence would follow with a rush and light would blaze 
upon its skeleton. he felt it stirring underneath his feet--this flowing 
movement of light, dry, heaped-up sand. it was always--sand. 

then other incident of a similar kind came about, clearing the way to a 
natural acquaintanceship. henriot watch the process with amusement, 
yet with another feeling too that was only a little less than anxiety. a 
keen observer, no detail escape him; he saw the forces of their lives 
draw closer. it made him think of the device of young people who desire 
to know one another, yet cannot get a proper introduction. fate 
condescend to such little tricks. they want a third person, he began 
to feel. a third was necessary to some plan they had on hand, and--they 
wait to see if he could fill the place. this woman, with whom he had 
yet exchange no single word, seem so familiar to him, well known for 
years. they weigh and watch him, wonder if he would do. 

none of the device were too obviously used, but at length henriot 
picked up so many forgotten articles, and heard so many significant 
phrases, casual let fall, that he began to feel like the villain in a 
machine-made play, where the hero for ever drops clue his enemy is 
intended to discover. 

introduction follow inevitably. "my aunt can tell you; she know 
arabic perfectly." he had been discuss the meaning of some local name 
or other with a neighbour after dinner, and vance had join them. the 
neighbour move away; these two were left standing alone, and he 
accept a cigarette from the other's case. there was a rustle of skirt 
behind them. "here she comes," said vance; "you will let me introduce 
you." he did not ask for henriot's name; he had already taken the 
trouble to find it out--another little betrayal, and another clue. 

it was in a secluded corner of the great hall, and henriot turn to see 
the woman's stately figure coming towards them across the thick carpet 
that deaden her footsteps. she came sailing up, her black eyes fixed 
upon his face. very erect, head upright, shoulder almost squared, she 
move wonderful well; there was dignity and power in her walk. she was 
dress in black, and her face was like the night. he found it 
impossible to say what lent her this air of impressive and solemnity 
that was almost majestic. but there _was_ this touch of dark and of 
power in the way she came that made him think of some sphinx-like figure 
of stone, some idol motionless in all its parts but moving as a whole, 
and gliding across--sand. beneath those level lid her eyes stare hard 
at him. and a faint sensation of distress stir in him deep, deep 
down. where had he seen those eyes before? 

he bowed, as she join them, and vance led the way to the armchair in 
a corner of the lounge. the meeting, as the talk that followed, he felt, 
were all part of a preconceived plan. it had happen before. the woman, 
that is, was familiar to him--to some part of his being that had drop 
stitch of old, old memory. 

lady statham! at first the name had disappointed him. so many folk wear 
titles, as syllable in certain tongue wear accents--without them being 
mute, unnoticed, unpronounced. nonentities, born to names, so often 
claim attention for their insignificance in this way. but this woman, 
had she been jemima jones, would have made the name distinguished and 
select. she was a big and sombre personality. why was it, he wonder 
afterwards, that for a moment something in him shrank, and that his 
mind, metaphorical speaking, flung up an arm in self-protection? the 
instinct flash and passed. but it seem to him born of an automatic 
feeling that he must protect--not himself, but the woman from the man. 
there was confusion in it all; links were missing. he studied her 
intently. she was a woman who had none of the external feminine signal 
in either dress or manner, no graces, no little womanly hesitation and 
alarms, no daintiness, yet neither anything distinct masculine. her 
charm was strong, possessing; only he kept forget that he was 
talk to a--woman; and the thing she inspired in him included, with 
respect and wonder, somewhere also this curious hint of dread. this 
instinct to protect her flee as soon as it was born, for the interest of 
the conversation in which she so quick plunge him obliterate all 
minor emotion whatsoever. here, for the first time, he drew close to 
egypt, the egypt he had sought so long. it was not to be explained. he 
_felt_ it. 

beginning with commonplaces, such as "you like egypt? you find here what 
you expected?" she led him into better regions with "one find here what 
one brings." he knew the delightful experience of talk fluent on 
subject he was at home in, and to some one who understood. the feeling 
at first that to this woman he could not say mere anythings, slip 
into its opposite--that he could say everything. stranger ten minutes 
ago, they were at once in deep and intimate talk together. he found his 
idea readily followed, agree with up to a point--the point which 
permit discussion to start from a basis of general accord towards 
speculation. in the excitement of idea he neglect the uncomfortable 
note that had stir his caution, forgot the warning too. her mind, 
moreover, seem known to him; he was often aware of what she was go 
to say before he actually heard it; the current of her thought struck a 
familiar gait, and more than once he experienced vivid again the odd 
sensation that it all had happen before. the very sentence and 
phrase with which she pointed the turn of her unusual idea were never 
wholly unexpected. 

for her idea were decidedly unusual, in the sense that she accept 
without question speculation not commonly deem worth consideration at 
all, indeed not ordinarily even known. henriot knew them, because he had 
read in many fields. it was the strength of her belief that fascinate 
him. she offer no apologies. she knew. and while he talked, she 
listen with fold arms and her black eyes fixed upon his own, 
richard vance watch with vigilant eyes and listen too, ceaseless 
alert. vance join in little enough, however, gave no opinions, his 
attitude one of general acquiescence. twice, when pause of slacken 
interest made it possible, henriot fancy he surprise another quality 
in this negative attitude. interpret it each time differently, he yet 
dismiss both interpretation with a smile. his imagination leap so 
absurd to violent conclusions. they were not tenable: vance was 
neither her keeper, nor was he in some fashion a detective. yet in his 
manner was sometimes this suggestion of the detective order. he watch 
with such deep attention, and he conceal it so clumsy with an 
affectation of careless indifference. 

there is nothing more dangerous than that impulsive intimacy stranger 
sometimes adopt when an atmosphere of mutual sympathy take them by 
surprise, for it is akin to the false frank friends affect when 
telling "candidly" one another's faults. the mood is invariable 
regret later. henriot, however, yield to it now with something like 
abandon. the pleasure of talk with this woman was so unexpected, and 
so keen. 

for lady statham believe apparently in some egypt of her dreams. her 
interest was neither historical, archaeological, nor political. it was 
religious--yet hardly of this earth at all. the conversation turn upon 
the knowledge of the ancient egypt from an unearthly point of view, 
and even while he talk he was vague aware that it was _her_ mind 
talk through his own. she drew out his idea and made him say them. 
but this he was properly aware of only afterwards--that she had 
cleverly, merciless pump him of all he had ever known or read upon 
the subject. moreover, what vance watch so intent was himself, and 
the reaction in himself this remarkable woman produced. that also he 
realise later. 

his first impression that these two belong to what may be call the 
"crank" order was justified by the conversation. but, at least, it was 
interesting crankiness, and the belief behind it made it even 
fascinating. long before the end he surprise in her a more vital form 
of his own attitude that anything _may_ be true, since knowledge has 
never yet found final answer to any of the biggest questions. 

he understood, from sentence drop early in the talk, that she was 
among those few "superstitious" folk who think that the old egypt 
came close to reading the eternal riddle of the world than any 
others, and that their knowledge was a remnant of that ancient wisdom 
religion which exist in the superb, dark civilization of the sunken 
atlantis, lost continent that once join africa to mexico. eighty 
thousand years ago the dim sands of poseidonis, great island adjoin 
the main continent which itself had vanish a vast period before, sank 
down beneath the waves, and the entire known world to-day was descended 
from its survivors. 

hence the significant fact that all religion and "mythological" system 
begin with a story of a flood--some cataclysm upheaval that destroy 
the world. egypt itself was colonise by a group of atlantean priest 
who brought their curious, deep knowledge with them. they had foreseen 
the cataclysm. 

lady statham talk well, bring into her great dream this strong, 
insistent quality of belief and fact. she knew, from plato to donelly, 
all that the mind of men have ever speculate upon the gorgeous legend. 
the evidence for such a sunken continent--henriot had skim it too in 
years gone by--she made bewildering complete. he had heard baconian 
demolish shakespeare with an array of evidence equally overwhelming. it 
catch the imagination though not the mind. yet out of her facts, as 
she present them, grew a strange likelihood. the force of this woman's 
personality, and her calm and quiet way of believe all she talk 
about, took her listener to some extent--further than ever before, 
certainly--into the great dream after her. and the dream, to say the 
least, was a picturesque one, laden with wonderful possibilities. for as 
she talk the spirit of old egypt move up, staring down upon him out 
of eyes lid so curious level. hitherto all had prate to him of the 
arabs, their ancient faith and customs, and the splendour of the 
bedouins, those prince of the desert. but what he sought, barely 
confessed in words even to himself, was something old far than this. 
and this strange, dark woman brought it close. deep in his soul, long 
slumbering, awoke. he heard forgotten questions. 

only in this brief way could he attempt to sum up the storm she rouse 
in him. 

she carry him far beyond mere outline, however, though afterwards he 
recall the detail with difficulty. so much more was suggest than 
actually expressed. she contrived to make the general modern scepticism 
an evidence of cheap mentality. it was so easy; the depth it affect to 
conceal, mere emptiness. "we have try all things, and found all 
wanting"--the mind, as measure instrument, merely confessed 
inadequate. various shrewd judgment of this kind increase his respect, 
although her acceptance went so far beyond his own. and, while the label 
of credulous refuse to stick to her, her sense of imaginative wonder 
enable her to escape that dreadful compromise, a man's mind in a 
woman's temperament. she fascinate him. 

the spiritual worship of the ancient egyptians, she held, was a 
symbolic explanation of things generally allude to as the secret of 
life and death; their knowledge was a remnant of the wisdom of atlantis. 
material relics, equally misunderstood, still stood to-day at karnac, 
stonehenge, and in the mysterious writings on bury mexico temple and 
cities, so significant akin to the hieroglyphics upon the egypt 
tombs. 

"the one misinterpret as literally as the other," she suggested, "yet 
both fragment of an advanced knowledge that found its grave in the sea. 
the wisdom of that old spiritual system has vanish from the world, 
only a degrade literal left of its undecipherable language. the 
jewel has been lost, and the casket is fill with sand, sand, sand." 

how keen her black eyes search his own as she said it, and how oddly 
she made the little word resound. the syllable drew out almost into 
chanting. echo answer from the depths within him, carry it on and 
on across some desert of forgotten belief. veil of sand flew everywhere 
about his mind. curtains lifted. whole hill of sand went shift into 
level surface whence garden of dim outline emerge to meet the 
sunlight. 

"but the sand may be removed." it was her nephew, speak almost for 
the first time, and the interrupt had an odd effect, introduce a 
sharp practical element. for the tone expressed, so far as he dare 
express it, disapproval. it was a bait observation, an invitation to 
opinion. 

"we are not sand-diggers, mr. henriot," put in lady statham, before he 
decided to respond. "our object is quite another one; and i believe--i 
have a feeling," she add almost questioningly, "that you might be 
interested enough to help us perhaps." 

he only wonder the direct attack had not come sooner. its blunt 
hardly surprise him. he felt himself leap forward to accept it. a 
sudden subsidence had free his feet. 

then the warning operate suddenly--for an instant. henriot _was_ 
interested; more, he was half seduced; but, as yet, he did not mean to 
be included in their purposes, whatever these might be. that shrink 
dread came back a moment, and was gone again before he could question 
it. his eyes look full at lady statham. "what is it that you know?" 
they ask her. "tell me the things we once knew together, you and i. 
these words are merely trifling. and why do another man now stand in 
my place? for the sands heap upon my memory are shifting, and it is 
_you_ who are moving them away." 

his soul whisper it; his voice said quite another thing, although the 
words he use seem oddly chosen: 

"there is much in the idea of ancient egypt that has attract me ever 
since i can remember, though i have never caught up with anything 
definite enough to follow. there was majesty somewhere in their 
conceptions--a large, calm majesty of spiritual dominion, one might call 
it perhaps. i _am_ interested." 

her face remain expressionless as she listened, but there was grave 
conviction in the eyes that held him like a spell. he saw through them 
into dim, faint pictures whose background was always sand. he forgot 
that he was speak with a woman, a woman who half an hour ago had been 
a stranger to him. he follow these fade mental pictures, though he 
never caught them up.... it was like his dream in london. 

lady statham was talking--he had not notice the means by which she 
effect the abrupt transition--of familiar belief of old egypt; of the 
ka, or double, by whose existence the survival of the soul was possible, 
even its return into manifested, physical life; of the astrology, or 
influence of the heavenly body upon all sublunar activities; of 
terrific form of other life, known to the ancient worship of atlantis, 
great potency that might be invoke by ritual and ceremonial, and of 
their lesser influence as recognise in certain lower forms, hence 
treat with venerate as the "sacred animal" branch of this dim 
religion. and she spoke lightly of the modern learning which so glib 
imagine it was the animal themselves that were look upon as 
"gods"--the bull, the bird, the crocodile, the cat. "it's there they all 
go so absurd wrong," she said, "taking the symbol for the power 
symbolised. yet natural enough. the mind to-day wear blinkers, study 
only the detail seen directly before it. had none of us experienced 
love, we should think the first lover mad. few to-day know the powers 
_they_ knew, hence deny them. if the world were deaf it would stand with 
mockery before a hearing group sway by an orchestra, pity both 
listener and performers. it would deem our admiration of a great 
swinging bell mere foolish worship of form and movement. similarly, with 
high powers that once express themselves in common forms--where best 
they could--being themselves bodiless. the learned men classify the 
form with painstaking detail. but deity has gone out of life. the 
powers symbolise are no long experienced." 

"these powers, you suggest, then--their kas, as it were--may still--" 

but she wave aside the interruption. "they are satisfied, as the common 
people were, with a degrade literalism," she went on. "nut was the 
heavens, who spread herself across the earth in the form of a woman; 
shu, the vastness of space; the ibis typify thoth, and hath was the 
patron of the western hills; khonsu, the moon, was personified, as was 
the deity of the nile. but the high priest of ra, the sun, you notice, 
remain ever the great one of visions." 

the high priest, the great one of visions!--how wonderful again she 
made the sentence sing. she put splendour into it. the pictures shift 
sudden close in his mind. he saw the grandeur of memphis and 
heliopoli rise against the stars and shake the sand of age from their 
stern old temples. 

"you think it possible, then, to get into touch with these high powers 
you speak of, powers once manifest in common forms?" 

henriot ask the question with a degree of conviction and solemnity 
that surprise himself. the scenery change about him as he listened. 
the spacious hall of this former khedivial palace melt into desert 
spaces. he smelt the open wilderness, the sand that haunt helouan. the 
soft-footed arab servant move across the hall in their white sheet 
like eddy of dust the wind stir from the libya dunes. and over 
these two stranger close beside him stole a queer, indefinite 
alteration. mood and emotions, nameless as unknown stars, rose through 
his soul, trail dark mists of memory from unfathomable distances. 

lady statham answer him indirectly. he found himself wish that 
those steady eyes would sometimes close. 

"love is known only by feeling it," she said, her voice deepen a 
little. "behind the form you feel the person loved. the process is an 
evocation, pure and simple. an arduous ceremonial, involve worship and 
devotional preparation, is the means. it is a difficult ritual--the 
only one acknowledge by the world as still effectual. ritual is the 
passage way of the soul into the infinite." 

he might have said the words himself. the thought lay in him while she 
utter it. evocation everywhere in life was as true as assimilation. 
nevertheless, he stare his companion full in the eyes with a touch of 
almost rude amazement. but no further question prompt themselves; or, 
rather, he decline to ask them. he recalled, somehow uneasily, that in 
ceremonial the points of the compass have significance, standing for 
forces and activity that sleep there until invoked, and a passing 
light fell upon that curious midnight request in the corridor upstairs. 
these two were on the track of undesirable experiments, he thought.... 
they wish to include him too. 

"you go at night sometimes into the desert?" he heard himself saying. it 
was impulsive and miscalculated. his feeling that it would be wise to 
change the conversation result in give it fresh impetus instead. 

"we saw you there--in the wadi hof," put in vance, sudden break his 
long silence; "you too sleep out, then? it means, you know, the valley 
of fear." 

"we wondered--" it was lady statham's voice, and she lean forward 
eager as she said it, then abrupt left the sentence incomplete. 
henriot started; a sense of momentary acute discomfort again ran over 
him. the same second she continued, though obviously change the 
phrase--"we wonder how you spent your day there, during the heat. but 
you paint, don't you? you draw, i mean?" 

the commonplace question, he realise in every fibre of his being, meant 
something _they_ deem significant. was it his talent for drawing that 
they sought to use him for? even as he answer with a simple 
affirmative, he had a flash of intuition that might be fanciful, yet 
that might be true: that this extraordinary pair were intent upon some 
ceremony of evocation that should summon into actual physical expression 
some power--some type of life--known long ago to ancient worship, and 
that they even sought to fix its bodily outline with the pencil--his 
pencil. 

a gateway of incredible adventure open at his feet. he balanced on the 
edge of knowing unutterable things. here was a clue that might lead him 
towards the hidden egypt he had ever crave to know. an awful hand was 
beckoning. the sands were shifting. he saw the million eyes of the 
desert watch him from beneath the level lid of centuries. speck by 
speck, and grain by grain, the sand that smother memory lift the 
countless wrapping that embalm it. 

and he was willing, yet afraid. why in the world did he hesitate and 
shrink? why was it that the presence of this silent, watch 
personality in the chair beside him kept caution still alive, with 
warning close behind? the pictures in his mind were gorgeous coloured. 
it was richard vance who somehow streak them through with black. a 
thing of darkness, born of this man's unassertive presence, flit ever 
across the scenery, mar its grandeur with something evil, petty, 
dreadful. he held a horrible thought alive. his mind was thinking venal 
purposes. 

in henriot himself imagination had grown curious heated, fed by what 
had been suggest rather than actually said. idea of immensity crowded 
his brain, yet never assume definite shape. they were familiar, even as 
this strange woman was familiar. once, long ago, he had known them well; 
had even practised them beneath these bright egypt stars. whence came 
this prodigious glad excitement in his heart, this sense of mighty 
powers coax down to influence the very detail of daily life? behind 
them, for all their vagueness, lay an archetype splendour, fraught with 
forgotten meanings. he had always been aware of it in this mysterious 
land, but it had ever hitherto elude him. it hover everywhere. he had 
felt it brood behind the towering colossi at thebes, in the skeleton 
of waste temples, in the uncouth comely of the sphinx, and in the 
crude terror of the pyramid even. over the whole of egypt hung its 
invisible wings. these were but isolated fragment of the body that 
might express it. and the desert remain its cleanest, truest symbol. 
sand knew it closest. sand might even give it bodily form and outline. 

but, while it escape description in his mind, as equally it elude 
visualise in his soul, he felt that it combine with its vastness 
something infinite small as well. of such wee particle is the giant 
desert born.... 

henriot start nervous in his chair, convict once more of 
unconscionable staring; and at the same moment a group of hotel people, 
return from a dance, pass through the hall and nod him 
good-night. the scent of the women reach him; and with it the sound of 
their voice discuss personalities just left behind. a london 
atmosphere came with them. he caught trivial phrases, utter in a 
drawl tone, and follow by the shrill laughter of a girl. they 
pass upstairs, discuss their little things, like marionette upon a 
tiny stage. 

but their passage brought him back to things of modern life, and to some 
standard of familiar measurement. the pictures that his soul had gaze 
at so deep within, he realised, were a pictorial transfer caught 
incomplete from this woman's vivid mind. he had seen the desert as the 
grey, enormous tomb where hover still the ka of ancient egypt. sand 
screen her visage with the veil of centuries. but she was there, and 
she was living. egypt herself had pitch a temporary camp in him, and 
then move on. 

there was a momentary break, a sense of abrupt and dislocation. and 
then he became aware that lady statham had been speak for some time 
before he caught her actual words, and that a certain change had come 
into her voice as also into her manner. 




v 


she was leaning close to him, her face sudden glowing and alive. 
through the stone figure course the fire of a passion that deepen 
the coal-black eyes and communicate a hint of light--of exaltation--to 
her whole person. it was incredible moving. to this deep passion was due 
the power he had felt. it was her entire life; she live for it, she 
would die for it. her calm of manner enhance its effect. hence the 
strength of those first impression that had storm him. the woman had 
belief; however wild and strange, it was sacred to her. the secret of 
her influence was--conviction. 

his attitude shift several points then. the wonder in him pass over 
into awe. the things she knew were real. they were not merely 
imaginative speculations. 

"i knew i was not wrong in thinking you in sympathy with this line of 
thought," she was saying in lower voice, steady with earnestness, and as 
though she had read his mind. "you, too, know, though perhaps you hardly 
realise that you know. it lie so deep in you that you only get vague 
feelings of it--intimations of memory. isn't that the case?" 

henriot gave assent with his eyes; it was the truth. 

"what we know instinctively," she continued, "is simply what we are 
try to remember. knowledge is memory." she pause a moment watch 
his face closely. "at least, you are free from that cheap scepticism 
which label these old belief as superstition." it was not even a 
question. 

"i--worship real belief--of any kind," he stammered, for her words and 
the close proximity of her atmosphere cause a strange upheaval in his 
heart that he could not account for. he falter in his speech. "it is 
the most vital quality in life--rarer than deity." he was use her own 
phrase even. "it is creative. it construct the world anew--" 

"and may reconstruct the old." 

she said it, lift her face above him a little, so that her eyes 
look down into his own. it grew big and somehow masculine. it was the 
face of a priest, spiritual power in it. where, oh where in the echo 
past had he known this woman's soul? he saw her in another setting, a 
forest of column dim about her, towering above giant aisles. again he 
felt the desert had come close. into this tent-like hall of the hotel 
came the sift of tiny sand. it heap soft about the very furniture 
against his feet, block the exit of door and window. it shroud the 
little present. the wind that brought it stir a veil that had hung 
for age motionless.... 

she had been saying many things that he had miss while his mind went 
searching. "there were type of life the atlantean system knew it might 
revive--life unmanifested to-day in any bodily form," was the sentence 
he caught with his return to the actual present. 

"a type of life?" he whispered, look about him, as though to see who 
it was had join them; "you mean a--soul? some kind of soul, alien to 
humanity, or to--to any form of living thing in the world to-day?" what 
she had been saying reach him somehow, it seemed, though he had not 
heard the words themselves. still hesitating, he was yet so eager to 
hear. already he felt she meant to include him in her purposes, and that 
in the end he must go willingly. so strong was her persuasion on his 
mind. 

and he felt as if he knew vague what was coming. before she answer 
his curious question--prompting it indeed--rose in his mind that strange 
idea of the group-soul: the theory that big soul cannot express 
themselves in a single individual, but need an entire group for their 
full manifestation. 

he listen intently. the reflection that this sudden intimacy was 
unnatural, he rejected, for many conversation were really gather 
into one. long watch and preparation on both side had clear the 
way for the ripen of acquaintance into confidence--how long he dim 
wondered? but if this conception of the group-soul was not new, the 
suggestion lady statham develop out of it was both new and 
startling--and yet always so curious familiar. its value for him lay, 
not in far-fetched evidence that support it, but in the deep belief 
which made it a vital asset in an honest inner life. 

"an individual," she said quietly, "one soul express completely in a 
single person, i mean, is exceedingly rare. not often is a physical 
instrument found perfect enough to provide it with adequate expression. 
in the lower range of humanity--certainly in animal and insect 
life--one soul is share by many. behind a tribe of savage stand one 
savage. a flock of bird is a single bird, scattered through the 
consciousness of all. they wheel in mid-air, they migrate, they obey the 
deep intelligence call instinct--all as one. the life of any one lion 
is the life of all--the lion group-soul that manifest itself in the 
entire genus. an ant-heap is a single ant; through the bee spread the 
consciousness of a single bee." 

henriot knew what she was working up to. in his eager to hasten 
disclosure he interrupted-- 

"and there may be type of life that have no corresponding bodily 
expression at all, then?" he ask as though the question were forced 
out of him. "they exist as powers--unmanifested on the earth to-day?" 

"powers," she answered, watch him close with unswerving stare, 
"that need a group to provide their body--their physical expression--if 
they came back." 

"came back!" he repeated below his breath. 

but she heard him. "they once had expression. egypt, atlantis knew 
them--spiritual powers that never visit the world to-day." 

"bodies," he whisper softly, "actual bodies?" 

"their sphere of action, you see, would be their body. and it might be 
physical outline. so potent a descent of spiritual life would select 
material for its body where it could find them. our conventional notion 
of a body--what is it? a single outline moving altogether in one 
direction. for little human souls, or fragments, this is sufficient. but 
for vast type of soul an entire host would be required." 

"a church?" he ventured. "some body of belief, you surely mean?" 

she bowed her head a moment in assent. she was determined he should 
seize her meaning fully. 

"a wave of spiritual awakening--a descent of spiritual life upon a 
nation," she answer slowly, "forms itself a church, and the body of 
true believer are its sphere of action. they are literally its bodily 
expression. each individual believer is a corpuscle in that body. the 
power has provided itself with a vehicle of manifestation. otherwise we 
could not know it. and the more real the belief of each individual, the 
more perfect the expression of the spiritual life behind them all. a 
group-soul walk the earth. moreover, a nation naturally devout could 
attract a type of soul unknown to a nation that deny all faith. faith 
bring back the gods.... but to-day belief is dead, and deity has left 
the world." 

she talk on and on, develop this main idea that in days of old 
faith there were deify type of life upon the earth, evoke by worship 
and beneficial to humanity. they had long ago withdrawn because the 
worship which brought them down had die the death. the world had grown 
pettier. these vast centre of spiritual power found no "body" in which 
they now could express themselves or manifest.... her thought and 
phrase pour over him like sand. it was always sand he felt--burying 
the present and uncover the past.... 

he try to steady his mind upon familiar objects, but wherever he 
look sand stare him in the face. outside these trivial wall the 
desert lay listening. it lay wait too. vance himself had drop out 
of recognition. he belong to the world of things to-day. but this 
woman and himself stood thousand of years away, beneath the column of 
a temple in the sands. and the sands were moving. his feet went shift 
with them ... running down vista of ageless memory that woke terror by 
their sheer immensity of distance.... 

like a muffle voice that call to him through many veil and 
wrappings, he heard her describe the stupendous powers that evocation 
might coax down again among the world of men. 

"to what useful end?" he ask at length, amaze at his own temerity, 
and because he knew instinctive the answer in advance. it rose through 
these layer of coil memory in his soul. 

"the extension of spiritual knowledge and the widen of life," she 
answered. "the link with the 'unearthly kingdom' wherein this ancient 
system went forever searching, would be re-established. complete 
rehabilitate might follow. portions--little portion of these 
powers--expressed themselves naturally once in certain animal types, 
instinctive life that did not deny or reject them. the worship of sacred 
animal was the relic of a once gigantic system of evocation--not of 
monsters," and she smile sadly, "but of powers that were willing and 
ready to descend when worship summon them." 

again, beneath his breath, henriot heard himself murmur--his own voice 
startle him as he whisper it: "actual bodily shape and outline?" 

"material for body is everywhere," she answered, equally low; "dust to 
which we all return; sand, if you prefer it, fine, fine sand. life 
mould it easily enough, when that life is potent." 

a certain confusion spread slow through his mind as he heard her. he 
lit a cigarette and smoke some minutes in silence. lady statham and her 
nephew wait for him to speak. at length, after some inner battle and 
hesitation, he put the question that he knew they wait for. it was 
impossible to resist any longer. 

"it would be interesting to know the method," he said, "and to revive, 
perhaps, by experiment--" 

before he could complete his thought, she took him up: 

"there are some who claim to know it," she said gravely--her eyes a 
moment masterful. "a clue, thus followed, might lead to the entire 
reconstruction i spoke of." 

"and the method?" he repeated faintly. 

"evoke the power by ceremonial evocation--the ritual is obtainable--and 
note the form it assumes. then establish it. this shape or outline once 
secured, could then be made permanent--a mould for its return at 
will--its natural physical expression here on earth." 

"idol!" he exclaimed. 

"image," she reply at once. "life, before we can know it, must have a 
body. our souls, in order to manifest here, need a material vehicle." 

"and--to obtain this form or outline?" he began; "to fix it, rather?" 

"would be require the clever pencil of a fearless looker-on--some one 
not engaged in the actual evocation. this form, accurate made 
permanent in solid matter, say in stone, would provide a channel always 
open. experiment, properly speaking, might then begin. the cistern of 
power behind would be accessible." 

"an amazing proposition!" henriot exclaimed. what surprise him was that 
he felt no desire to laugh, and little even to doubt. 

"yet known to every religion that ever deserve the name," put in vance 
like a voice from a distance. black came somehow with his 
interruption--a touch of darkness. he spoke eagerly. 

to all the talk that followed, and there was much of it, henriot 
listen with but half an ear. this one idea storm through him with an 
uproar that kill attention. judgment was held utterly in abeyance. he 
carry away from it some vague suggestion that this woman had hint at 
previous lives she half remembered, and that every year she came to 
egypt, haunting the sands and temple in the effort to recover lost 
clues. and he recall afterwards that she said, "this all came to me as 
a child, just as though it was something half remembered." there was the 
further suggestion that he himself was not unknown to her; that they, 
too, had met before. but this, compare to the grave certainty of the 
rest, was merest fantasy that did not hold his attention. he answered, 
hardly knowing what he said. his preoccupation with other thought deep 
down was so intense, that he was probably barely polite, utter empty 
phrases, with his mind elsewhere. his one desire was to escape and be 
alone, and it was with genuine relief that he presently excuse himself 
and went upstairs to bed. the halls, he noticed, were empty; an arab 
servant wait to put the lights out. he walk up, for the lift had 
long cease running. 

and the magic of old egypt stalk beside him. the study that had 
fascinate his mind in early youth return with the power that had 
subdued his mind in boyhood. the cult of osiri woke in his blood again; 
horu and nephthy stir in their long-forgotten centres. there 
revive in him, too long buried, the awful glamour of those liturgal 
rite and vast body of observances, those spell and formulae of 
incantation of the oldest known recension that years ago had capture 
his imagination and belief--the book of the dead. trumpet voice call 
to his heart again across the desert of some dim past. there were form 
of life--impulses from the creative power which is the universe--other 
than the soul of man. they could be known. a spiritual exaltation, 
rouse by the words and presence of this singular woman, shout to him 
as he went. 

then, as he closed his bedroom door, careful lock it, there stood 
beside him--vance. the forgotten figure of vance came up close--the 
watch eyes, the simulated interest, the feign belief, the detective 
mental attitude, these broke through the grandiose panorama, bring 
darkness. vance, strong personality that hid behind assume nonentity 
for some purpose of his own, intrude with sudden violence, demanding an 
explanation of his presence. 

and, with an equal suddenness, explanation offer itself then and 
there. it came unsought, its horror of certainty utterly unjustified; 
and it came in this unexpected fashion: 

behind the interest and acquiesce of the man ran--fear: but behind 
the vivid fear ran another thing that henriot now perceive was vile. 
for the first time in his life, henriot knew it at close quarters, 
actual, ready to operate. though familiar enough in daily life to be of 
common occurrence, henriot had never realise it as he did now, so close 
and terrible. in the same way he had never _realised_ that he would 
die--vanish from the busy world of men and women, forgotten as though he 
had never existed, an eddy of wind-blown dust. and in the man name 
richard vance this thing was close upon blossom. henriot could not name 
it to himself. even in thought it appall him. 

* * * * * 

he undressed hurriedly, almost with the child's idea of finding safety 
between the sheets. his mind undressed itself as well. the business of 
the day laid itself automatic aside; the will sank down; desire grew 
inactive. henriot was exhausted. but, in that stage towards slumber when 
thinking stops, and only fugitive pictures pass across the mind in 
shadowy dance, his brain cease shouting its mechanical explanations, 
and his soul unveil a peer eye. great limb of memory, smother by 
the activity of the present, stir their stiffen length through 
the sands of long ago--sands this woman had begun to excavate from some 
far-off pre-existence they had surely known together. vague and 
certainty ran hand in hand. detail were unrecoverable, but the emotion 
in which they were embed moved. 

he turn restless in his bed, strive to seize the amazing clue and 
follow them. but deliberate effort hid them instantly again; they 
retired instantly into the subconsciousness. with the brain of this body 
he now occupy they had nothing to do. the brain store memory of 
each life only. this ancient script was graven in his soul. 
subconscious alone could interpret and reveal. and it was his 
subconscious memory that lady statham had been so busy excavating. 

dim it stir and move about the depths within him, never clearly 
seen, indefinite, felt as a yearning after unrecoverable knowledge. 
against the dark background of vance's fear and sinister purpose--both 
of this present life, and recent--he saw the grandeur of this woman's 
impossible dream, and _knew_, beyond argument or reason, that it was 
true. judgment and will asleep, he left the impossible aside, and 
took the grandeur. the belief of lady statham was not credulous and 
superstition; it was memory. still to this day, over the sands of egypt, 
hover immense spiritual potencies, so vast that they could only know 
physical expression in a group--in many. their sphere of bodily 
manifestation must be a host, each individual unit in that host a 
corpuscle in the whole. 

the wind, rising from the lybian waste across the nile, swept up 
against the expose side of the hotel, and made his window rattle--the 
old, sad wind of egypt. henriot got out of bed to fasten the outside 
shutters. he stood a moment and watch the moon floating down behind 
the sakkara pyramids. the pleiade and orion's belt hung brilliantly; 
the great bear was close to the horizon. in the sky above the desert 
swung ten thousand stars. no sound rose from the street of helouan. 
the tide of sand was coming slow in. 

and a flock of enormous thought swoop past him from field of this 
unbelievable, lost memory. the desert, pale in the moon, was coextensive 
with the night, too huge for comfort or understanding, yet charged to 
the brim with infinite peace. behind its majesty of silence lay whisper 
of a vanish language that once could call with power upon mighty 
spiritual agencies. its skirt were fold now, but, slow across the 
league of sand, they began to stir and rearrange themselves. he grew 
sudden aware of this envelop shroud of sand--as the raw material of 
bodily expression: form. 

the sand was in his imagination and his mind. shake loose the fold 
of its gigantic skirts, it rose; it move a little towards him. he saw 
the eternal countenance of the desert watch him--immobile and 
unchang behind these shift veil the wind laid so careful over 
it. egypt, the ancient egypt, turn in her vast sarcophagus of desert, 
waken from her sleep of age at the belief of approach 
worshippers. 

only in this insignificant manner could he express a letter of the 
terrific language that crowded to seek expression through his soul.... 
he closed the shutter and careful fasten them. he turn to go back 
to bed, curious trembling. then, as he did so, the whole singular 
delusion caught him with a shock that held him motionless. up rose the 
stupendous apparition of the entire desert and stood behind him on that 
balcony. swift as thought, in silence, the desert stood on end against 
his very face. it tower across the sky, hiding ore and the moon; it 
dip below the horizons. the whole grey sheet of it rose up before his 
eyes and stood. through its unfold skirt ran ten thousand eddy of 
swirl sand as the crease of its grave-clothes smooth themselves 
out in moonlight. and a bleak, scar countenance, huge as a planet, 
gaze down into his own.... 

through his dreamless sleep that night two things lay active and awake 
... in the subconscious part that know no slumber. they were 
incongruous. one was evil, small and human; the other unearthly and 
sublime. for the memory of the fear that haunt vance, and the sinister 
cause of it, prick at him all night long. but behind, beyond this 
common, intelligible emotion, lay the crowd wonder that caught his 
soul with glory: 

the sand was stirring, the desert was awake. ready to mate with them in 
material form, brood close the ka of that colossal entity that once 
express itself through the myriad life of ancient egypt. 




vi 


next day, and for several days following, henriot kept out of the path 
of lady statham and her nephew. the acquaintanceship had grown too 
rapid to be quite comfortable. it was easy to pretend that he took 
people at their face value, but it was a pose; one like to know 
something of antecedents. it was otherwise difficult to "place" them. 
and henriot, for the life of him, could not "place" these two. his 
subconscious brought explanation when it came--but the 
subconscious is only temporary active. when it retired he 
flounder without a rudder, in confusion. 

with the flood of morning sunshine the value of much she had said 
evaporated. her presence alone had supply the key to the cipher. but 
while the indigestible portion he rejected, there remain a good deal 
he had already assimilated. the discomfort remained; and with it the 
grave, unholy reality of it all. it was something more than theory. 
result would follow--if he join them. he would witness curious 
things. 

the force with which it drew him brought hesitation. it operate in him 
like a shock that numb at first by its abrupt arrival, and needs time 
to realise in the right proportions to the rest of life. these right 
proportions, however, did not come readily, and his emotion range 
between sceptical laughter and complete acceptance. the one detail he 
felt certain of was this dreadful thing he had divine in vance. try 
hard to disbelieve it, he found he could not. it was true. though 
without a shred of real evidence to support it, the horror of it 
remained. he knew it in his very bones. 

and this, perhaps, was what drove him to seek the comfort 
companionship of folk he understood and felt at home with. he told his 
host and hostess about the strangers, though omit the actual 
conversation because they would merely smile in blank miscomprehension. 
but the moment he describe the strong black eyes beneath the level 
eyelids, his hostess turn with a start, her interest deep roused: 
"why, it's that awful statham woman," she exclaimed, "that must be lady 
statham, and the man she call her nephew." 

"sounds like it, certainly," her husband added. "felix, you'd better 
clear out. they'll bewitch you too." 

and henriot bridled, yet wonder why he did so. he drew into his shell 
a little, give the merest sketch of what had happened. but he listen 
close while these two practical old friends supply him with 
information in the gossip way that human nature loves. no doubt there 
was much embroidery, and more perversion, exaggeration too, but the 
account evidently rest upon some basis of solid foundation for all 
that. smoke and fire go together always. 

"he _is_ her nephew right enough," mansfield correct his wife, before 
proceeding to his own man's form of elaboration; "no question about 
that, i believe. he's her favourite nephew, and she's as rich as a pig. 
he follow her out here every year, wait for her empty shoes. but 
they _are_ an unsavoury couple. i've met 'em in various parts, all over 
egypt, but they always come back to helouan in the end. and the story 
about them are simply legion. you remember--" he turn hesitating to 
his wife--"some people, i heard," he change his sentence, "were made 
quite ill by her." 

"i'm sure felix ought to know, yes," his wife bold took him up, "my 
niece, fanny, had the most extraordinary experience." she turn to 
henriot. "her room was next to lady statham in some hotel or other at 
assouan or edfu, and one night she woke and heard a kind of mysterious 
chant or intone next her. hotel door are so dreadfully thin. there 
was a funny smell too, like incense of something sickly, and a man's 
voice kept chime in. it went on for hours, while she lay terrify in 
bed--" 

"frightened, you say?" ask henriot. 

"out of her skin, yes; she said it was so uncanny--made her feel icy. 
she want to ring the bell, but was afraid to leave her bed. the room 
was full of--of things, yet she could see nothing. she _felt_ them, you 
see. and after a bit the sound of this sing-song voice so got on her 
nerves, it half daze her--a kind of enchantment--she felt choke and 
suffocated. and then--" it was her turn to hesitate. 

"tell it all," her husband said, quite grave too. 

"well--something came in. at least, she describe it oddly, rather; she 
said it made the door bulge inwards from the next room, but not the door 
alone; the wall bulge or sway as if a huge thing pressed against 
them from the other side. and at the same moment her windows--she had 
two big balconies, and the venetian shutter were fastened--both her 
window _darkened_--though it was two in the morning and pitch dark 
outside. she said it was all _one_ thing--trying to get in; just as 
water, you see, would rush in through every hole and opening it could 
find, and all at once. and in spite of her terror--that's the odd part 
of it--she say she felt a kind of splendour in her--a sort of elation." 

"she saw nothing?" 

"she say she doesn't remember. her senses left her, i believe--though 
she won't admit it." 

"fainted for a minute, probably," said mansfield. 

"so there it is," his wife concluded, after a silence. "and that's true. 
it happen to my niece, didn't it, john?" 

story and legendary account of strange things that the presence of 
these two brought pour out then. they were obviously somewhat mixed, 
one account borrowing picturesque detail from another, and all in 
disproportion, as when people tell story in a language they are 
little familiar with. but, listen with avidity, yet also with 
uneasiness, somehow, henriot put two and two together. truth stood 
behind them somewhere. these two held traffic with the powers that 
ancient egypt knew. 

"tell felix, dear, about the time you met the nephew--horrid 
creature--in the valley of the kings," he heard his wife say presently. 
and mansfield told it plainly enough, evidently glad to get it done, 
though. 

"it was some years ago now, and i didn't know who he was then, or 
anything about him. i don't know much more now--except that he's a 
dangerous sort of charlatan-devil, _i_ think. but i came across him one 
night up there by thebe in the valley of the kings--you know, where 
they bury all their johnny with so much magnificence and procession 
and masses, and all the rest. it's the most astounding, the most haunt 
place you ever saw, gloomy, silent, full of gorgeous lights and shadow 
that seem alive--terribly impressive; it make you creep and shudder. 
you feel old egypt watch you." 

"get on, dear," said his wife. 

"well, i was coming home late on a blasted lazy donkey, dog-tired into 
the bargain, when my donkey boy sudden ran for his life and left me 
alone. it was after sunset. the sand was red and shining, and the big 
cliff sort of fiery. and my donkey stuck its four feet in the ground 
and wouldn't budge. then, about fifty yard away, i saw a 
fellow--european apparently--doing something--heaven know what, for i 
can't describe it--among the boulder that lie all over the ground 
there. ceremony, i suppose you'd call it. i was so interested that at 
first i watched. then i saw he wasn't alone. there were a lot of moving 
things round him, towering big things, that came and went like shadows. 
that twilight is fearful bewildering; perspective changes, and 
distance get all confused. it's fearful hard to see properly. i only 
remember that i got off my donkey and went up closer, and when i was 
within a dozen yard of him--well, it sound such rot, you know, but i 
swear the things sudden rush off and left him there alone. they went 
with a roaring noise like wind; shadowy but tremendous big, they were, 
and they vanish up against the fiery precipice as though they slip 
bang into the stone itself. the only thing i can think of to describe 
'em is--well, those sand-storms the khamasin raises--the hot winds, you 
know." 

"they probably _were_ sand," his wife suggested, burning to tell 
another story of her own. 

"possibly, only there wasn't a breath of wind, and it was hot as 
blazes--and--i had such extraordinary sensations--never felt anything 
like it before--wild and exhilarated--drunk, i tell you, drunk." 

"you saw them?" ask henriot. "you made out their shape at all, or 
outline?" 

"sphinx," he reply at once, "for all the world like sphinxes. you know 
the kind of face and head these limestone strata in the desert 
take--great visage with square egypt head-dresses where the driven 
sand has eaten away the soft stuff beneath? you see it 
everywhere--enormous idol they seem, with face and eyes and lip 
awfully like the sphinx--well, that's the nearest i can get to it." he 
puffed his pipe hard. but there was no sign of levity in him. he told 
the actual truth as far as in him lay, yet half ashamed of what he told. 
and a good deal he left out, too. 

"she's got a face of the same sort, that statham horror," his wife said 
with a shiver. "reduce the size, and paint in awful black eyes, and 
you've got her exactly--a living idol." and all three laughed, yet a 
laughter without merriment in it. 

"and you spoke to the man?" 

"i did," the englishman answered, "though i confess i'm a bit ashamed of 
the way i spoke. fact is, i was excited, thundering excited, and felt 
a kind of anger. i want to kick the beggar for practise such bally 
rubbish, and in such a place too. yet all the time--well, well, i 
believe it was sheer funk now," he laughed; "for i felt uncommonly queer 
out there in the dusk, alone with--with that kind of business; and i was 
angry with myself for feeling it. anyhow, i went up--i'd lost my donkey 
boy as well, remember--and slate him like a dog. i can't remember what 
i said exactly--only that he stood and stare at me in silence. that 
made it worse--seemed twice as real then. the beggar said no single word 
the whole time. he sign to me with one hand to clear out. and then, 
sudden out of nothing--she--that woman--appeared and stood beside him. 
i never saw her come. she must have been behind some boulder or other, 
for she simply rose out of the ground. she stood there and stare at me 
too--bang in the face. she was turn towards the sunset--what was left 
of it in the west--and her black eyes shone like--ugh! i can't describe 
it--it was shocking." 

"she spoke?" 

"she said five words--and her voice--it'll make you laugh--it was 
metallic like a gong: 'you are in danger here.' that's all she said. i 
simply turn and clear out as fast as ever i could. but i had to go 
on foot. my donkey had follow its boy long before. i tell you--smile 
as you may--my blood was all curdle for an hour afterwards." 

then he explain that he felt some kind of explanation or apology was 
due, since the couple lodge in his own hotel, and how he approach the 
man in the smoking-room after dinner. a conversation resulted--the man 
was quite intelligent after all--of which only one sentence had remain 
in his mind. 

"perhaps you can explain it, felix. i wrote it down, as well as i could 
remember. the rest confuse me beyond words or memory; though i must 
confess it did not seem--well, not utter rot exactly. it was about 
astrology and ritual and the worship of the old egyptians, and i don't 
know what else besides. only, he made it intelligible and almost 
sensible, if only i could have got the hang of the thing enough to 
remember it. you know," he added, as though believe in spite of 
himself, "there _is_ a lot of that wonderful old egypt religious 
business still hanging about in the atmosphere of this place, say what 
you like." 

"but this sentence?" henriot asked. and the other went off to get a 
note-book where he had written it down. 

"he was jawing, you see," he continue when he came back, henriot and 
his wife have kept silence meanwhile, "about direction being of 
importance in religious ceremonies, west and north symbolise certain 
powers, or something of the kind, why people turn to the east and all 
that sort of thing, and speak of the whole universe as if it had 
living forces tuck away in it that express themselves somehow when 
rouse up. that's how i remember it anyhow. and then he said this 
thing--in answer to some fool question probably that i put." and he read 
out of the note-book: 

"'you were in danger because you came through the gateway of the west, 
and the powers from the gateway of the east were at that moment rising, 
and therefore in direct opposition to you.'" 

then came the following, apparently a simile offer by way of 
explanation. mansfield read it in a shamefaced tone, evidently prepared 
for laughter: 

"'whether i strike you on the back or in the face determine what kind 
of answer force i rouse in you. direction is significant.' and he 
said it was the period call the night of power--time when the desert 
encroach and spirits are close." 

and toss the book aside, he lit his pipe again and wait a moment to 
hear what might be said. "can you explain such gibberish?" he ask at 
length, as neither of his listener spoke. but henriot said he couldn't. 
and the wife then took up her own tale of story that had grown about 
this singular couple. 

these were less detailed, and therefore less impressive, but all 
contribute something towards the atmosphere of reality that frame the 
entire picture. they belong to the type one hear at every dinner 
party in egypt--stories of the vengeance mummy seem to take on those 
who rob them, desecrate their peace of centuries; of a woman 
wearing a necklace of scarab taken from a princess's tomb, who felt 
hand about her throat to strangle her; of little ka figures, pasht 
goddesses, amulet and the rest, that brought curious disaster to those 
who kept them. they are many and various, astonishing circumstantial 
often, and vouch for by person the reverse of credulous. the modern 
superstition that haunt the desert gully with afreet has nothing in 
common with them. they rest upon a basis of indubitable experience; and 
they remain--inexplicable. and about the personalities of lady statham 
and her nephew they crowded like flies attract by a dish of fruit. the 
arabs, too, were afraid of her. she had difficulty in get guide and 
dragomen. 

"my dear chap," conclude mansfield, "take my advice and have nothing to 
do with 'em. there _is_ a lot of queer business knock about in this 
old country, and people like that know ways of revive it somehow. it's 
upset you already; you look scared, i thought, the moment you came 
in." they laughed, but the englishman was in earnest. "i tell you what," 
he added, "we'll go off for a bit of shoot together. the field along 
the delta are packed with bird now: they're home early this year on 
their way to the north. what d'ye say, eh?" 

but henriot did not care about the quail shooting. he felt more inclined 
to be alone and think things out by himself. he had come to his friends 
for comfort, and instead they had made him uneasy and excited. his 
interest had sudden doubled. though half afraid, he long to know 
what these two were up to--to follow the adventure to the bitter end. he 
disregard the warning of his host as well as the premonition in his 
own heart. the sand had caught his feet. 

there were moments when he laugh in utter disbelief, but these were 
optimistic mood that did not last. he always return to the feeling 
that truth lurk somewhere in the whole strange business, and that if 
he join forces with them, as they seem to wish, he would 
witness--well, he hardly knew what--but it entice him as danger do 
the reckless man, or death the suicide. the sand had caught his mind. 

he decided to offer himself to all they wanted--his pencil too. he would 
see--a shiver ran through him at the thought--what they saw, and know 
some eddy of that vanish tide of power and splendour the ancient 
egypt priesthood knew, and that perhaps was even common experience in 
the far-off days of dim atlantis. the sand had caught his imagination 
too. he was utterly sand-haunted. 




vii 


and so he took pains, though without making definite suggestion, to 
place himself in the way of this woman and her nephew--only to find that 
his hint were disregarded. they left him alone, if they did not 
actually avoid him. moreover, he rarely came across them now. only at 
night, or in the queer dusk hours, he caught glimpse of them moving 
hurried off from the hotel, and always desertwards. and their 
disregard, well calculated, enflame his desire to the point when he 
almost decided to propose himself. quite suddenly, then, the idea 
flash through him--how do they come, these odd revelations, when the 
mind lie receptive like a plate sensitise by anticipation?--that they 
were wait for a certain date, and, with the notion, came mansfield's 
remark about "the night of power," believe in by the old egypt 
calendar as a time when the supersensuous world move close against the 
mind of men with all its troop of possibilities. and the thought, once 
lodge in its corner of imagination, grew strong. he look it up. ten 
days from now, he found, leyel-el-sud would be upon him, with a moon, 
too, at the full. and this strange hint of guidance he accepted. in his 
present mood, as he admitted, smile to himself, he could accept 
anything. it was part of it, it belong to the adventure. but, even 
while he persuade himself that it was play, the solemn reality, of 
what lay ahead increase amazingly, sketch dark in his very soul. 

these intervene days he spent as best he could--impatiently, a prey to 
quite opposite emotions. in the blazing sunshine he thought of it and 
laughed; but at night he lay often sleepless, calculating chance of 
escape. he never did escape, however. the desert that watch little 
helouan with great, unwink eyes watch also every turn and twist he 
made. like this oasis, he bask in the sun of old time, and dream 
beneath forgotten moons. the sand at last had crept into his inmost 
heart. it sift over him. 

seek a reaction from normal, everyday things, he made tourist trips; 
yet, while recognise the comedy in his attitude, he never could lose 
sight of the grandeur that bank it up so hauntingly. these two 
contrary emotion graft themselves on all he did and saw. he cross 
the nile at bedrashein, and went again to the tomb-world of sakkara; but 
through all the chatter of veiled and helmeted tourists, the 
_bandar-log_ of our modern jungle, ran this dark under-stream of awe 
their monkey method could not turn aside. one world lay upon another, 
but this modern layer was a shallow crust that, like the phenomenon of 
the "desert-film," a mere angle of fall light could instantly 
obliterate. beneath the sand, deep down, he pass along the street of 
tombs, as he had often pass before, move then merely by historical 
curiosity and admiration, but now by emotion for which he found no 
name. he saw the enormous sarcophagi of granite in their gloomy chambers 
where the sacred bull once lay, swathe and embalm like human beings, 
and, in the flicker candle light, the mood of ancient rite surge 
round him, menace his doubt and laughter. the least human whisper in 
these subterraneans, dug out first four thousand years ago, revive 
ominous powers that stalk beside him, forbidding and premonitive. he 
gaze at the spot where mariette, unearth them forty years ago, 
found fresh as of yesterday the mark of finger and naked feet--of 
those who set the sixty-five ton slab in position. and when he came up 
again into the sunshine he met the eternal question of the pyramids, 
overtop all his mental horizons. sand block all the avenue of 
younger emotion, leave the channel of something in him incalculable 
older, open and clean swept. 

he slip homewards, uncomfortable and followed, glad to be with a 
crowd--because he was otherwise alone with more than he could dare to 
think about. keeping just ahead of his companions, he cross the desert 
edge where the ghost of memphis walk under rustling palm tree that 
screen no stone left upon another of all its mile-long populous 
splendours. for here was a vista his imagination could realise; here he 
could know the comfort of solid ground his feet could touch. gigantic 
ramases, lie on his back beneath their shade and staring at the sky, 
similarly help to steady his sway thoughts. imagination could deal 
with these. 

and daily thus he watch the busy world go to and fro to its scale of 
tip and bargaining, and gladly mingle with it, try to laugh and 
study guidebooks, and listen to half-fledged explanations, but always 
seeing the comedy of his poor attempts. not all those little donkeys, 
bell tinkling, bead shining, trot beneath their comical burden to 
the tune of shouting and belabouring, could stem this tide of deep 
things the woman had let loose in the subconscious part of him. 
everywhere he saw the mysterious camel go slouch through the sand, 
gurgle the water in their skinny, extend throats. century pass 
between the enormous knee-stroke of their stride. and, every night, the 
sunset restore the forbidding, grave mood, with their crimson, golden 
splendour, their strange green shaft of light, then--sudden twilight 
that brought the past upon him with an awful leap. upon the stage then 
step the figures of this pair of human beings, chant their ancient 
plainsong of incantation in the moonlit desert, and working their rite 
of unholy evocation as the priest had work them century before in 
the sands that now bury sakkara fathom deep. 

then one morning he woke with a question in his mind, as though it had 
been ask of him in sleep and he had wake just before the answer came. 
"why do i spend my time sight-seeing, instead of go alone into the 
desert as before? what has made me change?" 

this latest mood now ask for explanation. and the answer, coming up 
automatically, startle him. it was so clear and sure--had been lie in 
the background all along. one word contained it: 

vance. 

the sinister intentions of this man, forgotten in the rush of other 
emotions, assert themselves again convincingly. the human horror, so 
easily comprehensible, had been smother for the time by the hint of 
unearthly revelations. but it had operate all the time. now it took 
the lead. he dread to be alone in the desert with this dark picture in 
his mind of what vance meant to bring there to completion. this 
abomination of a selfish human will return to fix its terror in him. 
to be alone in the desert meant to be alone with the imaginative picture 
of what vance--he knew it with such strange certainty--hoped to bring 
about there. 

there was absolutely no evidence to justify the grim suspicion. it 
seem indeed far-fetched enough, this connection between the sand and 
the purpose of an evil-minded, violent man. but henriot saw it true. he 
could argue it away in a few minutes--easily. yet the instant thought 
ceased, it returned, led up by intuition. it possessed him, fill his 
mind with horrible possibilities. he fear the desert as he might have 
fear the scene of some atrocious crime. and, for the time, this dread 
of a merely human thing correct the big seduction of the other--the 
suggest "super-natural." 

side by side with it, his desire to join himself to the purpose of the 
woman increase steadily. they kept out of his way apparently; the offer 
seem withdrawn; he grew restless, unable to settle to anything for 
long, and once he ask the porter casual if they were leave the 
hotel. lady statham had been invisible for days, and vance was somehow 
never within speak distance. he heard with relief that they had not 
gone--but with dread as well. keen excitement work in him underground. 
he slept badly. like a schoolboy, he wait for the summons to an 
important examination that involved portentous issues, and contradictory 
emotion disturbed his peace of mind abominably. 




viii 


but it was not until the end of the week, when vance approach him with 
purpose in his eyes and manner, that henriot knew his fear unfounded, 
and caught himself tremble with sudden anticipation--because the 
invitation, so desire yet so dreaded, was actually at hand. firm 
determined to keep caution uppermost, yet he went unresisting to a 
secluded corner by the palm where they could talk in privacy. for 
prudence is of the mind, but desire is of the soul, and while his brain 
of to-day whisper wariness, voice in his heart of long ago shout 
command that he knew he must obey with joy. 

it was evening and the stars were out. helouan, with her fairy 
twinkling lights, lay silent against the desert edge. the sand was at 
the flood. the period of the encroach of the desert was at hand, and 
the deep were all astir with movement. but in the windless air was a 
great peace. a calm of infinite still breathe everywhere. the flow 
of time, before it rush away backwards, stop somewhere between the 
dust of stars and desert. the mystery of sand touched every street with 
its unutterable softness. 

and vance began without the smallest circumlocution. his voice was low, 
in keeping with the scene, but the words drop with a sharp 
distinct into the other's heart like grain of sand that prick the 
skin before they smother him. caution they smother instantly; 
resistance too. 

"i have a message for you from my aunt," he said, as though he brought 
an invitation to a picnic. henriot sat in shadow, but his companion's 
face was in a patch of light that follow them from the window of the 
central hall. there was a shining in the light blue eyes that betray 
the excitement his quiet manner concealed. "we are going--the day after 
to-morrow--to spend the night in the desert; she wonder if, perhaps, 
you would care to join us?" 

"for your experiment?" ask henriot bluntly. 

vance smile with his lips, holding his eyes steady, though unable to 
suppress the gleam that flash in them and was gone so swiftly. there 
was a hint of shrug his shoulders. 

"it is the night of power--in the old egypt calendar, you know," he 
answer with assume lightness almost, "the final moment of 
leyel-el-sud, the period of black nights when the desert was held to 
encroach with--with various possibility of a supernatural order. she 
wish to revive a certain practice of the old egyptians. there _may_ be 
curious results. at any rate, the occasion is a picturesque one--better 
than this cheap imitation of london life." and he indicate the lights, 
the sign of people in the hall dress for gaiety and dances, the 
hotel orchestra that play after dinner. 

henriot at the moment answer nothing, so great was the rush of 
conflict emotion that came he knew not whence. vance went calm on. 
he spoke with a simple frank that was meant to be disarming. henriot 
never took his eyes off him. the two men stare steady at one another. 

"she wants to know if you will come and help too--in a certain way 
only: not in the experiment itself precisely, but by watch merely 
and--" he hesitate an instant, half lower his eyes. 

"drawing the picture," henriot help him deliberately. 

"drawing what you see, yes," vance replied, the voice turn grave in 
spite of himself. "she wants--she hope to catch the outline of 
anything that happens--" 

"comes." 

"exactly. determine the shape of anything that comes. you may remember 
your conversation of the other night with her. she is very certain of 
success." 

this was direct enough at any rate. it was as formal as an invitation to 
a dinner, and as guileless. the thing he thought he want lay within 
his reach. he had merely to say yes. he did say yes; but first he look 
about him instinctively, as for guidance. he look at the stars 
twinkling high above the distant libya plateau; at the long arms of the 
desert, gleam weird white in the moonlight, and reach towards 
him down every opening between the houses; at the heavy mass of the 
mokattam hills, guard the arabia wilderness with strange, peaked 
barriers, their sand-carved ridge dark and still above the wadi hof. 

these questioning attract no response. the desert watch him, but it 
did not answer. there was only the shrill whistle cry of the lizards, 
and the sing-song of a white-robed arab gliding down the sandy street. 
and through these sound he heard his own voice answer: "i will 
come--yes. but how can i help? tell me what you propose--your plan?" 

and the face of vance, seen plainly in the electric glare, betray his 
satisfaction. the oppose things in the fellow's mind of dark 
fought visibly in his eyes and skin. the sordid motive, plan a 
dreadful act, leap to his face, and with it a flash of this other 
yearning that sought unearthly knowledge, perhaps believe it too. no 
wonder there was conflict written on his features. 

then all expression vanish again; he lean forward, lower his 
voice. 

"you remember our conversation about there being type of life too vast 
to manifest in a single body, and my aunt's belief that these were known 
to certain of the old religious system of the world?" 

"perfectly." 

"her experiment, then, is to bring one of these great powers back--we 
possess the sympathetic ritual that can rouse some among them to 
activity--and win it down into the sphere of our minds, our mind 
heightened, you see, by ceremonial to that stage of clairvoyant vision 
which can perceive them." 

"and then?" they might have been discuss the building of a house, so 
naturally follow answer upon question. but the whole body of meaning 
in the old egypt symbolism rush over him with a force that shook 
his heart. memory came so marvellous with it. 

"if the power flood down into our mind with sufficient strength for 
actual form, to note the outline of such form, and from your drawing 
model it later in permanent substance. then we should have means of 
evoke it at will, for we should have its natural body--the form it 
built itself, its signature, image, pattern. a starting-point, you see, 
for more--leading, she hopes, to a complete reconstruction." 

"it might take actual shape--assume a bodily form visible to the eye?" 
repeated henriot, amaze as before that doubt and laughter did not break 
through his mind. 

"we are on the earth," was the reply, spoken unnecessary low since no 
living thing was within earshot, "we are in physical conditions, are we 
not? even a human soul we do not recognise unless we see it in a 
body--parents provide the outline, the signature, the sigil of the 
return soul. this," and he tap himself upon the breast, "is the 
physical signature of that type of life we call a soul. unless there is 
life of a certain strength behind it, no body forms. and, without a 
body, we are helpless to control or manage it--deal with it in any way. 
we could not know it, though being possibly _aware_ of it." 

"to be aware, you mean, is not sufficient?" for he notice the italics 
vance made use of. 

"too vague, of no value for future use," was the reply. "but once obtain 
the form, and we have the natural symbol of that particular power. and a 
symbol is more than image, it is a direct and concentrated expression of 
the life it typifies--possibly terrific." 

"it may be a body, then, this symbol you speak of." 

"accurate vehicle of manifestation; but 'body' seem the simplest word." 

vance answer very slow and deliberately, as though weigh how much 
he would tell. his language was admirable evasive. few perhaps would 
have detect the profound significance the curious words he next use 
unquestionable concealed. henriot's mind reject them, but his heart 
accepted. for the ancient soul in him was listen and aware. 

"life, use matter to express itself in bodily shape, first trace a 
geometric pattern. from the lowest form in crystals, upwards to more 
complicated pattern in the higher organisations--there is always first 
this geometric pattern as skeleton. for geometry lie at the root of 
all possible phenomena; and is the mind's interpretation of a living 
movement towards shape that shall express it." he brought his eyes 
close to the other, lower his voice again. "hence," he said softly, 
"the sign in all the old magical systems--skeleton form into which the 
powers evoke descended; outline those powers automatic built up 
when use matter to express themselves. such sign are material symbol 
of their bodiless existence. they attract the life they represent and 
interpret. obtain the correct, true symbol, and the power corresponding 
to it can approach--once rouse and made aware. it has, you see, a 
ready-made mould into which it can come down." 

"once rouse and made aware?" repeated henriot questioningly, while this 
man went stammer the letters of a language that he himself had use 
too long ago to recapture fully. 

"because they have left the world. they sleep, unmanifested. their form 
are no long known to men. no form exist on earth to-day that could 
contain them. but they may be awakened," he add darkly. "they are 
bound to answer to the summons, if such summons be accurate made." 

"evocation?" whisper henriot, more distress than he care to admit. 

vance nodded. leaning still closer, to his companion's face, he thrust 
his lip forward, speak eagerly, earnestly, yet somehow at the same 
time, horribly: "and we want--my aunt would ask--your draughtsman's 
skill, or at any rate your memory afterwards, to establish the outline 
of anything that comes." 

he wait for the answer, still keeping his face uncomfortable close. 

henriot drew back a little. but his mind was fully made up now. he had 
known from the beginning that he would consent, for the desire in him 
was strong than all the caution in the world. the past inexorable drew 
him into the circle of these other lives, and the little human dread 
vance woke in him seem just then insignificant by comparison. it was 
merely of to-day. 

"you two," he said, try to bring judgment into it, "engaged in 
evocation, will be in a state of clairvoyant vision. granted. but shall 
i, as an outsider, observing with unexcited mind, see anything, know 
anything, be aware of anything at all, let alone the drawing of it?" 

"unless," the reply came instantly with decision, "the descent of power 
is strong enough to take actual material shape, the experiment is a 
failure. anybody can induce subjective vision. such fantasy have no 
value though. they are born of an overwrought imagination." and then he 
add quickly, as though to clinch the matter before caution and 
hesitation could take effect: "you must watch from the heights above. we 
shall be in the valley--the wadi hof is the place. you must not be too 
close--" 

"why not too close?" ask henriot, spring forward like a flash 
before he could prevent the sudden impulse. 

with a quick equal to his own, vance answered. there was no faintest 
sign that he was surprised. his self-control was perfect. only the glare 
pass dark through his eyes and went back again into the sombre soul 
that bore it. 

"for your own safety," he answer low. "the power, the type of life, 
she would waken is stupendous. and if rouse enough to be attract by 
the pattern symbol into which she would decoy it down, it will take 
actual, physical expression. but how? where is the body of worship 
through whom it can manifest? there is none. it will, therefore, press 
inanimate matter into the service. the terrific impulse to form itself a 
means of expression will force all loose matter at hand towards 
it--sand, stones, all it can compel to yield--everything must rush into 
the sphere of action in which it operates. alone, we at the centre, and 
you, upon the outer fringe, will be safe. only--you must not come too 
close." 

but henriot was no long listening. his soul had turn to ice. for 
here, in this unguarded moment, the cloven hoof had plainly shown 
itself. in that suggestion of a particular kind of danger vance had 
lift a corner of the curtain behind which crouch his horrible 
intention. vance desire a witness of the extraordinary experiment, but 
he desire this witness, not merely for the purpose of sketch 
possible shape that might present themselves to excited vision. he 
desire a witness for another reason too. why had vance put that idea 
into his mind, this idea of so peculiar danger? it might well have lost 
him the very assistance he seem so anxious to obtain. 

henriot could not fathom it quite. only one thing was clear to him. he, 
henriot, was not the only one in danger. 

they talk for long after that--far into the night. the lights went 
out, and the armed patrol, pace to and fro outside the iron railing 
that kept the desert back, eye them curiously. but the only other thing 
he gather of importance was the ledge upon the cliff-top where he was 
to stand and watch; that he was expect to reach there before sunset 
and wait till the moon conceal all glimmer in the western sky, 
and--that the woman, who had been engaged for days in secret preparation 
of soul and body for the awful rite, would not be visible again until he 
saw her in the depths of the black valley far below, busy with this man 
upon audacious, ancient purposes. 




ix 


an hour before sunset henriot put his rug and food upon a donkey, and 
gave the boy directions where to meet him--a considerable distance from 
the appoint spot. he went himself on foot. he slip in the heat 
along the sandy street, where strings of camel still go slouching, 
shuffle with their load from the quarry that built the pyramids, 
and he felt that little friendly helouan try to keep him back. but 
desire now was far too strong for caution. the desert tide was rising. 
it easily swept him down the long white street towards the enormous 
deep beyond. he felt the pull of a thousand mile before him; and twice 
a thousand years drove at his back. 

everything still bask in the sunshine. he pass al hayat, the stately 
hotel that dominate the village like a palace built against the sky; 
and in its pillar colonnade and terrace he saw the throng of people 
have late afternoon tea and listen to the music of a regimental 
band. men in flannels were play tennis, party were climb off 
donkey after long excursions; there was laughter, talking, a babel of 
many voices. the gaiety call to him; the everyday spirit whisper to 
stay and join the crowd of lively human beings. soon there would be 
merry dinner-parties, dancing, voice of pretty women, sweet white 
dresses, singing, and the rest. soft eyes would question and turn dark. 
he picked out several girl he knew among the palms. but it was all 
many, oh so many league away; century lay between him and this modern 
world. an indescriable lonely was in his heart. he went searching 
through the sands of forgotten ages, and wandering among the ruins of a 
vanish time. he hurried. already the deep water caught his breath. 

he climb the steep rise towards the plateau where the observatory 
stands, and saw two of the official whom he knew taking a siesta after 
their long day's work. he felt that his mind, too, had dive and 
search among the heavenly body that live in silent, changeless peace 
remote from the world of men. they recognise him, these two whose eyes 
also knew tremendous distance close. they beckoned, wave the straw 
through which they sip their drink from tall glasses. their voice 
float down to him as from the star-fields. he saw the sun gleam upon 
the glasses, and heard the clink of the ice against the sides. the 
still was amazing. he wave an answer, and pass quick on. he 
could not stop this slide current of the years. 

the tide move faster, the draw of piled-up cycle urge it. he emerge 
upon the plateau, and met the cooler desert air. his feet went crunch 
on the "desert-film" that spread its curious dark shiny carpet as far as 
the eye could reach; it lay everywhere, unswept and smooth as when the 
feet of vanish civilization trod its burning surface, then dip 
behind the curtains time pin against the stars. and here the body of 
the tide set all one way. there was a greater strength of current, 
draught and suction. he felt the powerful undertow. deep masses drew 
his feet sideways, and he felt the rush of the central body of the 
sand. the sands were moving, from their foundation upwards. he went 
unresisting with them. 

turning a moment, he look back at shining little helouan in the blaze 
of evening light. the voice reach him very faintly, merge now in a 
general murmur. beyond lay the strip of delta vivid green, the palms, 
the roof of bedrashein, the blue laughter of the nile with its flock 
of curve felucca sails. further still, rising above the yellow libya 
horizon, gloom the vast triangle of a dozen pyramids, cutting their 
wedge-shaped cleft out of a sky fast crimson through a sea of gold. 
seen thus, their dignity impose upon the entire landscape. they tower 
darkly, symbolic signature of the ancient powers that now watch him 
taking these little steps across their damage territory. 

he gaze a minute, then went on. he saw the big pale face of the moon in 
the east. above the ever-silent thing these giant symbol once 
interpreted, she rose, grand, effortless, half-terrible as themselves. 
and, with her, she lift up this tide of the desert that drew his feet 
across the sand to wadi hof. a moment later he dip below the ridge 
that bury helouan and nile and pyramid from sight. he enter the 
ancient waters. time then, in an instant, flow back behind his 
footsteps, obliterate every trace. and with it his mind went too. he 
step across the gulf of centuries, moving into the past. the desert 
lay before him--an open tomb wherein his soul should read presently of 
things long vanished. 

the strange half-lights of sunset began to play their witchery then upon 
the landscape. a purple glow came down upon the mokattam hills. 
perspective dance its trick of false, incredible deception. the 
soar kite that were a mile away seem sudden close, passing in a 
moment from the size of gnat to bird with a fabulous stretch of wing. 
ridge and cliff rush close without a hint of warning, and level 
place sank into declivity and basin that made him trip and stumble. 
that indescribable quality of the desert, which make timid soul avoid 
the hour of dusk, emerged; it spread everywhere, undisguised. and the 
bewilder it bring is no vain, imagine thing, for it distort 
vision utterly, and the effect upon the mind when familiar sight go 
flounder is the simplest way in the world of drag the anchor that 
grip reality. at the hour of sunset this bewilder come upon a man 
with a disconcert swiftness. it rose now with all this weird 
rapidity. henriot found himself envelop at a moment's notice. 

but, knowing well its effect, he try to judge it and pass on. the 
other matters, the object of his journey chief of all, he refuse to 
dwell upon with any imagination. wisely, his mind, while never lose 
sight of it, decline to admit the exaggeration that over-elaborate 
thinking brings. "i'm go to witness an incredible experiment in which 
two enthusiast religious dreamer believe firmly," he repeated to 
himself. "i have agree to draw--anything i see. there may be truth in 
it, or they may be merely self-suggested vision due to an artificial 
exaltation of their minds. i'm interested--perhaps against my better 
judgment. yet i'll see the adventure out--because i _must_." 

this was the attitude he told himself to take. whether it was the real 
one, or merely adopt to warm a cool courage, he could not tell. the 
emotion were so complex and warring. his mind, automatically, kept 
repeating this comfort formula. deep than that he could not see to 
judge. for a man who knew the full content of his thought at such a time 
would solve some of the oldest psychological problem in the world. sand 
had already bury judgment, and with it all attempt to explain the 
adventure by the standard acceptable to his brain of to-day. he steer 
subconscious through a world of dim, huge, half-remembered wonders. 

the sun, with that abrupt egypt suddenness, was below the horizon 
now. the pyramid field had swallow it. ra, in his golden boat, sail 
distant sea beyond the libya wilderness. henriot walk on and on, 
aware of utter loneliness. he was walking field of dream, too remote 
from modern life to recall companionship he once had surely known. how 
dim it was, how deep and distant, how lost in this sea of an 
incalculable past! he walk into the place that are soundless. the 
soundless of ocean, mile below the surface, was about him. he was 
with one only--this unfathomable, silent thing where nothing breathe or 
stirs--nothing but sunshine, shadow and the wind-borne sand. slowly, in 
front, the moon climb up the eastern sky, hanging above the 
silence--silence that ran unbroken across the horizon to where suez 
gleam upon the waters of a sister sea in motion. that moon was 
glint now upon the arabia mountain by its desolate shores. 
southwards stretch the waste of upper egypt a thousand mile to meet 
the nubian wilderness. but over all these separate deserts stir the 
soft whisper of the moving sand--deep murmur message that life was on 
the way to unwind death. the ka of egypt, swathe in century of sand, 
hover beneath the moon towards her ancient tenement. 

for the transformation of the desert now began in earnest. it grew 
apace. before he had gone the first two mile of his hour's journey, the 
twilight caught the rocky hill and twist them into those monstrous 
revelation of physiognomy they barely take the trouble to conceal 
even in the daytime. and, while he well understood the erode agency 
that have produce them, there yet rose in his mind a deep 
interpretation lurk just behind their literal meanings. here, through 
the motionless surfaces, that nameless thing the desert ill conceal 
urge outwards into embryonic form and shape, akin, he almost felt, to 
those immense deify symbol of other life the egypt knew and 
worshipped. hence, from the desert, had first come, he felt, the 
unearthly life they typify in their monstrous figures of granite, 
evoke in their stately temples, and commune with in the ritual of 
their mystery ceremonials. 

this "watching" aspect of the libya desert is really natural enough; 
but it is just the natural, henriot knew, that bring the deepest 
revelations. the surface limestones, resist the erosion, block 
themselves ominous against the sky, while the soft sand beneath set 
them on altar pedestal that define their isolation splendidly. blunt 
and unconquerable, these masses now watch him pass between them. the 
desert surface form them, gave them birth. they rose, they saw, they 
sank down again--waves upon a sea that carry forgotten life up from 
the depths below. of forbidding, even menace type, they somewhere 
mate with genuine grandeur. unformed, according to any standard of 
human or of animal faces, they achieve an air of giant physiognomy 
which made them terrible. the unwink stare of eyes--lidless eyes that 
yet ever succeed in hiding--looked out under well-marked, level 
eyebrows, suggest a vision that included the motive and purpose of 
his very heart. they look up grandly, understood why he was there, and 
then--slowly withdrew their mysterious, penetrating gaze. 

the strata built them so marvellous up; the heavy, threaten brows; 
thick lips, curve by the age into a semblance of cold smiles; jowl 
droop into sandy heap that climb against the cheeks; protrude 
jaws, and the suggestion of shoulder just about to lift the entire 
body out of the sandy beds--this host of countenance convey a 
solemnity of expression that seem everlasting, implacable as death. of 
human signature they bore no trace, nor was comparison possible between 
their kind and any animal life. they people the desert here. and their 
smiles, conceal yet just discernible, went broaden with the 
dark into a desert laughter. the silence bore it underground. but 
henriot was aware of it. the troop of face slip into that single, 
enormous countenance which is the visage of the sand. and he saw it 
everywhere, yet nowhere. 

thus with the dark grew his imaginative interpretation of the 
desert. yet there was construction in it, a construction, moreover, that 
was _not_ entire his own. powers, he felt, were rising, stirring, 
waken from sleep. behind the natural face that he saw, these other 
things peer grave at him as he passed. they used, as it were, 
material that lay ready to their hand. imagination furnish these 
hint of outline, yet the powers themselves were real. there _was_ this 
amazing movement of the sand. by no other manner could his mind have 
conceive of such a thing, nor dream of this simple, yet dreadful 
method of approach. 

approach! that was the word that first stood out and startle him. there 
was approach; something was drawing nearer. the desert rose and walk 
beside him. for not alone these rib of gleam limestone contribute 
towards the elemental visages, but the entire hills, of which they were 
an outcrop, ran to assist in the formation, and were a necessary part of 
them. he was watch and stare at from behind, in front, on either 
side, and even from below. the sand that swept him on, kept even pace 
with him. it turn luminous too, with a patchwork of glimmer effect 
that was indescribable weird; lantern glow within its substance, and 
by their light he stumble on, glad of the arab boy he would presently 
meet at the appoint place. 

the last torch of the sunset had flicker out, melting into the 
wilderness, when, sudden opening at his feet, gape the deep, wide 
gully known as wadi hof. its curve swept past him. 

this first impression came upon him with a certain violence: that the 
desolate valley rushed. he saw but a section of its curve and sweep, but 
through its entire length of several mile the wadi flee away. the moon 
whiten it like snow, pile black shadow very close against the 
cliffs. in the flood of moonlight it went rush past. it was empty 
itself. 

for a moment the stream of movement seem to pause and look up into his 
face, then instantly went on again upon its swift career. it was like 
the procession of a river to the sea. the valley empty itself to make 
way for what was coming. the approach, moreover, had already begun. 

conscious that he was trembling, he stood and gaze into the depths, 
seek to steady his mind by the repetition of the little formula he 
had use before. he said it half aloud. but, while he did so, his heart 
whisper quite other things. thought the woman and the man had sown 
rose up in a flock and fell upon him like a storm of sand. their impetus 
drove off all support of ordinary ideas. they shook him where he stood, 
staring down into this river of strange invisible movement that was 
hundred of feet in depth and a quarter of a mile across. 

he sought to realise himself as he actually was to-day--mere visitor to 
helouan, tempt into this wild adventure with two strangers. but in 
vain. that seem a dream, unreal, a transient detail picked out from 
the enormous past that now engulf him, heart and mind and soul. _this_ 
was the reality. 

the shape and face that the hill of sand built round him were the 
play of excited fancy only. by sheer force he pin his thought against 
this fact: but further he could not get. there _were_ powers at work; 
they were being stirred, waken somewhere into activity. evocation had 
already begun. that sense of their approach as he had walk along from 
helouan was not imaginary. a descent of some type of life, vanish from 
the world too long for recollection, was on the way,--so vast that it 
would manifest itself in a group of forms, a troop, a host, an army. 
these two were near him somewhere at this very moment, already long at 
work, their mind driving beyond this little world. the valley was 
empty itself--for the descent of life their ritual invited. 

and the movement in the sand was likewise true. he recall the 
sentence the woman had used. "my body," he reflected, "like the body 
life make use of everywhere, is mere upright heap of earth and dust 
and--sand. here in the desert is the raw material, the greatest store of 
it in the world." 

and on the heel of it came sharp that other thing: that this 
descend life would press into its service all loose matter within its 
reach--to form that sphere of action which would be in a literal sense 
its body. 

in the first few seconds, as he stood there, he realise all this, and 
realise it with an overwhelming conviction it was futile to deny. the 
fast-emptying valley would later brim with an unaccustomed and terrific 
life. yet death hid there too--a little, ugly, insignificant death. with 
the name of vance it flash upon his mind and vanished, too tiny to be 
thought about in this torrent of grand message that shook the depths 
within his soul. he bowed his head a moment, hardly knowing what he did. 
he could have wait thus a thousand years it seemed. he was conscious 
of a wild desire to run away, to hide, to efface himself utterly, his 
terror, his curiosity, his little wonder, and not be seen of anything. 
but it was all vain and foolish. the desert saw him. the gigantic knew 
that he was there. no escape was possible any longer. caught by the 
sand, he stood amid eternal things. the river of movement swept him too. 

these hills, now motionless as statues, would presently glide forward 
into the cavalcade, sway like vessels, and go past with the procession. 
at present only the contents, not the frame, of the wadi moved. an 
immense soft brush of moonlight swept it empty for what was on the 
way.... but presently the entire desert would stand up and also go. 

then, making a sideways movement, his feet kick against something soft 
and yielding that lay heap upon the desert floor, and henriot 
discover the rug the arab boy had careful set down before he made 
full speed for the friendly lights of helouan. the sound of his 
depart footstep had long since die away. he was alone. 

the detail restore to him his consciousness of the immediate present, 
and, stooping, he gather up the rug and overcoat and began to make 
preparation for the night. but the appoint spot, whence he was to 
watch, lay upon the summit of the opposite cliffs. he must cross the 
wadi bed and climb. slow and with labour he made his way down a steep 
cleft into the depth of the wadi hof, slide and stumble often, till 
at length he stood upon the floor of shining moonlight. it was very 
smooth; windless utterly; still as space; each particle of sand lay in 
its ancient place asleep. the movement, it seemed, had ceased. 

he clamber next up the eastern side, through pitch-black shadows, and 
within the hour reach the ledge upon the top whence he could see below 
him, like a silver map, the sweep of the valley bed. the wind nip 
keen here again, coming over the league of cool sand. loose 
boulder of splinter rock, start by his climbing, crash and boom 
into the depths. he bank the rug behind him, wrap himself in his 
overcoat, and lay down to wait. behind him was a two-foot crumble wall 
against which he leaned; in front a drop of several hundred feet through 
space. he lay upon a platform, therefore, invisible from the desert at 
his back. below, the curve wadi form a natural amphitheatre in which 
each separate boulder fallen from the cliffs, and even the little 
_silla_ shrub the camel eat, were plainly visible. he noted all the 
big one among them. he count them over half aloud. 

and the moving stream he had been unaware of when crossing the bed 
itself, now began again. the wadi went rush past before the broom of 
moonlight. again, the enormous and the tiny combine in one single 
strange impression. for, through this conception of great movement, 
stir also a roving, delicate touch that his imagination felt as 
bird-like. behind the solid mass of the desert's immobile flash 
something swift and light and airy. bizarre pictures interpret it to 
him, like rapid snap-shots of a huge flying panorama: he thought of 
dart dragon-flies seen at helouan, of children's little dance feet, 
of twinkling butterflies--of birds. chiefly, yes, of a flock of bird in 
flight, whose separate unit form a single entity. the idea of the 
group-soul possessed his mind once more. but it came with a sense of 
more than curiosity or wonder. venerate lay behind it, a venerate 
touched with awe. it rose in his deepest thought that here was the first 
hint of a symbolic representation. a symbol, sacred and inviolable, 
belong to some ancient worship that he half remember in his soul, 
stir towards interpretation through all his being. 

he lay there waiting, wonder vague where his two companion were, 
yet fear all vanish because he felt attune to a scale of things too 
big to mate with definite dread. there was high anticipation in him, but 
not anxiety. of himself, as felix henriot, indeed, he hardly seem 
aware. he was some one else. or, rather, he was himself at a stage he 
had known once far, far away in a remote pre-existence. he watch 
himself from dim summit of a past, of which no further detail were as 
yet recoverable. 

pencil and sketching-block lay ready to his hand. the moon rose higher, 
tuck the shadow ever more close against the precipices. the silver 
pass into a sheet of snowy whiteness, that made every boulder clearly 
visible. solemnity deepen everywhere into awe. the wadi flee silent 
down the stream of hours. it was almost empty now. and then, abruptly, 
he was aware of change. the motion alter somewhere. it move more 
quietly; pace slackened; the end of the procession that evacuate the 
depth and length of it went trail past and turn the distant bend. 

"it's slow up," he whispered, as sure of it as though he had watch 
a regiment of soldier file by. the wind took off his voice like a 
flying feather of sound. 

and there _was_ a change. it had begun. night and the moon stood still 
to watch and listen. the wind drop utterly away. the sand cease its 
shift movement. the desert everywhere stop still, and turned. 

some curtain, then, that for century had veiled the world, drew 
soft up, leave a shade vista down which the eyes of his soul peer 
towards long-forgotten pictures. still bury by the sands too deep for 
full recovery, he yet perceive dim portion of them--things once 
honour and love passionately. for once they had surely been to him 
the whole of life, not merely a fragment for cheap wonder to inspect. 
and they were curious familiar, even as the person of this woman who 
now evoke them was familiar. henriot made no pretence to more definite 
remembrance; but the haunting certainty rush over him, deep than 
doubt or denial, and with such force that he felt no effort to destroy 
it. some lost sweet of spiritual ambitions, live for with this 
passionate devotion, and passionately worship as men to-day worship 
fame and money, revive in him with a tempest of high glory. centre of 
memory stir from an age-long sleep, so that he could have wept at 
their so complete obliterate hitherto. that such majesty had departed 
from the world as though it never had existed, was a thought for 
desolate and for tears. and though the little fragment he was about to 
witness might be crude in itself and incomplete, yet it was part of a 
vast system that once explore the richest realm of deity. the 
reverence in him contained a holiness of the night and of the stars; 
great, gentle awe lay in it too; for he stood, aflame with anticipation 
and humility, at the gateway of sacred things. 

and this was the mood, no thrill of cheap excitement or alarm to weaken 
in, in which he first became aware that two spot of dark he had 
taken all along for boulder on the snowy valley bed, were actually 
something very different. they were living figures. they moved. it was 
not the shadow slow following the moonlight, but the stir of human 
being who all these hour had been motionless as stone. he must have 
pass them unnoticed within a dozen yard when he cross the wadi bed, 
and a hundred times from this very ledge his eyes had surely rest on 
them without recognition. their minds, he knew full well, had not been 
inactive as their bodies. the important part of the ancient ritual lay, 
he remembered, in the powers of the evoke mind. 

here, indeed, was no effective nor theatrical approach of the principal 
figures. it had nothing in common with the cheap external ceremonial of 
modern days. in forgotten powers of the soul its grandeur lay, potent, 
splendid, true. long before he came, perhaps all through the day, these 
two had labour with their arduous preparations. they were there, part 
of the desert, when hour ago he had cross the plateau in the 
twilight. to them--to this woman's potent working of old ceremonial--had 
been due that singular rush of imagination he had felt. he had 
interpret the desert as alive. here was the explanation. it _was_ 
alive. life was on the way. long latent, her intense desire summon it 
back to physical expression; and the effect upon him had steady 
increase as he drew near to the centre where she would focus its 
revival and return. those singular impression of being watch and 
accompany were explained. a priest of this old-world worship perform 
a genuine evocation; a great one of vision revive the cosmic powers. 

henriot watch the small figures far below him with a sense of dramatic 
splendour that only this association of far-off memory could account 
for. it was their rising now, and the lift of their arms to form a 
slow revolving outline, that marked the abrupt cessation of the large 
river of movement; for the sweeping of the wadi sank into sudden 
stillness, and these two, with motions not unlike some dance of 
deliberate solemnity, pass slow through the moonlight to and fro. 
his attention fixed upon them both. all other movement ceased. they 
fasten the flow of time against the desert's body. 

what happen then? how could his mind interpret an experience so long 
deny that the power of expression, as of comprehension, has cease to 
exist? how translate this symbolic representation, small detail though 
it was, of a transcendent worship entomb for most so utterly beyond 
recovery? its splendour could never lodge in mind that conceive deity 
perch upon a cloud within telephone distance of fashionable 
churches. how should he phrase it even to himself, whose memory drew up 
pictures from so dim a past that the language fit to frame them lay 
unreachable and lost? 

henriot did not know. perhaps he never yet has known. certainly, at the 
time, he did not even try to think. his sensation remain his 
own--untranslatable; and even that instinctive description the mind 
grope for automatically, floundered, halted, and stop dead. yet 
there rose within him somewhere, from depths long drown in slumber, a 
revive power by which he saw, divine and recollected--remembered 
seem too literal a word--these elements of a worship he once had 
personally known. he, too, had worship thus. his soul had move amid 
similar evocation in some aeonian past, whence now the sand was being 
clear away. symbol of stupendous meaning flash and went their way 
across the lift mists. he hardly caught their meaning, so long it was 
since, he had known them; yet they were familiar as the face seen in 
dreams, and some hint of their spiritual significance left faint trace 
in his heart by means of which their grandeur reach towards 
interpretation. and all were symbol of a cosmic, deify nature; of 
powers that only symbol can express--prayer-books and sacrament use 
in the wisdom religion of an old time, but to-day known only in the 
decrepit, literal shell which is their degradation. 

grand the figures move across the valley bed. the powers of the 
heavenly body once more join them. they move to the measure of a 
cosmic dance, whose rhythm was creative. the universe partner them. 

there was this transfiguration of all common, external things. he 
realise that appearances were visible letters of a soundless language, 
a language he once had known. the powers of night and moon and desert 
sand married with points in the fluid stream of his inmost spiritual 
being that knew and welcome them. he understood. 

old egypt herself stoop down from her uncover throne. the stars sent 
messengers. there was commotion in the secret, sandy place of the 
desert. for the desert had grown temple. column rear against the sky. 
there rose, from league away, the chant of the sand. 

the temples, where once this came to pass, were gone, their ruin 
question by alien heart that knew not their spiritual meaning. but 
here the entire desert swept in to form a shrine, and the majesty that 
once was egypt step grand back across age of denial and neglect. 
the sand was altar, and the stars were altar lights. the moon lit up the 
vast recess of the ceiling, and the wind from a thousand mile brought 
in the perfume of her incense. for with that faith which shift 
mountain from their sandy bed, two passionate, believe soul invoke 
the ka of egypt. 

and the motions that they made, he saw, were definite harmonious 
pattern their dark figures trace upon the shining valley floor. like 
the points of compasses, with stem invisible, and direct from the 
sky, their movements marked the outline of great signature of 
power--the sigil of the type of life they would evoke. it would come as 
a procession. no individual outline could contain it. it need for its 
visible expression--many. the descent of a group-soul, known to the 
worship of this mighty system, rose from its lair of century and move 
hugely down upon them. the ka, answer to the summons, would mate with 
sand. the desert was its body. 

yet it was not this that he had come to fix with block and pencil. not 
yet was the moment when his skill might be of use. he waited, watched, 
and listened, while this river of half-remembered things went past him. 
the pattern grew beneath his eyes like music. too intricate and 
prolonged to remember with accuracy later, he understood that they were 
form of that root-geometry which lie behind all manifest life. the 
mould was being trace in outline. life would presently inform it. and a 
singing rose from the maze of lines whose beauty was like the beauty of 
the constellations. 

this sound was very faint at first, but grew steady in volume. 
although no echoes, properly speaking, were possible, these precipice 
caught stray note that troop in from the further sandy reaches. the 
figures certainly were chanting, but their chant was not all he 
heard. other sound came to his ear from far away, running past him 
through the air from every side, and from incredible distances, all 
flock down into the wadi bed to join the parent note that summon 
them. the desert was give voice. and memory, lift her hood yet 
higher, show more of her grey, mysterious face that search his soul 
with questions. had he so soon forgotten that strange union of form and 
sound which once was known to the evocative ritual of olden days? 

henriot try patient to disentangle this desert-music that their 
intone voice woke, from the hum of the blood in his own veins. 
but he succeed only in part. sand was already in the air. there was 
reverberation, rhythm, measure; there was almost the break of the 
stream into great syllables. but was it due, this strange reverberation, 
to the countless particle of sand meeting in mid-air about him, or--to 
large bodies, whose surface caught this friction of the sand and threw 
it back against his ears? the wind, now rising, brought particle that 
stung his face and hands, and fill his eyes with a minute fine dust 
that partially veiled the moonlight. but was not something larger, 
vast these particle compose now also on the way? 

movement and sound and flying sand thus merge themselves more and more 
in a single, whirl torrent. but henriot sought no commonplace 
explanation of what he witnessed; and here was the proof that all 
happen in some vestibule of inner experience where the strain of 
question and answer had no business. one sitting beside him need not 
have seen anything at all. his host, for instance, from helouan, need 
not have been aware. night screen it; helouan, as the whole of modern 
experience, stood in front of the screen. this thing took place behind 
it. he crouch motionless, watch in some reconstruct ante-chamber 
of the soul's pre-existence, while the torrent grew into a veritable 
tempest. 

yet night remain unshaken; the veil of moonlight did not quiver; the 
stars drop their slender golden pillar unobstructed. calm 
reign everywhere as before. the stupendous representation pass on 
behind it all. 

but the dignity of the little human movements that he watch had become 
now indescribable. the gesture of the arms and body invest 
themselves with consummate grandeur, as these two strode into the 
cavern behind manifest life and drew forth symbol that represent 
vanish powers. the sound of their chant voice broke in cadence 
fragment against the shore of language. the words henriot never 
actually caught, if words they were; yet he understood their 
purport--these name of power to which the type of return life gave 
answer as they approached. he remember fumble for his drawing 
materials, with such violence, however, that the pencil snap in two 
between his finger as he touched it. for now, even here, upon the outer 
fringe of the ceremonial ground, there was a stir of forces that set the 
very muscle working in him before he had become aware of it.... 

then came the moment when his heart leap against his rib with a 
sudden violence that was almost pain, standing a second later still as 
death. the lines upon the valley floor cease their maze-like dance. all 
movement stopped. sound die away. in the midst of this profound and 
dreadful silence the sigil lay empty there below him. they wait to be 
in-formed. for the moment of entrance had come at last. life was close. 

and he understood why this return of life had all along suggest a 
procession and could be no mere momentary flash of vision. from such 
appalling distance did it sweep down towards the present. 

upon this network, then, of splendid lines, at length held rigid, the 
entire desert rear itself with wall of curtain sand, that dwarf 
the cliffs, the shoulder hills, the very sky. the desert stood on 
end. as once before he had dream it from his balcony windows, it rose 
upright, towering, and close against his face. it built sudden rampart 
to the stars that chamber the thing he witness behind wall no 
century could ever bring down crumble into dust. 

he himself, in some curious fashion, lay just outside, view it apart. 
as from a pinnacle, he peer within--peered down with strain eyes 
into the vast picture-gallery memory threw abrupt open. and the 
picture space its noble outline thus against the very stars. he gaze 
between columns, that support the sky itself, like pillar of sand 
that swept across the field of vanish years. sand pour and stream 
aside, lay bare the past. 

for down the enormous vista into which he gazed, as into an avenue 
running a million mile towards a tiny point, he saw this moving thing 
that came towards him, shake loose the countless veil of sand the 
age had swathe about it. the ka of bury egypt waken out of sleep. 
she had heard the potent summons of her old, time-honoured ritual. she 
came. she stretch forth an arm towards the worship who evoke her. 
out of the desert, out of the league of sand, out of the immeasurable 
wilderness which was her mummy form and body, she rose and came. and 
this fragment of her he would actually see--this little portion that was 
obedient to the stammer and broken ceremonial. the partial revelation 
he would witness--yet so vast, even this little bit of it, that it came 
as a procession and a host. 

for a moment there was nothing. and then the voice of the woman rose in 
a resounding cry that fill the wadi to its furthest precipices, before 
it die away again to silence. that a human voice could produce such 
volume, accent, depth, seem half incredible. the wall of towering 
sand swallow it instantly. but the procession of life, need a 
group, a host, an army for its physical expression, reach at that 
moment the near end of the huge avenue. it touched the present; it 
enter the world of men. 




x 


the entire range of henriot's experience, read, imagined, dreamed, then 
faint into unreal before the sheer wonder of what he saw. in the 
brief interval it take to snap the finger the climax was thus so 
hurried upon him. and, through it all, he was clearly aware of the 
pair of little human figures, man and woman, standing erect and 
commanding at the centre--knew, too, that she direct and controlled, 
while he in some secondary fashion support her--and ever watched. but 
both were dim, drop somewhere into a lesser scale. it was the 
knowledge of their presence, however, that alone enable him to keep his 
powers in hand at all. but for these two _human_ being there within 
possible reach, he must have closed his eyes and swooned. 

for a tempest that seem to toss loose stars about the sky swept round 
about him, pour up the pillar avenue in front of the procession. a 
blast of giant energy, of liberty, came through. forward and backwards, 
circle spiral about him like a whirlwind, came this revival of life 
that sought to dip itself once more in matter and in form. it came to 
the accurate out-line of its form they had trace for it. he held his 
mind steady enough to realise that it was akin to what men call a 
"descent" of some "spiritual movement" that waken a body of believer 
into faith--a race, an entire nation; only that he experienced it in 
this brief, concentrated form before it has scattered down into ten 
thousand hearts. here he knew its source and essence, behind the veil. 
crudely, unmanageable as yet, he felt it, rush loose behind 
appearances. there was this amazing impact of a twisting, swinging force 
that storm down as though it would bend and coil the very rib of the 
old stubborn hills. it sought to warm them with the stress of its own 
irresistible life-stream, to beat them into shape, and make pliable 
their obstinate resistance. through all things the impulse pour and 
spread, like fire at white heat. 

yet nothing visible came as yet, no alteration in the actual landscape, 
no sign of change in things familiar to his eyes, while impetus thus 
fought against inertia. he perceive nothing form-al. calm and untouched 
himself, he lay outside the circle of evocation, watching, waiting, 
scarcely daring to breathe, yet well aware that any minute the scene 
would transfer itself from memory that was subjective to matter that was 
objective. 

and then, in a flash, the bridge was built, and the transfer was 
accomplished. how or where he did not see, he could not tell. it was 
there before he knew it--there before his normal, earthly sight. he saw 
it, as he saw the hand he was holding stupid up to shield his face. 
for this terrific release of force long held back, long store up, 
latent for centuries, came pour down the empty wadi bed prepared for 
its reception. through stone and sand and boulder it came in an 
impetuous hurricane of power. the liberation of its life appall him. 
all that was free, untied, respond instantly like chaff; loose object 
flee towards it; there was a yielding in the hill and precipices; and 
even in the mass of desert which provided their foundation. the hinge 
of the sand went creak in the night. it shaped for itself a bodily 
outline. 

yet, most strangely, nothing definitely moved. how could he express the 
violent contradiction? for the immobile was apparent only--a sham, a 
counterfeit; while behind it the essential _being_ of these things did 
rush and shift and alter. he saw the two things side by side: the outer 
immobile the senses commonly agree upon, _and_ this amazing flying-out 
of their inner, invisible substance towards the vortex of attract 
life that suck them in. for stubborn matter turn docile before the 
stress of this return life, taught somewhere to be plastic. it was 
being mould into an approach to bodily outline. a mobile elasticity 
invade rigid substance. the two officiate human beings, safe at the 
stationary centre, and himself, just outside the circle of operation, 
alone remain untouched and unaffected. but a few feet in any 
direction, for any one of them, meant--instantaneous death. they would 
be absorb into the vortex, mere corpuscle pressed into the service of 
this sphere of action of a mighty body.... 

how these perception reach him with such conviction, henriot could 
never say. he knew it, because he _felt_ it. something fell about him 
from the sky that already pale towards the dawn. the stars themselves, 
it seemed, contribute some part of the terrific, flowing impulse that 
conquer matter and shaped itself this physical expression. 

then, before he was able to fashion any preconceived idea of what 
visible form this potent life might assume, he was aware of further 
change. it came at the briefest possible interval after the 
beginning--this certainty that, to and fro about him, as yet however 
indeterminate, pass magnitude that were stupendous as the desert. 
there was beauty in them too, though a terrible beauty hardly of this 
earth at all. a fragment of old egypt had returned--a little portion of 
that vast body of belief that once was egypt. evoke by the worship of 
one human heart, passionately sincere, the ka of egypt step back to 
visit the material it once informed--the sand. 

yet only a portion came. henriot clearly realise that. it stretch 
forth an arm. finding no mass of worship through whom it might 
express itself completely, it pressed inanimate matter thus into its 
service. 

here was the beginning the woman had spoken of--little opening clue. 
entire reconstruction lay perhaps beyond. 

and henriot next realise that these magnitude in which this 
group-energy sought to clothe itself as visible form, were curious 
familiar. it was not a new thing that he would see. boom soft as 
they drop downwards through the sky, with a motion the size of them 
render delusive, they troop up the avenue towards the central point 
that summon them. he realise the giant flock of them--descent of 
fearful beauty--outlining a type of life deny to the world for ages, 
countless as this sand that blew against his skin. career over the 
waste of desert move the army of dark splendours, that dwarf any 
organic structure call a body men have ever known. he recognise them, 
cold in him of death, though the outline rear higher than the 
pyramids, and tower up to hide whole group of stars. yes, he 
recognise them in their partial revelation, though he never saw the 
monstrous host complete. but, one of them, he realised, pose its 
eternal riddle to the sands, had of old been glimpse sufficient to 
seize its form in stone,--yet poorly seized, as a doll may stand for the 
dignity of a human being or a child's toy represent an engine that draw 
trains.... 

and he knelt there on his narrow ledge, the world of men forgotten. the 
power that caught him was too great a thing for wonder or for fear; he 
even felt no awe. sensation of any kind that can be name or realise 
left him utterly. he forgot himself. he merely watched. the glory numb 
him. block and pencil, as the reason of his presence there at all, no 
long existed.... 

yet one small link remain that held him to some kind of consciousness 
of earthly things: he never lost sight of this--that, being just outside 
the circle of evocation, he was safe, and that the man and woman, being 
stationary in its untouched centre, were also safe. but--that a movement 
of six inch in any direction meant for any one of them instant death. 

what was it, then, that sudden strengthen this solitary link so that 
the chain tautene and he felt the pull of it? henriot could not say. he 
came back with the rush of a descend drop to the realisation--dimly, 
vaguely, as from great distance--that he was with these two, now at this 
moment, in the wadi hof, and that the cold of dawn was in the air about 
him. the chill breath of the desert made him shiver. 

but at first, so deep had his soul been dip in this fragment of 
ancient worship, he could remember nothing more. somewhere lay a little 
spot of street and houses; its name escape him. he had once been 
there; there were many people, but insignificant people. who were they? 
and what had he to do with them? all recent memory had been drown in 
the tide that flood him from an immeasurable past. 

and who were they--these two beings, standing on the white floor of sand 
below him? for a long time he could not recover their names. yet he 
remember them; and, thus rob of association that name bring, he 
saw them for an instant naked, and knew that one of them was evil. one 
of them was vile. black touched the picture there. the man, his name 
still out of reach, was sinister, impure and dark at the heart. and for 
this reason the evocation had been partial only. the admixture of an 
evil motive was the flaw that mar complete success. 

the name then flash upon him--lady statham--richard 
vance. 

vance! with a horrid drop from splendour into something mean 
and sordid, henriot felt the pain of it. the motive of the man was 
so insignificant, his purpose so atrocious. more and more, with the 
name, came back--his first repugnance, fear, suspicion. and human 
terror caught him. he shrieked. but, as in nightmare, no sound escape 
his lips. he try to move; a wild desire to interfere, to protect, 
to prevent, flung him forward--close to the dizzy edge of the 
gulf below. but his muscle refuse obedience to the will. the 
paralysis of common fear rooted him to the rocks. 

but the sudden change of focus instantly destroy the picture; 
and so vehement was the fall from glory into meanness, that it dislocate 
the machinery of clairvoyant vision. the inner perception 
cloud and grew dark. outer and inner mingle in violent, inextricable 
confusion. the wrench seem almost physical. it happen 
all at once, retreat and continuation for a moment somehow combined. 
and, if he did not definitely see the awful thing, at least he 
was aware that it had come to pass. he knew it as positively as 
though his eye were glue against a magnify lens in the still 
of some laboratory. he witness it. 

the supreme moment of evocation was close. life, through that 
awful sandy vortex, whirl and raged. loose particle shower 
and pelted, caught by the draught of vehement life that mould the 
substance of the desert into imperial outline--when, suddenly, shot 
the little evil thing across that mar and blasted it. 

into the whirlpool flew forward a particle of material that was a 
human being. and the group-soul caught and use it. 

the actual accomplishment henriot did not claim to see. he was 
a witness, but a witness who could give no evidence. whether the 
woman was pushed of set intention, or whether some detail of 
sound and pattern was false use to effect the terrible result, he 
was helpless to determine. he pretend no itemise account. she 
went. in one second, with appalling swiftness, she disappeared, 
swallow out of space and time within that awful maw--one little 
corpuscle among a million through which the life, now stalk the 
desert wastes, mould itself a troop-like body. sand took her. 

there follow emptiness--a hush of unutterable silence, stillness, 
peace. movement and sound instantly retired whence they 
came. the avenue of memory closed; the splendour all went 
down into their sandy tombs.... 

* * * * * 

the moon had sunk into the libya wilderness; the eastern sky was 
red. the dawn drew out that wondrous sweet of the desert, 
which is as sister to the sweet that the moonlight brings. the 
desert settled back to sleep, huge, unfathomable, charged to the 
brim with life that watches, waits, and yet conceal itself behind 
the ruins of apparent desolation. and the wadi, empty at his feet, 
fill slow with the gentle little wind that bring the sunrise. 

then, across the pale glimmer of sand, henriot saw a figure 
moving. it came quick towards him, yet unsteadily, and with a 
hurry that was ugly. vance was on the way to fetch him. and the 
horror of the man's approach struck him like a hammer in the face. 
he closed his eyes, sink back to hide. 

but, before he swooned, there reach him the clatter of the 
murderer's tread as he began to climb over the splinter rocks, and 
the faint echo of his voice, calling him by name--falsely and in 
pretence--for help. 


the end 


[transcriber's note: in chapter ix of the story sand, the 
word "indescriable" was correct to "indescribable."] 







end of project gutenberg's four weird tales, by algernon blackwood 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook four weird tale *** 

***** this file should be name 16726.txt or 16726.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/7/2/16726/ 

produce by suzanne shell, geetu melwani and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
