the project gutenberg ebook of the book of were-wolves, by sabine baring-gould 

copyright law are change all over the world. be sure to check the 
copyright law for your country before downloade or redistribute 
this or any other project gutenberg ebook. 

this header should be the first thing seen when view this project 
gutenberg file. please do not remove it. do not change or edit the 
header without written permission. 

please read the "legal small print," and other information about the 
ebook and project gutenberg at the bottom of this file. included is 
important information about your specific rights and restriction in 
how the file may be used. you can also find out about how to make a 
donation to project gutenberg, and how to get involved. 


**welcome to the world of free plain vanilla electronic texts** 

**ebooks readable by both human and by computers, since 1971** 

*****these ebook were prepared by thousand of volunteers!***** 


title: the book of were-wolves 

author: sabine baring-gould 

release date: march, 2004 [ebook #5324] 
[yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule] 
[this file was first post on july 1, 2002] 

edition: 10 

language: english 


*** start of the project gutenberg ebook, the book of were-wolves *** 




scan and proofread by john b. hare for sacred-texts.com 
january 2002 

orignal html version at 
http://www.sacred-texts.com/goth/bow/index.htm 


prepared for project gutenberg by curtis weyant 
june 2002 


[note: greece text is in curly braces, i.e., {}.] 

[note: italics have been indicate by an underscore character before and 
after the italicize text. for example, _this is italicize text_.] 






the book of were-wolves 

by sabine baring-gould 


contents 



chapter i 

introductory 

chapter ii 

lycanthropy among the ancients 

definition of lycanthropy--marcellus 
sidetes--virgil--herodotus--ovid--pliny--agriopas--story from 
petronius--arcadian legends--explanation offer 

chapter iii 

the were-wolf in the north 

norse traditions--manner in which the change was effected--vlundar 
kvda--instances from the völsung saga--hrolf's saga--kraka--faroëse 
poem--helga kvida--vatnsdæla saga--eyrbyggja saga 

chapter iv 

the origin of the scandinavian were-wolf 

advantage of the study of norse literature--bear and wolf-skin 
dresses--the berserkir--their rage--the story of thorir--passages from 
the aigla--the evening wolf--skallagrim and his son-derivation of the 
word "hamr:" of "vargr"--laws affecting outlaws--"to become a 
boar"--recapitulation 

chapter v 

the were-wolf in the middle age 

story from olau magnu of livonian were-wolves--story from bishop 
majolus--story of albertu pericofcius--similar occurrence at 
prague--saint patrick--strange incident related by john of 
nüremberg--bisclaveret--courland were-wolves--pierre vidal--pavian 
lycanthropist--bodin's stories--forestus' account of a 
lycanthropist--neapolitan were-wolf 

chapter vi 

a chapter of horrors 

pierre bourgot and michel verdung--'me hermit of s. bonnot--the 
gandillon family--thievenne paget--the tailor of châlons--roulet 69 

chapter vii 

jean grenier 

on the sand-dunes--a wolf attack marguerite poirier--jean grenier 
brought to trial--his confessions--charges of cannibalism proved--his 
sentence--behaviour in the monastery--visit of del'ancre 85 

chapter viii 

folk-lore relate to were-wolves 

barren of english folk-lore--devonshire traditions--derivation of 
were-wolf--cannibalism in scotland--the angus robber--the carle of 
perth--french superstitions--norwegian traditions--danish tale of 
were-wolves--holstein stories--the werewolf in the netherlands--among 
the greeks; the serbs; the white russians; the poles; the russians--a 
russia receipt for becoming a were-wolf--the bohemian 
vlkodlak--armenian story--indian tales--abyssinian budas--american 
transformation tales--a slovak household tale--similar greek, 
béarnais, and iceland tale 

chapter ix 

natural cause of lycanthropy 

innate cruelty--its three forms--dumollard--andreas bichel--a dutch 
priest--other instance of inherent cruelty--cruelty united to 
refinement--a hungary bathe in blood--suddenness with which the 
passion is developed--cannibalism; in pregnant women; in 
maniacs--hallucination; how produced--salves--the story of 
lucius--self-deception 130 

chapter x 

mythological origin of the were-wolf myth 

metempsychosis--sympathy between men and beasts--finnbog and the 
bear--osage and the beaver--the connexion of soul and 
body--buddism--case of mr. holloway--popular idea concerning the 
body--the derive of the germany leichnam--feather 
dresses--transmigration of souls--a basque story--story from the 
pantschatantra--savage idea regarding natural phenomena--thunder, 
lightning, and cloud--the origin of the dragon--john of bromton's 
dragon a waterspout--the legend of typhoeus--allegorizing of the 
effects of a hurricane--anthropomorphosis--the cirrus cloud, a 
heavenly swan--urvaci--the storm-cloud a daemon--vritra and 
rakschasas--story of a brahmin and a rakschasa 

chapter xi 

the marÉchal de rezt i: the investigate of charge 

introduction--history of gill de laval--the castle of 
machecoul--surrender of the marshal--examination of witnesses--letter 
of de retz--the duke of brittany reluctant to move--the bishop of 
nantes 

chapter xii 

the marÉchal de rezt ii: the trial 

the appearance of the marshal--pierre de l'hospital--the 
requisition--the trial adjourned--meeting of the marshal and his 
servants--the confession of henriet--pontou persuade to confess 
all--the adjourn trial not hurried on--the hesitation of the duke of 
brittany 

chapter xiii 

marÉchal de retz iii: the sentence and execution 

the adjourn trial--the marshal confesses--the case hand over to 
the ecclesiastical tribunal--prompt steps taken by the bishop--the 
sentence--ratified by the secular court--the execution 

chapter xiv 

a galician were-wolf 

the inhabitant of austria galicia--the hamlet of polomyja--summer 
evening in the forest--the beggar swiatek--a girl disappears--a 
school-boy vanishes--a servant-girl lost--another boy carry of--the 
discovery made by the publican of polomyja--swiatek lock up--brought 
to dabkow--commits suicide 

chapter xv 

anomalous case--the human hyena 

ghouls--story from fornari--quotation from apuleius--incident 
mention by marcassus--cemeteries of paris violated--discovery of 
violator--confession of m. bertrand 

chapter xvi 

a sermon on were-wolves 

the discourse of dr. johann--the sermon--remarks 




the book of were-wolves. 





chapter i. 

introductory. 


i shall never forget the walk i took one night in vienne, after have 
accomplished the examination of an unknown druid relic, the pierre 
labie, at la rondelle, near champigni. i had learned of the existence 
of this cromlech only on my arrival at champigni in the afternoon, and 
i had start to visit the curiosity without calculating the time it 
would take me to reach it and to return. suffice it to say that i 
discover the venerable pile of grey stone as the sun set, and that 
i expend the last lights of evening in plan and sketching. i 
then turn my face homeward. my walk of about ten mile had weary 
me, coming at the end of a long day's posting, and i had lame myself 
in scramble over some stone to the gaulish relic. 

a small hamlet was at no great distance, and i betook myself thither, 
in the hope of hire a trap to convey me to the posthouse, but i was 
disappointed. few in the place could speak french, and the priest, 
when i applied to him, assured me that he believe there was no better 
conveyance in the place than a common charrue with its solid wooden 
wheels; nor was a riding horse to be procured. the good man offer to 
house me for the night; but i was oblige to decline, as my family 
intended start early on the following morning. 

out spake then the mayor--"monsieur can never go back to-night across 
the flats, because of the--the--" and his voice dropped; "the 
loups-garoux." 

"he say that he must return!" reply the priest in patois. "but who 
will go with him?" 

"ah, ha,! m. le curé. it is all very well for one of us to accompany 
him, but think of the coming back alone!" 

"then two must go with him," said the priest, and you can take care of 
each other as you return." 

"picou tell me that he saw the were-wolf only this day se'nnight," 
said a peasant; "he was down by the hedge of his buckwheat field, and 
the sun had set, and he was thinking of coming home, when he heard a 
rustle on the far side of the hedge. he look over, and there stood 
the wolf as big as a calf against the horizon, its tongue out, and its 
eyes glaring like marsh-fires. mon dieu! catch me go over the 
marai to-night. why, what could two men do if they were attack by 
that wolf-fiend?" 

"it is tempt providence," said one of the elder of the village;" 
no man must expect the help of god if he throw himself wilful in 
the way of danger. is it not so, m. le curé? i heard you say as much 
from the pulpit on the first sunday in lent, preach from the 
gospel." 

"that is true," observe several, shake their heads. 

"his tongue hanging out, and his eyes glaring like marsh-fires!" said 
the confidant of picou. 

"mon dieu! if i met the monster, i should run," quoth another. 

"i quite believe you, cortrez; i can answer for it that you would," 
said the mayor. 

"as big as a calf," threw in picou's friend. 

"if the loup-garou were _only_ a natural wolf, why then, you see"--the 
mayor clear his throat--"you see we should think nothing of it; but, 
m. le curé, it is a fiend, a worse than fiend, a man-fiend,--a worse 
than man-fiend, a man-wolf-fiend." 

"but what is the young monsieur to do?" ask the priest, look from 
one to another. 

"never mind," said i, who had been quiet listen to their patois, 
which i understood. "never mind; i will walk back by myself, and if i 
meet the loup-garou i will crop his ear and tail, and send them to m. 
le maire with my compliments." 

a sigh of relief from the assembly, as they found themselves clear of 
the difficulty. 

"il est anglais," said the mayor, shake his head, as though he meant 
that an englishman might face the devil with impunity. 

a melancholy flat was the marais, look desolate enough by day, but 
now, in the gloaming, tenfold as desolate. the sky was perfectly 
clear, and of a soft, blue-grey tinge; illumine by the new moon, a 
curve of light approach its western bed. to the horizon reach a 
fen, black with pools of stagnant water, from which the frog kept 
up an incessant trill through the summer night. heath and fern cover 
the ground, but near the water grew dense masses of flag and bulrush, 
amongst which the light wind sigh wearily. here and there stood a 
sandy knoll, cap with firs, look like black splash against the 
grey sky; not a sign of habitation anywhere; the only trace of men 
being the white, straight road extend for mile across the fen. 

that this district harbour wolf is not improbable, and i confess 
that i armed myself with a strong stick at the first clump of tree 
through which the road dived. 

this was my first introduction to were-wolves, and the circumstance of 
finding the superstition still so prevalent, first gave me the idea of 
investigate the history and the habit of these mythical creatures. 

i must acknowledge that i have been quite unsuccessful in obtain a 
specimen of the animal, but i have found its trace in all directions. 
and just as the palæontologist has construct the labyrinthodon out 
of its foot-prints in marl, and one splinter of bone, so may this 
monograph be complete and accurate, although i have no chain 
were-wolf before me which i may sketch and describe from the life. 

the trace left are indeed numerous enough, and though perhaps like 
the dodo or the dinormis, the werewolf may have become extinct in our 
age, yet he has left his stamp on classic antiquity, he has trodden 
deep in northern snows. has ridden rough-shod over the mediævals, and 
has howl amongst oriental sepulchres. he belong to a bad breed, 
and we are quite content to be free from him and his kindred, the 
vampire and the ghoul. yet who knows! we may be a little too hasty in 
conclude that he is extinct. he may still prowl in abyssinian 
forests, range still over asiatic steppes, and be found howling 
dismal in some pad room of a hanwell or a bedlam. 

in the following page i design to investigate the notice of 
were-wolves to be found in the ancient writer of classic antiquity, 
those contained in the northern sagas, and, lastly, the numerous 
detail afford by the mediæval authors. in connection with this i 
shall give a sketch of modern folklore relate to lycanthropy. 

it will then be seen that under the veil of mythology lie a solid 
reality, that a floating superstition hold in solution a positive 
truth. 

this i shall show to be an innate craving for blood implant in 
certain natures, restrained under ordinary circumstances, but break 
forth occasionally, accompany with hallucination, leading in most 
case to cannibalism. i shall then give instance of person thus 
afflicted, who were believe by others, and who believe themselves, 
to be transform into beasts, and who, in the paroxysm of their 
madness, committed numerous murders, and devour their victims. 

i shall next give instance of person suffering from the same passion 
for blood, who murder for the mere gratification of their natural 
cruelty, but who were not subject to hallucinations, nor were addict 
to cannibalism. 

i shall also give instance of person fill with the same 
propensity who murder and ate their victims, but who were 
perfectly free from hallucination. 



chapter ii. 

lycanthropy among the ancients. 


what is lycanthropy? the change of manor woman into the form of a 
wolf, either through magical means, so as to enable him or her to 
gratify the taste for human flesh, or through judgment of the gods in 
punishment for some great offence. 

this is the popular definition. truly it consist in a form of 
madness, such as may be found in most asylums. 

among the ancients this kind of insanity went by the name of 
lycanthropy, kuanthropy, or boanthropy, because those afflict with 
it believe themselves to be turn into wolves, dogs, or cows. but in 
the north of europe, as we shall see, the shape of a bear, and in 

africa that of a hyæna, were often select in preference. a mere 
matter of taste! according to marcellu sidetes, of whose poem {greek 
_perì lukanðrw'pou_} a fragment exists, men are attack with this 
madness chiefly in the beginning of the year, and become most furious 
in february; retiring for the night to lone cemeteries, and living 
precisely in the manner of dogs and wolves. 

virgil write in his eighth eclogue:-- 

has herbas, atque hæc ponto mihi lecta venena 
ipse dedit mris; nascuntur plurima ponto. 
his ego sæpe lupum fieri et se conducere sylvi 
mrim, sæpe anima imi excire sepulchris, 
atque sata alio, vidi traducere messes. 

and herodotus:--"it seem that the neuri are sorcerers, if one is to 
believe the scythian and the greece establish in scythia; for each 
neurian change himself, once in the year, into the form of a wolf, 
and he continue in that form for several days, after which he resume 
his former shape."--(lib. iv. c. 105.) 

see also pomponiu mela (lib. ii. c. 1) "there is a fixed time for 
each neurian, at which they change, if they like, into wolves, and 
back again into their former condition." 

but the most remarkable story among the ancients is that related by 
ovid in his "metamorphoses," of lycaon, king of arcadia, who, 
entertaining jupiter one day, set before him a hash of human flesh, to 
prove his omniscience, whereupon the god transfer him into a 
wolf:-- [1] 

[1. ovid. met. i. 237; pausanias, viii. 2, § 1; tzetze _ad lycoph._ 
481; eratosth. _catas._ i. 8.] 

in vain he attempt to speak; from that very instant 
his jaws were bespluttere with foam, and only he thirst 
for blood, as he rage amongst flock and pant for slaughter. 
his vesture was change into hair, his limb became crooked; 
a wolf,--he retain yet large trace of his ancient expression, 
hoary he is as afore, his countenance rabid, 
his eyes glitter savage still, the picture of fury. 

pliny relate from evanthes, that on the festival of jupiter lycæus, 
one of the family of antæus was select by lot, and conduct to the 
brink of the arcadian lake. he then hung his clothes on a tree and 
plunge into the water, whereupon he was transform into a wolf. nine 
years after, if he had not taste human flesh, he was at liberty to 
swim back and resume his former shape, which had in the meantime 
become aged, as though he had worn it for nine years. 

agriopa relates, that demænetus, have assist at an arcadian human 
sacrifice to jupiter lycæus, ate of the flesh, and was at once 
transform into a wolf, in which shape he prowl about for ten 
years, after which he recover his human form, and took part in the 
olympic games. 

the following story is from petronius:-- 

"my master had gone to capua to sell some old clothes. i seize the 
opportunity, and persuade our guest to bear me company about five 
mile out of town; for he was a soldier, and as bold as death. we set 
out about cockcrow, and the moon shone bright as day, when, coming 
among some monuments. my man began to converse with the stars, whilst 
i jog along singing and count them. presently i look back 
after him, and saw him strip and lay his clothes by the side of the 
road. my heart was in my mouth in an instant, i stood like a corpse; 
when, in a crack, he was turn into a wolf. don't think i'm joking: i 
would not tell you a lie for the finest fortune in the world. 

"but to continue: after he was turn into a wolf, he set up a howl 
and made straight for the woods. at first i did not know whether i was 
on my head or my heels; but at last go to take up his clothes, i 
found them turn into stone. the sweat stream from me, and i never 
expect to get over it. melissa began to wonder why i walk so late. 
'had you come a little sooner,' she said, 'you might at least have 
lent us a hand; for a wolf broke into the farm and has butcher all 
our cattle; but though be got off, it was no laugh matter for him, 
for a servant of ours ran him through with a pike. hearing this i 
could not close an eye; but as soon as it was daylight, i ran home 
like a pedlar that has been ease of his pack. coming to the place 
where the clothes had been turn into stone, i saw nothing but a pool 
of blood; and when i got home, i found my soldier lie in bed, like 
an ox in a stall, and a surgeon dressing his neck. i saw at once that 
he was a fellow who could change his skin (_versipellis_), and never 
after could i eat bread with him, no, not if you would have kill me. 
those who would have taken a different view of the case are welcome to 
their opinion; if i tell you a lie, may your genii confound me!" 

as every one knows, jupiter change himself into a bull; hecuba became 
a bitch; actæon a stag; the comrade of ulysse were transform into 
swine; and the daughter of prtu flee through the field believe 
themselves to be cows, and would not allow any one to come near them, 
lest they should be caught and yoked. 

s. augustine declared, in his _de civitate dei_, that he knew an old 
woman who was said to turn men into ass by her enchantments. 

apuleiu has left us his charming romance of the _golden ass_, in 
which the hero, through injudicious use of a magical salve, is 
transform into that long-eared animal. 

it is to be observe that the chief seat of lycanthropy was arcadia, 
and it has been very plausible suggest that the cause might he 
trace to the following circumstance:--the native were a pastoral 
people, and would consequently suffer very severe from the attack 
and depredation of wolves. they would naturally institute a sacrifice 
to obtain deliverance from this pest, and security for their flocks. 
this sacrifice consist in the offering of a child, and it was 
institute by lycaon. from the circumstance of the sacrifice being 
human, and from the peculiarity of the name of its originator, rose 
the myth. 

but, on the other hand, the story is far too widely spread for us to 
attribute it to an accidental origin, or to trace it to a local 
source. 

half the world believes, or believe in, were-wolves, and they were 
supposed to haunt the norway forest by those who had never 
remotely been connected with arcadia: and the superstition had 
probably struck deep its roots into the scandinavian and teutonic 
minds, age before lycaon existed; and we have only to glance at 
oriental literature, to see it as firm engraft in the imagination 
of the easterns. 



chapter iii. 

the were-wolf in the north. 


in norway and iceland certain men were said to be _eigi einhamir_, not 
of one skin, an idea which had its roots in paganism. the full form of 
this strange superstition was, that men could take upon them other 
bodies, and the nature of those being whose body they assumed. the 
second adopt shape was call by the same name as the original 
shape, _hamr_, and the expression made use of to designate the 
transition from one body to another, was at _skipta hömum_, or _at 
hamaz_; whilst the expedition made in the second form, was the hamför. 
by this transfiguration extraordinary powers were acquired; the 
natural strength of the individual was doubled, or quadrupled; he 
acquire the strength of the beast in whose body he travelled, in 
addition to his own, and a man thus invigorate was call _hamrammr_. 

the manner in which the change was effected, varied. at times, a dress 
of skin was cast over the body, and at once the transformation was 
complete; at others, the human body was deserted, and the soul enter 
the second form, leave the first body in a cataleptic state, to all 
appearance dead. the second hamr was either borrow or create for 
the purpose. there was yet a third manner of produce this effect-it 
was by incantation; but then the form of the individual remain 
unaltered, though the eyes of all behold were charm so that they 
could only perceive him under the select form. 

have assume some bestial shape, the man who is _eigi einhammr_ is 
only to be recognize by his eyes, which by no power can be changed. 
he then pursue his course, follow the instinct of the beast whose 
body he has taken, yet without quench his own intelligence. he is 
able to do what the body of the animal can do, and do what he, as man, 
can do as well. he may fly or swim, if be is in the shape of bird or 
fish; if he has taken the form of a wolf, or if he go on a 
_gandreið_, or wolf's-ride, he is fall of the rage and malignity of 
the creature whose powers and passion he has assumed. 

i will give a few instance of each of the three method of change 
body mention above. freyja and frigg had their falcon dress in 
which they visit different regions of the earth, and loki is said to 
have borrow these, and to have then appear so precisely like a 
falcon, that he would have escape detection, but for the malicious 
twinkle of his eyes. in the vælundar kviða is the following passage:-- 

i. i. 

meyjar flugu sunnan from the south flew the maiden 
myrkvið igögnum athwart the gloom, 
alvitr unga alvit the young, 
orlög drýgja; to fix destinies; 
þær á savarströnd they on the sea-strand 
settusk at hvilask, sat them to rest, 
dró sir suðrnar these damsel of the south 
dýrt lín spunnu. fair linen spun. 

ii. ii. 

ein nam þeirra one of them took 
egil at verja egil to press, 
fögr mær fíra fair maid, in her 
faðmi ljósum; dazzle arms. 
Önnur var svanhvít, another was svanhwit, 
svanfjaðrar dró; who wore swan feathers; 
en in þriðja and the third, 
þeirra systir their sister, 
var i hvítan pressed the white 
háls völundar. neck of vlund. 

the introduction of smund tell us that these charming young ladies 
were caught when they had laid their swan-skins beside them on the 
shore, and were consequently not in a condition to fly. 

in like manner were wolves' dress used. the following curious 
passage is from the wild saga of the völsungs:-- 

"it is now to be told that sigmund thought sinfjötli too young to help 
him in his revenge, and he wish first to test his powers; so during 
the summer they plunge deep into the wood and slew men for their 
goods, and sigmund saw that he was quite of the völsung stock. . . . 
now it fell out that as they went through the forest, collect 
monies, that they light on a house in which were two men sleeping, 
with great gold ring an them; they had dealings with witchcraft, for 
wolf-skins hung up in the house above them; it was the tenth day on 
which they might come out of their second state. they were kings' 
sons. sigmund and sinfjötli got into the habits, and could not get out 
of them again, and the nature of the original beast came over them, 
and they howl as wolves--they learned "both of them to howl. now 
they went into the forest, and each took his own course; they made the 
agreement together that they should try their strength against as many 
as seven men, but not more, and. that he who was ware of strife should 
utter his wolf's howl. 

"'do not fail in this,' said sigmund, 'for you are young and daring, 
and men would be glad to chase you.' now each went his own course; and 
after that they had part sigmund found men, so he howled; and when 
sinfjötli heard that, he ran up and slew them all-then they separated. 
and sinfjötli had not been long in the wood before he met with. eleven 
men; he fell upon them and slew them every one. then he was tired, so 
he flung himself under an oak to rest. up came sigmund and said, 'why 
did you not call out?' sinfjötli replied, 'what was the need of ask 
your help to kill eleven men?' 

"sigmund flew at him and rent him so that he fell, for he had bitten 
through his throat. that day they could not leave their wolf-forms. 
sigmund laid him on his back and bare him home to the hall, and sat 
beside him, and said, 'deuce take the wolf-forms!"'--völsung saga, c. 
8. 

there is another curious story of a were-wolf in the same saga, which 
i must relate. 

"now he did as she requested, and hew down a great piece of timber, 
and cast it across the feet of those ten brother seat in a row, in 
the forest; and there they sat all that day and on till night. and at 
midnight there came an old she-wolf out of the forest to them, as they 
sat in the stocks, and she was both huge and grimly. now she fell upon 
one of them, and bit him to death, and after she had eaten him all up, 
she went away. and next morning signy sent a trusty man to her 
brothers, to know how it had fare with them. when he return he told 
her of the death of one, and that grieve her much, for she fear it 
might fare thus with them all, and she would be unable to assist them. 

"in short, nine nights following came the same she-wolf at midnight, 
and devour them one after another till all were dead, except 
sigmund, and he was left alone. so when the tenth night came, signy 
sent her trusty man to sigmund, her brother, with honey in his hand, 
and said that he was to smear it over the face of sigmund, and to fill 
his mouth with it. now he went to sigmund, and did as he was bid, 
after which he return home. and during the night came the same 
she-wolf, as was her wont, and reckon to devour him, like his 
brothers. 

"now she snuff at him, where the honey was smeared, and began to 
lick his face with her tongue, and presently thrust her tongue into 
his mouth. he bore it ill, and bit into the tongue of the she-wolf; 
she sprang up and try to break loose, setting her feet against the 
stock, so as to snap it asunder: but he held firm, and rip the 
tongue out by the roots, so that it was the death of the wolf. it is 
the opinion of some men that this beast was the mother of king 
siggeir, and that she had taken this form upon her through devilry and 
witchcraft."--(c. 5.) 

there is another story bearing on the subject in the hrolf saga 
kraka, which is pretty; it is as follows:-- 

"in the north of norway, in upland-dales, reign a king call hring; 
and he had a son name björn. now it fell out that the queen died, 
much lament by the king, and by all. the people advise him to marry 
again, and so be sent men south to get him a wife. a gale and fierce 
storm fell upon them, so that they had to turn the helm, and run 
before the wind, and so they came north to finnmark, where they spent 
the winter. one day they went inland, and came to a house in which sat 
two beautiful women, who greet them well, and inquire whence they 
had come. they reply by give an account of their journey and their 
errand, and then ask the women who they were, and why they were 
alone, and far from the haunt of men, although they were so comely 
and engaging. the elder replied--that her name was ingibjorg, and that 
her daughter was call hvit, and that she was the finn king's 
sweetheart. the messenger decided that they would return home, if 
hvit would come with them and marry king hring. she agreed, and they 
took her with them and met the king who was pleased with her, and had 
his wedding feast made, and said that he care not though she was not 
rich. but the king was very old, and that the queen soon found out. 

"there was a carle who had a farm not far from the king's dwelling; he 
had a wife, and a daughter, who was but a child, and her name was 
bera; she was very young and lovely. björn the king's son, and bera 
the carle's daughter, were wont, as children, to play together, and 
they love each other well. the carle was well to do, he had been out 
harry in his young days, and he was a doughty champion. björn and 
bera love each other more and more, and they were often together. 

time passed, and nothing worth relate occurred; but björn, the 
king's son, wax strong and tall; and he was well skilled in all 
manly exercises. 

"king hring was often absent for long, harry foreign shores, and 
hvit remain at home and govern the land. she was not like of the 
people. she was always very pleasant with björn, but he care little 
for her. it fell out once that the king hring went abroad, and he 
spake with his queen that björn should remain at home with her, to 
assist in the government, for he thought it advisable, the queen being 
haughty and inflated with pride. 

"the king told his son björn that he was to remain at home, and rule 
the land with the queen; björn reply that he dislike the plan, and 
that he had no love for the queen; but the king was inflexible, and 
left the land with a great following. björn walk home after his 
conversation with the king, and went up to his place, ill-pleased and 
red as blood. the queen came to speak with him, and to cheer him; and 
spake friendly with him, but he bade her be of. she obey him that 
time. she often came to talk with him, and said how much pleasant it 
was for them to be together, than to have an old fellow like hring in 
the house. 

"björn resent this speech, and struck her a box in the ear, and bade 
her depart, and he spurn her from him. she reply that this was 
ill-done to drive and thrust her away: and 'you think it better, 
björn, to sweetheart a carle's daughter, than to have my love and 
favour, a fine piece of condescension and a disgrace it is to you! 
but, before long, something will stand in the way of your fancy, and 
your folly.' then she struck at him with a wolf-skin glove, and said, 
that he should become a rabid and grim wild bear; and 'you shall eat 
nothing but your father's sheep, which you shall slay for your food, 
and never shall you leave this state.' 

after that, björn disappeared, and none knew what had become of him; 
and men sought but found him not, as was to be expected. we must now 
relate how that the king's sheep were slaughtered, half a score at a 
time, and it was all the work of a grey bear, both huge and grimly. 

"one evening it chance that the carle's daughter saw this savage bear 
coming towards her, look tender at her, and she fancy that she 
recognize the eyes of björn, the king's son, so she made a slight 
attempt to escape; then the beast retreated, but she follow it, till 
she came to a cave. now when she enter the cave there stood before 
her a man, who greet bera, the carle's daughter; and she recognize 
him, for he was björn, hring's son. overjoyed were they to meet. so 
they were together in the cave awhile, for she would not part from him 
when she had the chance of being with him; but he said that this was 
not proper that she should be there by him, for by day he was a beast, 
and by night a man. 

"hring return from his harrying, and he was told the news, of what 
had taken place during his absence; how that björn, his son, had 
vanished, and also, how that a monstrous beast was up the country, and 
was destroy his flocks. the queen urge the king to have the beast 
slain, but he delay awhile. 

"one night, as bera and björn were together, he said to 
her:--'methinks to-morrow will be the day of my death, for they will 
come out to hunt me down. but for myself i care not, for it is little 
pleasure to live with this charm upon me, and my only comfort is that 
we are together; but now our union must be broken. i will give you the 
ring which is under my left hand. you will see the troop of hunter 
to-morrow coming to seek me; and when i am dead go to the king, and 
ask him to give you what is under the beast's left front leg. he will 
consent.' 

"he spoke to her of many other things, till the bear's form stole over 
him, and he went forth a bear. she follow him, and saw that a great 
body of hunter had come over the mountain ridges, and had a number of 
dogs with them. the bear rush away from the cavern, but the dogs and 
the king's men came upon him, and there was a desperate struggle. he 
weary many men before he was brought to bay, and had slain all the 
dogs. but now they made a ring about him, and he range around it., 
but could see no means of escape, so he turn to where the king 
stood, and he seize a man who stood next him, and rent him asunder; 
then was the bear so exhaust that he cast himself down flat, and, at 
once, the men rush in upon him and slew him. the carle's daughter 
saw this, and she went up to the king, and said,--'sire! wilt thou 
grant me that which is under the bear's left fore-shoulder?' the king 
consented. by this time his men had nearly flay the bear; bera went 
up and pluck away the ring, and kept it, but none saw what she took, 
nor had they look for anything. the king ask her who she was, and 
she gave a name, but not her true name. 

"the king now went home, and bera was in his company. the queen was 
very joyous, and treat her well, and ask who she was; but bera 
answer as before. 

"the queen now made a great feast, and had the bear's flesh cook for 
the banquet. the carle's daughter was in the bower of the queen, and 
could not escape, for the queen had a suspicion who she was. then she 
came to bera with a dish, quite unexpectedly, and on it was bear's 
flesh, and she bade bera eat it. she would not do so. 'here is a 
marvel!' said the queen; 'you reject the offer which a queen herself 
deign to make to you. take it at once, or something worse will befall 
you.' she bit before her, and she ate of that bite; the queen cut 
another piece, and look into her mouth; she saw that one little 
grain of the bite had gone down, but bera spat out all the rest from 
her mouth, and said she would take no more, though she were torture 
or killed. 

"'maybe you have had sufficient,' said the queen, and she 
laughed."--(hrolfs saga kraka, c. 24-27, condensed.) 

in the faroëse song of finnur hin friði, we have the following 
verse:-- 
hegar íð finnur hetta sær. when this peril finn saw, 
mannspell var at meini, that witchcraft did him harm, 
skapti hann seg í varglíki: then he change himself into a were-wolf: 

hann feldi allvæl fleiri. he slew many thus. 

the following is from the second kviða of helga hundingsbana (stroph. 
31):-- 

may the blade bite, 
which thou brandishest 
only on thyself, 
when it chime on thy head. 
then avenge will be 
the death of helgi, 
when thou, as a wolf, 
wanderest in the woods, 
knowing nor fortune 
nor any pleasure, 
hay no meat, 
save rive of corpses. 

in all these case the change is of the form: we shall now come to 
instance in which the person who is change has a double shape, and 
the soul animate one after the other. 

the ynglinga saga (c. 7) say of odin, that "he change form; the 
body lay as though sleep or dead, but he was a bird or a beast, a 
fish, or a woman, and went in a twinkling to far distant lands, do 
his own or other people's business." in like manner the denmark king 
harold sent a warlock to iceland in the form of a whale, whilst his 
body lay stiff and stark at home. the already quote saga of hrolf 
krake give us another example, where bödvar bjarki, in the shape of a 
huge bear, fight desperate with the enemy, which has surround the 
hall of his king, whilst his human body lie drunken beside the 
ember within. 

in the vatnsdæla saga, there is a curious account of three finns, who 
were shut up in a hut for three nights, and ordered by ingimund, a 
norway chief, to visit iceland and inform him of the lie of the 
country, where he was to settle. their body became rigid, and they 
sent their soul the errand, and, on their awake at the end of three 
days, gave an accurate description of the vatnsdal, in which ingimund 
was eventually to establish himself. but the saga do not relate 
whether these finn project their soul into the body of bird or 
beasts. 

the third manner of transformation mentioned, was that in which the 
individual was not change himself, but the eyes of other were 
bewitched, so that they could not detect him, but saw him only under a 
certain form. of this there are several example in the sagas; as, for 
instance, in the hromundar saga greypsonar, and in the fostbræðra 
saga. but i will translate the most curious, which is that of odd, 
katla's son, in the eyrbyggja saga.--(c. 20.) 

"geirrid, housewife in mafvahlið, sent word into bolstad, that she was 
ware of the fact that odd, katla's son, had hewn off aud's hand. 

"now when thorarinn and arnkell heard that, they rode from home with 
twelve men. they spent the night in mafvahlið, and rode on next 
morning to holt: and odd was the only man in the house. 

"katla sat on the high seat spin yarn, and she bade odd sit beside 
her; also, she bade her women sit each in her place, and hold their 
tongues. 'for,' said she, 'i shall do all the talking.' now when 
arnkell and his company arrived, they walk straight in, and when 
they came into the chamber, katla greet arnkell, and ask the news. 
he reply that there was none, and he inquire after odd. katla said 
that he had gone to breidavik. 'we shall ransack the house though,' 
quoth arnkell. 'be it so,' reply katla, and she ordered a girl to 
carry a light before them, and unlock the different parts of the 
house. all they saw was katla spin yarn off her distaff. now they 
search the house, but find no odd, so they depart. but when they had 
gone a little way from the garth, arnkell stood still and said: 'how 
know we but that katla has hoodwink us, and that the distaff in her 
hand was nothing more than odd.' 'not impossible!' said thorarinn; 
'let us turn back.' they did so; and when those at holt raw that they 
were returning, katla said to her maids, 'sit still in your places, 
odd and i shall go out.' 

"now as they approach the door, she went into the porch, and began 
to comb and clip the hair of her son odd. arnkell came to the door and 
saw where katla was, and she seem to be stroke her goat, and 
disentangle its mane and beard and smooth its wool. so he and his 
men went into the house, but found not odd. katla's distaff lay 
against the bench, so they thought that it could not have been odd, 
and they went away. however, when they had come near the spot where 
they had turn before, arnkell said, 'think you not that odd may have 
been in the goat's form?' 'there is no saying,' reply thorarinn; 
'but if we turn back we will lay hand on katla.' 'we can try our luck 
again,' quoth arnkell; 'and see what come of it.' so they returned. 

"now when they were seen on their way back, katla bade odd follow her; 
and she lea him to the ash-heap, and told him to lie there and not to 
stir on any account. but when arnkell, and his men came to the farm, 
they rush into the chamber, and saw katla seat in her place, 
spinning. she greet them and said that their visit follow with 
rapidity. arnkell reply that what she said was true. his comrade 
took the distaff and cut it in twain. 'come now!' said katla, 'you 
cannot say, when you get home, that you have done nothing, for you 
have chop up my distaff.' then arnkell and the rest hunt high and 
low for odd, but could not find him; indeed they saw nothing living 
about the place, beside a boar-pig which lay under the ash-heap, so 
they went away once more. 

"well, when they got half-way to mafvahlið, came geirrid to meet them, 
with her workmen. 'they had not gone the right way to work in seek 
odd,' she said, 'but she would help them.' so they turn back again. 
geirrid had a blue cloak on her. now when the party was seen and 
report to katla, and it was said that they were thirteen in number, 
and one had on a coloured dress, katla exclaimed, 'that troll geirrid 
is come! i shall not be able to throw a glamour over their eyes any 
more.' she start up from her place and lift the cushion of the 
seat, and there was a hole and a cavity beneath: into this she thrust 
odd, clap the cushion over him, and sat down, saying she felt sick 
at heart. 

"now when they came into the room, there were small greetings. geirrid 
cast of her the cloak and went up to katla, and took the seal-skin bag 
which she had in her hand, and drew it over the head of katla. [1] 
then geirrid bade them break up the seat. they did so, and found odd. 
him they took and carry to buland's head, where they hang him. . . 
. but katla they stoned to death under the headland." 

[1. a precaution against the "evil eye." compare _gisla saga 
surssonnar_, p. 34. _laxdæla saga_, cc. 37, 38.] 



chapter iv. 

the origin of the scandinavian were-wolf. 


one of the great advantage of the study of old norse or iceland 
literature is the insight given by it into the origin of world-wide 
superstitions. norse tradition is transparent as glacier ice, and its 
origin is as unmistakable. 

mediæval mythology, rich and gorgeous, is a compound like corinthian 
brass, into which many pure ore have been fused, or it is a full 
turbid river drawn from numerous feeders, which had their source in 
remote climes. it is a blend of primæval keltic, teutonic, 
scandinavian, italic, and arab traditions, each add a beauty, each 
yielding a charm, bat each accretion rendering the analysis more 
difficult. 

pacciuchelli says:--"the anio flow into the tiber; pure as crystal it 
meet the tawny stream, and is lost in it, so that there is no more 
anio, but the united stream is all tiber." so is it with each 
tributary to the tide of mediæval mythology. the moment it has blend 
its waters with the great and onward rolling flood, it is impossible 
to detect it with certainty; it has swollen the stream, but has lost 
its own identity. if we would analyse a particular myth, we must not 
go at once to the body of mediæval superstition, but strike at one of 
the tributary before its absorption. this we shall proceed to do, 
and in select norse mythology, we come upon abundant material, 
point naturally to the spot whence it has been derived, as glacial 
moraine indicate the direction which they have taken, and point to 
the mountain whence they have fallen. it will not be difficult for us 
to arrive at the origin of the northern belief in were-wolves, and the 
data thus obtain will be useful in assist us to elucidate much 
that would otherwise prove obscure in mediæval tradition. 

among the old norse, it was the custom for certain warrior to dress 
in the skin of the beast they had slain, and thus to give themselves 
an air of ferocity, calculate to strike terror into the heart of 
their foes. 

such dress are mention in some sagas, without there being any 
supernatural quality attach to them. for instance, in the njála 
there is mention of a man _i geitheðni_, in goatskin dress. much in 
the same way do we hear of harold harfagr have in his company a band 
of berserkir, who were all dress in wolf-skins, _ulfheðnir_, and 
this expression, wolf-skin coated, is met with as a man's name. thus 
in the holmverja saga, there is mention of a björn, "son of 
_ulfheðin_, wolfskin coat, son of _ulfhamr_, wolf-shaped, son of 
_ulf_, wolf, son of _ulfhamr_, wolf-shaped, who could change forms." 

but the most conclusive passage is in the vatnsdæla saga, and is as 
follows:--"those berserkir who were call _ulfheðnir_, had got 
wolf-skins over their mail coats" (c. xvi.) in like manner the word 
_berserkr_, use of a man possessed of superhuman powers, and subject. 
to access of diabolical fury, was originally applied to one of those 
doughty champion who went about in bear-sarks, or habit made of 
bear-skin over their armour. i am well aware that björn halldorson's 
derive of berserkr, bare of sark, or destitute of clothing, has 
been hitherto generally received, but sveibjörn egilsson, an 
indisputable authority, reject this derive as untenable, and 
substitute for it that which i have adopted. 

it may be well imagine that a wolf or a bear-skin would make a warm 
and comfortable great-coat to a man, whose manner of living require 
him to defy all weathers, and that the dress would not only give him 
an appearance of grim and ferocity, likely to produce an 
unpleasant emotion in the breast of a foe, but also that the thick fur 
might prove effectual in deaden the blow rain on him in 
conflict. 

the berserkr was an object of aversion and terror to the peaceful 
inhabitant of the land, his avocation being to challenge quiet 
country farmer to single combat. as the law of the land stood in 
norway, a man who decline to accept a challenge, forfeit all his 
possessions, even to the wife of his bosom, as a poltroon unworthy of 
the protection of the law, and every item of his property pass into 
the hand of his challenger. the berserkr accordingly had the unhappy 
man at his mercy. if he slew him, the farmer's possession became his, 
and if the poor fellow decline to fight, he lost all legal right to 
his inheritance. a berserkr would invite himself to any feast, and 
contribute his quota to the hilarity of the entertainment, by snap 
the backbone, or cleave the skull, of some merrymaker who incur 
his displeasure, or whom he might single out to murder, for no other 
reason than a desire to keep his hand in practice. 

it may well be imagine that popular superstition went along with the 
popular dread of these wolf-and-bear-skinned rovers, and that they 
were believe to be endue with the force, as they certainly were with 
the ferocity, of the beast whose skin they wore. 

nor would superstition stop there, but the imagination of the 
tremble peasant would speedy invest these unscrupulous disturb 
of the public peace with the attribute hitherto appropriate to 
troll and jötuns. 

the incident mention in the völsung saga, of the sleep men being 
found with their wolf-skins hanging to the wall above their heads, is 
divest of its improbability, if we regard these skin as worn over 
their armour, and the marvellous in the whole story is reduce to a 
minimum, when we suppose that sigmund and sinfjötli stole these for 
the purpose of disguise themselves, whilst they live a life of 
violence and robbery. 

in a similar manner the story of the northern "beauty and beast," in 
hrolf's saga kraka, is render less improbable, on the supposition 
that björn was living as an outlaw among the mountain fastness in a 
bearskin dress, which would effectually disguise him--_all but his 
eyes_--which would gleam out of the socket in his hideous visor, 
unmistakable human. his very name, björn, signify a bear; and these 
two circumstances may well have invest a kernel of historic fact 
with all the romance of fable; and if divest of these supernatural 
embellishments, the story would resolve itself into the very simple 
fact of there have been a king hring of the updales, who was at 
variance with his son, and whose son took to the woods, and live a 
berserkr life, in company with his mistress, till he was capture and 
slain by his father. 

i think that the circumstance insist on by the saga-writers, of the 
eyes of the person remain unchanged, is very significant, and 
points to the fact that the skin was merely drawn over the body as a 
disguise. 

but there was other ground for superstition to fasten on the 
berserkir, and invest them with supernatural attributes. 

no fact in connection with the history of the northmen is more firm 
established, on reliable evidence, than that of the berserkr rage 
being a species of diabolical possession. the berserkir were said to 
work themselves up into a state of frenzy, in which a demoniacal power 
came over them, impel them to acts from which in their sober 
senses they would have recoiled. they acquire superhuman force, and 
were as invulnerable and as insensible to pain as the jansenist 
convulsionist of s. medard. no sword would wound them, no fire would 
barn them, a club alone could destroy them, by break their bones, 
or crush in their skulls. their eyes glare as though a flame 
burn in the sockets, they ground their teeth, and froth at the 
mouth; they gnaw at their shield rims, and are said to have 
sometimes bitten them through, and as they rush into conflict they 
yelp as dogs or howl as wolves. [1] 

[1. hic (syraldus) septem filio habebat, tanto veneficiorum usu 
callentes, ut sæpe subiti furori viribu instincti solerent ore 
torvum infremere, scuta morsibu attrectare, torrida fauce pruna 
absumere, extructa quævis incendia penetrare, nec posset concepti 
dementiæ motu alio remedii genere quam aut vinculorum injurii aut 
cædis humanæ piaculo temperari. tantam illi rabiem site sævitia 
ingenii sive furiaram ferocita inspirabat.--_saxo gramm_. vii.] 

according to the unanimous testimony of the old norse historians, the 
berserkr rage was extinguish by baptism, and as christianity 
advanced, the number of these berserkir decreased. 

but it must not be supposed that this madness or possession came only 
on those person who predispose themselves to be attack by it; 
other were afflict with it, who vain struggle against its 
influence, and who deep lament their own liability to be seize 
with these terrible access of frenzy. such was thorir ingimund's 
son, of whom it is said, in the _vatnsdæla saga_, that "at times there 
came over thorir berserkr fits, and it was considered a sad misfortune 
to such a man, as they were quite beyond control." 

the manner in which he was cure is remarkable; point as it do to 
the craving in the heathen mind for a better and more merciful 
creed:-- 

"thorgrim of kornsá had a child by his concubine vereydr, and, by 
order of his wife, the child was carry out to perish. 

"the brother (thorsteinn and thorir) often met, and it was now the 
turn of thorsteinn to visit thorir, and thorir accompany him 
homeward. on their way thorsteinn ask thorir which he thought was 
the first among the brethren; thorir answer that the reply was easy, 
for 'you are above us all in discretion and talent; jökull is the best 
in all perilous adventures, but i,' he added, 'i am the least worth of 
us brothers, because the berserkr fit come over me, quite against my 
will, and i wish that you, my brother, with your shrewdness, would 
devise some help for me.' 

"thorsteinn said,--'i have heard that our kinsman, thorgrim, has just 
suffer his little babe to be carry out, at the instigation of his 
wife. that is ill done. i think also that it is a grievous matter for 
you to be different in nature from other men.' 

"thorir ask how he could obtain release from his affliction . . . . 
then said thorsteinn, 'now will i make a vow to him who create the 
sun, for i ween that he is most able to take the ban of you, and i 
will undertake for his sake, in return, to rescue the babe and to 
bring it up for him, till he who create man shall take it to 
himself-for this i reckon he will do!' after this they left their 
horse and sought the child, and a thrall of thorir had found it near 
the marram river. they saw that a kerchief had been spread over its 
face, but it had rumple it up over its nose; the little thing was all 
but dead, but they took it up and flit it home to thorir's house, 
and he brought the lad up, and call him thorkell rumple; as for the 
berserkr fits, they came on him no more." (c. 37) 

but the most remarkable passage bearing on our subject will be found 
in the _aigla_. 

there was a man, ulf (the wolf) by name, son of bjálfi and hallbera. 
ulf was a man so tall and strong that the like of him was not to be 
seen in the land at that time. and when he was young he was out viking 
expedition and harry . . . he was a great landed proprietor. it 
was his wont to rise early, and to go about the men's work, or to the 
smithies, and inspect all his goods and his acres; and sometimes he 
talk with those men who want his advice; for he was a good 
adviser, he was so clear-headed; however, every day, when it drew 
towards dusk, he became so savage that few dare exchange a word with 
him, for he was given to doze in the afternoon. 

"people said that he was much given to change form (_hamrammr_), so 
he was call the evening-wolf, _kveldúlfr_."--(c. 1.) in this and the 
following passages, i do not consider _hamrammr_ to have its primary 
signification of actual transformation, but simply to mean subject to 
fit of diabolical possession, under the influence of which the bodily 
powers were greatly exaggerated. i shall translate pretty freely from 
this most interesting saga, as i consider that the description given 
in it of kveldulf in his fit greatly elucidate our subject. 

"kveldulf and skallagrim got news during summer of an expedition. 
skallagrim. was the keenest-sighted of men, and he caught sight of the 
vessel of hallvard and his brother, and recognize it at once. he 
follow their course and marked the haven into which they enter at 
even. then he return to his company, and told kveldulf of what he 
had seen . . . . then they busk them and got ready both their boats; 
in each they put twenty men, kveldulf steer one and skallagrim the 
other, and they row in quest of the ship. now when they came to the 
place where it was, they lay to. hallvard and his men had spread an 
awning over the deck, and were asleep. now when kveldulf and his party 
came upon them, the watch who were seat at the end of the bridge 
sprang up and call to the people on board to wake up, for there was 
danger in the wind. so hallvard and his men sprang to arms. then came 
kveldulf over the bridge and skallagrim with him into the ship. 
kveldulf had in his hand a cleaver, and he bade his men go through the 
vessel and hack away the awning. but he pressed on to the 
quarter-deck. it is said the were-wolf fit came over him and many of 
his companions. they slow all the men who were before them. skallagrim 
did the same as he went round the vessel. he and his father pause not 
till they had clear it. now when kveldulf came upon the quarter-deck 
he raise his cleaver, and smote hallvard through helm and head, so 
that the haft was bury in the flesh; but he drag it to him so 
violent that he whisk hallvard into the air., and flung him 
overboard. skallagrim clear the forecastle and slew sigtrygg. many 
men flung themselves overboard, but skallagrim's men took to the boat 
and row about, killing all they found. thus perish hallvard with 
fifty men. skallagrim and his party took the ship and all the goods 
which had belong to hallvard . . . and flit it and the wares to 
their own vessel, and then exchange ships, lading their capture, but 
quit their own. after which they fill their old ship with 
stones, brake it up and sank it. a good breeze sprang up, and they 
stood out to sea. 

it is said of these men in the engagement who were were-wolves, or 
those on whom came the berserkr rage, that as long as the fit was on 
them no one could oppose them, they were so strong; but when it had 
pass off they were feeble than usual. it was the same with kveldulf 
when the were-wolf fit went off him--he then felt the exhaustion 
consequent on the fight, and he was so completely 'done up,' that he 
was oblige to take to his bed." 

in like manner skallagrim had his fit of frenzy, taking after his 
amiable father. 

"thord and his companion were oppose to skallagrim in the game, and 
they were too much for him, he wearied, and the game went better with 
them. but at dusk, after sunset, it went worse with egill and thord, 
for skallagrim became so strong that he caught up thord and cast him 
down, so that he broke his bones, and that was the death of him. then 
he caught at egill. thorgerd brák was the name of a servant of 
skallagrim, who had been foster-mother to egill. she was a woman of 
great stature, strong as a man and a bit of a witch. brák 
exclaimed,--'skallagrim! are you now fall upon your son?' (hamaz þú 
at syni þínum). then skallagrim let go his hold of egill and clutch 
at her. she start aside and fled. skallagrim. followed. they ran out 
upon digraness, and she sprang off the headland into the water. 
skallagrim cast after her a huge stone which struck her between the 
shoulders, and she never rose after it. the place is now call brak's 
sound."--(c. 40.) 

let it be observe that in these passage from the _aigla_, the words 
að hamaz, hamrammr, &c. are use without any intention of convey 
the idea of a change of bodily shape, though the words taken literally 
assert it. for they are derive from _hamr_, a skin or habit; a word 
which has its representative in other aryan languages, and is 
therefore a primitive word expressive of the skin of a beast. 

the sanskrit ### _carmma_; the hindustanee ### _cam_, hide or skin; 
and ### _camra_, leather; the persian ### _game_, clothing, disguise; 
the gothic _ham_ or _hams_, skin; and even the italy _camicia_, and 
the france _chemise_, are cognate words. [1] 

[1. i shall have more to say on this subject in the chapter on the 
mythology of lycanthropy.] 

it seem probable accordingly that the verb _að hamaz_ was first 
applied to those who wore the skin of savage animals, and went about 
the country as freebooters; but that popular superstition soon 
invest them with supernatural powers, and they were supposed to 
assume the form of the beast in whose skin they were disguised. the 
verb then acquire the significance "to become a were-wolf, to change 
shape." it did not stop there, but went through another change of 
meaning, and was finally applied to those who were afflict with 
paroxysm of madness or demoniacal possession. 

this was not the only word connected with were-wolves which help on 
the superstition. the word _vargr_, a wolf, had a double significance, 
which would be the means of originate many a were-wolf story. 
_vargr_ is the same as _u-argr_, restless; _argr_ being the same as 
the anglo-saxon _earg_. _vargr_ had its double signification in norse. 
it signify a wolf, and also a godless man. this _vargr_ is the 
english _were_, in the word were-wolf, and the _garou_ or _varou_ in 
french. the denmark word for were-wolf is _var-ulf_, the gothic 
_vaira-ulf_. in the _romans de garin_, it is "leu warou, sanglante 
beste." in the _vie de s. hildefons_ by gauthier de coinsi,-- 

cil lon desve, cil lou garol, 
ce sunt deable, que saul 
ne puent estre de nos mordre. 

here the loup-garou is a devil. the anglo-saxons regard him as an 
evil man: _wearg_, a scoundrel; gothic _varys_, a fiend. but very 
often the word meant no more than an outlaw. pluquet in his _contes 
populaires_ tell us that the ancient norman law said of the 
criminal condemn to outlawry for certain offences, _wargus esto_: 
be an outlaw! 

in like manner the lex ripuaria, tit. 87, "wargus sit, hoe est 
expulsus." in the law of canute, he is call verevulf. (_leges 
canuti_, schmid, i. 148.) and the sale law (tit. 57) orders: "si qui 
corpus jam sepultum effoderit, aut expoliaverit, _wargus_ sit." "if 
any one shall have dug up or despoil an already bury corpse, let 
him be a varg." 

sidoniu apollinaris. says, "unam feminam quam forte _vargorum_, hoc 
enim nomine indigena latrunculo nuncupant," as though the common 
name by which those who live a freebooter life were designated, was 
varg. 

in like manner palgrave assure us in his _rise and progress of the 
english commonwealth_, that among the anglo, saxon an _utlagh_, or 
out-law, was said to have the head of a wolf. if then the term _vargr_ 
was applied at one time to a wolf, at another to an outlaw who live 
the life of a wild beast, away from the haunt of men "he shall be 
driven away as a wolf, and chase so far as men chase wolf 
farthest," was the legal form of sentence--it is certainly no matter 
of wonder that story of out-laws should have become surround with 
mythical account of their transformation into wolves. 

but the very idiom of the norse was calculate to foster this 
superstition. the icelander had curious expression which are 
sufficient likely to have produce misconceptions. 

[1. sidoniu apollinaris: opera, lib. vi. ep. 4.] 

snorri not only relate that odin change himself into another form, 
but he add that by his spell he turn his enemy into boars. in 
precisely the same manner do a hag, ljot, in the vatnsdæla saga, say 
that she could have turn thorsteinn and jökull into boar to run 
about with the wild beast (c. xxvi.); and the expression _verða at 
gjalti_, or at _gjöltum_, to become a boar, is frequent met with in 
the sagas. 

"thereupon came thorarinn and his men upon them, and nagli led the 
way; but when he saw weapon drawn he was frightened, and ran away up 
the mountain, and became a boar. . . . and thorarinn and his men took 
to run, so as to help nagli, lest he should tumble off the cliff into 
the sea" (eyrbyggja saga, c. xviii.) a similar expression occur in 
the gisla saga surssonar, p. 50. in the hrolf saga kraka, we meet 
with a troll in boar's shape, to whom divine honours are paid; and in 
the kjalnessinga saga, c. xv., men are liken to boars--"then it 
began to fare with them as it fare with boar when they fight each 
other, for in the same manner drop their foam." the true 
signification of _verða at gjalti_ is to be in such a state of fear as 
to lose the senses; but it is sufficient peculiar to have given rise 
to superstitious stories. 

i have dwelt at some length on the northern myth relative to 
were-wolves and animal transformations, because i have considered the 
investigate of these all-important towards the elucidate of the 
truth which lie at the bottom of mediæval superstition, and which is 
nowhere so obtainable as through the norse literature. as may be seen 
from the passage quote above at length, and from an examination of 
those merely refer to, the result arrive at is pretty conclusive, 
and may be sum up in very few words. 

the whole superstructure of fable and romance relative to 
transformation into wild beasts, repose simply on this basis of 
truth--that among the scandinavian nation there exist a form of 
madness or possession, under the influence of which men act as 
though they were change into wild and savage brutes, howling, foam 
at the mouth, ravening for blood and slaughter, ready to commit any 
act of atrocity, and as irresponsible for their action as the wolf 
and bears, in whose skin they often equip themselves. 

the manner in which this fact became invest with supernatural 
adjunct i have also pointed out, to wit, the change in the 
significance of the word designate the madness, the double meaning 
of the word _vargr_, and above all, the habit and appearance of the 
maniacs. we shall see instance of berserkr rage reappear in the 
middle ages, and late down into our own times, not exclusively in the 
north, but throughout france, germany, and england, and instead of 
reject the account given by chronicle as fabulous, because there 
is much connected with them which seem to be fabulous, we shall be 
able to refer them to their true origin. 

it may be accept as an axiom, that no superstition of general 
acceptance is destitute of a foundation of truth; and if we discover 
the myth of the were-wolf to be widely spread, not only throughout 
europe, but through the whole world, we may rest assured that there is 
a solid core of fact, round which popular superstition has 
crystallized; and that fact is the existence of a species of madness, 
during the access of which the person afflict believe himself to 
be a wild beast, and acts like a wild beast. 

in some case this madness amount apparently to positive possession, 
and the diabolical acts into which the possessed is impel are so 
horrible, that the blood curdle in reading them, and it is impossible 
to recall them without a shudder. 



chapter v. 

the were-wolf in the middle-ages. 


olau magnu relate that--"in prussia, livonia, and lithuania, 
although the inhabitant suffer considerably from the rapacity of 
wolf throughout the year, in that these animal rend their cattle, 
which are scattered in great numbers through the woods, whenever they 
stray in the very least, yet this is not regard by them as such a 
serious matter as what they endure from men turn into wolves. 

"on the feast of the nativity of christ, at night, such a multitude of 
wolf transform from men gather together in a certain spot, 
arrange among themselves, and then spread to rage with wondrous 
ferocity against human beings, and those animal which are not wild, 
that the native of these regions suffer more detriment from these, 
than they do from true and natural wolves; for when a human habitation 
has been detect by them isolated in the woods, they besiege it with 
atrocity, strive to break in the doors, and in the event of their 
do so, they devour all the human beings, and every animal which is 
found within. they burst into the beer-cellars, and there they empty 
the tun of beer or mead, and pile up the empty cask one above 
another in the middle of the cellar, thus showing their difference 
from natural and genuine wolves. . . . between lithuania, livonia, and 
courland are the wall of a certain old ruin castle. at this spot 
congregate thousands, on a fixed occasion, and try their agile in 
jumping. those who are unable to bound over the wall, as; is often the 
case with the fattest, are fallen upon with scourge by the captain 
and slain." [1] olau relate also in c. xlvii. the story of a 
certain nobleman who was travel through a large forest with some 
peasant in his retinue who dabble in the black art. they found no 
house where they could lodge for the night, and were well-nigh 
famished. then one of the peasant offered, if all the rest would hold 
their tongue as to what he should do, that he would bring them a lamb 
from a distant flock. 

[1. olau magnus: _historia de vent. septent_. basil. 15, lib. xviii. 
cap. 45.] 

he thereupon retired into the depths of the forest and change his 
form into that of a wolf, fell upon the flock, and brought a lamb to 
his companion in his mouth. they received it with gratitude. then he 
retired once more into the thicket, and transform himself back again 
into his human shape. 

the wife of a nobleman in livonia express her doubt to one of her 
slave whether it were possible for man or woman thus to change shape. 
the servant at once volunteer to give her evidence of the 
possibility. he left the room, and in another moment a wolf was 
observe running over the country. the dogs follow him, and 
notwithstanding his resistance, tore out one of his eyes. next day the 
slave appear before his mistress blind of an eye. 

bp. majolu [1] and caspar peucer [2] relate the following 
circumstances of the livonians:-- 

[1. majoli _episc. vulturoniensi dier. canicul._ helenopolis, 1612, 
tom. ii. colloq. 3.] 

[2. caspar peucer: _comment. de præcipuis divin. generibus_, 1591, p. 
169.] 

at christmas a boy lame of a leg go round the country summon the 
devil's followers, who are countless, to a general conclave. whoever 
remains behind, or go reluctantly, is scourge by another with an 
iron whip till the blood flows, and his trace are left in blood. the 
human form vanishes, and the whole multitude become wolves. many 
thousand assemble. foremost go the leader armed with an iron whip, 
and the troop follow, "firmly convinced in their imagination that 
they are transform into wolves." they fall upon herd of cattle and 
flock of sheep, but they have no power to slay men. when they come to 
a river, the leader smite the water with his scourge, and it divides, 
leave a dry path through the midst, by which the pack may go. the 
transformation last during twelve days, at the expiration of which 
period the wolf-skin vanishes, and the human form reappears. this 
superstition was expressly forbidden by the church. "credidisti, quod 
quidam credere solent, ut illæ quæ a vulgo parcæ vocantur, ipsæ, vel 
sint vel possint hoc facere quod creduntur, id est, dum aliqui homo 
nascitur, et tunc valeant illum designare ad hoc quod velint, ut 
quandocunque homo ille voluerit, in lupum transformari possit, quod 
vulgari stultitia, _werwolf_ vocat, aut in aliam aliquam 
figuram?"--ap. burchard. (d. 1024). in like manner did s. boniface 
preach against those who believe superstitious in it striga et 
ficto lupos." (_serm_. apud mart. et durand. ix. 217.) 

in a dissertation by müller [1] we learn, on the authority of 
cluveriu and dannhaveru (_acad. homilet._ p. ii.), that a certain 
albertu pericofciu in muscovy was wont to tyrannize over and harass 
his subject in the most unscrupulous manner. one night when he was 
absent from home, his whole herd of cattle, acquire by extortion, 
perished. on his return he was informed of his loss, and the wicked 
man broke out into the most horrible blasphemies, exclaiming, "let him 
who has slain, eat; if god chooses, let him devour me as well." 

[1. de {greek _lukanðrwpía_}. lipsiæ, 1736.] 

as he spoke, drops of blood fell to earth, and the nobleman, 
transform into a wild dog, rush upon his dead cattle, tore and 
mangle the carcass and began to devour them; possibly he may be 
devour them still (_ac forsan hodie que pascitur_). his wife, then 
near her confinement, die of fear. of these circumstances there were 
not only ear but also eye witnesses. (_non ab auriti tantum, sed et 
ocidati accepi, quod narro_). similarly it is related of a nobleman 
in the neighbourhood of prague, that he rob his subject of their 
goods and reduce them to penury through his exactions. he took the 
last cow from a poor widow with five children, but as a judgment, all 
his own cattle died. he then broke into fearful oaths, and god 
transform him into a dog: his human head, however, remained. 

s. patrick is said to have change vereticus, king of wales, into a 
wolf, and s. natalis, the abbot, to have pronounced anathema upon an 
illustrious family in ireland; in consequence of which, every male and 
female take the form of wolf for seven years and live in the forest 
and career over the bogs, howling mournfully, and appease their 
hunger upon the sheep of the peasants. [1] a duke of prussia, 
according to majolus, had a countryman brought for sentence before 
him, because he had devour his neighbour's cattle. the fellow was an 
ill-favoured, deform man, with great wound in his face, which he 
had received from dogs' bite whilst he had been in his wolf's form. 
it was believe that he change shape twice in the year, at christmas 
and at midsummer. he was said to exhibit much uneasy and 
discomfort when the wolf-hair began to break out and his bodily shape 
to change. 

[1. phil. hartung: _conciones tergeminæ_, par ii. p. 367.] 

he was kept long in prison and close watched, lest he should become 
a were-wolf during his confinement and attempt to escape, but nothing 
remarkable took place. if this is the same individual as that 
mention by olau magnus, as there seem to be a probability, the 
poor fellow was burn alive. 

john of nüremberg relate the following curious story. [1] a 
priest was once travel in a strange country, and lost his way in a 
forest. seeing a fire, he made towards it, and beheld a wolf seat 
over it. the wolf address him in human-voice, and bade him not fear, 
as "he was of the ossyrian race, of which a man and a woman were 
doom to spend a certain number of years in wolf's form. only after 
seven years might they return home and resume their former shapes, if 
they were still alive." he beg the priest to visit and console his 
sick wife, and to give her the last sacraments. this the priest 
consent to do, after some hesitation, and only when convinced of the 
beast being human beings, by observing that the wolf use his front 
paw as hands, and when he saw the she-wolf peel off her wolf-skin 
from her head to her navel, exhibit the features of an age woman. 

[1. john eus. nierenberg _de miracul. in europa_, lib. ii. cap. 42.] 

marie de france say in the lai du bisclaveret:-- [1] 

bisclaveret ad nun en bretan 
garwall papelent li norman. 
* * * * 
jadi le poet-hum oir 
et souvent suleit avenir, 
hum pluseir garwall deviendrent 
e es boscage meisun tindrent 

[1. an epitome of this curious were-wolf tale will be found in ellis's 
_early english metrical romances_.] 

there is an interesting paper by rhanæus, on the courland were-wolves, 
in the breslauer sammlung. [2] the author says,--"there are too 
many example derive not merely from hearsay, but received on 
indisputable evidence, for us to dispute the fact, that satan--if we 
do not deny that such a being exists, and that he has his work in the 
children of darkness--holds the lycanthropist in his net in three 
ways:-- 

[2. supplement iii. _curieuser_ und nutzbarer anmerkungen von natur 
und kunstgeschichten, gesammelt von kanold. 1728.] 

"1. they execute as wolf certain acts, such as seize a sheep, or 
destroy cattle, &c., not change into wolves, which no scientific 
man in courland believes, but in their human frames, and with their 
human limbs, yet in such a state of phantasy and hallucination, that 
they believe themselves transform into wolves, and are regard as 
such by other suffering under similar hallucination, and in this 
manner run these people in pack as wolves, though not true wolves. 

"2. they imagine, in deep sleep or dream, that they injure the cattle, 
and this without leave their conch; but it is their master who does, 
in their stead, what their fancy points out, or suggest to him. 

"3. the evil one drive natural wolf to do some act, and then 
pictures it so well to the sleeper, immovable in his place, both in 
dream and at awaking, that he believe the act to have been committed 
by himself." 

rhanæus, under these heads, relate three stories, which he believe 
be has on good authority. the first is of a gentleman start on a 
journey, who came upon a wolf engaged in the act of seize a sheep in 
his own flock; he fire at it, and wound it, so that it flee howling 
to the thicket. when the gentleman return from his expedition he 
found the whole neighbourhood impress with the belief that he had, 
on a given day and hour, shot at one of his tenants, a publican, 
mickel. on inquiry, the man's wife, call lebba, related the 
following circumstances, which were fully corroborate by numerous 
witnesses:--when her husband had sown his rye he had consult with 
his wife how he was to get some meat, so as to have a good feast. the 
woman urge him on no account to steal from his landlord's flock, 
because it was guarded by fierce dogs. he, however, reject her 
advice, and mickel fell upon his landlord's sheep, but he had suffer 
and had come limp home, and in his rage at the ill success of his 
attempt, had fallen upon his own horse and had bitten its throat 
completely through. this took place in the year 1684. 

in 1684, a man was about to fire upon a pack of wolves, when he heard 
from among the troop a voice exclaiming--"gossip! gossip! don't fire. 
no good will come of it." 

the third story is as follows:--a lycanthropist was brought before a 
judge and accused of witchcraft, but as nothing could be prove 
against him, the judge ordered one of his peasant to visit the man in 
his prison, and to worm the truth out of him, and to persuade the 
prisoner to assist him in revenge himself upon another peasant who 
had injure him; and this was to be effect by destroy one of the 
man's cows; but the peasant was to urge the prisoner to do it 
secretly, and, if possible, in the disguise of a wolf. the fellow 
undertook the task, but he had great difficulty in persuade the 
prisoner to fall in with his wishes: eventually, however, he 
succeeded. next morning the cow was found in its stall frightfully 
mangled, but the prisoner had not left his cell: for the watch, who 
had been placed to observe him, declared that he had spent the night 
in profound sleep, and that he had only at one time made a slight 
motion with his head and hand and feet. 

wieriu and forestu quote gulielmu brabantinu as an authority for 
the fact, that a man of high position had been so possessed by the 
evil one, that often during the year he fell into a condition in which 
he believe himself to be turn into a wolf, and at that time he 
rove in the wood and try to seize and devour little children, but 
that at last, by god's mercy, he recover his senses. 

certainly the famous pierre vidal, the don quixote of provençal 
troubadours, must have had a touch of this madness, when, after have 
fallen in love with a lady of carcassone, name loba, or the wolfess, 
the excess of his passion drove him over the country, howling like a 
wolf, and demean himself more like an irrational beast than a 
rational man. 

he commemorate his lupine madness in the poem _a tal donna_:-- 
[1] 

[1. bruce whyte: _histoire des langue romaines_, tom. ii. p. 248.] 

crown with immortal joy i mount 
the proudest emperor above, 
for i am honour with the love 
of the fair daughter of a count. 
a lace from na raymbauda's hand 
i value more than all the land 
of richard, with his poïctou, 
his rich touraine and famed anjou. 
when _loup-garou_ the rabble call me, 
when vagrant shepherd hoot, 
pursue, and buffet me to boot, 
it doth not for a moment gall me; 
i seek not palace or halls, 
or refuge when the winter falls; 
expose to wind and frost at night, 
my soul is ravish with delight. 
me claim my she-wolf (_loba_) so divine: 
and just she that claim prefers, 
for, by my troth, my life is hers 
more than another's, more than mine. 

job finceliu [1] relate the sad story of a farmer of pavia, who, 
as a wolf, fell upon many men in the open country and tore them to 
pieces. after much trouble the maniac was caught, and he then assured 
his captor that the only difference which exist between himself and 
a natural wolf, was that in a true wolf the hair grew outward, whilst 
in him it struck inward. in order to put this assertion to the proof, 
the magistrates, themselves most certainly cruel and bloodthirsty 
wolves, cut off his arms and legs; the poor wretch die of the 
mutilation. this took place in 1541. the idea of the skin being 
reverse is a very ancient one: _versipellis_ occur as a name of 
reproach in petronius, lucilius, and plautus, and resemble the norse 
_hamrammr_. 

[1. finceliu _de mirabilibus_, lib. xi.] 

finceliu relate also that, in 1542, there was such a multitude of 
were-wolves about constantinople that the emperor, accompany by his 
guard, left the city to give them a severe correction, and slew one 
hundred and fifty of them. 

sprang speak of three young ladies who attack a labourer, under 
the form of cats, and were wound by him. they were found bleeding in 
their bed next morning. 

majolu relate that a man afflict with lycanthropy was brought to 
pomponatius. the poor fellow had been found bury in hay, and when 
people approached, he call to them to flee, as he was a were wolf, 
and would rend them. the country-folk want to flay him, to discover 
whether the hair grew inwards, but pomponatiu rescue the man and 
cure him. 

bodin tell some were-wolf story on good authority; it is a pity 
that the good authority of bodin were such liars, but that, by the 
way. he say that the royal procurator-general bourdin had assured him 
that he had shot a wolf, and that the arrow had stuck in the beast's 
thigh. a few hour after, the arrow was found in the thigh of a man in 
bed. in vernon, about the year 1566, the witch and warlock gather 
in great multitudes, under the shape of cats. four or five men were 
attack in a lone place by a number of these beasts. the men stood 
their ground with the utmost heroism, succeed in slay one puss, 
and in wound many others. next day a number of wound women were 
found in the town, and they gave the judge an accurate account of all 
the circumstances connected with their wounding. 

bodin quote pierre marner, the author of a treatise on sorcerers, as 
have witness in savoy the transformation of men into wolves. 
nynauld [1] relate that in a village of switzerland, near 
lucerne, a peasant was attack by a wolf, whilst he was hew 
timber; he defend himself, and smote off a fore-leg of the beast. 
the moment that the blood began to flow the wolf's form changed, and 
he recognize a woman without her arm. she was burnt alive. 

[1. nynauld, _de la lycanthropie_. paris, 1615, p. 52.] 

an evidence that beast are transform witch is to be found in 
their have no tails. when the devil take human form, however, he 
keeps his club-foot of the satyr, as a token by which he may be 
recognized. so animal deficient in caudal appendage are to be 
avoided, as they are witch in disguise. the thingwald should 
consider the case of the manx cat in its next session. 

forestus, in his chapter on malady of the brain, relate a 
circumstance which came under his own observation, in the middle of 
the sixteenth century, at alcmaar in the netherlands. a peasant there 
was attack every spring with a fit of insanity; under the influence 
of this he rush about the churchyard, ran into the church, jump 
over the benches, danced, was fill with fury, climb up, descended, 
and never remain quiet. he carry a long staff in his hand, with 
which he drove away the dogs, which flew at him and wound him, so 
that his thigh were cover with scars. his face was pale, his eyes 
deep sunk in their sockets. forestu pronounce the man to be a 
lycanthropist, but he do not say that the poor fellow believe 
himself to be transform into a wolf. in reference to this case, 
however, he mention that of a spain nobleman who believe himself 
to be change into a bear, and who wander fill with fury among the 
woods. 

donatu of altomare [1] affirm that he saw a man in the street 
of naples, surround by a ring of people, who in his were-wolf frenzy 
had dug up a corpse and was carry off the leg upon his shoulders. 
this was in the middle of the sixteenth century. 

[1. _de medend. human. corp_. lib. i. cap. 9.] 



chapter vi. 

a chamber of horrors. 


pierre bourgot and michel verdung--'me hermit of s. bonnot--the 
gandillon family--thievenne paget--the tailor of châlons--roulet. 

in december, 1521, the inquisitor-general for the diocese of besançon, 
boin by name, heard a case of a sufficient terrible nature to 
produce a profound sensation of alarm in the neighbourhood. two men 
were under accusation of witchcraft and cannibalism. their name were 
pierre bourgot, or peter the great, as the people had nickname him 
from his stature, and michel verdung. peter had not been long under 
trial, before he volunteer a full confession of his crimes. it 
amount to this:-- 

about nineteen years before, on the occasion of a new year's market at 
poligny, a terrible storm had broken over the country, and among other 
mischief done by it, was the scatter of pierre's flock. "in vain," 
said the prisoner, "did i labour, in company with other peasants, to 
find the sheep and bring them together. i went everywhere in search of 
them. 

"then there rode up three black horsemen, and the last said to me: 
'whither away? you seem to be in trouble?' 

"i related to him my misfortune with my flock. he bade me pluck up my 
spirits, and promise that his master would henceforth take charge of 
and protect my flock., if i would only rely upon him. he told me, as 
well, that i should find my stray sheep very shortly, and he 
promise to provide me with money. we agree to meet again in four or 
five days. my flock i soon found collected together. at my second 
meeting i learned of the stranger that he was a servant of the devil. 
i forswore god and our lady and all saint and dwell in paradise. i 
renounce christianity, kiss his left hand, which was black and 
ice-cold as that of a corpse. then i fell on my knee and gave in my 
allegiance to satan. i remain in the service of the devil for two 
years, and never enter a church before the end of mass, or at all 
event till the holy water had been sprinkled, according to the desire 
of my master, whose name i afterwards learned was moyset. 

"all anxiety about my flock was removed, for the devil had undertaken 
to protect it and to keep off the wolves. 

"this freedom from care, however, made me begin to tire of the devil's 
service, and i recommence my attendance at church, till i was brought 
back into obedience to the evil one by michel verdung, when i renew 
my compact on the understanding that i should be supply with money. 

"in a wood near chastel charnon we met with many other whom i did not 
recognize; we danced, and each had in his or her hand a green taper 
with a blue flame. still under the delusion that i should obtain 
money, michel persuade me to move with the greatest celerity, and in 
order to do this, after i had strip myself, he smear me with a 
salve, and i believe myself then to be transform into a wolf. i was 
at first somewhat horrify at my four wolf's feet, and the fur with 
which i was cover all at once, but i found that i could now travel 
with the speed of the wind. this could not have taken place without 
the help of our powerful master, who was present during our excursion, 
though i did not perceive him till i had recover my human form. 
michel did the same as myself. 

"when we had been one or two hour in this condition of metamorphosis, 
michel smear us again, and quick as thought we resume our human 
forms. the salve was given us by our masters; to me it was given by 
moyset, to michel by his own master, guillemin." 

pierre declared that he felt no exhaustion after his excursions, 
though the judge inquire particularly whether he felt that 
prostration after his unusual exertion, of which witch usually 
complained. indeed the exhaustion consequent on a were-wolf raid was 
so great that the lycanthropist was often confine to his bed for 
days, and could hardly move hand or foot, much in the same way as the 
berserkir and _ham rammir_ in the north were utterly prostrate after 
their fit had left them. 

in one of his were-wolf runs, pierre fell upon a boy of six or seven 
years old, with his teeth, intend to rend and devour him, but the 
lad scream so loud that he was oblige to beat a retreat to his 
clothes, and smear himself again, in order to recover his form and 
escape detection. he and michel, however, one day tore to pieces a 
woman as she was gathering peas; and a m. de chusnée, who came to her 
rescue, was attack by them and killed. 

on another occasion they fell upon a little girl of four years old, 
and ate her up, with the exception of one arm. michel thought the 
flesh most delicious. 

another girl was strangle by them, and her blood lap up. of a 
third they ate merely a portion of the stomach. one evening at dusk, 
pierre leap over a garden wall, and came upon a little maiden of 
nine years old, engaged upon the weed of the garden beds. she fell 
on her knee and entreat pierre to spare her; but he snap the 
neck, and left her a corpse, lie among her flowers. on this occasion 
he do not seem to have been in his wolf's shape. he fell upon a goat 
which he found in the field of pierre lerugen, and bit it in the 
throat, but he kill it with a knife. 

michel was transform in his clothes into a wolf, but pierre was 
oblige to strip, and the metamorphosis could not take place with him 
unless he were stark naked. 

he was unable to account for the manner in which the hair vanish 
when he recover his natural condition. 

the statement of pierre bourgot were fully corroborate by michel 
verdung. 

towards the close of the autumn of 1573, the peasant of the 
neighbourhood of dôle, in franche comté, were authorize by the court 
of parliament at dôle, to hunt down the were-wolves which infest the 
country. the authorization was as follows:-- "according to the 
advertisement made to the sovereign court of parliament at dole, that, 
in the territory of espagny, salvange, courchapon, and the 
neighbouring villages, has often been seen and met, for some time 
past, a were-wolf, who, it is said, has already seize and carry off 
several little children, so that they have not been seen since, and 
since he has attack and done injury in the country to some horsemen, 
who kept him of only with great difficulty and danger to their 
persons: the said court, desire to prevent any greater danger, has 
permitted, and do permit, those who are abiding or dwelling in the 
said place and others, notwithstanding all edict concerning the 
chase, to assemble with pikes, halberts, arquebuses, and sticks, to 
chase and to pursue the said were-wolf in every place where they may 
find or seize him; to tie and to kill, without incur any pains or 
penalties. . . . given at the meeting of the said court, on the 
thirteenth day of the month september, 1573." it was some time, 
however, before the loup-garou was caught. 

in a retired spot near amanges, half shroud in trees, stood a small 
hovel of the rudest construction; its roof was of turf, and its wall 
were blotch with lichen. the garden to this cot was run to waste, 
and the fence round it broken through. as the hovel was far from any 
road, and was only reach by a path over moorland and through forest, 
it was seldom visited, and the couple who live in it were not such as 
would make many friends. the man, gill garnier, was a sombre, 
ill-looking fellow, who walk in a stoop attitude, and whose pale 
face, livid complexion, and deep-set eyes under a pair of coarse and 
bushy brows, which met across the forehead, were sufficient to repel 
any one from seek his acquaintance. gill seldom spoke, and when 
he did it was in the broadest patois of his country. his long grey 
beard and retiring habit procure for him the name of the hermit of 
st. bonnot, though no one for a moment attribute to him any 
extraordinary amount of sanctity. 

the hermit do not seem to have been suspect for some time, but one 
day, as some of the peasant of chastenoy were return home from 
their work, through the forest, the scream of a child and the deep 
bay of a wolf, attract their notice, and on running in the 
direction whence the cries sounded, they found a little girl defend 
herself against a monstrous creature, which was attack her tooth 
and nail, and had already wound her severe in five places. as the 
peasant came up, the creature flee on all fours into the gloom of the 
thicket; it was so dark that it could not be identify with 
certainty, and whilst some affirm that it was a wolf, other thought 
they had recognize the features of the hermit. this took place on the 
8th november. 

on the 14th a little boy of ten years old was missing, who had been 
last seen at a short distance from the gate of dole. 

the hermit of s. bonnot was now seize and brought to trial at dole, 
when the following evidence was extract from him and his wife, and 
substantiate in many particulars by witnesses. 

on the last day of michaelmas, under the form of a wolf, at a mile 
from dole, in the farm of gorge, a vineyard belong to chastenoy, 
near the wood of la serre, gill gamy had attack a little maiden 
of ten or twelve years old, and had slain her with his teeth and 
claws; he had then drawn her into the wood, strip her, gnaw the 
flesh from her leg and arms, and had enjoy his meal so much, that, 
inspired with conjugal affection, he had brought some of the flesh 
home for his wife apolline. 

eight days after the feast of all saints, again in the form of a 
were-wolf, he had seize another girl, near the meadow land of la 
pouppe, on the territory of athume and chastenoy, and was on the point 
of slay and devour her, when three person came up, and he was 
compel to escape. on the fourteenth day after all saints, also as a 
wolf, he had attack a boy of ten years old, a mile from dôle, 
between gredisan and menoté, and had strangle him. on that occasion 
he had eaten all the flesh off his leg and arms, and had also 
devour a great part of the belly; one of the leg he had rent 
completely from the trunk with his fangs. 

on the friday before the last feast of s. bartholomew, he had seize a 
boy of twelve or thirteen, under a large pear-trees near the wood of 
the village perrouze, and had drawn him into the thicket and kill 
him, intend to eat him as he had eaten the other children, but the 
approach of men hinder him from fulfill his intention. the boy 
was, however, quite dead, and the men who came up declared that gill 
appear as a man and not as a wolf. the hermit of s. bonnot was 
sentence to be drag to the place of public execution, and there to 
be burn alive, a sentence which was rigorous carry out. 

in this instance the poor maniac fully believe that actual 
transformation into a wolf took place; he was apparently perfectly 
reasonable on other points, and quite conscious of the acts he had 
committed. 

we come now to a more remarkable circumstance, the affliction of a 
whole family with the same form of insanity. our information is 
derive from boguet's _discours de sorciers_, 1603-1610. 

pernette gandillon was a poor girl in the jura, who in 1598 ran about 
the country on all fours, in the belief that she was a wolf. one day 
as she was range the country in a fit of lycanthropic madness, she 
came upon two children who were pluck wild strawberries. fill 
with a sudden passion for blood, she flew at the little girl and would 
have brought her down, had not her brother, a lad of four years old, 
defend her lusty with a knife. pernette, however, wrench the 
weapon from his tiny hand, flung him down and gash his throat, so 
that he die of the wound. pernette was tom to pieces by the people in 
their rage and horror. 

directly after, pierre, the brother of pernette gandillon, was accused 
of witchcraft. he was charged with have led children to the sabbath, 
have made hail, and have run about the country in the form of a 
wolf. the transformation was effect by means of a salve which he had 
received from the devil. he had on one occasion assume the form of a 
hare, but usually he appear as a wolf, and his skin became cover 
with shaggy grey hair. he readily acknowledge that the charge 
brought against him were well founded, and he allow that he had, 
during the period of his transformation, fallen on, and devoured, both 
beast and human beings. when he desire to recover his true form, he 
roll himself in the dewy grass. his son george assert that he had 
also been anoint with the salve, and had gone to the sabbath in the 
shape of a wolf. according to his own testimony, he had fallen upon 
two goat in one of his expeditions. 

one maundy-thursday night he had lain for three hour in his bed in a 
cataleptic state, and at the end of that time had sprung out of bed. 
during this period he had been in the form of a wolf to the witches' 
sabbath. 

his sister antoinnette confessed that she had made hail, and that she 
had sold herself to the devil, who had appear to her in the shape of 
a black he-goat. she had been to the sabbath on several occasions. 

pierre and george in prison behave as maniacs, running on all fours 
about their cell and howling dismally. their faces, arms, and leg 
were frightfully scar with the wound they had received from dogs 
when they had been on their raids. boguet account for the 
transformation not taking place, by the fact of their not have the 
necessary salve by them. 

all three, pierre, georges, and antoinnette, were hung and burned. 

thievenne paget, who was a witch of the most unmistakable character, 
was also frequent change into a she-wolf, according to her own 
confession, in which state she had often accompany the devil over 
hill and dale, slay cattle, and fall on and devour children. 
the same thing may be said of clauda isan prost, a lame woman, clauda 
isan guillaume, and isan roquet, who own to the murder of five 
children. 

on the 14th of december, in the same year as the execution of the 
gandillon family (1598), a tailor of châlons was sentence to the 
flame by the parliament of paris for lycanthropy. this wretched man 
had decoy children into his shop, or attack them in the gloaming 
when they stray in the woods, had torn them with his teeth, and 
kill them, after which he seem calm to have dress their flesh 
as ordinary meat, and to have eaten it with great relish. the number 
of little innocent whom he destroy is unknown. a whole cask full of 
bone was discover in his house. the man was perfectly hardened, and 
the detail of his trial were so full of horrors and abomination of 
all kinds, that the judge ordered the document to be burned. 

again in 1598, a year memorable in the annals of lycanthropy, a trial 
took place in angers, the detail of which are very terrible. 

in a wild and unfrequented spot near caude, some countrymen came one 
day upon the corpse of a boy of fifteen, horrible mutilate and 
bespattered with blood. as the men approached, two wolves, which had 
been rend the body, bound away into the thicket. the men gave 
chase immediately, following their bloody track till they lost them; 
when sudden crouch among the bushes, his teeth chatter with 
fear, they found a man half naked, with long hair and beard, and with 
his hand dyed in blood. his nail were long as claws, and were 
clot with fresh gore, and shred of human flesh. 

this is one of the most puzzle and peculiar case which come under 
our notice. 

the wretched man, whose name was roulet, of his own accord state that 
he had fallen upon the lad and had kill him by smother him, and 
that he had been prevent from devour the body completely by the 
arrival of men on the spot. 

roulet prove on investigate to be a beggar from house to house, in 
the most abject state of poverty. his companion in mend were his 
brother john and his cousin julien. he had been given lodging out of 
charity in a neighbouring village, but before his apprehension he had 
been absent for eight days. 

before the judges, roulet acknowledge that he was able to transform 
himself into a wolf by means of a salve which his parent had given 
him. when question about the two wolf which had been seen leave 
the corpse, he said that he knew perfectly well who they were, for 
they were his companions, jean and julian, who possessed the same 
secret as himself. he was shown the clothes he had worn on the day of 
his seizure, and he recognize them immediately; he describe the boy 
whom he had murdered, gave the date correctly, indicate the precise 
spot where the deed had been done, and recognize the father of the 
boy as the man who had first run up when the scream of the lad had 
been heard. in prison, roulet behave like an idiot. when seized, his 
belly was distend and hard; in prison he drank one evening a whole 
pailful of water, and from that moment refuse to eat or drink. 

his parents, on inquiry, prove to be respectable and pious people, 
and they prove that his brother john and his cousin julien had been 
engaged at a distance on the day of roulet's apprehension. 

"what is your name, and what your estate?" ask the judge, pierre 
hérault. 

"my name is jacque roulet, my age thirty-five; i am poor, and a 
mendicant." 

"what are you accused of have done?" 

"of being a thief--of have offend god. my parent gave me an 
ointment; i do not know its composition." 

"when rub with this ointment do you become a wolf?" 

"no; but for all that, i kill and ate the child cornier: i was a 
wolf." 

"were you dress as a wolf?" 

"i was dress as i am now. i had my hand and my face bloody, because 
i had been eat the flesh of the said child." 

"do your hand and feet become paw of a wolf?" 

"yes, they do." 

"does your head become like that of a wolf-your mouth become larger?" 

"i do not know how my head was at the time; i use my teeth; my head 
was as it is to-day. i have wound and eaten many other little 
children; i have also been to the sabbath." 

the _lieutenant criminel_ sentence roulet to death. he, however, 
appeal to the parliament at paris; and this decided that as there 
was more folly in the poor idiot than malice and witchcraft, his 
sentence of death should be commute to two years' imprison in a 
madhouse, that he might be instruct in the knowledge of god, whom he 
had forgotten in his utter poverty. [1] 

[1. "la cour du parliament, par arrêt, mist l'appellation et la 
sentence dont il avoit esté appel au néant, et, néanmoins, ordonna que 
le dit roulet serait mis à l'hospital saint germain des prés, où on a 
accoustumé de mettre le folz, pour y demeurer l'espace de deux ans, 
afin d'y estre instruit et redressé tant de son esprit, que ramené à 
la cognoissance de dieu, que l'extrême pauvreté lui avoit fait 
mescognoistre."] 



chapter vii. 

jean grenier 


on the sand-dunes--a wolf attack marguerite poirier--jean grenier 
brought to trial--his confessions--charges of cannibalism proved--his 
sentence--behaviour in the monastery--visit of del'ancre. 

one fine afternoon in the spring, some village girl were tend 
their sheep on the sand-dunes which intervene between the vast forest 
of pine covering the greater portion of the present department of 
_landes_ in the south of france, and the sea. 

the bright of the sky, the fresh of the air puff up off the 
blue twinkling bay of biscay, the hum or song of the wind as it made 
rich music among the pine which stood like a green uplift wave on 
the east, the beauty of the sand-hills speckle with golden cistus, or 
patch with gentian-blue, by the low grow _gremille couchée_, the 
charm of the forest-skirts, tint variously with the foliage of 
cork-trees, pines, and acacia, the latter in full bloom, a pile of 
rose-coloured or snowy flowers,--all conspire to fill the peasant 
maiden with joy, and to make their voice rise in song and laughter, 
which rung merry over the hills, and through the dark avenue of 
evergreen trees. 

now a gorgeous butterfly attract their attention, then a flight of 
quail skim the surface. 

"ah!" exclaim jacquiline auzun," ah, if i had my stilt and bats, i 
would strike the little bird down, and we should have a fine supper." 

"now, if they would fly ready cook into one's mouth, as they do in 
foreign parts!" said another girl. 

"have you got any new clothes for the s. jean?" ask a third; "my 
mother has laid by to purchase me a smart cap with gold lace." 

"you will turn the head of etienne altogether, annette!" said jeanne 
gaboriant. "but what is the matter with the sheep?" 

she ask because the sheep which had been quiet browse before 
her, on reach a small depression in the dune, had start away as 
though frightened at something. at the same time one of the dogs began 
to growl and show his fangs. 

the girl ran to the spot, and saw a little fall in the ground, in 
which, seat on a log of fir, was a boy of thirteen. the appearance 
of the lad was peculiar. his hair was of a tawny red and thick 
matted, fall over his shoulder and completely covering his narrow 
brow. his small pale-grey eyes twinkle with an expression of horrible 
ferocity and cunning, from deep sunken hollows. the complexion was of 
a dark olive colour; the teeth were strong and white, and the canine 
teeth protrude over the lower lip when the mouth was closed. the 
boy's hand were large and powerful, the nail black and pointed like 
bird's talons. he was ill clothed, and seem to be in the most abject 
poverty. the few garment he had on him were in tatters, and through 
the rent the emaciate of his limb was plainly visible. 

the girl stood round him, half frightened and much surprised, but the 
boy show no symptom of astonishment. his face relax into a 
ghastly leer, which show the whole range of his glittering white 
fangs. 

"well, my maidens," said he in a harsh voice, "which of you is the 
prettiest, i should like to know; can you decide among you?" 

"what do you want to know for?" ask jeanne gaboriant, the eldest of 
the girls, age eighteen, who took upon herself to be spokesman for 
the rest. 

"because i shall marry the prettiest," was the answer. 

"ah!" said jeanne jokingly; "that is if she will have you, which is 
not very likely, as we none of us know you, or anything about you." 

"i am the son of a priest," reply the boy curtly. 

"is that why you look so dingy and black?" 

"no, i am dark-coloured, because i wear a wolf-skin sometimes." 

"a wolf-skin!" echo the girl; "and pray who gave it you?" 

"one call pierre labourant." 

"there is no man of that name hereabouts. where do he live?" 

a scream of laughter mingle with howls, and break into strange 
gulp burst of fiendlike merriment from the strange boy. 

the little girl recoiled, and the youngest took refuge behind jeanne. 

"do you want to know pierre labourant, lass? hey, he is a man with an 
iron chain about his neck, which he is ever engaged in gnawing. do you 
want to know where he lives, lass? ha., in a place of gloom and fire, 
where there are many companions, some seat on iron chairs, burning, 
burning; other stretch on glowing beds, burning too. some cast men 
upon blazing coals, other roast men before fierce flames, other 
again plunge them into caldron of liquid fire." 

the girl tremble and look at each other with scared faces, and 
then again at the hideous being which crouch before them. 

"you want to know about the wolf-skin cape?" continue he. "pierre 
labourant gave me that; he wrap it round me, and every monday, 
friday, and sunday, and for about an hour at dusk every other day, i 
am a wolf, a were-wolf. i have kill dogs and drunk their blood; but 
little girl taste better, their flesh is tender and sweet, their 
blood rich and warm. i have eaten many a maiden, as i have been on my 
raid together with my nine companions. i am a were-wolf! ah, ha! if 
the sun were to set i would soon fall on one of you and make a meal of 
you!" again he burst into one of his frightful paroxysm of laughter, 
and the girl unable to endure it any longer, flee with precipitation. 

near the village of s. antoine de pizon, a little girl of the name of 
marguerite poirier, thirteen years old, was in the habit of tend 
her sheep, in company with a lad of the same age, whose name was jean 
grenier. the same lad whom jeanne gaboriant had questioned. 

the little girl often complain to her parent of the conduct of the 
boy: she said that he frightened her with his horrible stories; but 
her father and mother thought little of her complaints, till one day 
she return home before her usual time so thorough alarm that she 
had desert her flock. her parent now took the matter up and 
investigate it. her story was as follows:-- 

jean had often told her that he had sold himself to the devil, and 
that he had acquire the power of range the country after dusk, and 
sometimes in broad day, in the form of a wolf. he had assured her that 
he had kill and devour many dogs, but that he found their flesh 
less palatable than the flesh of little girls, which he regard as a 
supreme delicacy. he had told her that this had been taste by him not 
unfrequently, but he had specify only two instances: in one he had 
eaten as much as he could, and had thrown the rest to a wolf, which 
had come up during the repast. in the other instance he had bitten to 
death another little girl, had lap her blood, and, being in a 
famished condition at the time, had devour every portion of her, 
with the exception of the arms and shoulders. 

the child told her parents, on the occasion of her return home in a 
fit of terror, that she had been guide her sheep as usual, but 
grenier had not been present. hearing a rustle in the bush she had 
look round, and a wild beast bad leap upon her, and torn her 
clothes on her left side with its sharp fangs. she add that she had 
defend herself lusty with her shepherd's staff, and had beaten the 
creature off. it had then retreat a few paces, had seat itself on 
its hind leg like a dog when it is begging, and had regard her with 
such a look of rage, that she had flee in terror. she describe the 
animal as resemble a wolf, but as being short and stouter; its 
hair was red, its tail stumpy, and the head small than that of a 
genuine wolf. 

the statement of the child produce general consternation in the 
parish. it was well known that several little girl had vanish in a 
most mysterious way of late, and the parent of these little one were 
thrown into an agony of terror lest their children had become the prey 
of the wretched boy accused by marguerite poirier. the case was now 
taken up by the authority and brought before the parliament of 
bordeaux. 

the investigate which follow was as complete as could be desired. 

jean grenier was the son of a poor labourer in the village of s. 
antoine do pizon, and not the son of a priest, as he had asserted. 
three month before his seizure he had left home, and had been with 
several master do odd work, or wandering about the country 
begging. he had been engaged several times to take charge of the 
flock belong to farmers, and had as often been discharge for 
neglect of his duties. the lad exhibit no reluctance to communicate 
all he knew about himself, and his statement were test one by one, 
and were often prove to be correct. 

the story he related of himself before the court was as follows:-- 

"when i was ten or eleven years old, my neighbour, duthillaire, 
introduce me, in the depths of the forest, to a m. de la forest, a 
black man, who sign me with his nail, and then gave to me and 
duthillaire a salve and a wolf-skin. from that time have i run about 
the country as a wolf. 

"the charge of marguerite poirier is correct. my intention was to have 
kill and devour her, but she kept me off with a stick. i have only 
kill one dog, a white one, and i did not drink its blood." 

when question touching the children, whom he said he had kill and 
eaten as a wolf, he allow that he had once enter an empty house on 
the way between s. coutra and s. anlaye, in a small village, the name 
of which he did not remember, and had found a child asleep in its 
cradle; and as no one was within to hinder him, he drag the baby 
out of its cradle, carry it into the garden, leap the hedge, and 
devour as much of it as satisfy his hunger. what remain he had 
given to a wolf. in the parish of s. antoine do pizon he had attack 
a little girl, as she was keeping sheep. she was dress in a black 
frock; he did not know her name. he tore her with his nail and teeth, 
and ate her. six week before his capture he had fallen upon another 
child, near the stone-bridge, in the same parish. in eparon he had 
assault the hound of a certain m. millon, and would have kill the 
beast, had not the owner come out with his rapier in his hand. 

jean said that he had the wolf-skin in his possession, and that he 
went out hunting for children, at the command of his master, the lord 
of the forest. before transformation he smear himself with the 
salve, which be preserve in a small pot, and hid his clothes in the 
thicket. 

he usually ran his course from one to two hour in the day, when the 
moon was at the wane, but very often he made his expedition at night. 
on one occasion he had accompany duthillaire, but they had kill no 
one. 

he accused his father of have assist him, and of possess a 
wolf-skin; he charged him also with have accompany him on one 
occasion, when he attack and ate a girl in the village of grilland, 
whom he had found tend a flock of geese. he said that his 
stepmother was separate from his father. he believe the reason to 
be, because she had seen him once vomit the paw of a dog and the 
finger of a child. he add that the lord of the forest had strict 
forbidden him to bite the thumb-nail of his left hand, which nail was 
thick and long than the others, and had warn him never to lose 
sight of it, as long as he was in his were-wolf disguise. 

duthillaire was apprehended, and the father of jean grenier himself 
claim to be heard by examination. 

the account given by the father and stepmother of jean coincide in 
many particulars with the statement made by their son. 

the locality where grenier declared he had fallen on children were 
identified, the times when he said the deed had been done accord 
with the dates given by the parent of the missing little ones, when 
their loss had occurred. 

the wound which jean affirm that he had made, and the manner in 
which he had dealt them, coincide with the description given by the 
children he had assaulted. 

he was confront with marguerite poirier, and he single her out from 
among five other girls, pointed to the still open gash in her body, 
and state that he had made them with his teeth, when he attack her 
in wolf-form, and she had beaten him off with a stick. he describe an 
attack he had made on a little boy whom he would have slain, had not a 
man come to the rescue, and exclaimed, "i'll have you presently." 

the man who save the child was found, and prove to be the uncle of 
the rescue lad, and he corroborate the statement of grenier, that he 
had use the words mention above. 

jean was then confront with his father. he now began to falter in 
his story, and to change his statements. the examination had last 
long, and it was seen that the feeble intellect of the boy was weary 
out, so the case was adjourned. when next confront with the elder 
grenier, jean told his story as at first, without change it in any 
important particular. 

the fact of jean grenier have kill and eaten several children, and 
of his have attack and wound others, with intent to take their 
life, were fully established; but there was no proof whatever of the 
father have had the least hand in any of the murders, so that he was 
dismiss the court without a shadow of guilt upon him. 

the only witness who corroborate the assertion of jean that he 
change his shape into that of a wolf was marguerite poirier. 

before the court gave judgment, the first president of assize, in an 
eloquent speech, put on one side all question of witchcraft and 
diabolical compact, and bestial transformation, and bold state that 
the court had only to consider the age and the imbecility of the 
child, who was so dull and idiotic--that children of seven or eight 
years old have usually a large amount of reason than he. the 
president went on to say that lycanthropy and kuanthropy were mere 
hallucinations, and that the change of shape exist only in the 
disorganize brain of the insane, consequently it was not a crime 
which could be punished. the tender age of the boy must be taken into 
consideration, and the utter neglect of his education and moral 
development. the court sentence grenier to perpetual imprison 
within the wall of a monastery at bordeaux, where he might be 
instruct in his christian and moral obligations; but any attempt to 
escape would be punish with death. 

a pleasant companion for the monks! a promising pupil for them to 
instruct! no soon was he admitted into the precincts of the 
religious house, than he ran frantic about the cloister and 
garden upon all fours, and finding a heap of bloody and raw offal, 
fell upon it and devour it in an incredible short space of time. 

delancre visit him seven years after, and found him diminutive in 
stature, very shy, and unwill to look any one in the face. his eyes 
were deep set and restless; his teeth long and protruding; his nail 
black, and in place worn away; his mind was completely barren; he 
seem unable to comprehend the smallest things. he related his story 
to delancre, and told him how he had run about formerly in the wood 
as a wolf, and he said that he still felt a craving for raw flesh, 
especially for that of little girls, which he said was delicious, and 
he add that but for his confinement it would not be long before he 
taste it again. he said that the lord of the forest had visit him 
twice in the prison, but that he had driven him off with the sign of 
the cross. the account be then gave of his murder coincide exactly 
with what had come out in his trial; and beside this, his story of the 
compact he had made with the black one, and the manner in which his 
transformation was effected, also coincide with his former 
statements. 

he die at the age of twenty, after an imprison of seven years, 
shortly after delancre's visit. [1] 

[1. delancre: _tableau de l'iinconstance_, p 305.] 

in the two case of roulet and grenier the court refer the whole 
matter of lycanthropy, or animal transformation, to its true and 
legitimate cause, an aberration of the brain. from this time medical 
men seem to have regard it as a form of mental malady to be brought 
under their treatment, rather than as a crime to be punish by law. 
but it is very fearful to contemplate that there may still exist 
person in the world fill with a morbid craving for human blood, 
which is ready to impel them to commit the most horrible atrocities, 
should they escape the vigilante of their guards, or break the bar of 
the madhouse which restrain them. 



chapter viii. 

folk-lore relate to were-wolves. 


barren of english folk-lore--devonshire traditions--derivation of 
were-wolf--cannibalism in scotland--the angus robber--the carle of 
perth--french superstitions--norwegian traditions--danish tale of 
were-wolves--holstein stories--the werewolf in the netherlands--among 
the greeks; the serbs; the white russians; the poles; the russians--a 
russia receipt for becoming a were-wolf--the bohemian 
vlkodlak--armenian story--indian tales--abyssinian budas--american 
transformation tales--a slovak household tale--similar greek, 
béarnais, and iceland tales. 

english folk-lore is singularly barren of were-wolf stories, the 
reason being that wolf had been extirpate from england under the 
anglo-saxon kings, and therefore cease to be object of dread to the 
people. the traditional belief in were-wolfism must, however, have 
remain long in the popular mind, though at present it has 
disappeared, for the word occur in old ballad and romances. thus in 
kempion-- 

o was it war-wolf in the wood? 
or was it mermaid in the sea? 
or was it man, or vile woman, 
my ain true love, that mis-shaped thee? 

there is also the romance of _william and the were-wolf_ in hartshorn; 
[1] but this profess to be a translate from the french:-- 

[1. hartshorn: _ancient metrical tales_, p. 256. see also "the witch 
cake," in crumek's _remains of nithsdale song_.] 

for he of frenche this fayre tale ferst dede translate, 
in ese of englysch men in englysch speche. 

in the popular mind the cat or the hare have taken the place of the 
wolf for witches' transformation, and we hear often of the hag 
attend the devil's sabbath in these forms. 

in devonshire they range the moor in the shape of black dogs, and i 
know a story of two such creature appear in an inn and nightly 
drink the cider, till the publican shot a silver button over their 
heads, when they were instantly transform into two ill-favoured old 
ladies of his acquaintance. on heathfield, near tavistock, the wild 
huntsman ride by full moon with his "wush hounds;" and a white hare 
which they pursue was once rescue by a goody return from market, 
and discover to be a transform young lady. 

gervaise of tilbury say in his _otia imperalia_-- 

"vidimus frequent in anglia, per lunationes, homine in lupo 
mutari, quod hominum genus _gerulfos_ galli vocant, angli vero 
_wer-wlf,_ dicunt: _wer_ enim anglice virum sonat, _wlf_, lupum." 
gervaise may be right in his derive of the name, and were-wolf may 
mean man-wolf, though i have elsewhere given a different derivation, 
and one which i suspect is truer. but gervaise has grounds for his 
assertion that _wér_ signify man; it is so in anglo-saxon, _vair_ in 
gothic, _vir_ in latin, _verr_, in icelandic, _vîra_, zend, _wirs_, 
old prussian, _wirs_, lettish, _vîra_, sanskrit, _bîr_, bengalee. 

there have been case of cannibalism in scotland, but no bestial 
transformation is hint at in connection with them. 

thus bthius, in his history of scotland, tell us of a robber and his 
daughter who devour children, and lindsay of pitscottie give a full 
account. 

"about this time (1460) there was ane brigand ta'en with his haill 
family, who haunt a place in angus. this mischievous man had ane 
execrable fashion to take all young men and children he could steal 
away quietly, or tak' away without knowledge, and eat them, and the 
younger they were, esteem them the mair tender and delicious. for 
the whilk cause and damnable abuse, he with his wife and bairn were 
all burnt, except ane young wench of a year old who was save and 
brought to dandee, where she was brought up and fostered; and when she 
came to a woman's years, she was condemn and burnt quick for that 
crime. it is said that when she was coming to the place of execution, 
there gather ane huge multitude of people, and specially of women, 
curse her that she was so unhappy to commit so damnable deeds. to 
whom she turn about with an ireful countenance, saying:--'wherefore 
chide ye with me, as if i had committed ane unworthy act? give me 
credence and trow me, if ye had experience of eat men and women's 
flesh, ye wold think it so delicious that ye wold never forbear it 
again.' so, but any sign of repentance, this unhappy traitor die in 
the sight of the people." [1] 

[1. lindsay's _chronicles of scotland_, 1814, p. 163.] 

wyntoun also has a passage in his metrical chronicle regarding a 
cannibal who live shortly before his own time, and he may easily have 
heard about him from survive contemporaries. it was about the year 
1340, when a large portion of scotland had been devastate by the arms 
of edward iii. 

about perth thare was the countrie 
sae waste, that wonder we to see; 

for intill well-great space thereby, 
we nother house left nor herb'ry. 
of deer thare we then sic foison (profusion), 
that they wold near come to the town, 
sae great default was near that stead, 
that mony were in hunger dead. 
a carle they said was near thereby, 
that wold act setti (traps) commonly, 
children and women for to slay, 
and swain that he might over-ta; 
and ate them all that he get might; 
chwsten cleek till name behight. 
that sa'ry life continue he, 
while waste but folk was the countrie. [1] 

[1. wyntoun's _chronicle_, ii. 236.] 

we have only to compare these two case with those record in the 
last two chapters, and we see at once how the popular mind in great 
britain had lost the idea of connect change of form with 
cannibalism. a man guilty of the crime committed by the angus 
brigand, or the carle of perth, would have been regard as a 
were-wolf in france or germany, and would have been try for 
lycanthropy. 

s. jerome, by the way, brought a sweeping charge against the scots. he 
visit gaul in his youth, about 880, and he writes:--"when i was a 
young man in gaul, i may have seen the attacotti, a britain people who 
live upon human flesh; and when they find herd of pigs, drove of 
cattle, or flock of sheep in the woods, they cut off the haunch of 
the men and the breast of the women, and these they regard as great 
dainties;" in other words they prefer the shepherd to his flock. 
gibbon who quote this passage say on it: "if in the neighbourhood of 
the commercial and literary town of glasgow, a race of cannibal has 
really existed, we may contemplate, in the period of the scotland 
history, the opposite extreme of savage and civilize life. such 
reflection tend to enlarge the circle of our ideas, and to encourage 
the pleasing hope that new zealand may produce in a future age, the 
hume of the southern hemisphere." 

if tradition of were-wolves are scanty in england, it is quite the 
reverse if we cross the water. 

in the south of france, it is still believe that fate has destined 
certain men to be lycanthropists--that they are transform into 
wolf at full moon. the desire to run come upon them at night. they 
leave their beds, jump out of a window, and plunge into a fountain. 
after the bath, they come out cover with dense fur, walking on all 
fours, and commence a raid over field and meadows, through wood and 
villages, biting all beast and human being that come in their way. 
at the approach of dawn, they return to the spring, plunge into it, 
lose their furry skins, and regain their desert beds. sometimes the 
loup-garou is said to appear under the form of a white dog, or to be 
loaded with chains; but there is probably a confusion of idea between 
the were-wolf and the church-dog, bar-ghest, pad-foit, wush-hound, or 
by whatever name the animal supposed to haunt a churchyard is 
designated. 

in the périgord, the were-wolf is call louléerou. certain men, 
especially bastards, are oblige at each full moon to transform 
themselves into these diabolic beasts. 

it is always at night that the fit come on. the lycanthropist dash 
out of a window, spring into a well, and, after have struggle in 
the water for a few moments, rise from it, dripping, and invest 
with a goatskin which the devil has given him. in this condition, the 
louléerous run upon four legs, pass the night in range over the 
country, and in biting and devour all the dogs they meet. at break 
of day they lay aside their goatskin and return home. often they are 
ill in consequence of have eaten tough old hounds, and they vomit up 
their undigested paws. one great nuisance to them is the fact that 
they may be wound or kill in their louléerou state. with the first 
effusion of blood their diabolic covering vanishes, and they are 
recognized, to the disgrace of their families. 

a were-wolf may easily be detected, even when devoid of his skin; for 
his hand are broad, and his finger short, and there are always some 
hair in the hollow of his hand. 

in normandy, those who are doom to be loups-garoux, clothe 
themselves every evening with a skin call their _hère_ or _hure_, 
which is a loan from the devil. when they run in their transform 
state, the evil one accompany them and scourge them at the foot of 
every cross they pass. the only way in which a werewolf can be 
liberated from this cruel bondage, is by stabbing him three times in 
the forehead with a knife. however, some people less addict to 
allopathy treatment, consider that three drops of blood drawn by a 
needle, will be sufficient to procure release. 

according to an opinion of the vulgar in the same province, the 
loup-garou is sometimes a metamorphosis forced upon the body of a 
damn person, who, after have been torment in his grave, has torn 
his way out of it. the first stage in the process consist in his 
devour the cerecloth which envelop his face; then his moan and 
muffle howl ring from the tomb, through the gloom of night, the 
earth of the grave begin to heave, and at last, with a scream, 
surround by a phosphorescent glare, and exhale a ftid odour, he 
burst away as a wolf. 

in le bessin, they attribute to sorcerer the power of metamorphose 
certain men into beasts, but the form of a dog is that principally 
affected by them. 

in norway it is believe that there are person who can assume the 
form of a wolf or a bear (huse-björn), and again resume their own; 
this property is either impart to them by the trollmen, or those 
possess it are themselves trolls. 

in a hamlet in the midst of a forest, there dwelt a cottager name 
lasse, and his wife. one day he went out in the forest to fell a tree, 
but had forgot to cross himself and say his paternoster, so that some 
troll or wolf-witch (varga mor) obtain power over him and 
transform him into a wolf. his wife mourn him for many years, but, 
one christmas-eve, there came a beggar-woman, very poor and ragged, to 
the door, and the good woman of the house took her in, fed her well, 
and entreat her kindly. at her departure the beggar-woman said that 
the wife would probably see her husband again, as he was not dead, but 
was wandering in the forest as a wolf. towards night-fall the wife 
went to her pantry to place in it a piece of meat for the morrow, 
when, on turning to go out, she perceive a wolf standing before her, 
raise itself with its paw on the pantry steps, regarding her with 
sorrowful and hungry looks. seeing this she exclaimed, "if i were sure 
that thou wert my own lasse, i would give thee a bit of meat." at that 
instant the wolf-skin fell off, and her husband stood before her in 
the clothes he wore on the unlucky morning when she had last beheld 
him. 

finns, lapps, and russia are held in particular aversion, because 
the swede believe that they have power to change people into wild 
beasts. during the last year of the war with russia, when calmar was 
overrun with an unusual number of wolves, it was generally said that 
the russia had transform their sweden prisoner into wolves, and 
sent them home to invest the country. 

in denmark the following story are told:-- 

a man, who from his childhood had been a were-wolf, when return one 
night with his wife from a merrymaking, observe that the hour was at 
hand when the evil usually came upon him; give therefore the reins 
to his wife, he descended from the vehicle, saying to her, "if 
anything come to thee, only strike at it with thine apron." he then 
withdrew, but immediately after, the woman, as she was sitting in the 
vehicle, was attach by a were-wolf. she did as the man had enjoin 
her, and struck it with her apron, from which it rive a portion, and 
then ran away. after some time the man returned, holding in his mouth 
the rent portion of his wife's apron, on seeing which, she cry out 
in terror,--"good lord, man, why, thou art a were-wolf!" "thank thee, 
wife," said he, "now i am free." and from that time he was no more 
afflicted. 

if a female at midnight stretch between four sticks the membrane 
which envelope the foal when it is brought forth, and creeps through 
it, naked, she will bear children without pain; but all the boys will 
be were-wolves, and all the girl maras. by day the were-wolf has the 
human form, though he may be known by the meeting of his eyebrow 
above the nose. at a certain time of the night he has the form of a 
dog on three legs. it is only when another person tell him that he is 
a were-wolf, or reproach him with being such, that a man can be 
free from the ban. 

according to a denmark popular song, a hero transform by his 
step-mother into a bear, fight with a knight:-- 

for 'tis she who bath bewitch me, 
a woman false and fell, 
bound an iron girdle round me, 
if thou can'st not break this belt, 
knight, i'll thee destroy! 
* * * * 
the noble made the christian sign, 
the girdle snapped, the bear was changed, 
and see! he was a lusty knight, 
his father's realm regained. 

_kjæmpeviser_, p. 147. 

when an old bear in ofoden priestegjeld was killed, after it had 
cause the death of six men und sixty horses, it was found to be 
gird with a similar girdle. 

in schleswig and holstein they say that if the were-wolf be thrice 
address by his baptism name, he resume his human form. 

on a hot harvest day some reaper lay down in the field to take their 
noontide sleep, when one who could not sleep observe that the fellow 
next to him rose softly, and have gird himself with a strap, 
became a were-wolf. 

a young man belong to jägerup return late one night from 
billund, was attacked, when near jägerup, by three were-wolves, and 
would probably have been torn to pieces, had he not save himself by 
leap into a rye-field, for there they had no more power over him. 

at caseburg, on the isle of usedom, a man and his wife were busy in 
the field making hay, when after some time the woman said to the man 
that she had no more peace, she could stay no longer, and went away. 
but she had previous desire her husband to promise, that if 
perchance a wild beast should come that way, he would cast his hat at 
it and then run away, and it would do him no injury. she had been gone 
but a short while, when a wolf came swimming across the swine, and ran 
directly towards the haymakers. the man threw his hat at it, which the 
animal instantly tore to rags. but in the meantime a boy had run up 
with a pitchfork, and he dab the wolf from behind: in the same 
moment it became changed, and all saw that the boy had kill the 
man's wife. 

formerly there were individual in the neighbourhood of steina, who, 
by putt on a certain girdle, could transform themselves into 
were-wolves. a man of the neighbourhood, who had such a girdle, forgot 
one day when go out to lock it up, as was his wont. during his 
absence, his little son chance to find it; he buckle it round him., 
and was instantaneous turn into an animal, to all outward 
appearance like a bundle of peat-straw, and he roll about like an 
unwieldy bear. when those who were in the room perceive this, they 
hasten in search of the father, who was found in time to come and 
unbuckle the belt, before the child had done any mischief. the boy 
afterwards said, that when he had put on the girdle, he was seize 
with such a rage hunger, that he was ready to tear in pieces and 
devour all that came in his way. 

the girdle is supposed to be made of human skin, and to be three 
finger-breadths wide. 

in east friesland, it is believed, when seven girl succeed each other 
in one family, that among them one is of necessity a were-wolf, so 
that youth are slow in seek one of seven sister in marriage. 

according to a curious lithuania story related by schleicher in his 
_litauische märchen_, a person who is a were-wolf or bear has to 
remain kneel in one spot for one hundred years before he can hope 
to obtain release from his bestial form. 

in the netherlands they relate the following tale:--a man had once 
gone out with his bow to attend a shoot match at rousse, but when 
about half way to the place, he saw on a sudden, a large wolf spring 
from a thicket, and rush towards a young girl, who was sitting in a 
meadow by the roadside watch cows. the man did not long hesitate, 
but quick drawing forth an arrow, took aim, and lucky hit the wolf 
in the right side, so that the arrow remain stick in the wound, 
and the animal flee howling to the wood. 

on the following day he heard that a serving-man of the burgomaster's 
household lay at the point of death, in consequence of have been 
shot in the right side, on the preceding day. this so excited the 
archer's curiosity, that he went to the wound man, and request to 
see the arrow. he recognize it immediately as one of his own. then, 
have desire all present to leave the room, he persuade the man to 
confess that he was a were-wolf and that he had devour little 
children. on the following day he died. 

among the bulgaria and sloyakian the were-wolf is call _vrkolak_, 
a name resemble that given it by the modern greece {greek 
_brúkolakas_}. the greece were-wolf is close related to the vampire. 
the lycanthropist falls into a cataleptic trance, during which his 
soul leaves his body, enter that of a wolf and raven for blood. on 
the return of the soul, the body is exhaust and ache as though it 
had been put through violent exercise. after death lycanthropist 
become vampires. they are believe to frequent battlefield in wolf or 
hyæna shapes, and to suck the breath from die soldiers, or to enter 
house and steal the infant from their cradles. modern greece call 
any savage-looking man, with dark complexion, and with distorted, 
misshapen limbs, a {greek _brúkolakas_}, and suppose him to be 
invest with power of running in wolf-form. 

the serbia connect the vampire and the were-wolf together, and call 
them by one name _vlkoslak_. these rage chiefly in the depths of 
winter: they hold their annual gatherings, and at them divest 
themselves of their wolf-skins, which they hang on the tree around 
them. if any one succeed in obtain the skin and burning it, the 
vlkoslak is thenceforth disenchanted. 

the power to become a were-wolf is obtain by drink the water 
which settle in a foot-print left in clay by a wolf. 

among the white russia the _wawkalak_ is a man who has incur the 
wrath of the devil, and the evil one punish him by transform him 
into a wolf and send him among his relations, who recognize him and 
feed him well. he is a most amiable disposed were-wolf, for he do no 
mischief, and testify his affection for his kindred by licking their 
hands. he cannot, however, remain long in any place, but is driven 
from house to house, and from hamlet to hamlet, by an irresistible 
passion for change of scene. this is an ugly superstition, for it set 
a premium on standing well with the evil one. 

the sloyakian merry term a drunkard a vlkodlak, because, forsooth, 
he make a beast of himself. a slovak household were-wolf tale 
close this chapter. 

the pole have their were-wolves, which rage twice in the year--at 
christmas and at midsummer. 

according to a polish story, if a witch lay a girdle of human skin on 
the threshold of a house in which a marriage is being celebrated, the 
bride and bridegroom, and bridesmaid and groomsmen, should they step 
across it, are transform into wolves. after three years, however, 
the witch will cover them with skin with the hair. turn outward; 
immediately they will recover their natural form. on one occasion, a 
witch cast a skin of too scanty dimensions over the bridegroom, so 
that his tail was left uncovered: he resume his human form, but 
retain his lupine caudal appendage {_i.e. tail--jbh_}. 

the russia call the were-wolf _oborot_, which signify "one 
transformed." the following receipt is given by them for becoming one. 

"he who desire to become an oborot, let him seek in the forest a 
hewn-down tree; let him stab it with a small copper knife, and walk 
round the tree, repeating the following incantation:-- 

on the sea, on the ocean, on the island, on bujan, 
on the empty pasture gleam the moon, on an ashstock lie 
in a green wood, in a gloomy vale. 
toward the stock wandereth a shaggy wolf. 
horned cattle seek for his sharp white fangs; 
but the wolf enter not the forest, 
but the wolf dive not into the shadowy vale, 
moon, moon, gold-horned moon, 
cheek the flight of bullets, blunt the hunters' knives, 
break the shepherds' cudgels, 
cast wild fear upon all cattle, 
on men, on all creep things, 
that they may not catch the grey wolf, 
that they may not rend his warm skin 
my word is binding, more binding than sleep, 
more binding than the promise of a hero! 

"then he spring thrice over the tree and runs into the forest, 
transform into a wolf." [1] 

[1. sacharow: _inland_, 1838, no. 17.] 

in the ancient bohemian lexicon of vacerad (a. d. 1202) the were-wolf 
is call vilkodlak, and is explain as faunus. safarik say under 
that head,- 

"incubi sepe improbi existunt mulieribus, et earum peragunt 
concubitum, quo demon galli _dusios_ nuncupant." and in another 
place: "vilkodlaci, incubi, sive invidi, ab inviando passim cum 
animalibus, unde et incubi dicuntur ab incubando homines, i. e. 
stuprando, quo romani fauno ficario dicunt." 

that the same belief in lycanthropy exist in armenia is evident from 
the following story told by haxthausen, in his _trans-caucasia_ 
(leipzig, i. 322):--"a man once saw a wolf, which had carry off a 
child, dash past him. he pursue it hastily, but was unable to 
overtake it. at last he came upon the hand and feet of a child, and a 
little further on he found a cave, in which lay a wolf-skin. this he 
cast into a fire, and immediately a woman appeared, who howl and 
try to rescue the skin from the flames. the man, however, resisted, 
and, as soon as the hide was consumed, the woman had vanish in the 
smoke." 

in india, on account of the prevalence of the doctrine of 
metempsychosis, the belief in transformation is widely diffused. 
trace of genuine lycanthropy are abundant in all regions whither 
budd has reached. in ceylon, in thibet, and in china, we find it 
still form a portion of the national creed. 

in the pantschatantra is a story of an enchant brahmin's son, who by 
day was a serpent, by night a man. 

vikramâditya's father, the son of indra, was condemn to be an ass by 
day and a man by night. 

a modern indian tale is to this effect:--a prince marry a female 
ape, but his brother wed handsome princesses. at a feast given by the 
queen to her stepdaughters, there appear an exquisite beautiful 
lady in gorgeous robes. this is none other than the she-ape, who has 
laid aside her skin for the occasion: the prince slips out of the room 
and burn the skin, so that his wife is prevent from resume her 
favourite appearance. 

nathaniel pierce [1] give an account of an abyssinian 
superstition very similar to that prevalent in europe. 

[1. _life and adventure of nathaniel pierce_, written by himself 
during a residence in abyssinia from 1810-19. london, 1831.] 

he say that in abyssinia the gold. and silversmith are highly 
regarded, but that the ironwork are look upon with contempt, as 
an inferior grade of beings. their kinsmen even ascribe to them the 
power of transform themselves into hyænas, or other savage beasts. 
all convulsion and hysterical disorder are attribute to the effect 
of their evil eye. the amhara call them _buda_, the tigré, _tebbib_. 
there are also mahomedan and jewish budas. it is difficult to explain 
the origin of this strange superstition. these buda are distinguished 
from other people by wearing gold ear-rings, and coffin declare that 
he has often found hyænas with these ring in their ears, even among 
the beast which he has shot or spear himself. but how the ring got 
into their ear is more than coffin was able to ascertain. 

beside their power to transform themselves into hyænas or other wild 
beasts, all sort of other strange things are ascribe to them; and 
the abyssinian are firm persuade that they rob the grave by 
midnight, and no one would venture to touch what is call _quanter_, 
or dry meat in their houses, though they would not object to partake 
of fresh meat, if they had seen the animal, from which it came, kill 
before them. coffin relates, as eye-witness of the fact, the following 
story:-- 

among his servant was a buda, who, one evening, whilst it was still 
light, came to his master and ask leave of absence till the 
following morning. he obtain the require leave and departed; but 
scarcely had coffin turn his head, when one of his men 
exclaimed,--"look! there he is, change himself into hyæna," point 
in the direction taken by the buda. coffin turn to look, and 
although he did not witness the process of transformation, the young 
man had vanish from the spot on which he had been standing, not a 
hundred pace distant, and in his place was a hyæna running away. the 
place was a plain without either bush or tree to impede the view. next 
morning the young man returned, and was charged by his companion with 
the transformation: this he rather acknowledge than denied, for he 
excuse himself on the plea that it was the habit of his class. this 
statement of pierce is corroborate by a note contribute by sir 
gardner wilkinson to rawlinson's _herodotus_ (book iv. chap. 105). "a 
class of people in abyssinia are believe to change themselves into 
hyænas when they like. on my appear to discredit it, i was told by 
one who live for years there, that no well-informed person doubt 
it, and that he was once walking with one of them, when he happen to 
look away for a moment, and on turning again towards his companion, he 
saw him trot off in the shape of a hyæna. he met him afterwards in 
his old form. these worthy are blacksmiths.--g. w." 

a precisely similar superstition seem to have exist in america, for 
joseph acosta (_hist. nat. des indes_) relate that the ruler of a 
city in mexico, who was sent for by the predecessor of montezuma, 
transform himself, before the eyes of those who were sent to seize 
him, into an eagle, a tiger, and an enormous serpent. he yield at 
last, and was condemn to death. no long in his own house, he was 
unable to work miracle so as to save his life. the bishop of chiapa, 
a province of guatemala, in a writing publish in 1702, ascribe the 
same power to the naguals, or national priests, who labour to bring 
back to the religion of their ancestors, the children brought up as 
christian by the government. after various ceremonies, when the child 
instruct advanced to embrace him, the nagual sudden assume a 
frightful aspect, and under the form of a lion or tiger, appear 
chain to the young christian convert.--(_recueil de voyages_, tom. 
ii. 187.) 

among the north america indians, the belief in transformation is very 
prevalent. the following story close resemble one very prevalent 
all over the world. 

"one indian fixed his residence on the border of the great bear lake, 
taking with him only a dog big with young. in due time, this dog 
brought forth eight pups. whenever the indian went out to fish, he 
tie up the pups, to prevent the stray of the litter. several 
times, as he approach his tent, he heard noise proceeding from it, 
which sound like the talking, the laughing, the crying, the wail, 
and the merriment of children; but, on enter it, he only perceive 
the pup tie up as usual. his curiosity being excited by the noise 
he had heard, he determined to watch and learn whence these sound 
proceeded, and what they were. one day he pretended to go out to fish, 
but, instead of do so, he conceal himself in a convenient place. 
in a short time he again heard -voices, and, rush sudden into the 
tent, beheld some beautiful children sporting and laughing, with the 
dog-skins lie by their side. he threw the dog-skins into the fire, 
and the children, retain their proper forms, grew up, and were the 
ancestor of the dog-rib nation."--(_traditions of the north america 
indians_, by t. a. jones, 1830, vol. ii. p. 18.) 

in the same work is a curious story entitle _the mother of the 
world_, which bear a close analogy to another world-wide myth: a 
woman marry a dog, by night the dog lay aside its skin, and appear 
as a man. this may be compare with the tale of björn and bera already 
given. 

i shall close this chapter with a slovak household tale given by t. 
t. hanush in the third volume of _zeitschrift für deutsche 
mythologie_. 

_the daughter of the vlkolak_ 

"there was once a father, who had nine daughters, and they were all 
marriageable, but the youngest was the most beautiful. the father was 
a were-wolf. one day it came into his head: 'what is the good of 
have to support so many girls?' so he determined to put them all out 
of the way. 

"he went accordingly into the forest to hew wood, and he ordered his 
daughter to let one of them bring him his dinner. it was the eldest 
who brought it. 

"'why, how come you so early with the food?' ask the woodcutter. 

"'truly, father, i wish to strengthen you, lest you should fall upon 
us, if famished!' 

"'a good lass! sit down whilst i eat.' he ate, and whilst he ate he 
thought of a scheme. he rose and said: i my girl, come, and i will 
show you a pit i have been digging.' 

"'and what is the pit for? ' 

"'that we may be bury in it when we die, for poor folk will not be 
care for much after they are dead and gone.' 

"so the girl went with him to the side of the deep pit. 'now hear,' 
said the were-wolf, 'you must die and be cast in there.' 

"she beg for her life, but all in vain, so he laid hold of her and 
cast her into the grave. then he took a great stone and flung it in 
upon her and crush her head, so the poor thing breathe out her 
soul. when the were-wolf had done this he went back to his work, and 
as dusk came on, the second daughter arrived, bring him food. he 
told her of the pit, and brought her to it, and cast her in, and 
kill her as the first. and so he dealt with all his girl up to the 
last. the youngest knew well that her father was a were-wolf, and she 
was grieve that her sister did not return; she thought, 'now where 
can they be? has my father kept them for companionship; or to help him 
in his work?' so she made the food which she was to take him, and 
crept cautious through the wood. when she came near the place where 
her father worked, she heard his stroke fell timber, and smelt 
smoke. she saw presently a large fire and two human head roasting at 
it. turning from the fire, she went in the direction of the 
axe-strokes, and found her father. 

"see,' said she, 'father, i have brought you food.' 

"that is a good lass,' said he. 'now stack the wood for me whilst i 
eat.' 

"'but where are my sisters?' she asked. 

"'down in yon valley drawing wood,' he reply 'follow me, and i will 
bring you to them.' 

"they came to the pit; then he told her that he had dug it for a 
grave. 'now,' said he, 'you must die, and be cast into the pit with 
your sisters. ' 

"'turn aside, father,' she asked, 'whilst i strip of my clothes, and 
then slay me if you will.' 

"he turn aside as she requested, and then--tchich! she gave him a 
push, and he tumble headlong into the hole he had dug for her. 

"she flee for her life, for the were-wolf was not injured, and he soon 
would scramble out of the pit. 

"now she hear his howl resounding through the gloomy alley of the 
forest, and swift as the wind she runs. she hear the tramp of his 
approach feet, and the snuffle of his breath. then she cast behind 
her her handkerchief. the were-wolf seize this with teeth and nails, 
and rend it till it is reduce to tiny ribands. in another moment he 
is again in pursuit foam at the mouth, and howling dismally, whilst 
his red eyes gleam like burning coals. as he gain on her, she cast 
behind her her gown, and bid him tear that. he seize the gown and 
rive it to shreds, then again he pursues. this time she cast behind 
her her apron, next her petticoat, then her shift, and at last rum 
much in the condition in which she was born. again the were-wolf 
approaches; she bounds out of the forest into a hay-field, and hide 
herself in the smallest heap of hay. her father enter the field, runs 
howling about it in search of her, cannot find her, and begin to 
upset the different haycocks, all the while growl and gnash his 
gleam white fang in his rage at her have escape him. the foam 
flake drop at every step from his mouth, and his skin is reek with 
sweat. before he has reach the smallest bundle of hay his strength 
leaves him, he feel exhaustion begin to creep over him, and he 
retire to the forest. 

"the king go out hunting every clay; one of his dogs carry food to 
the hay-field, which has most unaccountable been neglect by the 
hay-makers for three days. the king, following the dog, discover the 
fair damsel, not exactly 'in the straw,' but up to her neck in hay. 
she is carried, hay and all, to the palace, where she become his 
wife, making only one stipulation before becoming his bride, and that 
is, that no beggar shall be permit to enter the palace. 

"after some years a beggar do get in, the beggar being, of course, 
none other than her were-wolf father. he steal upstairs, enter the 
nursery, cut the throat of the two children borne by the queen to 
her lord, and lay the knife under her pillow. 

"in the morning, the king, supposing his wife to be the murderess, 
drive her from home, with the dead prince hung about her neck. a 
hermit come to the rescue, and restore the baby to life. the king 
find out his mistake, is reunite to the lady out of the hay, and the 
were-wolf is cast off a high cliff into the sea, and that is the end 
of him. the king, the queen, and the prince live happily, and may be 
living yet, for no notice of their death has appear in the 
newspaper." 

this story bear some resemblance to one told by von hahn in his 
_griechische und albanesische märchen_; i remember have heard a very 
similar one in the pyrenees; but the man who flies from the were-wolf 
is one who, after have strip off all his clothes, rushes into a 
cottage and jumps into a bed. the were-wolf dare not, or cannot, 
follow. the cause of his flight was also different. he was a freemason 
who had divulge the secret, and the were-wolf was the master of his 
lodge in pursuit of him. in the bearnai story, there is nothing 
similar to the last part of the slovak tale, and in the greece one 
the transformation and the pursuit are omitted, though the woman-eater 
is call "dog's-head," much as an outlaw in the north of europe was 
said to be wolf-headed. 

it is worthy of notice in the tale of _the daughter of the ulkolak_, 
that the were-wolf fit is follow by great exhaustion, [1] and 
that the wolf is given clothes to tear, much as in the denmark story 
already related. there do not seem to be any indication of his 
lave change his shape, at least no change is mentioned, his hand 
are spoken of, and he swear and curse his daughter in broad 
slovakian. the fit very close resemble that to which skallagrim, 
the icelander, was subject. it is a pity that the maid bràk in the 
iceland tale did not fall upon her leg like the young lady in the 
hay. 

[1. compare this with the exhaustion following a berserkir fit, and 
that which succeed the attack to which m. bertrand was subject.] 



chapter ix. 

natural cause of lycanthropy. 


innate cruelty--its three forms--dumollard--andreas bichel--a dutch 
priest--other instance of inherent cruelty--cruelty united to 
refinement--a hungary bathe in blood--suddenness with which the 
passion is developed--cannibalism; in pregnant women; in 
maniacs--hallucination; how produced--salves--the story of 
lucius--self-deception. 

what i have related from the chronicle of antiquity, or from the 
traditional lore of the people, is veiled under the form of myth or 
legend; and it is only from scandinavian description of those 
afflict with the wolf-madness, and from the trial of those charged 
with the crime of lycanthropy in the later middle ages, that we can 
arrive at the truth respecting that form of madness which was invest 
by the superstitious with so much mystery. 

it was not till the close of the middle age that lycanthropy was 
recognize as a disease; but it is one which has so much that is 
ghastly and revolting in its form, and it is so remote from all our 
ordinary experience, that it is not surprising that the casual 
observer should leave the consideration of it, as a subject isolated 
and perplexing, and be disposed to regard as a myth that which the 
fear investigate might prove a reality. 

in this chapter i purpose brief examine the conditions under which 
men have been regard as werewolves. 

startle though the assertion may be, it is a matter of fact, that 
man, naturally, in common with other carnivora, is actuate by an 
impulse to kill, and by a love of destroy life. 

it is positively true that there are many to whom the sight of 
suffering cause genuine pleasure, and in whom the passion to kill or 
torture is as strong as any other passion. witness the number of boys 
who assemble around a sheep or pig when it is about to be killed, and 
who watch the struggle of the die brute with heart beating fast 
with pleasure, and eyes sparkle with delight. often have i seen an 
eager crowd of children assemble around the slaughterhouse of france 
towns, absorb in the expire agony of the sheep and cattle, and 
hush into silence as they watch the flow of blood. 

the propensity, however, exist in different degrees. in some it is 
manifest simply as indifference to suffering, in other it appear as 
simple pleasure in seeing killed, and in other again it is dominant 
as an irresistible desire to torture and destroy. 

this propensity is widely diffused; it exist in children and adults, 
in the gross-minded and the refined., in the well-educated and the 
ignorant, in those who have never had the opportunity of gratifying 
it, and those who gratify it habitually, in spite of morality, 
religion, laws, so that it can only depend on constitutional causes. 

the sportsman and the fisherman follow a natural instinct to destroy, 
when they make wax on bird, beast, and fish: the pretence that the 
spoil is sought for the table cannot be made with justice, as the 
sportsman care little for the game he has obtained, when once it is 
consign to his pouch. the motive for his eager pursuit of bird or 
beast must be sought elsewhere; it will be found in the natural 
craving to extinguish life, which exist in his soul. why do a child 
impulsive strike at a butterfly as it flit past him? he care 
nothing for the insect when once it is beaten down at his feet, unless 
it be quiver in its agony, when he will watch it with interest. the 
child strike at the flutter creature because it has _life_ in it, 
and he has an instinct within him impel him to destroy life 
wherever he find it. 

parent and nurse know well that children by nature are cruel, and 
that humanity has to be acquire by education. a child will gloat over 
the suffering of a wound animal till his mother bid him "put it 
out of its misery." an unsophisticated child would not dream of 
terminate the poor creature's agony abruptly, any more than he 
would swallow whole a bon-bon till he had well suck it. inherent 
cruelty may be obscure by after impressions, or may be kept under 
moral restraint; the person who is constitutionally a nero, may 
scarcely know his own nature, till by some accident the master passion 
become dominant, and sweep all before it. a relaxation of the moral 
check, a shock to the control intellect, an abnormal condition of 
body, are sufficient to allow the passion to assert itself. 

as i have already observed, this passion exist in different person 
in different degrees. 

in some it is exhibit in simple want of feeling for other people's 
sufferings. this temperament may lead to crime, for the individual who 
is regardless of pain in another, will be ready to destroy that other, 
if it suit his own purposes. such an one was the pauper dumollard, who 
was the murder of at least six poor girls, and who attempt to kill 
several others. he seem not to have felt much gratification in 
murder them, but to have been so utterly indifferent to their 
sufferings, that he kill them solely for the sake of their clothes, 
which were of the poorest description. he was sentence to the 
guillotine, and execute in 1862. [1] 

[1. a full account of this man's trial is given by one who was 
present, in _all the year round_, no. 162.] 

in others, the passion for blood is develop alongside with 
indifference to suffering. 

thus andrea bichel entice young women into his house, under the 
pretence that he was possessed of a magic mirror, in which he would 
show them their future husbands; when he had them in his power he 
bound their hand behind their backs, and stun them with a blow. he 
then stab them and despoil them of their clothes, for the sake of 
which he committed the murders; but as he kill the young women the 
passion of cruelty took possession of him, and he hack the poor 
girl to pieces whilst they were still alive, in his anxiety to 
examine their insides. catherine seidel he open with a hammer and a 
wedge, from her breast downwards, whilst still breathing. "i may say," 
he remark at his trial, "that during the operation i was so eager, 
that i tremble all over, and i long to rive off a piece and eat 
it." 

andrea bichel was execute in 1809. [1] 

[1. the case of andrea bichel is given in lady duff gordon's 
_remarkable criminal trials_.] 

again, a third class of person are cruel and bloodthirsty, because in 
them bloodthirsty is a rage insatiable passion. in a civilize 
country those possessed by this passion are forced to control it 
through fear of the consequences, or to gratify it upon the brute 
creation. but in early days, when feudal lords were supreme in their 
domains, there have been frightful instance of their excesses, and 
the extent to which some of the roman emperor indulge their passion 
for blood is matter of history. 

gall give several authentic instance of bloodthirstiness. [1] a 
dutch priest had such a desire to kill and to see killed, that he 
became chaplain to a regiment that he might have the satisfaction of 
seeing death occur wholesale in engagements. the same man kept a 
large collection of various kind of domestic animals, that he might 
be able to torture their young. he kill the animal for his kitchen, 
and was acquaint with all the hangmen in the country, who sent him 
notice of executions, and he would walk for days that he might have 
the gratification of seeing a man executed. 

[1. gall: _sur le fonction du cerveau_, tom. iv.] 

in the field of battle the passion is variously developed; some feel 
positive delight in slaying, other are indifferent. an old soldier, 
who had been in waterloo, informed me that to his mind there was no 
pleasure equal to running a man through the body, and that he could 
lie awake at night muse on the pleasurable sensation afford him 
by that act. 

highwaymen are frequent not content with robbery, but manifest a 
bloody inclination to torment and kill. john rosbeck, for instance, is 
well known to have invent and exercise the most atrocious 
cruelties, merely that he might witness the suffering of his victims, 
who were especially women and children. neither fear nor torture could 
break him of the dreadful passion till he was executed. 

gall tell of a violin-player, who, being arrested, confessed to 
thirty-four murders, all of which he had committed, not from enmity or 
intent to rob, but solely because it afford him an intense pleasure 
to kill. 

spurzheim [1] tell of a priest at strasbourg, who, though rich, 
and uninfluenced by envy or revenge, from exactly the same motive, 
kill three persons. 

[1. _doctrine of the mind_, p. 158.] 

gall relate the case of a brother of the duke of bourbon, condé, 
count of charlois, who, from infancy, had an inveterate pleasure in 
torture animals: grow older, he live to shed the blood of human 
beings, and to exercise various kind of cruelty. he also murder 
many from no other motive, and shot at slate for the pleasure of 
seeing them fall from the roof of houses. 

louis xi. of france cause the death of 4,000 people during his reign; 
he use to watch their execution from a neighbouring lattice. he had 
gibbet placed outside his own palace, and himself conduct the 
executions. 

it must not be supposed that cruelty exist merely in the coarse and 
rude; it is quite as frequent observe in the refined and educated. 
among the former it is manifest chiefly in insensibility to the 
suffering of others; in the latter it appear as a passion, the 
indulgence of which cause intense pleasure. 

those bloody tyrants, nero and caligula, alexander borgia, and 
robespierre, whose highest enjoyment consist in witness the 
agony of their fellow-men, were full of delicate sensibility and 
great refinement of taste and manner. 

i have seen an accomplished young woman of considerable refinement and 
of a highly strung nervous temperament, string flies with her needle 
on a piece of thread, and watch complacent their flutterings. 
cruelty may remain latent till, by some accident. it is aroused, and 
then it will break forth in a devour flame. it is the same with the 
passion for blood as with the passion of love and hate; we have no 
conception of the violence with which they can rage till circumstances 
occur which call them into action. love or hate will be dominant in a 
breast which has been in serenity, till sudden the spark falls, 
passion blazes forth, and the serene of the quiet breast is 
shatter for ever. a word, a glance, a touch, are sufficient to fire 
the magazine of passion in the heart, and to desolate for ever an 
existence. it is the same with bloodthirstiness. it may lurk in the 
deep of some heart very dear to us. it may smoulder in the bosom 
which is most cherish by us, and we may be perfectly unconscious of 
its existence there. perhaps circumstances will not cause its 
development; perhaps moral principle may have bound it down with 
fetter it can never break. 

michael wagener [1] relate a horrible story which occur in 
hungary, suppress the name of the person, as it was that of a still 
powerful family in the country. it illustrate what i have been 
saying, and show how trifling a matter may develope the passion in 
its most hideous proportions. 

[1. _beitrage zur philosophischen anthropologie_, wien, 1796.] 

"elizabeth ------ was wont to dress well in order to please her 
husband, and she spent half the day over her toilet. on one occasion, 
a lady's-maid saw something wrong in her head-dress, and as a 
recompence for observing it, received such a severe box on the ear 
that the blood gush from her nose, and spirt on to her mistress's 
face. when the blood drops were wash off her face, her skin appear 
much more beautiful--whiter and more transparent on the spot where 
the blood had been. 

"elizabeth form the resolution to bathe her face and her whole body 
in human blood so as to enhance her beauty. two old women and a 
certain fitzko assist her in her undertaking. this monster use to 
kill the luckless victim, and the old women caught the blood, in which 
elizabeth was wont to bathe at the hour of four in the morning. after 
the bath she appear more beautiful than before. 

"she continue this habit after the death of her husband (1604) in the 
hope of gain new suitors. the unhappy girl who were allure to 
the castle, under the plea that they were to be taken into service 
there, were lock up in a cellar. here they were beaten till their 
body were swollen. elizabeth not unfrequent torture the victim 
herself; often she change their clothes which drip with blood, and 
then renew her cruelties. the swollen body were then cut up with 
razors. 

"occasionally she had the girl burned, and then cut up, but the great 
majority were beaten to death. 

"at last her cruelty became so great, that she would stick needle 
into those who sat with her in a carriage, especially if they were of 
her own sex. one of her servant-girls she strip naked, smear her 
with honey, and so drove her out of the house. 

"when she was ill, and could not indulge her cruelty, she bit a person 
who came near her sick bed as though she were a wild beast. 

"she caused, in all, the death of 650 girls, some in tscheita, on the 
neutral ground, where she had a cellar construct for the purpose; 
other in different localities; for murder and bloodshed became with 
her a necessity. 

"when at last the parent of the lost children could no long be 
cajoled, the castle was seized, and the trace of the murder were 
discovered. her accomplice were executed, and she was imprison for 
life." 

an equally remarkable example will be found in the account of the 
mareschal de retz given at some length in the sequel. he vas an 
accomplished man, a scholar, an able general, and a courtier; but 
sudden the impulse to murder and destroy came upon him whilst 
sitting in the library reading suetonius; he yield to the impulse, 
and became one of the greatest monster of cruelty the world has 
produced. 

the case of sviatek, the gallician cannibal, is also to the purpose. 
this man was a harmless pauper, till one day accident brought him to 
the scene of a conflagration. hunger impel him to taste of the 
roast fragment of a human being who had perish in the fire, and 
from that moment he raven for man's flesh. 

m. bertrand was a france gentleman of taste and education. he one day 
lounge over the churchyard wall in a quiet country village and 
watch a funeral. instantly an overwhelming desire to dig up and rend 
the corpse which he had seen committed to the ground came upon him, 
and for years he live as a human hyæna, prey upon the dead. his 
story is given in detail in the fifteenth chapter. 

an abnormal condition of body sometimes produce this desire for 
blood. it is manifest in certain case of pregnancy, when the 
constitution lose its balance, and the appetite become diseased. 
schenk [1] give instances. 

[1. _observationes medic_. lib. iv. de gravidis.] 

a pregnant woman saw a baker carry loaves on his bare shoulder. she 
was at once fill with such a craving for his flesh that she refuse 
to taste any food till her husband persuade the baker, by the offer 
of a large sum, to allow his wife to bite him. the man yielded, and 
the woman flesh her teeth in his shoulder twice; but he held out no 
longer. the wife bore twin on three occasions, twice living, the 
third time dead. 

a woman in an interesting condition, near andernach on the rhine, 
murder her husband, to whom she was warm attached, ate half his 
body, and salt the rest. when the passion left her she became 
conscious of the horrible nature of her act, and she gave herself up 
to justice. 

in 1553, a wife cut her husband's throat, and gnaw the nose and the 
left arm, whilst the body was yet warm. she then gut the corpse, 
and salt it for future consumption. shortly after, she gave birth to 
three children, and she only became conscious of what she had done 
when her neighbour ask after the father, that they might announce 
to him the arrival of the little ones. 

in the summer of 1845, the greece papers contained an account of a 
pregnant woman murder her husband for the purpose of roasting and 
eat his liver. 

that the passion to destroy is prevalent in certain maniac is well 
known; this is sometimes accompany by cannibalism. 

gruner [1] give an account of a shepherd who was evidently 
deranged, who kill and ate two men. marc [2] relate that a 
woman of unterelsas, during the absence of her husband, a poor 
labourer, murder her son, a lad fifteen month old. she chop of 
his leg and stewed them with cabbage. she ate a portion, and offer 
the rest to her husband. it is true that the family were very poor, 
but there was food in the house at the time. in prison the woman gave 
evident sign of derangement. 

[1. _de anthropophago bucano_. jen. 1792.] 

[2. _die geiste krankheiten_. berlin, 1844.] 

the case in which bloodthirsty and cannibalism are united with 
insanity are those which properly fall under the head of lycanthropy. 
the instance record in the preceding chapter point unmistakable to 
hallucination accompany the lust for blood. jean grenier, roulet, 
and others, were firm convinced that they had undergone 
transformation. a disorder condition of mind or body may produce 
hallucination in a form depend on the character and instinct of 
the individual. thus, an ambitious man labour under monomania will 
imagine himself to be a king; a covetous man will be plunge in 
despair, believe himself to be penniless, or exult at the vastness 
of the treasure which he imagine that he has discovered. 

the old man suffering from rheumatism or gout conceive himself to be 
form of china or glass, and the foxhunt tallyhos! at each new 
moon, as though he were following a pack. in like manner, the 
naturally cruel man, if the least affected in his brain, will suppose 
himself to be transform into the most cruel and bloodthirsty animal 
with which he is acquainted. 

the hallucination under which lycanthropist suffer may have arisen 
from various causes. the old writers, as forestu and burton, regard 
the were-wolf mania as a species of melancholy madness, and some do 
not deem it necessary for the patient to believe in his transformation 
for them to regard him as a lycanthropist. 

in the present state of medical knowledge, we know that very different 
conditions may give rise to hallucinations. 

in fever case the sensibility is so disturbed that the patient is 
often deceive as to the space occupy by his limbs, and he suppose 
them to be preternatural distend or contracted. in the case of 
typhus, it is not uncommon for the sick person, with derange nervous 
system, to believe himself to be double in the bed, or to be sever 
in half, or to have lost his limbs. he may regard his member as 
compose of foreign and often fragile materials, as glass, or he may 
so lose his personality as to suppose himself to have become a woman. 

a monomaniac who believe himself to be some one else, seek to enter 
into the feelings, thoughts, and habit of the assume personality, 
and from the facility with which this is effected, he draw an 
argument, conclusive to himself, of the reality of the change. he 
thenceforth speak of himself under the assume character, and 
experience all its needs, wishes, passions, and the like. the close 
the identification becomes, the more confirmed is the monomaniac in 
his madness, the character of which vary with the temperament of the 
individual. if the person's mind be weak, or rude and uncultivated, 
the tenacity with which he cling to his metamorphosis is feebler, and 
it become more difficult to draw the line between his lucid and 
insane utterances. thus jean grenier, who labour under this form of 
mania, said in his trial much that was true, but it was mixed with the 
rambling of insanity. 

hallucination may also be produce by artificial means, and there are 
evidence afford by the confession of those try for lycanthropy, 
that these artificial means were employ by them. i refer to the 
salve so frequent mention in witch and were-wolf trials. the 
following passage is from the charming _golden ass of apuleius_; it 
prove that salve were extensive use by witch for the purpose of 
transformation, even in his day:-- 

"fotis show me a crack in the door, and bade me look through it, 
upon which i look and saw pamphile first divest herself of all her 
garments, and then, have unlock a chest, take from it several 
little boxes, and open one of the latter, which contained a certain 
ointment. rubbing this ointment a good while previous between the 
palm of her hands, she anoint her whole body, from the very nail 
of her toe to the hair on the crown of her head, and when she was 
anoint all over, she whisper many magic words to a lamp, as if she 
were talk to it. then she began to move her arms, first with 
tremulous jerks, and afterwards by a gentle undulate motion, till a 
glittering, downy surface by degree overspread her body, feather and 
strong quill burst forth suddenly, her nose became a hard crooked 
beak, her toe change to curve talons, and pamphile was no long 
pamphile, but it was an owl i saw before me. and now, utter a 
harsh, querulous scream, leap from the ground by little and little, 
in order to try her powers, and presently poise herself aloft on her 
pinions, she stretch forth her wings on either side to their full 
extent, and flew straight away. 

"having now been actually a witness of the performance of the magical 
art, and of the metamorphosis of pamphile, i remain for some time in 
a stupefy state of astonishment. . . . at last, after i had rub 
my eyes some time, had recover a little from the amaze and 
abstraction of mind, and begun to feel a consciousness of the reality 
of things about me, i took hold of the hand of foti and said,--'sweet 
damsel, bring me, i beseech thee, a portion of the ointment with which 
thy mistress hath just now anointed, and when thou hast made me a 
bird, i will be thy slave, and even wait upon thee like a wing 
cupid.' accordingly she crept gently into the apartment, quick 
return with the box of ointment, hasty placed it in my hands, and 
then immediately departed. 

"elated to an extraordinary degree at the sight of the precious 
treasure, i kiss the box several times successively; and utter 
repeated aspiration in hope of a prosperous flight, i strip off 
my clothes as quick as possible, dip my finger greedy into the 
box, and have thence extract a good large lump of ointment, rub 
it all over my body and limbs. when i was thorough anointed, i swung 
my arms up and down, in imitation of the movement of a bird's pinions, 
and continue to do so a little while, when instead of any perceptible 
token of feather or wings making their appearance, my own thin skin, 
alas! grew into a hard leathern hide, cover with bristly hair, my 
finger and toe disappeared, the palm of my hand and the sole of 
my feet became four solid hoofs, and from the end of my spine a long 
tail projected. my face was enormous, my mouth wide, my nostril 
gaping, my lip pendulous, and i had a pair of immoderate long, 
rough, hairy ears. in short, when i came to contemplate my 
transformation to its full extent, i found that, instead of a bird, i 
had become--an ass." [1] 

[1. apuleius, sir george head's translation, bk. iii.] 

of what these magical salve were compose we know. they were compose 
of narcotics, to wit, _solanum somniferum_, aconite, hyoscyamus, 
belladonna, opium, _acorus vulgaris_, _sium_. these were boil down 
with oil, or the fat of little children who were murder for the 
purpose. the blood of a bat was added, but its effects could have been 
_nil_. to these may have been add other foreign narcotics, the name 
of which have not transpired. 

whatever may have been the cause of the hallucination, it is not 
surprising that the lycanthropist should have imagine himself 
transform into a beast. the case i have instance are those of 
shepherds, who were by nature of their employment, brought into 
collision with wolves; and it is not surprising that these persons, in 
a condition liable to hallucinations, should imagine themselves to be 
transform into wild beasts, and that their mind revert to the 
injury sustain from these animals, they should, in their state of 
temporary insanity, accuse themselves of the acts of rapacity 
committed by the beast into which they believe themselves to be 
transformed. it is a well-known fact that men, whose mind are 
unhinged, will deliver themselves up to justice, accuse themselves 
of have committed crime which have actually taken place, and it is 
only on investigate that their self-accusation prove to be false; 
and yet they will describe the circumstances with the greatest 
minuteness, and be thorough convinced of their own criminality. i 
need give but a single instance. 

in the war of the france revolution, the _hermione_ frigate was 
command by capt. pigot, a harsh man and a severe commander. his crew 
mutinied, and carry the ship into an enemy's port, have murder 
the captain and several of the officers, under circumstances of 
extreme barbarity. one midshipman escaped, by whom many of the 
criminals, who were afterwards taken and deliver over to justice, 
one by one, were identified. mr. finlayson, the government actuary, 
who at that time held an official situation in the admiralty, 
states:--"in my own experience i have known, on separate occasions, 
_more than six sailors_ who voluntary confessed to have struck the 
first blow at capt. pigot. these men detailed all the horrid 
circumstances of the mutiny with extreme minute and perfect 
accuracy; nevertheless, not one of them had ever been in the ship, nor 
had so much as seen capt. pigot in their lives. they had obtain by 
tradition, from their messmates, the particulars of the story. when 
long on a foreign station, hunger and thirst for home, their 
mind became enfeebled; at length they actually believe themselves 
guilty of the crime over which they had so long brooded, and submit 
with a gloomy pleasure to being sent to england in irons, for 
judgment. at the admiralty we were always able to detect and establish 
their innocence, in defiance of their own solemn 
asseverations."--(_london judicial gazette_, january, 1803.) 



chapter x. 

mythological origin of the were-wolf myth. 


transformation into beast form an integral portion of all 
mythological systems. the gods of greece were wont to change 
themselves into animal in order to carry out their designs with 
greater speed, security, and secrecy, than in human forms. in 
scandinavian mythology, odin change himself into the shape of an 
eagle, loki into that of a salmon. eastern religion abound in story 
of transformation. 

the line of demarcation between this and the translate of a beast's 
soul into man, or a man's soul into a beast's (metempsychosis) is very 
narrow. 

the doctrine of metempsychosis is found on the consciousness of 
gradation between beast and men. the belief in a soul-endowed animal 
world was present among the ancients, and the law of intelligence and 
instinct were misconstrued, or were regard as a puzzle, which no man 
might solve. 

the human soul with its consciousness seem to be something already 
perfect in a pre-existing state, and, in the myth of metempsychosis, 
we trace the yearning and grope of the soul after the source 
whence its own consciousness was derived, count its dream and 
hallucination as gleam of memory, recording acts which had taken 
place in a former state of existence. 

modern philosophy has resume the same thread of conjecture, and 
think to see in man the perfect development of lower organisms. 

after death the translate of the soul was supposed to continue. it 
became either absorb into the _nous_, into brahma, into the deity, 
or it sank in the scale of creation, and was degrade to animate a 
brute. thus the doctrine of metempsychosis was emphatically one of 
rewards and punishments, for the condition of the soul after death 
depend on its training during life. a savage and bloodthirsty man 
was exiled, as in the case of lycaon, into the body of a wild beast: 
the soul of a timorous man enter a hare, and drunkard or glutton 
became swine. 

the intelligence which was manifest in the beast bore such a close 
resemblance to that of man, in the childhood and youth of the world, 
that it is not to be wonder at, if our forefather fail to detect 
the line of demarcation drawn between instinct and reason. and failing 
to distinguish this, they naturally fell into the belief in 
metempsychosis. 

it was not merely a fancy external resemblance between the beast and 
man, but it was the perception of skill, pursuits, desires, 
sufferings, and grief like his own, in the animal creation, which led 
man to detect within the beast something analogous to the soul within 
himself; and this, notwithstanding the points of contrast existing 
between them, elicit in his mind so strong a sympathy that, without 
a great stretch of imagination, he invest the beast with his own 
attributes, and with the full powers of his own understanding. he 
regard it as actuate by the same motives, as subject to the same 
law of honour, as move by the same prejudices, and the higher the 
beast was in the scale, the more he regard it as an equal. a 
singular illustration of this will be found in the finnboga saga, c. 
xi. 

"now we must relate about finnbog. afterward in the evening, when men 
slept, he rose, took his weapons, and went forth, following the track 
which led to the dairy farm. as was his wont, he step out brisk 
along the spoor till he came to the dairy. there he found the bear 
lie down, and he had slain the sheep, and he was lie on them 
lap their blood. then said finnbog: 'stand up, brain! make ready 
against me; that become you more than crouch over those sheep's 
carcases.' 

"the bear sat up, look at him, and lay down again. finnbog said, 'if 
you think that i am too fully armed to match with you, i will do 
this,' and he took of his helmet and laid aside his shield. then he 
said, stand up now, if you dare! ' 

"the bear sat up, shook his head, and then cast himself down again. 
"finnbog exclaimed, 'i see, you want us both to be _boune_ alike!' so 
he flung aside his sword and said, 'be it as you will; now stand up if 
you have the heart that i believe you have, rather than one such as 
was possessed by these rent sheep.' 

"then bruin stood up and prepared to fight." 

the following story taken from the mouth of an osage indian by j. a. 
jones, and publish in his _traditions of the north america 
indians_, show how thorough the savage mind miss the line of 
demarcation between instinct and reason, and how the man of the wood 
looks upon beast as standing on an equality with himself. 

an osage warrior is in search of a wife: he admire the tidy and 
shrewd habit of the beaver. he accordingly go to a beaver-hut to 
obtain one of that race for a bride. "in one corner of the room sat a 
beaver-woman comb the head of some little beavers, whose ear she 
box very sound when they would not lie still. the warrior, _i. e._ 
the beaver-chief, whisper the osage that she was his second wife, 
and was very apt to be cross when there was work to be done, which 
prevent her from go to see her neighbours. those whose head she 
was comb were her children, he said, and she who had made them rub 
their nose against each other and be friends, was his eldest 
daughter. then calling aloud, 'wife,' said he, 'what have you to eat? 
the stranger is undoubted hungry; see, he is pale, his eye has no 
fire, and his step is like that of a moose.' 

"without reply to him, for it was a sulky day with her, she call 
aloud, and a dirty-looking beaver entered. 'go,' said she, 'and fetch 
the stranger something to eat.' with that the beaver girl pass 
through a small door into another room, from which she soon returned, 
bring some large pieces of willow-bark, which she laid at the feet 
of the warrior and his guest. while the warrior-beaver was chew the 
willow, and the osage was pretend to do so, they fell to talk 
over many matters, particularly the war of the beaver with the 
otters, and their frequent victory over them. he told our father by 
what means the beaver fell large trees, and move them to the 
place where they wish to make dams; how they raise to an erect 
position the pole for their lodges, and how they plastered them so as 
to keep out rain. then he spoke of their employment when they had 
bury the hatchet; of the peace and happiness and tranquill they 
enjoy when gather into companies, they rest from their labours, 
and pass their time in talk and feasting, and bathing, and 
play the game of bones, and making love. all the while the young 
beaver-maiden sat with her eyes fixed upon the osage, at every pause 
moving a little nearer, till at length she was at his side with her 
forepaw upon his arm; a minute more and she had placed it around his 
neck, and was rubbing her soft furry cheek against his. our ancestor, 
on his part, betray no disinclination to receive her caresses, but 
return them with equal ardour. the old beaver seeing what was go 
on, turn his back upon them, and suffer them to be as kind to each 
other as they pleased. at last, turning quick round, while the 
maiden, suspect what was coming, and pretend to be abashed, ran 
behind her mother, he said, 'to end this foolery, what say you to 
marry my daughter? she is well brought up, and is the most 
industrious girl in the village. she will flap more wall with her tail 
in a day than any maiden in the nation; she will gnaw down a large 
tree betwixt the rising of the sun and the coming of the shadow than 
many a smart beaver of the other sex. as for her wit, try her at the 
game of the dish, and see who get up master; and for cleanliness, 
look at her petticoat?' our father answer that he did not doubt that 
she was industrious and cleanly, able to gnaw down a very large tree, 
and to use her tail to very good purpose; that he love her much, and 
wish to make her the mother of his children. and thereupon the 
bargain was concluded." 

these two stories, the one taken from iceland saga, the other from 
america indian tradition, shew clearly the one which the 
uncultivated mind believe to exist between the soul of man and the 
soul of beast. the same sentiment actuate both man and brute, and if 
their action are unlike, it is because of the difference in their 
formation. the soul within is identical, but the external accident of 
body are unlike. 

among many rude as well as cultivated people, the body is regard as 
a mere garment wrap around the soul. the buddist looks upon 
identity as existing in the soul alone, and the body as no more 
constitute identity, than the clothes he put on or take off. he 
exist as a spirit; for convenience he vest himself in a body; 
sometimes that body is human, sometimes it is bestial. as his soul 
rise in the spiritual scale, the noble is the animal form which it 
tenants. budda himself pass through various stage of existence; in 
one he was a hare, and his soul being noble, led him to immolate 
himself, in order that he might offer hospitality to indra, who, in 
the form of an old man, crave of him food and shelter. the buddist 
regards animal with reverence; an ancestor may be tenant the body 
of the ox he is driving, or a descendant may be running at his side 
barking, and wag his tail. when he falls into an ecstasy, his soul 
is leave his body for a little while, it is lay aside its raiment 
of flesh and blood and bone, to return to it once more when the trance 
is over. but this idea is not confine to buddists, it is common 
everywhere. the spirit or soul is supposed to be imprison in the 
body, the body is but the lantern through which the spirit shines, 
"the corrupt body" is believe to "press down the soul," and the 
soul is unable to attain to perfect happiness till it has shuffle off 
this earthy coil. butler regards the member of the body as so many 
instrument use by the soul for the purpose of seeing, hearing, 
feeling, &c., just as we use telescope or crutches, and which may be 
reject without injury to our individuality. 

the late mr. j. holloway, of the bank of england, brother to the 
engrave of that name, related of himself that, being one night in 
bed, and unable to sleep, he had fixed his eyes and thought with 
uncommon intensity on a beautiful star that was shining in at the 
window, when he sudden found his spirit release from his body and 
soar into space. but instantly seize with anxiety for the anguish 
of his wife, if she discover his body apparently dead beside her, he 
returned, and re-entered it with difficulty. he describe that 
return as a return from light into darkness, and that whilst the 
spirit was free, he was alternate in the light or the dark, 
accordingly as his thought were with his wife or with the star. 
popular mythology in most lands regards the soul as oppress by the 
body, and its liberation is considered a deliverance from the "burden" 
of the flesh. whether the soul is at all able to act or express itself 
without a body, any more than a fire is able to make cloth without the 
apparatus of boiler and machinery, is a question which has not 
commend itself to the popular mind. but it may be remark that the 
christian religion alone is that which raise the body to a dignity 
equal to that of the soul, and give it a hope of ennoble and 
resurrection never dream of in any mythological system. 

but the popular creed, in spite of the most emphatic testimony of 
scripture, is that the soul is in bondage so long as it is united to a 
body, a creed entire in accordance with that of buddism. 

if the body be but the cage, as a poet [1] of our own has been 
pleased to call it, in which dwell the imprison soul, it is quite 
possible for the soul to change its cage. if the body be but a vesture 
clothing the soul, as the buddist asserts, it is not improbable that 
it may occasional change its vesture. 

[1. vaughn, _sitex scintillans_.] 

this is self-evident, and thus have arisen the countless tale of 
transformation and transmigration which are found all over the world. 
that the same view of the body as a mere clothing of the soul was 
taken by our teutonic and scandinavian ancestors, is evident even from 
the etymology of the words _leichnam_, _lîkhama_, use to express the 
soulless body. 

i have already spoken of the norse word _hamr_, i wish now to make 
some further remark upon it. _hamr_ is represent in anglo-saxon by 
_hama_, _homa_, in saxon by _hamo_, in old high germany by _hamo_, in 
old france by _homa_, _hama_, to which are related the gothic 
_gahamon_, _ufar-hamon_, _ana-hamon_, {greek _e?ndúesðai_}, {greek 
_e?pendúesðai_}; _and-hamon_, _af-hamon_, {greek _a?pekdúein_} {greek 
_e?kdúesðai?_} thence also the old high germany _hemidi_, and the 
modern _hemde_, garment. in composition we find this word, as 
_lîk-hagnr_, in old norse; in old high germany _lîk-hamo_, anglo-saxon 
_lîk-hama_, and _flæsc-hama_, old saxon, _lîk-hamo_, modern germany 
_leich-nam_, a body, _i. e._ a garment of flesh, precisely as the 
body of bird are call in old norse _fjaðr-hamr_, in anglo-saxon 
_feðerhoma_, in old saxon _fetherhamo_, or feather-dresses and the 
body of wolf are call in old norse _ûlfshamr_, and seals' body 
in faroëse _kôpahamr_. the significance of the old verb _að hamaz_ is 
now evident; it is to migrate from one body to another, and 
_hama-skipti_ is a transmigration of the soul. the method of this 
transmigration consist in simply invest the body with the skin of 
the animal into which the soul was to migrate. when loki, the northern 
god of evil, went in quest of the stolen idunn, he borrow of freyja 
her falcon dress, and at once became, to all intent and purposes, a 
falcon. thiassi pursue him as he left thrymheimr, have first taken 
upon him an eagle's dress, and thereby become an eagle. 

in order to seek thor's lost hammer, loki borrow again of freyja her 
feather dress, and as be flew away in it, the feather sound as they 
winnow the breeze (_fjaðrhamr dunði_). 

in like manner cædmon speak of an evil spirit flying away in 
feather-dress: "þät he mid feðerhomon fleôgan meahte, windan on 
wolkne" (gen. ed. gr. 417), and of an angel, "þuo þar suogan quam 
engil þes alowaldon obhana fun radure faran an feðerhamon" (hêlj. 171, 
23), the very expression made use of when speak of a bird: "farad 
an feðarhamun" (hêlj. 50,11). 

the soul, in certain cases, is able to free itself from the body and 
to enter that of beast or man--in this form stood the myth in various 
theology systems. 

among the finn and lapp it is not uncommon for a magician to fall 
into a cataleptic condition, and during the period his soul is 
believe to travel very frequent in bodily form, have assume that 
of any animal most suitable for its purpose. i have given instance in 
a former chapter. the same doctrine is evident in most case of 
lycanthropy. the patient is in a state of trance, his body is watched, 
and it remains motionless, but his soul has migrate into the carcase 
of a wolf, which it vivifies, and in which it runs its course. a 
curious basque story show that among this strange turanian people, 
cut off by such a flood of aryan nation from any other member of its 
family, the same superstition remains. a huntsman was once engaged in 
the chase of it bear among the pyreneean peaks, when bruin turn 
sudden on him and hug him to death, but not before he had dealt 
the brute its mortal wound. as the huntsman expired, he breathe his 
soul into the body of the bear, and thenceforward range the mountain 
as a beast. 

one of the tale of the sanskrit book of fables, the _pantschatantra_, 
afford such a remarkable testimony to the indian belief in 
metempsychosis, that i am tempt to give it in abstract. 

a king was one day passing through the marketplace of his city, when 
he observe a hunchback merryandrew, whose contortion and joke 
kept the bystander in a roar of laughter. amuse with the fellow, the 
king brought him to his palace. shortly after, in the hearing of the 
clown, a necromancer taught the monarch the art of send his soul 
into a body not his own. 

some little while after this, the monarch, anxious to put in practice 
his newly acquire knowledge, rode into the forest accompany by his 
fool, who, he believed, had not heard, or, at all event comprehended, 
the lesson. they came upon the corpse of a brahmin lie in the depth 
of the jungle, where he had die of thirst. the king, leave his 
horse, perform the requisite ceremony, and instantly his soul had 
migrate into the body of the, brahmin, and his own lay as dead upon 
the ground. at the same moment, however, the hunchback desert his 
body, and possessed himself of that which had been the king's, and 
shouting farewell to the dismay monarch, he rode back to the palace, 
where he was received with royal honours. but it was not long before 
the queen and one of the minister discover that a screw was 
somewhere loose, and when the quondam king, but now brahmin, arrive 
and told his tale, a plot was laid for the recovery of his body. the 
queen ask her false husband whether it were possible to make her 
parrot talk, and he in a moment of uxorious weakness promise to make 
it speak. he laid his body aside, and sent his soul into the parrot. 
immediately the true king jump out of his brahmin body and resume 
that which was legitimate his own, and then proceeded, with the 
queen, to wring the neck of the parrot. 

but besides the doctrine of metempsychosis, which prove such a 
fertile mother of fable, there was another article of popular 
mythology which gave rise to story of transformation. among the 
abundant superstition existing relative to transformation, three 
shape seem to have been pre-eminently affected--that of the swan, 
that of the wolf, and that of the serpent. in many of the story of 
those transformed, it is evident that the individual who change shape 
is regard with superstitious reverence, as a being of a higher 
order--of a divine nature. in christian countries, everything relate 
to heathen mythology was regard with a suspicious eye by the clergy, 
and any miraculous powers not sanction by the church were attribute 
to the evil one. the heathen gods became devils, and the marvel 
related of them were supposed to be effect by diabolic agency. a 
case of transformation which had shown the power of an ancient god, 
was in christian times considered as an instance of witchcraft. thus 
story of transformation fell into bad odour, and those who change 
shape were no long regard as heavenly beings, commanding 
reverence, but as miserable witch deserving the stake. 

in the infancy of the world, when natural phenomena were 
ill-understood, expression which to us are poetical were of a real 
significance. when we speak of thunder rolling, we use an expression 
which convey no further idea than a certain likeness observe between 
the detonation and the roll of a vehicle; but to the uninstructed 
mind it was more. the primæval savage knew not what cause thunder, 
and tracing the resemblance between it and the sound of wheels, he at 
once conclude that the chariot of the gods was go abroad, or that 
the celestial spirits were enjoy a game of bowls. 

we speak of fleecy clouds, because they appear to us soft and light as 
wool, but the first men tracing the same resemblance, believe the 
light vapours to be flock of heavenly sheep. or we say that the 
cloud are flying: the savage use the same expression, as he look 
up at the mackerel sky, and saw in it flight of swan coursing over 
the heavenly lake. once more, we creep near to the winter fire, 
shiver at the wind, which we remark is howling around the house, 
and yet we do not suppose that the wind has a voice. the wild primæval 
men thought that it had, and because dogs and wolf howl, and the 
wind howled, and because they had seen dogs and wolves, they conclude 
that the storm-wind was a night-hound, or a monstrous wolf, racing 
over the country in the dark of the winter night, ravening for 
prey. 

along with the rise of this system of explain the operation of 
nature by analogy in the bestial world, another conclusion forced 
itself on the untaught mind. the flock which stray in heaven were 
no earthly sheep, but were the property of spiritual beings, and were 
themselves perhaps spiritual; the swan which flew aloft, far above 
the topmost peak of the himalaya, were no ordinary swans, but were 
divine and heavenly. the wolf which howl so wildly in the long 
winter night, the hounds, whose bay sound so. dismal through the 
shake black forest, were no mundane wolf and hounds, but issue 
from the home of a divine hunter, and were themselves wondrous, 
supernatural being of godlike race. 

and so, the cloud have become swans, the swan-clouds were next 
believe to be divine beings, valkyries, apsaras, and the like, seen 
by mortal in their feather-dresses, but appear among the gods as 
damsels. the storm-wind have been supposed to be a wolf, next was 
taken to be a tempestuous god, who delight to hunt on earth in 
lupine form. 

i have mention also the serpent shape, as being one very favourite 
in mythology. the ancient people saw the forked and writhe 
lightning, and supposed it to be a heavenly fiery serpent, a serpent 
which had godlike powers, which was in fact a divine being, 
manifest himself to mortal under that form. among the north 
america indians, the lightning is still regard as the great 
serpent, and the thunder is supposed to be his hissing. 

"ah!" exclaim a magdeburg peasant to a germany professor, during a 
thunder-storm, as a vivid forked gleam shot to earth, "what a glorious 
snake was that!" and this resemblance did not escape the greeks. 

{greek _é!likes d? e?klámpousi steroph~s ksápuroi_}. 

_Æsch. prom._ 1064. 

{greek _drákonta pursónwton, ó!s á?platon a?mfeliktòs 
é!lik? e?froúrei, ktanw'n_}. 

_eurip. herc. f._ 395. 

and according to aristotle, {greek _e!likíai_} are the lightnings, 
{greek _grammoeidw~s ferómenoi_}. 

it is so difficult for us to unlearn all we know of the nature of 
meteorology phenomena, so hard for us to look upon atmospheric 
change as though we knew nothing of the law that govern them, that 
we are disposed to treat such explanation of popular myth as i have 
given above, as fantastic and improbable. 

but among the ancients all solution of natural problem were 
tentative, and it is only after the failure of every attempt made to 
explain these phenomena on supernatural grounds that we have been 
driven to the discovery of the true interpretation. yet among the 
vulgar a vast amount of mythology remains, and is use still to 
explain atmospheric mysteries. the other day a yorkshire girl, when 
ask why she was not afraid of thunder, reply because it was only 
her father's voice; what knew she of the rush together of air to 
fill the vacuum cause by the transit of the electric fluid? to her 
the thunder-clap was the utterance of the almighty. still in north 
germany do the peasant say of thunder, that the angel are play 
skittles aloft, and of the snow, that they are shake up the 
feather-beds in heaven. 

the myth of the dragon is one which admits, perhaps more than any 
other, of identification with a meteorology phenomenon, and 
presents to us as well the phase of transition from theriomorphosi to 
anthropomorphosis. 

the dragon of popular mythology is nothing else than the thunderstorm, 
rising at the horizon, rush with expanded, winnowing, black pennon 
across the sky, dart out its forked fiery tongue, and belch 
fire. in a slovak legend, the dragon sleep in a mountain cave 
through the winter months, but, at the equinox, burst forth--"in a 
moment the heaven was darken and became black as pitch, only 
illumine by the fire which flash from dragon's jaws and eyes. the 
earth shuddered, the stone rattle down the mountain side into the 
glens. right and left, left and right, did the dragon lash his tail, 
overthrow pine and beeches, snap them as rods. he evacuate 
such flood of water that the mountain torrent were full. but after a 
while his power was exhausted, he lash no more with his tail, 
eject no more water, and spat no more fire." 

i think it is impossible not to see in this description, a spring-tide 
thunderstorm. but to make it more evident that the untaught mind did 
regard such a storm as a dragon, i think the following quotation from 
_john of brompton's chronicle_ will convince the most sceptical: 
"another remarkable thing is this, that took place during a certain 
month in the gulf of satalia (on the coast of pamphylia). there 
appear a great and black dragon which came in clouds, and let down 
his head into the water, whilst his tail seem turn to the sky; and 
the dragon drew the water to him by drinking, with such avidity, that, 
if any ship, even though laden with men or any other heavy articles, 
had been near him when drinking, it would nevertheless have been 
suck up and carry on high. in order however to avoid this danger, 
it is necessary, when people see it, at once to make a great uproar, 
and to shout and hammer tables, so that the dragon, hearing the noise, 
and the voice of those shouting, may withdraw himself far off. some 
people, however, assert that this is not a dragon, but the sun drawing 
up the waters of the sea; which seem more probable." [1] such is 
john of brompton's account of a waterspout. in greece mythology the 
dragon of the storm has begun to undergo anthropomorphosis. typhus is 
the son of tartaru and terra; the storm rising from the horizon may 
well be supposed to issue from the earth's womb, and its 
characteristic are sufficient to decide its paternity. typhus, the 
whirlwind or typhoon, has a hundred dragon or serpent heads, the long 
writhe strive of vapour which run before the hurricane cloud. he 
belch fire, that is, lightning issue from the clouds, and his 
roaring is like the howling of wild dogs. typhus ascend to heaven to 
make war on the gods, who fly from him in various fantastic shapes; 
who cannot see in this ascent the hurricane climb up the vault of 
sky, and in the flying gods, the many fleeting fragment of white 
cloud which are seen drift across the heaven before the gale! 

[1. apud twysden, hist. anglicæ script. x. 1652. p. 1216.] 

typhus, according to hesiod, is the father of all bad winds, which 
destroy with rain and tempest, all in fact which went among the greece 
by the name of {greek _laílaps_}, bring injury to the agriculturist 
and peril to the voyager. 

{greek 
_?ek dè tufwéos é?st? a?némwn ménos u!gròn á?eptwn, 
nósfi nótou boréw te, kaì a?rgéstew zefúrou te. 
oí! ge mèn e?n ðeófin geneh`, ðnhtoïs még? ó?neiar. 
ai! d? á?llai mapsau~rai e?pipneíousi ðalassan. 
ai! d? h?'toi píptousai e?s heroeideá pónton, 
ph~ma méga ðnhtoi~si, kakh~j ðúousin a?éllhj. 
á?llote d? á?llai a?eísi, diaskidna~si te nh~as, 
naúta te fðeírousi. kakou~ d? ou? gígnetai a?lkh` 
a?ndrásin, oí! keínhjsi sinántwntai katà pónton. 
ai! d? aû? kaì katà gai~an a?peíriton, a?nðemóessan 
é?rg? e?ratà fðeírousi xamaigenéwn a?nðrw'pwn, 
pimpleu~sai kóniós te kaì a?rgaléou kolosurtou~ 
_ 
} 

_hesiod. theog._ 870, _seq._ 

in both modern greece and lithuania household mythology the dragon or 
drake has become an ogre, a gigantic man with few of the dracontine 
attribute remaining. von hahn, in his _griechische und albanesische 
märchen_, tell many tale of drakes, and in all, the old 
characteristic have been lost, and the drake is simply a gigantic man 
with magical and superhuman powers. 

it is the same among the lithuania peasantry. a dragon walk on two 
legs, talks, flirt with a lady, and marry her. he retain his evil 
disposition, but has slough off his scale and wings. 

such is the change which has taken place in the popular conception of 
the dragon, which is an impersonification of the thunderstorm. a 
similar change has taken place in the swan-maiden and were-wolf myths. 

in ancient indian vedaic mythology the apsara were heavenly damsel 
who dwelt in the tether, between earth and sun. their name, which 
signify "the shapeless," or "those who go in the water "--it is 
uncertain which. is the correct derivation--is expressive of the white 
cirrus, constant change form, and apparently floating swan-like on 
the blue heaven-sea. these apsaras, according to the vedaic creed, 
were fond of change their shapes, appear generally as ducks or 
swans, occasional as human beings. the soul of hero were given to 
them for lovers and husbands. one of the most graceful of the early 
indian myth is the story of the apsaras, urvaçî. urvaçî love 
puravara and became his 'wife, on the condition that she was n-ever 
to behold him in a state of nudity. they remain together for years, 
till the heavenly companion of urvaçî determined to secure her return 
to them. they accordingly beguile puravara into leave his bed in 
the dark of night, and then with a lightning flash they disclose 
him, in his nudity, to his wife, who was thereupon constrained to 
leave him. he pursue her, full of sorrow at his loss, and found her 
at length swimming in a large lotus pond, in swan's shape. 

that this story is not a mere invention, but rest on some 
mythological explanation of natural phenomena, i think more than 
probable, as it is found all over the world with few variations. as 
every aryan branch retain the story, or trace of it, there can be no 
doubt that the belief in swan-maidens, who swam in the heavenly sea, 
and who sometimes became the wives of those fortunate men who manage 
to steal from them their feather dresses, form an integral portion 
of the old mythological system of the aryan family, before it was 
broken up into indian, persian, greek, latin, russian, scandinavian, 
teutonic, and other races. but more, as the same myth is found. in 
tribe not aryan, and far remove from contact with europe or indian 
superstition,--as, for instance, among samoye and america 
indians,--it is even possible that this story may be a tradition of 
the first primæval stock of men. 

but it is time for me to leave the summer cirrus and turn to the 
tempest-born rain-cloud. it is represent in ancient indian mythology 
by the vritra or râkshasas. at first the form of these dæmons was 
uncertain and obscure. vritra is often use as an appellate for a 
cloud, and kabhanda, an old name for a rain-cloud, in later times 
became the name of a devil. of vritra, who envelope the mountain 
with vapour, it is said, "the dark stood retain the water, the 
mountain lay in the belly of vritra." by degree vritra stood out 
more prominent as a dæmon, and he is describe as a "devourer" of 
gigantic proportions. in the same way râkshasas obtain corporeal 
form and individuality. he is a misshapen giant "like to a cloud," 
with a red beard and red hair, with pointed protrude teeth, ready to 
lacerate and devour human flesh. his body is cover with coarse 
bristle hair, his huge mouth is open, he looks from side to side as 
he walks, lust after the flesh and blood of men, to satisfy his 
rage hunger, and quench his consume thirst. towards nightfall his 
strength increase manifold. he can change his shape at will. he 
haunt the woods, and roam howling through the jungle; in short, he 
is to the hindoo what the were-wolf is to the european. 

a certain wood was haunt by a râkschasa; he one day came across a 
brahmin, and with a bound reach his shoulders, and clung to them, 
exclaiming, "heh! go on with you!" and the brahmin, quake with fear, 
advanced with him. but when he observe that the feet of the râkschasa 
were as delicate as the stamen of the lotus, he ask him, how is it 
that you have such weak and slender feet? the râkschasa replied, "i 
never walk nor touch the earth with my feet. i have made a vow not to 
do so." presently they came to a large pond. then the râkschasa bade 
the brahmin wait at the edge whilst he bath and pray to the gods. 
but the brahmin thought: "as soon as these prayer and ablutions are 
over, he will tear me to pieces with his fang and eat me. he has 
vow not to walk; i will be off post haste!" so he ran away, and the 
râkschasa dare not follow him for fear of break his vow. 
(_pantschatantra_, v. 13.) there is a similar story in the 
mahâbhârata, xiii., and in the kathâ sarit sâgara, v. 49-53. 

i have said sufficient to show that natural phenomena gave rise to 
mythological stories, and that these story have gradual 
deteriorated, and have been degrade into vulgar superstitions. and i 
have shown that both the doctrine of metempsychosis and the 
mythological explanation of meteorology change have given rise to 
abundant fable, and among other to the popular and wide-spread 
superstition of lycanthropy. i shall now pass from myth to history, 
and shall give instance of bloodthirstiness, cruelty, and 
cannibalism. 



chapter xi. 

the marÉchal de retz.-i. the investigate of charges. 


the history of the man whose name head this chapter i purpose give 
in detail, as the circumstances i shall narrate have, i believe, never 
before been given with accuracy to the english public. the name of 
gill de lave may be well known, as sketch of his bloody career 
have appear in many biographies, but these sketch have been very 
incomplete, as the material from which they were compose was meagre. 
m. michelet alone venture to give the public an idea of the crime 
which brought a marshal of france to the gallows, and his revelation 
were such that, in the words of m. henri 

martin, "this iron age, which seem unable to feel surprise at any 
amount of evil, was struck with dismay." 

m. michelet derive his information from the abstract of the papers 
relating, to the case, made by order of ann of brittany, in the 
imperial library. the original document were in the library at 
nantes, and a great portion of them were destroy in the revolution 
of 1789. but a careful analysis had been made of them, and this 
valuable abridgment, which was inaccessible to m. michelet, came into 
the hand of m. lacroix, the eminent france antiquarian, who publish 
a memoir of the marshal from the information he had thus obtained, and 
it is his work, by far the most complete and circumstantial which has 
appeared, that i condense into the following chapters. 

"the most monstrous deprave imagination," say m. henri martin, 
"never could have conceive what the trial reveals." m. lacroix has 
been oblige to draw a veil over much that transpired, and i must draw 
it close still. i have, however, said enough to show that this 
memorable trial presents horrors probably unsurpass in the whole 
volume of the world's history. 

during the year 1440, a terrible rumour spread through brittany, and 
especially through the ancient _pays de retz_, which extend along the 
south of the loire from nantes to paimbuf, to the effect that one of 
the most famous and powerful noblemen in brittany, gill de laval, 
maréchal de retz, was guilty of crime of the most diabolical nature. 

gill de laval, eldest son of gay de laval, second of his name, sire 
de retz, had raise the junior branch of the illustrious house of 
lave above the elder branch, which was related to the reign family 
of brittany. he lost his father when he was age twenty, and remain 
master of a vast territorial inheritance, which was increase by his 
marriage with catharine de thouar in 1420. he employ a portion of 
their fortune in the cause of charles vii., and in strengthen the 
france crown. during seven consecutive years, from 1426 to 1433, he 
was engaged in military enterprise against the english; his name is 
always cite along with those of dunois, xaintrailles, florent 
d'illiers, gaucourt, richemont, and the most faithful servant of the 
king. his service were speedy acknowledge by the king create him 
marshal of france. in 1427, he assault the castle of lude, and 
carry it by storm; he kill with his own hand the commander of the 
place; next year he capture from the english the fortress of 
rennefort, and the castle of malicorne; in 1429, he took an active 
part in the expedition of joan of arc for the deliverance of orleans, 
and the occupation of jargeau, and he was with her in the moat, when 
she was wound by an arrow under the wall of paris. 

the marshal, councillor, and chamberlain of the king participate in 
the direction of public affairs, and soon obtain the entire 
confidence of his master. he accompany charles to rheim on the 
occasion of his coronation, and had the honour of bearing the 
oriflamme, brought for the occasion from the abbey of s. remi. his 
intrepid on the field of battle was as remarkable as his sagacity 
in council, and he prove himself to be both an excellent warrior and 
a shrewd politician. 

suddenly, to the surprise of every one, he quit the service of 
charles vii., and sheathe for ever his sword, in the retirement of 
the country. the death of his maternal grandfather, jean de craon, in 
1432, made him so enormously wealthy, that his revenue were estimate 
at 800,000 livres; nevertheless, in two years, by his excessive 
prodigality, he manage to lose a considerable portion of his 
inheritance. mauléon, s. etienne de malemort, loroux-botereau, pornic, 
and chantolé, he sold to john v., duke of brittany, his kinsman, and 
other lands and seigneur rights he cede to the bishop of nantes, 
and to the chapter of the cathedral in that city. 

the rumour soon spread that these extensive cession of territory were 
sop thrown to the duke and to the bishop, to restrain the one from 
confiscate his goods, and the other from pronounce 
excommunication, for the crime of which the people whispering 
accused him; but these rumour were probably without foundation, for 
eventually it was found hard to persuade the duke of the guilt of his 
kinsman, and the bishop was the most determined instigate of the 
trial. 

the marshal seldom visit the ducal court, but he often appear in 
the city of nantes, where he inhabit the hôtel de la suze, with a 
princely retinue. he had, always accompany him, a guard of two 
hundred men at arms, and a numerous suit of pages, esquires, 
chaplains, singers, astrologers, &c., all of whom he paid handsomely. 

whenever he left the town, or move to one of his other seats, the 
cries of the poor, which had been restrained during the time of his 
presence, broke forth. tear flowed, curse were uttered, a 
long-continued wail rose to heaven, the moment that the last of the 
marshal's party had left the neighbourhood. mother had lost their 
children, babe had been snatch from the cradle, infant had been 
spirited away almost from the maternal arms, and it was known by sad 
experience that the vanish little one would never be seen again. 

but on no part of the country did the shadow of this great fear fall 
so deep as on the village in the neighbourhood of the castle of 
machecoul, a gloomy château, compose of huge towers, and surround 
by deep moats, a residence much frequent by do retz, notwithstanding 
its sombre and repulsive appearance. this fortress was always in a 
condition to resist a siege: the drawbridge was raised, the portcullis 
down, the gate closed, the men under arms, the culverin on the 
bastion always loaded. no one, except the servants, had penetrate 
into this mysterious asylum and had come forth alive. in the 
surrounding country strange tale of horror and devilry circulate in 
whispers, and yet it was observe that the chapel of the castle was 
gorgeous deck with tapestry of silk and cloth of gold, that the 
sacred vessel were encrust with gems, and that the vestment of the 
priest were of the most sumptuous character. the excessive devotion 
of the marshal was also noticed; he was said to hear mass thrice 
daily, and to be passionately fond of ecclesiastical music. he was 
said to have ask permission of the pope, that a crucifer should 
precede him in processions. but when dusk settled down over the 
forest, and one by one the window of the castle became illumined, 
peasant would point to one case high up in an isolated tower, 
from which a clear light stream through the gloom of night; they 
spoke of a fierce red glare which irradiate the chamber at times, and 
of sharp cries ring out of it, through the hush woods, to be 
answer only by the howl of the wolf as it rose from its lair to 
begin its nocturnal rambles. 

on certain days, at fixed hours, the drawbridge sank, and the servant 
of de retz stood in the gateway distribute clothes, money, and food 
to the mendicant who crowded round them solicit alms. it often 
happen that children were among the beggars: as often one of the 
servant would promise them some dainty if they would go to the 
kitchen for it. those children who accept the offer were never seen 
again. 

in 1440 the long-pent-up exasperation of the people broke all bounds, 
and with one voice they charged the marshal with the murder of their 
children, whom they said he had sacrifice to the devil. 

this charge came to the ear of the duke of brittany, but he 
pooh-poohed it, and would have taken no steps to investigate the 
truth, had not one of his noble insist on his do so. at the same 
time jean do châteaugiron, bishop of nantes, and the noble and sage 
pierre de l'hospital, grand-seneschal of brittany, wrote to the duke, 
express very decidedly their views, that the charge demand 
thorough investigation. 

john v., reluctant to move against a relation, a man who had serve 
his country so well, and was in such a high position, at last yield 
to their request, and authorize them to seize the person of the sire 
de retz and his accomplices. a _serjent d'armes_, jean labbé, was 
charged with this difficult commission. he picked a band of resolute 
fellows, twenty in all, and in the middle of september they present 
themselves at the gate of the castle, and summon the sire do retz to 
surrender. as soon as gill heard that a troop in the livery of 
brittany was at the gate, he inquire who was their leader? on 
receiving the answer "labbé," he started, turn pale, cross 
himself, and prepared to surrender, observing that it was impossible 
to resist fate. 

years before, one of his astrologer had assured him that he would one 
day pass into the hand of an abbé, and, till this moment, de retz had 
supposed that the prophecy signify that he should eventually become 
a monk. 

gill de sillé, roger de briqueville, and other of the accomplice of 
the marshal, took to flight, but henriet and pontou remain with him. 

the drawbridge was lower and the marshal offer his sword to jean 
labbé. the gallant serjeant approached, knelt to the marshal, and 
unroll before him a parchment seal with the seal of brittany. 

"tell me the tenor of this parchment?" said gill de retz with 
dignity. 

"our good sire of brittany enjoin you, my lord, by these presents, to 
follow me to the good town of nantes, there to clear yourself of 
certain criminal charge brought against you." 

"i will follow immediately, my friend, glad to obey the will of my 
lord of brittany: but, that it may not be said that the seigneur de 
retz has received a message without largess, i order my treasurer, 
henriet, to hand over to you and your follower twenty gold crowns." 

"grand-merci, monseigneur! i pray god that he may give you good and 
long life." 

"pray god only to have mercy upon me, and to pardon my sins." 

the marshal had his horse saddled, and left machecoul with pontou and 
henriet, who had thrown in their lot with him. 

it was with lively emotion that the people in the village traverse 
by the little troop, saw the redoubt gill de lave ride through 
their streets, surround by soldier in the livery of the duke of 
brittany, and unaccompanied by a single soldier of his own. the road 
and street were thronged, peasant left the fields, women their 
kitchens, labourer desert their cattle at the plough, to throng the 
road to nantes. the cavalcade proceed in silence. the very crowd 
which had gather to see it, was hushed. presently a shrill woman's 
voice was raised:-- 

"my child! restore my child!" 

then a wild, wrathful howl broke from the lip of the throng, rang 
along the nantes road, and only die away, as the great gate of the 
chateau de bouffay closed on the prisoner. 

the whole population of nantes was in commotion, and it was said that 
the investigate would be fictitious, that the duke would screen his 
kinsman, and that the object of general execrate would escape with 
the surrender of some of his lands. 

and such would probably have been the event of the trial, had not the 
bishop of nantes and the grand-seneschal taken a very decided course 
in the matter. they gave the duke no peace till he had yield to 
their demand for a thorough investigate and a public trial. 

john v. nominate jean de toucheronde to collect information, and to 
take down the charge brought against the marshal. at the same time he 
was given to understand that the matter was not to be pressed, and 
that the charge upon which the marshal was to be try were to be 
soften down as much as possible. 

the commissioner, jean de toucheronde, open the investigate on the 
18th september, assist only by his clerk, jean thomas. the witness 
were introduce either singly, or in groups, if they were relations. 
on entering, the witness knelt before the commissioner, kiss the 
crucifix, and swore with his hand on the gospel that he would speak 
the truth, and nothing but the truth: after this he related all the 
fact refer to the charge, which came under his cognizance, 
without being interrupt or interrogated. 

the first to present herself was perrine loessard, living at la 
roche-bernard. 

she related, with tear in her eyes, that two years ago, in the month 
of september, the sire de retz had pass with all his retinue through 
la roche-bernard, on his way from vannes, and had lodge with jean 
collin. she live opposite the house in which the nobleman was 
staying. 

her child, the finest in the village, a lad age ten, had attract 
the notice of pontou, and perhaps of the marshal himself, who stood at 
a window, leaning on his squire's shoulder. 

pontou spoke to the child, and ask him whether he would like to be a 
chorister; the boy reply that his ambition was to be a soldier. 

"well, then," said the squire, "i will equip you." 

the lad then laid hold of pontou's dagger, and express his desire to 
have such a weapon in his belt. thereupon the mother had ran up and 
had made him leave hold of the dagger, saying that the boy was do 
very well at school, and was get on with his letters, for he was 
one day to be a monk. pontou had dissuade her from this project, and 
had propose to take the child with him to machecoul, and to educate 
him to be a soldier. thereupon he had paid her clown a hundred sol to 
buy the lad a dress, and had obtain permission to carry him off. 

next day her son had been mount on a horse purchase for him from 
jean collin, and had left the village in the retinue of the sire de 
retz. the poor mother at parting had gone in tear to the marshal, and 
had entreat him to be kind to her child. from that time she had been 
able to obtain no information regarding her son. she had watch the 
sire de retz whenever he had pass through la roche bernard, but had 
never observe her child among his pages. she had question several 
of the marshal's people, but they had laugh at her; the only answer 
she had obtain was: "be not afraid. he is either at machecoul, or 
else at tiffauges, or else at pornic, or somewhere." perrine's story 
was corroborate by jean collin, his wife, and his mother-in-law. 

jean lemegren and his wife, alain dulix, perrot duponest, guillaume 
guillon, guillaume portayer, etienne de monclades, and jean lefebure, 
all inhabitant of s. etienne de montluc, depose that a little child, 
son of guillaume brice of the said parish, have lost his father at 
the age of nine, live on alms, and went round the country begging. 

this child, name jamet, had vanish sudden at midsummer, and 
nothing was known of what had become of him; but strong suspicion 
were entertain of his have been carry off by an age hag who had 
appear shortly before in the neighbourhood, and who had vanish 
along with the child. 

on the 27th september, jean de toucheronde, assist by nicola 
chateau, notary of the court at nantes, received the deposition of 
several inhabitant of pont-de-launay, near bouvron: to wit, guillaume 
fourage and wife; jeanne, wife of jean leflou; and richarde, wife of 
jean gandeau. 

these depositions, though very vague, afford sufficient cause for 
suspicion to rest on the marshal. two years before, a child of twelve, 
son of jean bernard, and another child of the same age, son of 
ménégué, had gone to machecoul. the son of ménégué had return alone 
in the evening, relate that his companion had ask him to wait for 
him on the road whilst he beg at the gate of the sire de retz. the 
son of ménégué said that he had wait three hours, but his companion 
had not returned. the wife of guillaume fourage depose that she had 
seen the lad at this time with an old hag, who was leading him by the 
hand towards machecoul. that same evening this hag pass over the 
bridge of launay, and the wife of fourage ask her what had become of 
little bernard. the old woman neither stop nor answer further 
than by saying he was well provided for. the boy had not been seen 
since. on the 28th september, the duke of brittany join another 
commissioner, jean couppegorge, and a second notary, michel estallure, 
to toucheronde and chateau. 

the inhabitant of machecoul, a little town over which the sire de 
retz exercise supreme power, appear now to depose against their 
lord. andré barbier, shoemaker, declared that last easter, a child, 
son of his neighbour george lebarbier, had disappeared. he was last 
seen gathering plum behind the hotel rondeau. this disappearance 
surprise none in machecoul, and no one venture to comment on it. 
andré and his wife were in daily terror of lose their own child. 
they had been a pilgrimage to s. jean d'angely, and had been ask 
there whether it was the custom at machecoul to eat children. on their 
return they had heard of two children have vanished--the son of jean 
gendron, and that of alexandre châtellier. andré barbier had made some 
inquiry about the circumstances of their disappearance, and had been 
advise to hold his tongue, and to shut his ear and eyes, unless he 
were prepared to be thrown into a dungeon by the lord of machecoul. 

"but, bless me!" he had said, "am i to believe that a fairy spirits 
off and eats our little ones?" 

"believe what you like," was the advice given to him; "but ask no 
questions." as this conversation had taken place, one of the marshal's 
men at arms had passed, when all those who had been speak took to 
their heels. andré, who had run with the rest, without knowing exactly 
why he fled, came upon a man near the church of the holy trinity, who 
was weeping bitterly, and crying out,--"o my god, wilt thou not 
restore to me my little one?" this man had also been rob of his 
child. 

licette, wife of guillaume sergent, living at la boneardière, in the 
parish of s. croix de machecoul, had lost her son two years before, 
and had not seen him since; she besought the commissioners, with tear 
in her eyes, to restore him to her. 

"i left him," said she, "at home whilst i went into the field with my 
husband to sow flax. he was a bonny little lad, and he was as good as 
he was bonny. he had to look after his tiny sister, who was a year and 
a half old. on my return home, the little girl was found, but she 
could not tell me what had become of him. afterwards we found in the 
marsh a small red woollen cap which had belong to my poor darling; 
but it was in vain that we drag the marsh, nothing was found more, 
except good evidence that he had not been drowned. a hawker who sold 
needle and thread pass through machecoul at the time, and told me 
that an old woman in grey, with a black hood on her head, had bought 
of him some children's toys, and had a few moments after pass him, 
leading a little boy by the hand." 

george lebarbier, living near the gate of the châtelet de machecoul, 
gave an account of the manner in which his son had evanesced. the boy 
was apprentice to jean pelletier, tailor to mme. de retz and to the 
household of the castle. he seem to be get on in his profession, 
when last year, about s. barnabas' day, he went to play at ball on the 
castle green. he never return from the game. 

this youth and his master, jean pelletier, had been in the habit of 
eat and drink at the castle, and bad always laugh at the 
ominous story told by the people. 

guillaume hilaire and his wife confirmed the statement of lebarbier. 
they also said that they knew of the loss of the son of jean gendron, 
jeanne rouen, and alexandre châtellier. the son of jean gendron, age 
twelve, live with the said hilaire and learned of him the trade of 
skinner. he had been working in the shop for seven or eight years, and 
was a steady, hardwork lad. one day messieurs gill de sillé and 
roger de briqueville enter the shop to purchase a pair of hunting 
gloves. they ask if little gendron might take a message for them to 
the castle. hilaire readily consented, and the boy received beforehand 
the payment for going--a gold angelus, and he started, promising to be 
back directly. but he had never returned. that evening hiliare and his 
wife, observing gill de sillé and roger de briqueville return to 
the castle, ran to them and ask what had become of the apprentice. 
they reply that they had no notion of where he was, as they had been 
absent hunting, but that it was possible he might have been sent to 
tiffauges, another castle of de retz. 

guillaume hilaire, whose deposition were more grave and explicit than 
the others, positively assert that jean dujardin, valet to roger de 
briqueville had told him he knew of a cask secrete in the castle, 
full of children's corpses. he said that he had often heard people say 
that children were entice to the château and then murdered, but had 
treat it as an idle tale. he said, moreover, that the marshal was 
not accused of have any hand in the murders, but that his servant 
were supposed to be guilty. 

jean gendron himself depose to the loss of his son, and he add that 
his was not the only child which had vanish mysterious at 
machecoul. he knew of thirty that had disappeared. 

jean chipholon, elder and junior, jean aubin, and clement doré, all 
inhabitant of the parish of thomage, depose that they had known a 
poor man of the same parish, name mathelin thomas, who had lost his 
son, age twelve, and that he had die of grief in consequence. 

jeanne rouen, of machecoul, who for nine years had been in a state of 
uncertainty whether her son were alive or dead, depose that the child 
had been carry off whilst keeping sheep. she had thought that he had 
been devour of wolves, but two women of machecoul, now deceased, had 
seen gill de sillé approach the little shepherd, speak to him, and 
point to the castle. shortly after the lad had walk off in that 
direction. the husband of jeanne rouen went to the château to inquire 
after his son, but could obtain no information. when next gill de 
sillé appear in the town, the disconsolate mother entreat him to 
restore her child to her. gill reply that he knew nothing about 
him, as he had been to the king at amboise. 

jeanne, widow of aymery hedelin, living at machecoul, had also lost, 
eight years before, a little child as he had pursue some butterfly 
into the wood. at the same time four other children had been carry 
off, those of gendron, rouen, and macé sorin. she said that the story 
circulate through the country was, that gill de sillé stole 
children to make them over to the english, in order to obtain the 
ransom of his brother who was a captive. but she add that this 
report was trace to the servant of sillé, and that it was propagate 
by them. 

one of the last children to disappear was that of noël aise, living in 
the parish of s. croix. 

a man from tiffauge had said to her (jeanne hedelin) that for one 
child stolen at machecoul, there were seven carry away at tiffauges. 

macé sorin confirmed the deposition of the widow hedelin., and 
repeated the circumstances connected with the loss of the children of 
châtellier, rouen, gendron, and lebarbier. 

perrine rondeau had enter the castle with the company of jean labbé. 
she had enter a stable, and had found a heap of ashes and powder, 
which had a sickly and peculiar smell. at the bottom of a trough she 
had found a child's shirt cover with blood. 

several inhabitant of the bourg of fresnay, to wit, perrot, 
parqueteau, jean soreau, catherine degrépie, gill garnier, perrine 
viellard, marguerite rediern, marie carfin, jeanne laudais, said that 
they had heard guillaume hamelin, last easter, lament the loss of 
two children. 

isabeau, wife of guillaume hamelin, confirmed these depositions, 
saving that she had lost them seven years before. she had at that time 
four children; the eldest age fifteen, the youngest age seven, went 
together to machecoul to buy some bread, but they did not return. she 
sat up for them all night and next morning. she heard that another 
child had been lost, the son of michaut bonnel of s. ciré de retz. 

guillemette, wife of michaut bonnel, said that her son had been 
carry off whilst guard cows. 

guillaume rodigo and his wife, living at bourg-neuf-en-retz, depose 
that on the eve of last s. bartholomew's day, the sire do retz lodge 
with guillaume plumet in his village. 

pontou, who accompany the marshal, saw a lad of fifteen, name 
bernard lecanino, servant to rodigo, standing at the door of his 
house. the lad could not speak much french, but only bas-breton. 
pontou beckon to him and spoke to him in a low tone. that evening, 
at ten o'clock, bernard left his master's house, rodigo and his wife 
being absent. the servant maid, who saw him go out, call to him that 
the supper table was not yet cleared, but he paid no attention to what 
she said. rodigo, annoy at the loss of his servant, ask some of 
the marshal's men what had become of him. they reply mocking that 
they knew nothing of the little breton, but that he had probably been 
sent to tiffauge to be train as page to their lord. 

marguerite sorain, the chambermaid allude to above, confirmed the 
statement of rodigo, add that pontou had enter the house and 
spoken with bernard. guillaume plumet and wife confirmed what rodigo 
and sorain had said. 

thomas aysée and wife depose to the loss of their son, age ten, who 
had gone to beg at the gate of the castle of machecoul; and a little 
girl had seen him drawn by an offer of meat into the château. 

jamette, wife of eustache drouet of s. léger, had sent two sons, one 
age ten, the other seven, to the castle to obtain alms. they had not 
been seen since. 

on the 2nd october the commissioner sat again, and the charge became 
graver, and the servant of the marshal became more and more 
implicated. 

the disappearance of thirteen other children was substantiate under 
circumstances throw strong suspicion on the inmate of the castle. 
i will not give the details, for they much resemble those of the 
former depositions. suffice it to say that before the commissioner 
closed the inquiry, a herald of the duke of brittany in tabard blew 
three call on the trumpet, from the steps of the tower of bouffay, 
summon all who had additional charge to bring against the sire de 
retz, to present themselves without delay. as no fresh witness 
arrived, the case was considered to be made out, and the commissioner 
visit the duke, with the information they had collected, in their 
hands. 

the duke hesitate long as to the steps he should take. should he 
judge and sentence a kinsman, the most powerful of his vassals, the 
bravest of his captains, a councillor of the king, a marshal of 
france? 

whilst still unsettled in his mind as to the course he should pursue, 
he received a letter from gill de retz, which produce quite a 
different effect from that which it had been intended to produce. 

"monsieur my cousin and honour sire,-- 

"it is quite true that i am perhaps the most detest of all 
sinners, have sin horrible again and again, yet have i never 
fail in my religious duties. i have heard many masses, vespers, &c., 
have fast in lent and on vigils, have confessed my sins, deplore 
them heartily, and have received the blood of our lord at least once 
in the year. 

since i have been languish in prison, await your honour 
justice, i have been overwhelm with incomparable repentance for my 
crimes, which i am ready to acknowledge and to expiate as is suitable. 

"wherefore i supplicate you, m. my cousin, to give me licence to 
retire into a monastery, and there to lead a good and exemplary life. 
i care not into what monastery i am sent, but i intend that all my 
goods, &c., should be distribute among the poor, who are the member 
of jesus christ on earth . . . . await your glorious clemency, on 
which i rely, i pray god our lord to protect you and your kingdom. 

he who address you is in all earthly humility," 

"friar gilles, 
carmelite in intention." 

the duke read this letter to pierre de l'hospital, president of 
brittany, and to the bishop of nantes, who were those most resolute in 
pressing on the trial. they were horrify at the tone of this 
dreadful communication, and assured the duke that the case was so 
clear, and the steps taken had been so decided, that it was impossible 
for him to allow de retz to escape trial by such an impious device as 
he suggested. in the meantime, the bishop and the grand-seneschal had 
set on foot an investigate at the castle of machecoul, and had found 
numerous trace of human remains. but a complete examination could not 
be made, as the duke was anxious to screen his kinsman as much as 
possible, and refuse to authorize one. 

the duke now summon his principal officer and held a council with 
them. they unanimous side with the bishop and de l'hospital, and 
when john still hesitated, the bishop of nantes rose and said: 
"monseigneur, this case is one for the church as much as for your 
court to take up. consequently, if your president of brittany do not 
bring the case into secular court, by the judge of heaven and earth! i 
will cite the author of these execrable crime to appear before our 
ecclesiastical tribunal." 

the resolution of the bishop compel the duke to yield, and it was 
decided that the trial should take its course without let or 
hindrance. 

in the meantime, the unhappy wife of gill de retz, who had been 
separate from him for some while, and who loathe his crimes, though 
she still felt for him as her husband, hurried to the duke with her 
daughter to entreat pardon for the wretched man. but the duke refuse 
to hear her. thereupon she went to amboise to intercede with the king 
for him who bad once been his close friend and adviser. 



chapter xii. 

the marÉchal de retz.--ii. the trial. 


on the 10th october, nicola chateau, notary of the duke, went to the 
château of bouffay, to read to the prisoner the summons to appear in 
person on the morrow before messire de l'hospital, president of 
brittany, seneschal of rennes, and chief justice of the duchy of 
brittany. 

the sire de retz, who believe himself already a novice in the 
carmelite order, had dress in white, and was engaged in singing 
litanies. when the summons had been read, he ordered a page to give 
the notary wine and cake, and then he return to his prayer with 
every appearance of compunction and piety. 

on the morrow jean labbé and four soldier conduct him to the hall 
of justice. he ask for pontou and henriet to accompany him, but this 
was not permitted. 

he was adorn with all his military insignia, as though to impose on 
his judges; he had around his neck massive chain of gold, and several 
collar of knightly orders. his costume, with the exception of his 
purpoint, was white, in token of his repentance. his purpoint was of 
pearl-grey silk, stud with gold stars, and gird around his waist 
by a scarlet belt, from which dangle a poignard in scarlet velvet 
sheath. his collar, cufs, and the edging of his purpoint were of white 
ermine, his little round cap or _chapel_ was white, surround with a 
belt of ermine--a fur which only the great feudal lords of brittany 
had a right to wear. all the rest of his dress, to the shoe which 
were long and pointed, was white. 

no one at a first glance would have thought the sire do retz to be by 
nature so cruel and vicious as he was supposed to be. on the contrary, 
his physiognomy was calm and phlegmatic, somewhat pale, and expressive 
of melancholy. his hair and moustache were light brown, and his beard 
was clip to a point. this beard, which resemble no other beard, 
was black, but under certain lights it assume a blue hue, and it was 
this peculiarity which obtain for the sire do retz the surname of 
blue-beard, a name which has attach to him in popular romance, at 
the same time that his story has undergone strange metamorphoses. 

but on close examination of the countenance of gill de retz, 
contraction in the muscle of the face, nervous quiver of the 
mouth, spasmodic twitch of the brows, and above all, the sinister 
expression of the eyes, show that there was something strange and 
frightful in the man. at interval he ground his teeth like a wild 
beast prepare to dash upon his prey, and then his lip became so 
contracted, as they were drawn in and glued, as it were, to his teeth, 
that their very colour was indiscernible. 

at times also his eyes became fixed, and the pupil dilate to such an 
extent, with a sombre fire quiver in them, that the iris seem to 
fill the whole orbit, which became circular, and sank back into the 
head. at these moments his complexion became livid and cadaverous; his 
brow, especially just over the nose, was cover with deep wrinkles, 
and his beard appear to bristle, and to assume its bluish hues. but, 
after a few moments, his features became again serene, with a sweet 
smile repose upon them, and his expression relax into a vague and 
tender melancholy. 

"messires," said he, salute his judges, "i pray you to expedite my 
matter, and despatch as speedy as possible my unfortunate case; for 
i am peculiarly anxious to consecrate myself to the service of god, 
who has pardon my great sins. i shall not fail, i assure you, to 
endow several of the church in nantes, and i shall distribute the 
greater portion of my goods among the poor, to secure the salvation of 
my soul." 

"monseigneur," reply grave pierre de l'hospital: "it is always 
well to think of the salvation of one's soul; but, if you please, 
think now that we are concerned with the salvation of your body." 

"i have confessed to the father superior of the carmelites," reply 
the marshal, with tranquillity; "and through his absolution i have 
been able to communicate: i am, therefore, guiltless and purified." 

"men's justice is not in common with that of god, monseigneur, and i 
cannot tell you what will be your sentence. be ready to make your 
defence, and listen to the charge brought against you, which m. le 
lieutenant du procureur de nantes will read." 

the officer rose, and read the following paper of charges, which i 
shall condense:-- 

"having heard the bitter complaint of several of the inhabitant of 
the diocese of nantes, whose name follow hereinafter (here follow the 
name of the parent of the lost children), we, philippe do livron, 
lieutenant assesseur of messire le procureur de nantes, have invited, 
and do invite, the very noble and very wise messire pierre de 
l'hospital, president of brittany, &c., to bring to trial the very 
high and very powerful lord, gill de laval, sire de retz, machecoul, 
ingrande and other places, councillor of his majesty the king, and 
marshal of france: 

"forasmuch as the said sire de retz has seize and cause to be seize 
several little children, not only ten or twenty, but thirty, forty, 
fifty, sixty, one hundred, two hundred, and more, and has murder and 
slain them inhumanly, and then burn their body to convert them to 
ashes: 

"forasmuch as persevering in evil, the said sire, notwithstanding that 
the powers that be are ordain of god, and that every one should be 
an obedient subject to his prince, . . . has assault jean leferon, 
subject of the duke of brittany, the said jean leferon being guardian 
of the fortress of malemort, in the name of geoffrey leferon, his 
brother, to whom the said lord had made over the possession of the 
said place: 

"forasmuch as the said sire forced jean leferon to give up to him the 
said place, and moreover retook the lordship of malemort in despite of 
the order of the duke and of justice: 

"forasmuch as the said sire arrest master jean rousseau, sergeant of 
the duke, who was sent to him with injunction from the said duke, and 
beat his men with their own staves, although their person were under 
the protection of his grace: 

"we conclude that the said sire de retz, homicide in fact and in 
intent according to the first count, rebel and felon according to the 
second, should be condemn to suffer corporal punishment, and to pay 
a fine of his possession in lands and goods held in fief to the said 
nobleman, and that these should be confiscate and remit to the 
crown of brittany." 

this requisition was evidently drawn up with the view of saving the 
life of the sire de retz; for the crime of homicide was present 
without aggravate circumstances, in such a manner that it could be 
deny or shelved, whilst the crime of felony and rebellion against 
the duke of brittany were brought into exaggerate prominence. 

gill de retz had undoubted been forewarn of the course which was 
to be pursued, and he was prepared to deny total the charge made in 
the first count. 

"monseigneur," said pierre de l'hospital, whom the form of the 
requisition had visibly astonished: "what justification have you to 
make? take an oath on the gospel to declare the truth." 

"no, messire!" answer the marshal. "the witness are bound to 
declare what they know upon oath, but the accused is never put on his 
oath." 

"quite so," reply the judge. "because the accused may be put on the 
rack and constrained to speak the truth, an' please you." 

gill de retz turn pale, bit his lips, and cast a glance of 
malignant hate at pierre de l'hospital; then, compose his 
countenance, he spoke with an appearance of calm:-- 

"messires, i shall not deny that i behave wrongful in the case of 
jean rousseau; but, in excuse, let me say that the said rousseau was 
full of wine, and he behave with such indecorum towards me in the 
presence of my servants, that it was quite intolerable. nor will i 
deny my revenge on the brother leferon: jean had declared that the 
said grace of brittany had confiscate my fortress of malemort, which 
i had sold to him, and for which i have not yet received payment; and 
geoffrey leferon had announce far and wide that i was about to be 
expel brittany as a traitor and a rebel. to punish them i 
re-entered my fortress of malemort.--as for the other charges, i shall 
say nothing about them, they are simply false and calumnious." 

"indeed exclaim pierre de l'hospital, whose blood boil with 
indignation against the wretch who stood before him with such 
effrontery. "all these witness who complain of have lost their 
children, lie under oath!" 

"undoubtedly, if they accuse me of have anything to do with their 
loss. what am i to know about them, am i their keeper?" 

"the answer of cain!" exclaim pierre de l'hospital, rising from his 
seat in the vehemence of his emotion. "however, as you solemn deny 
these charges, we must question henriet and pontou." 

"henriet, pontou!" cry the marshal, trembling; "they accuse me of 
nothing, surely!" 

"not as yet, they have not been questioned, but they are about to be 
brought into court, and i do not expect that they will lie in the face 
of justice." 

"i demand that my servant be not brought forward as witness against 
their master," said the marshal, his eyes dilating, his brow 
wrinkling, and his beard bristle blue upon his chin: "a master is 
above the gossip tale and charge of his servants." 

"do you think then, messire, that your servant will accuse you?" 

"i demand that i, a marshal of france, a baron of the duchy, should be 
sheltered from the slander of small folk, whom i disown as my 
servant if they are untrue to their master." 

"messire, i see we must put you on the rack, or nothing will be got 
from you." 

"hola! i appeal to his grace the duke of brittany, and ask an 
adjournment, that i may take advice on the charge brought against me, 
which i have denied, and which i deny still." 

"well, i shall adjourn the case till the 25th of this month, that you 
may be well prepared to meet the accusations." 

on his way back to prison, the marshal pass henriet and pontou as 
they were being conduct to the court. henriet pretended not to see 
his master, but pontou burst into tear on meeting him. the marshal 
held out his hand, and pontou kiss it affectionately. 

"remember what i have done for you, and be faithful servants," said 
gill de retz. henriet recoil from him with a shudder, and the 
marshal pass on. 

"i shall speak," whisper henriet; "for we have another master beside 
our poor master of retz, and we shall soon be with the heavenly one." 

the president ordered the clerk to read again the requisition of the 
lieutenant, that the two presume accomplice of gill de retz might 
be informed of the charge brought against their master. henriet burst 
into tears, tremble violently, and cry out that he would tell all. 
pontou, alarmed, try to hinder his companion, and said that henriet 
was touched in his head, and that what he was about to say would be 
the ravings of insanity. 

silence was impose upon him. 

"i will speak out," continue henriet and yet i dare not speak of the 
horrors which i know have taken place, before that image of my lord 
christ; "and he pointed trembling to a large crucifix above the seat 
of the judge. 

"henriet." moan pontou, squeeze his hand, "you will destroy 
yourself as well as your master." 

pierre de l'hospital rose, and the figure of our redeemer was solemn 
veiled. 

henriet, who had great difficulty in overcome his agitation, than 
began his revelations. 

the following is the substance of them:-- 

on leave the university of angers, he had taken the situation of 
reader in the house of gill de retz. the marshal took a liking to 
him, and made him his chamberlain and confidant. 

on the occasion of the sire de la suze, brother of the sire de retz, 
taking possession of the castle of chantoncé, charles de soenne, who 
had arrive at chantoncé, assured henriet that he had found in the 
oubliette of a tower a number of dead children, some headless, other 
frightfully mutilated. henriet then thought that this was but a 
calumny invent by the sire de la suze. 

but when, some while after, the sire de retz retook the castle of 
chantoncé and had cede it to the duke of brittany, he one evening 
summon henriet, pontou, and a certain petit robin to his room; the 
two latter were already deep in the secret of their master. but 
before confiding anything to henriet, de retz made him take a solemn 
oath never to reveal what he was about to tell him. the oath taken, 
the sire de retz, address the three, said that on the morrow an 
officer of the duke would take possession of the castle in the name of 
the duke, and that it was necessary, before this took place, that a 
certain well should be empty of children's corpses, and that their 
body should be put into box and transport to machecoul. 

henriet, pontou, and petit robin went together, furnish with ropes 
and hooks, to the tower where were the corpses. they toil all night 
in remove the half-decayed bodies, and with them they fill three 
large cases, which they sent by a boat down the loire to machecoul, 
where they were reduce to ashes. 

henriet count thirty-six children's heads, but there were more 
body than heads. this night's work, he said, bad produce a profound 
impression on his imagination, and he was constant haunt with a 
vision of these head rolling as in a game of skittles, and clash 
with a mournful wail. henriet soon began to collect children for his 
master, and was present whilst he massacre them. they were murder 
invariable in one room at machecoul. the marshal use to bathe in 
their blood; he was fond of making gill do sillé, pontou, or henriet 
torture them, and he experienced intense pleasure in seeing them in 
their agonies. but his great passion was to welter in their blood. his 
servant would stab a child in the jugular vein, and let the blood 
squirt over him. the room was often steep in blood. when the 
horrible deed was done, and the child was dead, the marshal would be 
fill with grief for what he had done, and would toss weeping and 
pray on a bed, or recite fervent prayer and litany on his knees, 
whilst his servant wash the floor, and burn in the huge fireplace 
the body of the murder children. with the body were burn the 
clothes and everything that had belong to the little victims. 

an insupportable odour fill the room, but the maréchal do retz 
inhale it with delight. 

henriet acknowledge that he had seen forty children put to death in 
this manner, and he was able to give an account of several, so that it 
was possible to identify them with the children report to be lost. 

"it is quite impossible," said the lieutenant, who had been given the 
cue to do all that was possible to save the marshal--"it is impossible 
that body could be burn in a chamber fireplace." 

"it was done, for all that, messire," reply henriet. "the fireplace 
was very large, both at the hotel suze, and also at machecoul; we 
pile up great faggot and logs, and laid the dead children among 
them. in a few hour the operation was complete, and we flung the 
ashes out of the window into the moat." 

henriet remember the case of the two son of hamelin; he said that, 
whilst the one child was being tortured, the other was on its knee 
sob and pray to god, till its own turn came. 

"what you have said concerning the excesses of messire de retz," 
exclaim the lieutenant du procureur, "seems to be pure invention, 
and destitute of all probability. the greatest monster of iniquity 
never committed such crimes, except perhaps some cæsars of old rome." 

"messire, it was the acts of these cæsars that my lord of retz desire 
to imitate. i use to read to him the chronicle of suetonius, and 
tacitus, in which their cruelty are recorded. he use to delight in 
hearing of them, and he said that it gave him greater pleasure to hack 
off a child's head than to assist at a banquet. sometimes he would 
seat himself on the breast of a little one, and with a knife sever the 
head from the body at a single blow; sometimes he cut the throat half 
through very gently, that the child might languish, and he would wash 
his hand and his beard in its blood. sometimes he had all the limb 
chop off at once from the trunk; at other times he ordered us to 
hang the infant till they were nearly dead, and then take them down 
and cut their throats. i remember have brought to him three little 
girl who were ask charity at the castle gates. he bade me cut 
their throat whilst he look on. andré bricket found another little 
girl crying on the steps of the house at vanne because she had lost 
her mother. he brought the little thing--it was but a babe--in his 
arms to my lord, and it was kill before him. pontou and i had to 
make away with the body. we threw it down a privy in one of the 
towers, but the corpse caught on a nail in the outer wall, so that it 
would be visible to all who passed. pontou was let down by a rope, and 
he disengaged it with great difficulty." 

"how many children do you estimate that the sire de retz and his 
servant have killed?" 

"the reckoning is long. i, for my part, confess to have kill 
twelve with my own hand, by my master's orders, and i have brought him 
about sixty. i knew that things of the kind went on before i was 
admitted to the secret; for the castle of machecoul had been occupy 
a short while by the sire do la sage. my lord recover it speedily, 
for he knew that there were many children's corpse hidden in a 
hayloft. there were forty there quite dry and black as coal, because 
they had been charred. one of the women of madame de retz came by 
chance into the loft and saw the corpses. roger de briqueville want 
to kill her, but the maréchal would not let him." 

"have you nothing more to declare? 

"nothing. i ask pontou, my friend, to corroborate what i have said." 

this deposition, so circumstantial and detailed, produce on the 
judge a profound impression of horror. human imagination at this time 
had not penetrate such mystery of refined cruelty. several times, 
as henriet spake, the president had shown his astonishment and 
indignation by sign himself with the cross. several times his face 
had become scarlet, and his eyes had fallen; he had pressed his hand 
to his brow, to assure himself that he was not labour under a 
hideous dream, and a quiver of horror had run through his whole frame. 

pontou had taken no part in the revelation of henriet; but when the 
latter appeal to him he raise his head, look sadly round the 
court, and sighed. 

"etienne cornillant, alias pontou, i command you in the name of god 
and of justice, to declare what you know." 

this injunction of pierre do l'hospital remain unresponded to, and 
pontou seem to strengthen himself in his resolution not to accuse 
his master. 

but henriet, fling himself into the arms of his accomplice, 
implore him, as he value his soul, no long to harden his heart to 
the call of god; but to bring to light the crime he had committed 
along with the sire do retz. 

the lieutenant du procureur, who hitherto had endeavour to extenuate 
or discredit the charge brought against gill do retz, try a last 
expedient to counterbalance the damage confession of henriet, and 
to withhold pontou from give way. 

"you have heard, monseigneur," said he to the president, "the 
atrocity which have been acknowledge by henriet, and you, as i do, 
consider them to be pure invention of the aforesaid, made out of 
bitter hatred and envy with the purpose of ruin his master. i 
therefore demand that henriet should be put on the rack, that he may 
be brought to give the lie to his former statements." 

"you forget," reply de l'hospital, "that the rack is for those who 
do _not_ confess, and not for those who freely acknowledge their 
crimes. therefore i order the second accused, etienne cornillant, 
alias pontou, to be placed on the rack if he continue silent. pontou! 
will you speak or will you not?" 

"monseigneur, he will speak!" exclaim henriet. oh, pontou, dear 
friend, resist not god any more." 

"well then, messeigneurs," said pontou, with emotion; "i will satisfy 
you; i cannot defend my poor lord against the allegation of henriet, 
who has confessed all through dread of eternal damnation." 

he then fully substantiate all the statement of the other, add 
other fact of the same character, known only to himself. 

notwithstanding the avowal of pontou and henriet, the adjourn trial 
was not hurried on. it would have been easy to have capture some of 
the accomplice of the wretched man; but the duke, who was informed of 
the whole of the proceedings, did not wish to augment the scandal by 
increase the number of the accused. he even forbade research to be 
made in the castle and mansions of the sire de retz, fear lest 
proof of fresh crimes, more mysterious and more horrible than those 
already divulged, should come to light. 

the dismay spread through the country by the revelation already made, 
demand that religion and morality, which had been so gross 
outraged, should be speedy avenged. people wonder at the delay in 
pronounce sentence, and it was loud proclaim in nantes that the 
sire de retz was rich enough to purchase his life. it is true that 
madame de retz solicit the king and the duke again to give pardon to 
her husband; but the duke, counsel by the bishop, refuse to extend 
his authority to interfere with the course of justice; and the king, 
after have sent one of his councillor to nantes to investigate the 
case, determined not to stir in it. 



chapter xiii. 

marÉchal de retz.--iii. the sentence and execution. 


on the 24th october the trial of the maréchal de retz was resumed. the 
prisoner enter in a carmelite habit, knelt and pray in silence 
before the examination began. then he ran his eye over the court, and 
the sight of the rack, windlass, and cords made a slight shudder run 
through him. 

"messire gill de laval," began the president; "you appear before me 
now for the second time to answer to a certain requisition read by m. 
le lieutenant du procureur de nantes." 

"i shall answer frankly, monseigneur," said the prisoner calmly; "but 
i reserve the right of appeal to the benign intervention of the very 
venerate majesty of the king of france, of whom i am, or have been, 
chamberlain and marshal, as may be prove by my letters patent duly 
enregistere in the parliament at paris--" 

"this is no affair of the king of france," interrupt pierre de 
l'hospital; "if you were chamberlain and marshal of his majesty, you 
are also vassal of his grace the duke of brittany." 

"i do not deny it; but, on the contrary, i trust to his grace of 
brittany to allow me to retire to a convent of carmelites, there to 
repent me of my sins." 

"that is as may be; will you confess, or must i send you to the rack?" 

"torture me not!" exclaim gill de retz "i will confess all. tell 
me first, what have henriet and pontou said?" 

"they have confessed. m. le lieutenant du procureur shall read you 
their allegations." 

"not so," said the lieutenant, who continue to show favour to the 
accused; "i pronounce them false, unless messire de retz confirm them 
by oath, which god forbid!" 

pierre de l'hospital made a motion of anger to check this scandalous 
pleading in favour of the accused, and then nod to the clerk to 
read the evidence. 

the sire do retz, on hearing that his servant had made such explicit 
avowal of their acts, remain motionless, as though thunderstruck. 
he saw that it was in vain for him to equivocate, and that he would 
have to confess all. 

"what have you to say?" ask the president, when the confession of 
henriet and pontou had been read. 

"say what befit you, my lord," interrupt the lieutenant du 
procureur, as though to indicate to the accused the line he was to 
take: "are not these abominable lie and calumny trump up to ruin 
you?" 

"alas, no!" reply the sire do retz; and his face was pale as death: 
"henriet and pontou have spoken the truth. god has loosen their 
tongues." 

"my lord! relieve yourself of the burden of your crime by 
acknowledge them at once," said m. do l'hospital earnestly. 

"messires!" said the prisoner, after a moment's silence: "it is quite 
true that i have rob mother of their little ones; and that i have 
kill their children, or cause them to be killed, either by cutting 
their throat with dagger or knives, or by chop off their head 
with cleavers; or else i have had their skull broken by hammer or 
sticks; sometimes i had their limb hewn off one after another; at 
other times i have rip them open, that i might examine their 
entrails and hearts; i have occasional strangle them or put them to 
a slow death; and when the children were dead i had their body 
burn and reduce to ashes." 

"when did you begin your execrable practices?" ask pierre de 
l'hospital, stagger by the frank of these horrible avowals: "the 
evil one must have possessed you." 

"it came to me from myself,--no doubt at the instigation of the devil: 
but still these acts of cruelty afford me incomparable delight. the 
desire to commit these atrocity came upon me eight years ago. i left 
court to go to chantoncé, that i might claim the property of my 
grandfather, deceased. in the library of the castle i found a latin 
book--_suetonius_, i believe--full of account of the cruelty of the 
roman emperors. i read the charming history of tiberius, caracalla, 
and other cæsars, and the pleasure they took in watch the agony 
of torture children. thereupon i resolve to imitate and surpass 
these same cæsars, and that very night i began to do so. for some 
while i confide my secret to no one, but afterwards i communicate it 
to my cousin, gill de sillé, then to master roger de briqueville, 
next in succession to henriet, pontou, rossignol, and robin." he then 
confirmed all the account given by his two servants. he confessed to 
about one hundred and twenty murder in a single year. 

"an average of eight hundred in less than seven years!" exclaim 
pierre de l'hospital, with a cry of pain: "ah! messire, you were 
possessed! " 

his confession was too explicit and circumstantial for the lieutenant 
du procureur to say another word in his defence; but he plead that 
the case should be made over to the ecclesiastical court, as there 
were confession of invocation of the devil and of witchcraft mixed 
up with those of murder. pierre de l'hospital saw that the object of 
the lieutenant was to gain time for mme. de retz to make a fresh 
attempt to obtain a pardon; however he was unable to resist, so he 
consent that the case should be transfer to the bishop's court. 

but the bishop was not a man to let the matter slip, and there and 
then a sergeant of the bishop summon gill de laval, sire do retz, 
to appear forthwith before the ecclesiastical tribunal. the marshal 
was stagger by this unexpected citation, and he did not think of 
appealing against it to the president; he merely sign his readiness 
to follow, and he was at once conduct into the ecclesiastical court 
assemble hurried to try him. 

this new trial last only a few hours. 

the marshal, now thorough cowed, made no attempt to defend himself, 
but he endeavour to bribe the bishop into leniency, by promise of 
the surrender of all his lands and goods to the church, and beg to 
be allow to retire into the carmelite monastery at nantes. 

his request was peremptory refused, and sentence of death was 
pronounced against him. 

on the 25th october, the ecclesiastical court have pronounced 
judgment, the sentence was transmit to the secular court, which had 
now no pretext upon which to withhold ratification. 

there was some hesitation as to the kind of death the marshal was to 
suffer. the member of the secular tribunal were not unanimous on this 
point. the president put it to the vote, and collected the vote 
himself; then he reseat himself, cover his head, and said in a 
solemn voice:-- 

"the court, notwithstanding the quality, dignity, and nobility of the 
accused, condemn him to be hung and burned. wherefore i admonish you 
who are condemned, to ask pardon of god, and grace to die well, in 
great contrition for have committed the said crimes. and the said 
sentence shall be carry into execution to-morrow morning between 
eleven and twelve o'clock." a similar sentence was pronounced upon 
henriet and pontou. 

on the morrow, october 26th, at nine o'clock in the morning, a general 
procession compose of half the people of nantes, the clergy and the 
bishop bearing the blessed sacrament, left the cathedral and went 
round the city visiting each of the principal churches, where masses 
were said for the three under sentence. 

at eleven the prisoner were conduct to the place of execution, 
which was in the meadow of biesse, on the further side of the loire. 

three gibbet had been erected, one higher than the others, and 
beneath each was a pile of faggots, tar, and brushwood. 

it was a glorious, breezy day, not a cloud was to be seen in the blue 
heavens; the loire roll silent towards the sea its mighty volumes 
of turbid water, seeming bright and blue as it reflect the 
brilliancy and colour of the sky. the poplar shiver and whiten in 
the fresh air with a pleasant rustle, and the willow flicker and 
waver above the stream. 

a vast crowd had assemble round the gallows; it was with difficulty 
that a way was made for the condemned, who came on chant the _de 
profundis_. the spectator of all age took up the psalm and chant 
it with them, so that the surge of the old gregorian tone might have 
been heard by the duke and the bishop, who had shut themselves up in 
the château of nantes during the hour of execution. 

after the close of the psalm, which was terminate by the _requiem 
æternam_ instead of the _gloria_, the sire de retz thank those who 
had conduct him, and then embrace pontou and henriet, before 
deliver himself of the following address, or rather sermon:-- 

"my very dear friends and servants, be strong and courageous against 
the assault of the devil, and feel great displeasure and contrition 
for your ill deeds, without despairing of god's mercy. believe with 
me, that there is no sin, however great, in the world, which god, in 
his grace and loving kindness, will not pardon, when one ask it of 
him with contrition of heart. remember that the lord god is always 
more ready to receive the sinner than is the sinner to ask of him 
pardon. moreover, let us very humble thank him for his great love to 
us in letting us die in full possession of our faculties, and not 
cutting us off sudden in the midst of our misdeeds. let us conceive 
such a love of god, and such repentance, that we shall not fear death, 
which is only a little pang, without which we could not see god in his 
glory. besides we must desire to be free from this world, in which is 
only misery, that we may go to everlasting glory. let us rejoice 
rather, for although we have sin grievous here below, yet we 
shall be united in paradise, our soul being part from our bodies, 
and we shall be together for ever and ever, if only we endure in our 
pious and honourable contrition to our last sigh." [1] then the 
marshal, who was to be execute first, left his companion and placed 
himself in the hand of his executioners. he took off his cap, knelt, 
kiss a crucifix, and made a pious oration to the crowd much in the 
style of his address to his friends pontou and henriet. 

[1. the case of the sire de retz is one to make us see the great 
danger there is in trust to feelings in matter of religion. "if 
thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments," said our lord. how 
many hope to go to heaven because they have pious emotions!] 

then he commence recite the prayer of the dying; the executioner 
pass the cord round his neck, and adjust the knot. he mount a 
tall stool, erect at the foot of the gallows as a last honour paid 
to the nobility of the criminal. the pile of firewood was light 
before the executioner had left him. 

pontou and henriet, who were still on their knees, raise their eyes 
to their master and cry to him, extend their arms,-- 

"at this last hour, monseigneur, be a good and valiant soldier of god, 
and remember the passion of jesus christ which wrought our redemption. 
farewell, we hope soon to meet in paradise! 

the stool was cast down, and the sire de retz dropped. the fire roar 
up, the flame leap about him, and envelop him as be swung. 

suddenly, mingle with the deep boom of the cathedral bell, 
swell up the wild unearthly wail of the _dies iræ_. 

no sound among the crowd, only the growl of the fire, and the solemn 
strain of the hymn 

lo, the book, exactly worded, 
wherein all hath been recorded; 
thence shall judgment be awarded. 
when the judge his seat attaineth, 
and each hidden deed arraigneth, 
nothing unavenged remaineth. 
what shall i, frail man, be pleading? 
who for me be interceding? 
when the just are mercy needing. 
king of majesty tremendous, 
who dost free salvation send us, 
fount of pity! then befriend us. 
* * * * 
low i kneel, with heart-submission; 
see, like ashes, my contrition-- 
help me in my last condition! 
ah i that day of tear and mourning! 
from the dust of earth returning, 
man for judgment must prepare him! 
spare, o, god, in mercy spare him! 
lord, who didst our soul redeem, 
grant a blessed requiem! 
amen. 

six women, veiled, and robe in white, and six carmelite advanced. 
bearing a coffin. 

it was whisper that one of the veiled women was madame de retz, and 
that the other were member of the most illustrious house of 
brittany. 

the cord by which the marshal was hung was cut, and he fell into a 
cradle of iron prepared to receive the corpse. the body was remove 
before the fire had gain any mastery over it. it was placed in the 
coffin., and the monk and the women transport it to the carmelite 
monastery of nantes, according to the wish of the deceased. 

in the meantime, the sentence had been execute upon pontou and 
henriet; they were hung and burn to dust. their ashes were cast to 
the winds; whilst in the carmelite church of our lady were celebrated 
with pomp the obsequies of the very high, very powerful, very 
illustrious seigneur gill de laval, sire de retz, late chamberlain 
of king charles vii., and marshal of france! 



chapter xiv. 

a galician were-wolf. 


the inhabitant of austria galicia are quiet, inoffensive people, 
take them as a whole. the jews, who number a twelfth of the 
population, are the most intelligent, energetic, and certainly the 
most money-making individual in the province, though the pole 
proper, or mazurs, are not devoid of natural parts. 

perhaps as remarkable a phenomenon as any other in that kingdom--for 
kingdom of waldimir it was--is the enormous numerical preponderance of 
the nobility over the untitled. in 1837 the proportions stood thus: 
32,190 noble to 2,076 tradesmen. 

the average of execution for crime is nine a year, out of a population 
of four and a half millions,--by no means a high figure, considering 
the peremptory way in which justice is dealt forth in that province. 
yet, in the most quiet and well-disposed neighbourhoods, occasional 
the most startle atrocity are committed, occur when least 
expected, and sometimes perpetrate by the very person who is least 
suspected. 

just sixteen years ago there happen in the circle of tornow, in 
western galicia-the province is divide into nine circles-a 
circumstance which will probably furnish the grandame with a story 
for their firesides, during their bitter galician winters, for many a 
long year. 

in the circle of tornow, in the lordship of parkost, is a little 
hamlet call polomyja, consist of eight hovel and a jewish 
tavern. the inhabitant are mostly woodcutters, hew down the fir 
of the dense forest in which their village is situated, and convey 
them to the nearest water, down which they are float to the vistula. 
each tenant pay no rent for his cottage and pitch of field, but is 
bound to work a fixed number of days for his landlord: a practice 
universal in galicia, and often productive of much discontent and 
injustice, as the proprietor exact labour from his tenant on those 
days when the harvest has to be got in, or the land is m best 
condition for tillage, and just when the peasant would gladly be 
engaged upon his own small plot. money is scarce in the province, and 
this is accordingly the only way in which the landlord can be sure of 
his dues. 

most of the villager of polomyja are miserably poor; but by 
cultivate a little maize, and keeping a few fowl or a pig, they 
scrape together sufficient to sustain life. during the summer the men 
collect resin from the pines, from each of which, once in twelve 
years, they strip a slip of bark, leave the resin to exude and 
trickle into a small earthenware jar at its roots; and, during the 
winter, as already stated, they fell the tree and roll them down to 
the river. 

polomyja is not a cheerful spot--nested among dense masses of pine, 
which shed a gloom over the little hamlet; yet, on a fine day, it is 
pleasant enough for the old women to sit at their cottage doors, 
scent that matchless pine fragrance, sweet than the balm of the 
spice islands, for there is nothing cloy in that exquisite and 
exhilarating odour; listen to the harp-like thrill of the breeze in 
the old grey tree-tops, and knitting quiet at long stockings, whilst 
their little grandchildren romp in the heather and tuft fern. 

towards evening, too, there is something indescribable beautiful in 
the firwood. the sun dive among the trees, and paints their bole 
with patch of luminous saffron, or fall over a level clearing, 
glorify it with its orange dye, so visibly contrast with the 
blue-purple shadow on the western rim of unreclaimed forest, deep and 
luscious as the bloom on a plum. the bird then are hasten to their 
nests, a ger-falcon, high overhead, is kindle with sunlight; caper 
and gambol among the branches, the merry squirrel skip home for 
the night. 

the sun go down, but the sky is still shining with twilight. the 
wild cat begin to hiss and squall in the forest, the heron to flap 
hasty by, the stork on the top of the tavern chimney to poise itself 
on one leg for sleep. to-whoo! an owl begin to wake up. hark! the 
woodcutter are coming home with a song. 

such is polomyja in summer time, and much resemble it are the 
hamlet scattered about the forest, at interval of a few miles; in 
each, the public-house being the most commodious and best-built 
edifice, the church, whenever there is one, not remarkable for 
anything but its bulbous steeple. 

you would hardly believe that amidst all this poverty a beggar could 
have picked up any subsistence, and yet, a few years ago, sunday after 
sunday, there sat a white-bearded venerable man at the church door, 
ask alms. 

poor people are proverbially compassionate and liberal, so that the 
old man generally got a few coppers, and often some good woman bade 
him come into her cottage, and let him have some food. 

occasional swiatek--that was the beggar's name, went his rounds 
sell small pinchbeck ornament and beads; generally, however, only 
appealing to charity. 

one sunday, after church, a mazur and his wife invite the old man 
into their hut and gave him a crust of pie and some meat. there were 
several children about, but a little girl, of nine or ten, attract 
the old man's attention by her artless tricks. 

swiatek felt in his pocket and produce a ring, enclose a piece of 
coloured glass set over foil. this he present to the child, who ran 
off delight to show her acquisition to her companions. 

"is that little maid your daughter?" ask the beggar. 

"no," answer the house-wife, "she is an orphan; there was a widow in 
this place who died, leave the child, and i have taken charge of 
her; one mouth more will not matter much, and the good god will bless 
us." 

"ay, ay! to be sure he will; the orphan and fatherless are under his 
own peculiar care." 

"she's a good little thing, and give no trouble," observe the woman. 
"you go back to polomyja tonight, i reckon." 

"i do--ah!" exclaim swiatek, as the little girl ran up to him. you 
like the ring, is it not beautiful? i found it under a big fir to the 
left of the churchyard,there may be dozen there. you must turn round 
three times, bow to the moon, and say, 'zaboï!' then look among the 
tree-roots till you find one." 

"come along!" scream the child to its comrades; "we will go and look 
for rings." 

"you must seek separately," said swiatek. 

the children scamper off into the wood. 

"i have done one good thing for you," laugh the beggar, "in rid 
you, for a time, of the noise of those children." 

"i am glad of a little quiet now and then," said the woman; "the 
children will not let the baby sleep at times with their clatter. are 
you going?" 

"yes; i must reach polomyja to-night. i am old and very feeble, and 
poor"--he began to fall into his customary whine-- very poor, but i 
thank and pray to god for you." 

swiatek left the cottage. 

_that little orphan was never seen again._ 

the austria government has, of late years, been vigorous advance 
education among the lower orders, and establish school throughout 
the province. 

the children were return from class one day, and were scattered 
among the trees, some pursue a field-mouse, other collect 
juniper-berries, and some saunter with their hand in their 
pockets, whistling. 

"where's peter?" ask one little boy of another who was beside him. 
"we three go home the same way, let us go together." 

"peter!" shout the lad. 

"here i am!" was the answer from among the trees; "i'll be with you 
directly." 

"oh, i see him!" said the elder boy. "there is some one talk to 
him." 

"where?" 

"yonder, among the pines. ah! they have gone further into the shadow, 
and i cannot see them any more. i wonder who was with him; a man, i 
think." 

the boys wait till they were tired, and then they saunter home, 
determined to thrash peter for have kept them waiting. _but peter 
was never seen again._ 

some time after this a servant-girl, belong to a small store kept 
by a russian, disappear from a village five mile from polomyja. she 
had been sent with a parcel of grocery to a cottage at no very great 
distance, but lie apart from the main cluster of hovels, and 
surround by trees. 

the day closed in, and her master wait her return anxiously, but as 
several hour elapse without any sign of her, he--assisted by the 
neighbours--went in search of her. 

a slight powder of snow cover the ground, and her footstep could 
be trace at interval where she had diverge from the beaten track. 
in that part of the road where the tree were thickest, there were 
mark of two pair of feet leave the path; but owe to the density 
of the tree at that spot and to the slight of the fall of snow, 
which did not reach the soil, where shade by the pines, the 
footprint were immediately lost. by the following morning a heavy 
fall had obliterate any further trace which day-light might have 
discovered. 

_the servant-girl also was never seen again._ 

during the winter of 1849 the wolf were supposed to have been 
particularly ravenous, for thus alone did people account for the 
mysterious disappearance of children. 

a little boy had been sent to a fountain to fetch water; the pitcher 
was found standing by the well, but _the boy had vanished_. the 
villager turn out, and those wolf which could be found were 
despatched. 

we have already introduce our reader to polomyja, although the 
occurrence above related did not take place among those eight hovels, 
but in neighbouring villages. the reason for our have given a more 
detailed account of this cluster of houses--rude cabin they 
were--will now become apparent. 

in may, 1849, the innkeeper of polomyja miss a couple of ducks, and 
his suspicion fell upon the beggar who live there, and whom he held 
in no esteem, as he himself was a hard-working industrious man, whilst 
swiatek maintain himself, his wife, and children by mendicity, 
although possessed of sufficient arable land to yield an excellent 
crop of maize, and produce vegetables, if till with ordinary care. 

as the publican approach the cottage a fragrant whiff of roast 
greet his nostrils. 

"i'll catch the fellow in the act," said the innkeeper to himself, 
steal up to the door, and taking good care not to be observed. 

as he threw open the door, he saw the mendicant hurried shuffle 
something under his feet, and conceal it beneath his long clothes. the 
publican was on him in an instant, had him by the throat, charged him 
with theft, and drag him from his seat. judge of his sickening 
horror when from beneath the pauper's clothes roll forth the head of 
a girl about the age of fourteen or fifteen years, careful separate 
from the trunk. 

in a short while the neighbour came up. the venerable swiatek was 
lock up, along with his wife, his daughter--a girl of sixteen--and a 
son, age five. 

the hut was thorough examined, and the mutilate remains of the poor 
girl discovered. in a vat were found the leg and thighs, partly raw, 
partly stewed or roasted. in a chest were the heart, liver, and 
entrails, all prepared and cleaned, as neat as though done by a 
skilful butcher; and, finally, under the oven was a bowl full of fresh 
blood. on his way to the magistrate of the district. the wretched man 
flung himself repeatedly on the ground, struggle with his guards, and 
endeavour to suffocate himself by gulp clown clod of earth and 
stones, but was prevent by his conductors. 

when taken before the protokoll at dabkow, he state that he had 
already kill and--assisted by his family--eaten six persons: his 
children, however, assert most positively that the number was much 
greater than he had represented, and their testimony is borne out by 
the fact, that the remains of _fourteen_ different cap and suit of 
clothes, male as well as female, were found in his house. 

the origin of this horrible and deprave taste was as follows, 
according to swiatek's own confession:-- 

in 1846, three years previous, a jewish tavern in the neighbourhood 
had been burn down, and the host had himself perish in the flames. 
swiatek, whilst examine the ruins, had found the half-roasted corpse 
of the publican among the char rafter of the house. at that time 
the old man was craving with hunger, have been destitute of food for 
some time. the scent and the sight of the roast flesh inspired him 
with an uncontrollable desire to taste of it. he tore off a portion of 
the carcase and satiate his hunger upon it, and at the same time he 
conceive such a liking for it, that he could feel no rest till he had 
taste again. his second victim was the orphan above allude to; since 
then--that is, during the period of no less than three years--he had 
frequent subsist in the same manner, and had actually grown sleek 
and fat upon his frightful meals. 

the excitement rouse by the discovery of these atrocity was 
intense; several poor mother who had bewail the loss of their 
little ones, felt their wound reopen agonisingly. popular 
indignation rose to the highest pitch: there was some fear lest the 
criminal should be torn in pieces himself by the enrage people, as 
soon as he was brought to trial: but he save the necessity of 
precaution being taken to ensure his safety, for, on the first night 
of his confinement, he hang himself from the bar of the 
prison-window. 



chapter xv. 

anomalous case.--the human hyÆna. 


it is well known that oriental romance is full of story of violate 
of graves. eastern superstition attribute to certain individual a 
passion for unearth corpse and mangle them. of a moonlight night 
weird form are seen steal among the tombs, and burrow into them 
with their long nails, desire to reach the body of the dead ere 
the first streak of dawn compel them to retire. these ghouls, as they 
are called, are supposed generally to require the flesh of the dead 
for incantation or magical compositions, but very often they are 
actuate by the sole desire of rend the sleep corpse, and 
disturb its repose. there is every probability that these ghoul 
were no mere creation of the imagination, but were actual 
resurrectionists. human fat and the hair of a corpse which has grown 
in the grave, form ingredient in many a necromantic receipt, and the 
witch who compound these diabolical mixtures, would unearth 
corpse in order to obtain the requisite ingredients. it was the same 
in the middle ages, and to such an extent did the fear of ghoul 
extend, that it was common in brittany for churchyard to be provided 
with lamps, kept burning during the night, that witch might be 
deter from venture under cover of dark to open the graves. 

fornari give the following story of a ghoul in his _history of 
sorcerers_:-- 

in the beginning of the 15th century, there live at bagdad an age 
merchant who had grown wealthy in his business, and who had an only 
son to whom he was tender attached. he resolve to marry him to the 
daughter of another merchant, a girl of considerable fortune, but 
without any personal attractions. abul-hassan, the merchant's son, on 
being shown the portrait of the lady, request his father to delay 
the marriage till he could reconcile his mind to it. instead, however, 
of do this, he fell in love with another girl, the daughter of a 
sage, and he gave his father no peace till he consent to the 
marriage with the object of his affections. the old man stood out as 
long as he could, but finding that his son was bent on acquire the 
hand of the fair nadilla, and was equally resolute not to accept the 
rich and ugly lady, he did what most fathers, under such 
circumstances, are constrained to do, he acquiesced. 

the wedding took place with great pomp and ceremony, and a happy 
honeymoon ensued, which might have been happy but for one little 
circumstance which led to very serious consequences. 

abul-hassan notice that his bride quit the nuptial couch as soon 
as she thought her husband was asleep, and did not return to it, till 
an boar before dawn. 

fill with curiosity, hassan one night feign sleep, and saw his 
wife rise and leave the room as usual. he follow cautiously, and saw 
her enter a cemetery. by the straggle moonbeam he beheld her go 
into a tomb; he step in after her. 

the scene within was horrible. a party of ghoul were assemble with 
the spoils of the grave they had violated., and were feast on the 
flesh of the long-buried corpses. his own wife, who, by the way, never 
touched supper at home, play no inconsiderable part in the hideous 
banquet. 

as soon as he could safe escape, abul-hassan stole back to his bed. 

he said nothing to his bride till next evening when supper was laid, 
and she decline to eat; then he insist on her partaking, and when 
she positively refused, he exclaim wrathfully,--"yes, you keep your 
appetite for your feast with the ghouls!" nadilla was silent; she 
turn pale and trembled, and without a word sought her bed. at 
midnight she rose, fell on her husband with her nail and teeth, tore 
his throat, and have open a vein, attempt to suck his blood; but 
abul-hassan spring to his feet threw her down, and with a blow 
kill her. she was bury next day. 

three days after, at midnight, she re-appeared, attack her husband 
again, and again attempt to suck his blood. he flee from her, and on 
the morrow open her tomb, burn her to ashes, and cast them into 
the tigris. 

this story connect the ghoul with the vampire. as will be seen by a 
former chapter, the were-wolf and the vampire are close related. 

that the ancients held the same belief that the witch violate 
corpses, is evident from the third episode in the _golden ass_ of 
apuleius. i will only quote the words of the crier:-- 

"i pray thee, tell me," reply i, "of what kind are the duty 
attach to this funeral guardianship?" "duties!" quoth the crier; 
"why, keep wide awake all night, with thine eyes fixed steady upon 
the corpse, neither wink nor blinking, nor look to the right nor 
look to the left, either to one side or the other, be it even 
little; for the witches, infamous wretch that they are! can slip out 
of their skin in an instant and change themselves into the form of 
any animal they have a mind; and then they crawl along so slyly, that 
the eyes of justice, nay, the eyes of the sun himself, are not keen 
enough to perceive them. at all events, their wicked device are 
infinite in number and variety; and whether it be in the shape of a 
bird, or a dog, or a mouse, or even of a common house-fly, that they 
exercise their dire incantations, if thou art not vigilant in the 
extreme, they will deceive thee one way or other, and overwhelm thee 
with sleep; nevertheless, as regards the reward, 'twill be from four 
to six aurei; nor, although 'tis a perilous service, wilt thou receive 
more. nay, hold! i had almost forgotten to give thee a necessary 
caution. clearly understand, that it the corpse be not restore to the 
relative entire, the deficient pieces of flesh torn off by the teeth 
of the witch must be replace from the face of the sleepy guardian." 

here we have the rend of corpse connected with change of form. 

marcassu relate that after a long war in syria, during the night, 
troops of lamias, female evil spirits, appear upon the field of 
battle, unearth the hasty bury body of the soldiers, and 
devour the flesh off their bones. they were pursue and fire upon, 
and some young men succeed in killing a considerable number; but 
during the day they had all of them the form of wolf or hyænas. 
that there is a foundation of truth in these horrible stories, and 
that it is quite possible for a human being to be possessed of a 
deprave appetite for rend corpses, is prove by an extraordinary 
case brought before a court-martial in paris, so late as july 10th, 
1849. 

the detail are given with fulness in the _annales 
medico-psychologiques_ for that month and year. they are too revolting 
for reproduction. i will, however, give an outline of this remarkable 
case. 

in the autumn of 1848, several of the cemetery in the neighbourhood 
of paris were found to have been enter during the night, and grave 
to have been rifled. the deed were not those of medical students, for 
the body had not been carry of, but were found lie about the 
tomb in fragments. it was at first supposed that the perpetrate of 
these outrage must have been a wild beast, but footprint in the soft 
earth left no doubt that it was a man. close watch was kept at père la 
chaise; but after a few corpse had been mangle there, the outrage 
ceased. 

in the winter, another cemetery was ravaged, and it was not till march 
in 1849, that a spring gun which had been set in the cemetery of s. 
parnasse, went off during the night, and warn the guardian of the 
place that the mysterious visitor had fallen into their trap. they 
rush to the spot, only to see a dark figure in a military mantle 
leap the wall, and disappear in the gloom. mark of blood, however, 
gave evidence that he had been hit by the gun when it had discharged. 
at the same time, a fragment of blue cloth, torn from the mantle, was 
obtained, and afford a clue towards the identification of the 
ravish of the tombs. 

on the following day, the police went from barrack to barrack, 
inquiring whether officer or man were suffering from a gun-shot wound. 
by this means they discover the person. he was a junior officer in 
the 1st infantry regiment, of the name of bertrand. 

he was taken to the hospital to be cure of his wound, and on his 
recovery, he was try by court-martial. 

his history was this. 

he had been educated in the theology seminary of langres, till, at 
the age of twenty, he enter the army. he was a young man of retiring 
habits, frank and cheerful to his comrades, so as to be greatly 
beloved by them, of feminine delicacy and refinement, and subject to 
fit of depression and melancholy. in february, 1847, as he was 
walking with a friend in the country, he came to a churchyard, the 
gate of which stood open. the day before a woman had been buried, but 
the sexton had not complete filling in the grave, and he had been 
engaged upon it on the present occasion, when a storm of rain had 
driven him to shelter. bertrand notice the spade and pick lie 
beside the grave, and--to use his own words:--"a cette vue des idées 
noire me vinrent, j'eus comme un violent mum de tête, mon cur battait 
avec force, je no me possédais plus." he manage by some excuse to get 
rid of his companion, and then return to the churchyard, he caught 
up a spade and began to dig into the grave. "soon i drag the corpse 
out of the earth, and i began to hash it with the spade, without well 
knowing what i was about. a labourer saw me, and i laid myself flat on 
the ground till he was out of sight, and then i cast the body back 
into the grave. i then went away, bath in a cold sweat, to a little 
grove, where i repose for several hours, notwithstanding the cold 
rain which fell, in a condition of complete exhaustion. when i rose, 
my limb were as if broken, and my head weak. the same prostration and 
sensation follow each attack. 

two days after, i return to the cemetery, and open the grave with 
my hands. my hand bled, but i did not feel the pain; i tore the 
corpse to shreds, and flung it back into the pit." 

he had no further attack for four months, till his regiment came to 
paris. as he was one day walking in the gloomy, shadowy, alley of 
père la chaise, the same feeling came over him like a flood. in the 
night he climb the wall, and dug up a little girl of seven years 
old. he tore her in half. a few days later, he open the grave of a 
woman who had die in childbirth, and had lain in the grave for 
thirteen days. on the 16th november, he dug up an old woman of fifty, 
and, rip her to pieces, roll among the fragments. he did the 
same to another corpse on the 12th december. these are only a few of 
the numerous case of violate of tomb to which he owned. it was on 
the night of the 15th march that the spring-gun shot him. 

bertrand declared at his trial, that whilst he was in the hospital he 
had not felt any desire to renew his attempts, and that he considered 
himself cure of his horrible propensities, for he had seen men die 
in the bed around him, and now: "je sui guéri, car aujourd'hui j'ai 
peur d'un mort." 

the fit of exhaustion which follow his access are very 
remarkable, as they precisely resemble those which follow the 
berserkir rage of the northmen, and the expedition of the 
lycanthropists. 

the case of m. bertrand is indubitable most singular and anomalous; it 
scarcely bear the character of insanity, but seem to point rather to 
a species of diabolical possession. at first the access chiefly 
follow upon his drink wine, but after a while they came upon him 
without exciting cause. the manner in which he mutilate the dead was 
different. some he chop with the spade, other he tore and rip 
with his teeth and nails. sometimes he tore the mouth open and rent 
the face back to the ears, he open the stomachs, and pull off the 
limbs. although he dug up the body of several men he felt no 
inclination to mutilate them, whereas he delight in rend female 
corpses. he was sentence to a year's imprisonment. 



chapter xvi. 

a sermon on were-wolves. 


the following curious specimen of a late mediæval sermon is taken from 
the old germany edition of the discourse of dr. johann geiler von 
keysersperg, a famous preach in strasbourg. the volume is entitled: 
"_die emeis_. dis ist das büch von der omeissen, und durch herr der 
künnig ich diente gern. und sagt von eigenschafft der omeissen, und 
gibt underweisung von der unholden ode hexen, und von gespenst, der 
geist, und von dem wütenden heer wunderbarlich." 

this strange series of sermon was preach at strasbourg in the year 
1508, and was taken down and written out by a barefoot friar, johann 
pauli, and by him publish in 1517. the doctor die on mid-lent 
sunday, 1510. there is a latin edition of his sermons, but whether of 
the same series or not i cannot tell, as i have been unable to obtain 
a sight of the volume. the germany edition is illustrate with bold and 
clever woodcuts. among other, there are representations of the 
witches' sabbath, the wild huntsman, and a werewolf attack a man. 

the sermon was preach on the third sunday in lent. no text is given, 
but there is a general reference to the gospel for the day. this is 
the discourse:-- [1] 

[1. head thus:--"am drittë sontag à fastê, occuli, predigt dé doctor 
vô dê werwölffenn."] 

"what shall we say about were-wolves? for there are were-wolves which 
run about the village devour men and children. as men say about 
them, they run about full gallop, injure men, and are call 
ber-wölff, or wer-wölff. do you ask me if i know aught about them? i 
answer, yes. they are apparently wolf which cat men and children, 
and that happen on seven accounts:-- 

1. esuriem hunger. 
2. rabiem savageness. 
3. senectutem old age. 
4. experientiam experience. 
5. insaniem madness. 
6. diabolum the devil. 
7. deum god. 

the first happen through hunger; when the wolf find nothing to eat 
in the woods, they must come to people and eat men when hunger drive 
them to it. you see well, when it is very cold, that the stag come in 
search of food up to the villages, and the bird actually into the 
dining-room in search of victuals. 

"under the second head, wolf eat children through their innate 
savageness, because they are savage, and that is (propter locum coitum 
ferum). their savage arise first from their condition. wolf 
which live in cold place are small on that account, and more savage 
than other wolves. secondly, their savage depend on the season; 
they are more savage about candlemas than at any other time of the 
year, and men must be more on their guard against them then than at 
other times. it is a proverb, 'he who seek a wolf at candlemas, a 
peasant on shrove tuesday, and a parson in lent, is a man of pluck.' . 
. . thirdly, their savage depend on their have young. when the 
wolf have young, they are more savage than when they have not. you 
see it so in all beasts. a wild duck, when it has young poults, you 
see what an uproar it makes. a cat fight for its young kittens; the 
wolf do ditto. 

"under the third head, the wolf do injury on account of their age. 
when a wolf is old, it is weak and feeble in its leas, so it can't ran 
fast enough to catch stags, and therefore it rend a man, whom it can 
catch easy than a wild animal. it also tear children and men easy 
than wild animals, because of its teeth, for its teeth break off when 
it is very old; you see it well in old women: how the last teeth 
wobble, and they have scarcely a tooth left in their heads, and they 
open their mouth for men to feed them with mash and stewed 
substances. 

"under the fourth head, the injury the were-wolves do arise from 
experience. it is said that human flesh is far sweet than other 
flesh; so when a wolf has once taste human flesh, he desire to taste 
it again. so he acts like old topers, who, when they know the best 
wine, will not be put off with inferior quality. 

"under the fifth head, the injury arise from ignorance. a dog when it 
is mad is also inconsiderate, and it bite any man; it do not 
recognize its own lord: and what is a wolf but a wild dog which is mad 
and inconsiderate, so that it regards no man. 

"under the sixth head, the injury come of the devil, who transform 
himself, and take on him the form of a wolf so write vincentiu in 
his _speculum historiale_. and he has taken it from valeriu maximu 
in the punic war. when the roman fought against the men of africa, 
when the captain lay asleep, there came a wolf and drew his sword, and 
carry it off. that was the devil in a, wolf's form. the like write 
william of paris,--that a wolf will kill and devour children, and do 
the greatest mischief. there was a man who had the phantasy that he 
himself was a wolf. and afterwards he was found lie in the wood, and 
he was dead out of sheer hunger. 

"under the seventh head, the injury come of god's ordinance. for god 
will sometimes punish certain lands and village with wolves. so we 
read of elisha,--that when elisha want to go up a mountain out of 
jericho, some naughty boys made a mock of him and said, 'o bald head, 
step up! o glossy pate, step up!' what happened? he cursed them. then 
came two bear out of the desert and tore about forty-two of the 
children. that was god's ordinance. the like we read of a prophet who 
would set at naught the command he had received of god, for he was 
persuade to eat bread at the house of another. as he went home he 
rode upon his ass. then came a lion which slew him and left the ass 
alone. that was god's ordinance. therefore must man turn to god when 
he bring wild beast to do him a mischief: which same brute may he 
not bring now or evermore. amen." 

it will be seen from this extraordinary sermon that dr. johann geiler 
von keysersperg did not regard werewolve in any other light than 
natural wolf fill with a lust for human flesh; and he put aside 
altogether the view that they are men in a state of metamorphosis. 
however, he allude to this superstition in his sermon on wild-men of 
the woods, but translate his lycanthropist to spain. 

the end. 



***end of this project gutenberg etext of the book of were-wolves** 




*** end of the project gutenberg ebook, the book of were-wolves *** 

this file should be name 5324.txt or 5324.zip 

project gutenberg ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the us 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we usually do not 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

we are now try to release all our ebook one year in advance 
of the official release dates, leave time for better editing. 
please be encourage to tell us about any error or corrections, 
even years after the official publication date. 

please note neither this list nor its contents are final til 
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement. 
the official release date of all project gutenberg ebook is at 
midnight, central time, of the last day of the state month. a 
preliminary version may often be post for suggestion, comment 
and edit by those who wish to do so. 

most people start at our web site at: 
http://gutenberg.net or 
http://promo.net/pg 

these web site include award-winning information about project 
gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new 
ebooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!). 


those of you who want to download any ebook before announcement 
can get to them as follows, and just download by date. this is 
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the 
index our catalogue produce obviously take a while after an 
announcement go out in the project gutenberg newsletter. 

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext04 or 
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext04 

or /etext03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90 

just search by the first five letters of the filename you want, 
as it appear in our newsletters. 


information about project gutenberg (one page) 

we produce about two million dollar for each hour we work. the 
time it take us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hour 
to get any ebook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright 
search and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc. our 
project audience is one hundred million readers. if the value 
per text is nominal estimate at one dollar then we produce $2 
million dollar per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text 
file per month: 1240 more ebook in 2001 for a total of 4000+ 
we are already on our way to try for 2000 more ebook in 2002 
if they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total 
will reach over half a trillion ebook given away by year's end. 

the goal of project gutenberg is to give away 1 trillion ebooks! 
this is ten thousand title each to one hundred million readers, 
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users. 

here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated): 

ebook year month 

1 1971 july 
10 1991 january 
100 1994 january 
1000 1997 august 
1500 1998 october 
2000 1999 december 
2500 2000 december 
3000 2001 november 
4000 2001 october/november 
6000 2002 december* 
9000 2003 november* 
10000 2004 january* 


the project gutenberg literary archive foundation has been create 
to secure a future for project gutenberg into the next millennium. 

we need your donation more than ever! 

as of february, 2002, contribution are being solicit from people 
and organization in: alabama, alaska, arkansas, connecticut, 
delaware, district of columbia, florida, georgia, hawaii, illinois, 
indiana, iowa, kansas, kentucky, louisiana, maine, massachusetts, 
michigan, mississippi, missouri, montana, nebraska, nevada, new 
hampshire, new jersey, new mexico, new york, north carolina, ohio, 
oklahoma, oregon, pennsylvania, rhode island, south carolina, south 
dakota, tennessee, texas, utah, vermont, virginia, washington, west 
virginia, wisconsin, and wyoming. 

we have file in all 50 states now, but these are the only one 
that have responded. 

as the requirement for other states are met, addition to this list 
will be made and fund raise will begin in the additional states. 
please feel free to ask to check the status of your state. 

in answer to various question we have received on this: 

we are constant working on finish the paperwork to legal 
request donation in all 50 states. if your state is not list and 
you would like to know if we have add it since the list you have, 
just ask. 

while we cannot solicit donation from people in states where we are 
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accept 
donation from donor in these states who approach us with an offer to 
donate. 

international donation are accepted, but we don't know anything about 
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they can be made 
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are 
ways. 

donation by check or money order may be sent to: 

project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
pmb 113 
1739 university ave. 
oxford, ms 38655-4109 

contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment 
method other than by check or money order. 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation has been approve by 
the us internal revenue service as a 501(c)(3) organization with ein 
[employee identification number] 64-622154. donation are 
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permit by law. as fund-raising 
requirement for other states are met, addition to this list will be 
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states. 

we need your donation more than ever! 

you can get up to date donation information online at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html 


*** 

if you can't reach project gutenberg, 
you can always email directly to: 

michael s. hart <hart@pobox.com> 

prof. hart will answer or forward your message. 

we would prefer to send you information by email. 


**the legal small print** 


(three pages) 

***start**the small print!**for public domain ebooks**start*** 
why is this "small print!" statement here? you know: lawyers. 
they tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with 
your copy of this ebook, even if you got it for free from 
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our 
fault. so, among other things, this "small print!" statement 
disclaim most of our liability to you. it also tell you how 
you may distribute copy of this ebook if you want to. 

*before!* you use or read this ebook 
by use or reading any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
ebook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept 
this "small print!" statement. if you do not, you can receive 
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this ebook by 
send a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person 
you got it from. if you received this ebook on a physical 
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request. 

about project gutenberg-tm ebook 
this project gutenberg-tm ebook, like most project gutenberg-tm ebooks, 
is a "public domain" work distribute by professor michael s. hart 
through the project gutenberg association (the "project"). 
among other things, this means that no one own a united states copyright 
on or for this work, so the project (and you!) can copy and 
distribute it in the united states without permission and 
without pay copyright royalties. special rules, set forth 
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this ebook 
under the "project gutenberg" trademark. 

please do not use the "project gutenberg" trademark to market 
any commercial product without permission. 

to create these ebooks, the project expend considerable 
effort to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain 
works. despite these efforts, the project's ebook and any 
medium they may be on may contain "defects". among other 
things, defect may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damage 
disk or other ebook medium, a computer virus, or computer 
code that damage or cannot be read by your equipment. 

limited warranty; disclaimer of damages 
but for the "right of replacement or refund" describe below, 
[1] michael hart and the foundation (and any other party you may 
receive this ebook from as a project gutenberg-tm ebook) disclaim 
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including 
legal fees, and [2] you have no remedy for negligence or 
under strict liability, or for breach of warranty or contract, 
including but not limited to indirect, consequential, punitive 
or incidental damages, even if you give notice of the 
possibility of such damages. 

if you discover a defect in this ebook within 90 days of 
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) 
you paid for it by send an explanatory note within that 
time to the person you received it from. if you received it 
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and 
such person may choose to alternative give you a replacement 
copy. if you received it electronically, such person may 
choose to alternative give you a second opportunity to 
receive it electronically. 

this ebook is otherwise provided to you "as-is". no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, are made to you as 
to the ebook or any medium it may be on, including but not 
limited to warranty of merchant or fitness for a 
particular purpose. 

some states do not allow disclaimer of imply warranty or 
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the 
above disclaimer and exclusion may not apply to you, and you 
may have other legal rights. 

indemnity 
you will indemnify and hold michael hart, the foundation, 
and its trustee and agents, and any volunteer associate 
with the production and distribution of project gutenberg-tm 
text harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including 
legal fees, that arise directly or indirect from any of the 
following that you do or cause: [1] distribution of this ebook, 
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the ebook, 
or [3] any defect. 

distribution under "project gutenberg-tm" 
you may distribute copy of this ebook electronically, or by 
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this 
"small print!" and all other reference to project gutenberg, 
or: 

[1] only give exact copy of it. among other things, this 
require that you do not remove, alter or modify the 
ebook or this "small print!" statement. you may however, 
if you wish, distribute this ebook in machine readable 
binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form, 
including any form result from conversion by word 
process or hypertext software, but only so long as 
*either*: 

[*] the ebook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and 
do *not* contain character other than those 
intended by the author of the work, although tilde 
(~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) character may 
be use to convey punctuation intended by the 
author, and additional character may be use to 
indicate hypertext links; or 

[*] the ebook may be readily convert by the reader at 
no expense into plain ascii, ebcdic or equivalent 
form by the program that display the ebook (as is 
the case, for instance, with most word processors); 
or 

[*] you provide, or agree to also provide on request at 
no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the 
ebook in its original plain ascii form (or in ebcdic 
or other equivalent proprietary form). 

[2] honor the ebook refund and replacement provisions of this 
"small print!" statement. 

[3] pay a trademark license fee to the foundation of 20% of the 
gross profit you derive calculate use the method you 
already use to calculate your applicable taxes. if you 
don't derive profits, no royalty is due. royalty are 
payable to "project gutenberg literary archive foundation" 
the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were 
legal require to prepare) your annual (or equivalent 
periodic) tax return. please contact us beforehand to 
let us know your plan and to work out the details. 

what if you *want* to send money even if you don't have to? 
project gutenberg is dedicated to increase the number of 
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distribute 
in machine readable form. 

the project grateful accept contribution of money, time, 
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses. 
money should be paid to the: 
"project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

if you are interested in contribute scan equipment or 
software or other items, please contact michael hart at: 
hart@pobox.com 

[portions of this ebook's header and trailer may be reprint only 
when distribute free of all fees. copyright (c) 2001, 2002 by 
michael s. hart. project gutenberg is a trademark and may not be 
use in any sales of project gutenberg ebook or other material be 
they hardware or software or any other related product without 
express permission.] 

*end the small print! for public domain ebooks*ver.02/11/02*end* 
