the project gutenberg ebook, the lair of the white worm, by bram stoker 


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 





title: the lair of the white worm 


author: bram stoker 

release date: march 27, 2005 [ebook #1188] 

language: english 

character set encoding: iso-646-us (us-ascii) 


***start of the project gutenberg ebook the lair of the white worm*** 





transcribe form the 1911 w. foulsham & co. ltd. edition by david price, 
email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk 





the lair of the white worm 


to my friend bertha nicoll with affectionate esteem. 




chapter i--adam salton arrive 


adam salton saunter into the empire club, sydney, and found await 
him a letter from his grand-uncle. he had first heard from the old 
gentleman less than a year before, when richard salton had claim 
kinship, state that he had been unable to write earlier, as he had 
found it very difficult to trace his grand-nephew's address. adam was 
delight and reply cordially; he had often heard his father speak of 
the old branch of the family with whom his people had long lost touch. 
some interesting correspondence had ensued. adam eager open the 
letter which had only just arrived, and convey a cordial invitation to 
stop with his grand-uncle at lesser hill, for as long a time as he could 
spare. 

"indeed," richard salton went on, "i am in hope that you will make your 
permanent home here. you see, my dear boy, you and i are all that remain 
of our race, and it is but fitting that you should succeed me when the 
time comes. in this year of grace, 1860, i am close on eighty years of 
age, and though we have been a long-lived race, the span of life cannot 
be prolonged beyond reasonable bounds. i am prepared to like you, and to 
make your home with me as happy as you could wish. so do come at once on 
receipt of this, and find the welcome i am wait to give you. i send, 
in case such may make matter easy for you, a banker's draft for 200 
pounds. come soon, so that we may both of us enjoy many happy days 
together. if you are able to give me the pleasure of seeing you, send me 
as soon as you can a letter telling me when to expect you. then when you 
arrive at plymouth or southampton or whatever port you are bound for, 
wait on board, and i will meet you at the earliest hour possible." 

* * * * * 

old mr. salton was delight when adam's reply arrive and sent a groom 
hot-foot to his crony, sir nathaniel de salis, to inform him that his 
grand-nephew was due at southampton on the twelfth of june. 

mr. salton gave instruction to have ready a carriage early on the 
important day, to start for stafford, where he would catch the 11.40 a.m. 
train. he would stay that night with his grand-nephew, either on the 
ship, which would be a new experience for him, or, if his guest should 
prefer it, at a hotel. in either case they would start in the early 
morning for home. he had given instruction to his bailiff to send the 
postillion carriage on to southampton, to be ready for their journey 
home, and to arrange for relay of his own horse to be sent on at once. 
he intended that his grand-nephew, who had been all his life in 
australia, should see something of rural england on the drive. he had 
plenty of young horse of his own breeding and breaking, and could depend 
on a journey memorable to the young man. the luggage would be sent on by 
rail to stafford, where one of his cart would meet it. mr. salton, 
during the journey to southampton, often wonder if his grand-nephew was 
as much excited as he was at the idea of meeting so near a relation for 
the first time; and it was with an effort that he control himself. the 
endless railway lines and switch round the southampton dock fire his 
anxiety afresh. 

as the train drew up on the dockside, he was get his hand trap 
together, when the carriage door was wrench open and a young man jump 
in. 

"how are you, uncle? i recognise you from the photo you sent me! i 
want to meet you as soon as i could, but everything is so strange to me 
that i didn't quite know what to do. however, here i am. i am glad to 
see you, sir. i have been dream of this happiness for thousand of 
miles; now i find that the reality beat all the dreaming!" as he spoke 
the old man and the young one were heartily wring each other's hands. 

the meeting so auspicious begun proceed well. adam, seeing that the 
old man was interested in the novelty of the ship, suggest that he 
should stay the night on board, and that he would himself be ready to 
start at any hour and go anywhere that the other suggested. this 
affectionate willing to fall in with his own plan quite won the old 
man's heart. he warm accept the invitation, and at once they became 
not only on terms of affectionate relationship, but almost like old 
friends. the heart of the old man, which had been empty for so long, 
found a new delight. the young man found, on landing in the old country, 
a welcome and a surrounding in full harmony with all his dream 
throughout his wanderings and solitude, and the promise of a fresh and 
adventurous life. it was not long before the old man accept him to 
full relationship by calling him by his christian name. after a long 
talk on affair of interest, they retired to the cabin, which the elder 
was to share. richard salton put his hand affectionate on the boy's 
shoulders--though adam was in his twenty-seventh year, he was a boy, and 
always would be, to his grand-uncle. 

"i am so glad to find you as you are, my dear boy--just such a young man 
as i had always hope for as a son, in the days when i still had such 
hopes. however, that is all past. but thank god there is a new life to 
begin for both of us. to you must be the large part--but there is still 
time for some of it to be share in common. i have wait till we should 
have seen each other to enter upon the subject; for i thought it better 
not to tie up your young life to my old one till we should have 
sufficient personal knowledge to justify such a venture. now i can, so 
far as i am concerned, enter into it freely, since from the moment my 
eyes rest on you i saw my son--as he shall be, god willing--if he 
choose such a course himself." 

"indeed i do, sir--with all my heart!" 

"thank you, adam, for that." the old, man's eyes fill and his voice 
trembled. then, after a long silence between them, he went on: "when i 
heard you were coming i made my will. it was well that your interests 
should be protect from that moment on. here is the deed--keep it, 
adam. all i have shall belong to you; and if love and good wishes, or 
the memory of them, can make life sweeter, yours shall be a happy one. 
now, my dear boy, let us turn in. we start early in the morning and have 
a long drive before us. i hope you don't mind driving? i was go to 
have the old travel carriage in which my grandfather, your 
great-grand-uncle, went to court when william iv. was king. it is all 
right--they built well in those days--and it has been kept in perfect 
order. but i think i have done better: i have sent the carriage in which 
i travel myself. the horse are of my own breeding, and relay of them 
shall take us all the way. i hope you like horses? they have long been 
one of my greatest interests in life." 

"i love them, sir, and i am happy to say i have many of my own. my 
father gave me a horse farm for myself when i was eighteen. i devoted 
myself to it, and it has gone on. before i came away, my steward gave me 
a memorandum that we have in my own place more than a thousand, nearly 
all good." 

"i am glad, my boy. another link between us." 

"just fancy what a delight it will be, sir, to see so much of england--and 
with you!" 

"thank you again, my boy. i will tell you all about your future home and 
its surroundings as we go. we shall travel in old-fashioned state, i 
tell you. my grandfather always drove four-in-hand; and so shall we." 

"oh, thanks, sir, thanks. may i take the ribbon sometimes?" 

"whenever you choose, adam. the team is your own. every horse we use to- 
day is to be your own." 

"you are too generous, uncle!" 

"not at all. only an old man's selfish pleasure. it is not every day 
that an heir to the old home come back. and--oh, by the way . . . no, 
we had better turn in now--i shall tell you the rest in the morning." 




chapter ii--the caswall of castra regi 


mr. salton had all his life been an early riser, and necessarily an early 
waker. but early as he woke on the next morning--and although there was 
an excuse for not prolong sleep in the constant whirr and rattle of 
the "donkey" engine winch of the great ship--he met the eyes of adam 
fixed on him from his berth. his grand-nephew had given him the sofa, 
occupy the lower berth himself. the old man, despite his great 
strength and normal activity, was somewhat tired by his long journey of 
the day before, and the prolonged and exciting interview which follow 
it. so he was glad to lie still and rest his body, whilst his mind was 
active exercise in taking in all he could of his strange surroundings. 
adam, too, after the pastoral habit to which he had been bred, woke with 
the dawn, and was ready to enter on the experience of the new day 
whenever it might suit his elder companion. it was little wonder, then, 
that, so soon as each realise the other's readiness, they simultaneous 
jump up and began to dress. the steward had by previous instruction 
early breakfast prepared, and it was not long before they went down the 
gangway on shore in search of the carriage. 

they found mr. salton's bailiff look out for them on the dock, and he 
brought them at once to where the carriage was wait in the street. 
richard salton pointed out with pride to his young companion the 
suitability of the vehicle for every need of travel. to it were 
harness four useful horses, with a postillion to each pair. 

"see," said the old man proudly, "how it has all the luxury of useful 
travel--silence and isolation as well as speed. there is nothing to 
obstruct the view of those travel and no one to overhear what they 
may say. i have use that trap for a quarter of a century, and i never 
saw one more suitable for travel. you shall test it shortly. we are 
go to drive through the heart of england; and as we go i'll tell you 
what i was speak of last night. our route is to be by salisbury, 
bath, bristol, cheltenham, worcester, stafford; and so home." 

adam remain silent a few minutes, during which he seem all eyes, for 
he perpetual range the whole circle of the horizon. 

"has our journey to-day, sir," he asked, "any special relation to what 
you said last night that you want to tell me?" 

"not directly; but indirectly, everything." 

"won't you tell me now--i see we cannot be overheard--and if anything 
strike you as we go along, just run it in. i shall understand." 

so old salton spoke: 

"to begin at the beginning, adam. that lecture of yours on 'the roman 
in britain,' a report of which you post to me, set me thinking--in 
addition to telling me your tastes. i wrote to you at once and ask you 
to come home, for it struck me that if you were fond of historical 
research--as seem a fact--this was exactly the place for you, in 
addition to its being the home of your own forbears. if you could learn 
so much of the britain roman so far away in new south wales, where there 
cannot be even a tradition of them, what might you not make of the same 
amount of study on the very spot. where we are go is in the real 
heart of the old kingdom of mercia, where there are trace of all the 
various nationality which made up the conglomerate which became 
britain." 

"i rather gather that you had some more definite--more personal reason 
for my hurrying. after all, history can keep--except in the making!" 

"quite right, my boy. i had a reason such as you very wise guessed. i 
was anxious for you to be here when a rather important phase of our local 
history occurred." 

"what is that, if i may ask, sir?" 

"certainly. the principal landowner of our part of the county is on his 
way home, and there will be a great home-coming, which you may care to 
see. the fact is, for more than a century the various owner in the 
succession here, with the exception of a short time, have live abroad." 

"how is that, sir, if i may ask?" 

"the great house and estate in our part of the world is castra regis, the 
family seat of the caswall family. the last owner who live here was 
edgar caswall, grandfather of the man who is coming here--and he was the 
only one who stay even a short time. this man's grandfather, also 
name edgar--they keep the tradition of the family christian 
name--quarrelled with his family and went to live abroad, not keeping up 
any intercourse, good or bad, with his relatives, although this 
particular edgar, as i told you, did visit his family estate, yet his son 
was born and live and die abroad, while his grandson, the latest 
inheritor, was also born and live abroad till he was over thirty--his 
present age. this was the second line of absentees. the great estate of 
castra regi has had no knowledge of its owner for five 
generations--covering more than a hundred and twenty years. it has been 
well administered, however, and no tenant or other connected with it has 
had anything of which to complain. all the same, there has been much 
natural anxiety to see the new owner, and we are all excited about the 
event of his coming. even i am, though i own my own estate, which, 
though adjacent, is quite apart from castra regis.--here we are now in 
new ground for you. that is the spire of salisbury cathedral, and when 
we leave that we shall be get close to the old roman county, and you 
will naturally want your eyes. so we shall shortly have to keep our 
mind on old mercia. however, you need not be disappointed. my old 
friend, sir nathaniel de salis, who, like myself, is a free-holder near 
castra regis--his estate, doom tower, is over the border of derbyshire, 
on the peak--is coming to stay with me for the festivity to welcome 
edgar caswall. he is just the sort of man you will like. he is devoted 
to history, and is president of the mercian archaeology society. he 
know more of our own part of the country, with its history and its 
people, than anyone else. i expect he will have arrive before us, and 
we three can have a long chat after dinner. he is also our local 
geologist and natural historian. so you and he will have many interests 
in common. amongst other things he has a special knowledge of the peak 
and its caverns, and know all the old legend of prehistoric times." 

they spent the night at cheltenham, and on the following morning resume 
their journey to stafford. adam's eyes were in constant employment, and 
it was not till salton declared that they had now enter on the last 
stage of their journey, that he refer to sir nathaniel's coming. 

as the dusk was close down, they drove on to lesser hill, mr. salton's 
house. it was now too dark to see any detail of their surroundings. 
adam could just see that it was on the top of a hill, not quite so high 
as that which was cover by the castle, on whose tower flew the flag, 
and which was all ablaze with moving lights, manifest use in the 
preparation for the festivity on the morrow. so adam defer his 
curiosity till daylight. his grand-uncle was met at the door by a fine 
old man, who greet him warmly. 

"i came over early as you wished. i suppose this is your grand-nephew--i 
am glad to meet you, mr. adam salton. i am nathaniel de salis, and your 
uncle is one of my oldest friends." 

adam, from the moment of their eyes meeting, felt as if they were already 
friends. the meeting was a new note of welcome to those that had already 
sound in his ears. 

the cordiality with which sir nathaniel and adam met, made the impart 
of information easy. sir nathaniel was a clever man of the world, who 
had travelled much, and within a certain area studied deeply. he was a 
brilliant conversationalist, as was to be expect from a successful 
diplomatist, even under unstimulate conditions. but he had been 
touched and to a certain extent fire by the younger man's evident 
admiration and willing to learn from him. accordingly the 
conversation, which began on the most friendly basis, soon warm to an 
interest above proof, as the old man spoke of it next day to richard 
salton. he knew already that his old friend want his grand-nephew to 
learn all he could of the subject in hand, and so had during his journey 
from the peak put his thought in sequence for narration and explanation. 
accordingly, adam had only to listen and he must learn much that he 
want to know. when dinner was over and the servant had withdrawn, 
leave the three men at their wine, sir nathaniel began. 

"i gather from your uncle--by the way, i suppose we had better speak of 
you as uncle and nephew, instead of go into exact relationship? in 
fact, your uncle is so old and dear a friend, that, with your permission, 
i shall drop formality with you altogether and speak of you and to you as 
adam, as though you were his son." 

"i should like," answer the young man, "nothing better!" 

the answer warm the heart of both the old men, but, with the usual 
avoidance of englishmen of emotional subject personal to themselves, 
they instinctive return to the previous question. sir nathaniel took 
the lead. 

"i understand, adam, that your uncle has post you regarding the 
relationship of the caswall family?" 

"partly, sir; but i understood that i was to hear minute detail from 
you--if you would be so good." 

"i shall be delight to tell you anything so far as my knowledge goes. 
well, the first caswall in our immediate record is an edgar, head of the 
family and owner of the estate, who came into his kingdom just about the 
time that george iii. did. he had one son of about twenty-four. there 
was a violent quarrel between the two. no one of this generation has any 
idea of the cause; but, considering the family characteristics, we may 
take it for grant that though it was deep and violent, it was on the 
surface trivial. 

"the result of the quarrel was that the son left the house without a 
reconciliation or without even telling his father where he was going. he 
never came back again. a few years after, he died, without have in the 
meantime exchange a word or a letter with his father. he married abroad 
and left one son, who seem to have been brought up in ignorance of all 
belong to him. the gulf between them appear to have been 
unbridgable; for in time this son married and in turn had a son, but 
neither joy nor sorrow brought the sunder together. under such 
conditions no _rapprochement_ was to be look for, and an utter 
indifference, found at best on ignorance, took the place of family 
affection--even on community of interests. it was only due to the 
watchful of the lawyer that the birth of this new heir was ever made 
known. he actually spent a few month in the ancestral home. 

"after this the family interest merely rest on heirship of the estate. 
as no other children have been born to any of the new generation in 
the intervene years, all hope of heritage are now centre in the 
grandson of this man. 

"now, it will be well for you to bear in mind the prevailing 
characteristic of this race. these were well preserve and unchanging; 
one and all they are the same: cold, selfish, dominant, reckless of 
consequence in pursuit of their own will. it was not that they did not 
keep faith, though that was a matter which gave them little concern, but 
that they took care to think beforehand of what they should do in order 
to gain their own ends. if they should make a mistake, someone else 
should bear the burthen of it. this was so perpetual recurrent that it 
seem to be a part of a fixed policy. it was no wonder that, whatever 
change took place, they were always ensure in their own possessions. 
they were absolutely cold and hard by nature. not one of them--so far as 
we have any knowledge--was ever known to be touched by the soft 
sentiments, to swerve from his purpose, or hold his hand in obedience to 
the dictate of his heart. the pictures and effigy of them all show 
their adherence to the early roman type. their eyes were full; their 
hair, of raven blackness, grew thick and close and curly. their figures 
were massive and typical of strength. 

"the thick black hair, grow low down on the neck, told of vast 
physical strength and endurance. but the most remarkable characteristic 
is the eyes. black, piercing, almost unendurable, they seem to contain 
in themselves a remarkable will power which there is no gainsaying. it 
is a power that is partly racial and partly individual: a power 
impregnate with some mysterious quality, partly hypnotic, partly 
mesmeric, which seem to take away from eyes that meet them all power of 
resistance--nay, all power of wish to resist. with eyes like those, 
set in that all-commanding face, one would need to be strong indeed to 
think of resist the inflexible will that lay behind. 

"you may think, adam, that all this is imagination on my part, especially 
as i have never seen any of them. so it is, but imagination base on 
deep study. i have made use of all i know or can surmise logically 
regarding this strange race. with such strange compel qualities, is 
it any wonder that there is abroad an idea that in the race there is some 
demoniac possession, which tend to a more definite belief that certain 
individual have in the past sold themselves to the devil? 

"but i think we had better go to bed now. we have a lot to get through 
to-morrow, and i want you to have your brain clear, and all your 
susceptibilities fresh. moreover, i want you to come with me for an 
early walk, during which we may notice, whilst the matter is fresh in our 
minds, the peculiar disposition of this place--not merely your 
grand-uncle's estate, but the lie of the country around it. there are 
many things on which we may seek--and perhaps find--enlightenment. the 
more we know at the start, the more things which may come into our view 
will develop themselves." 




chapter iii--diana's grove 


curiosity took adam salton out of bed in the early morning, but when he 
had dress and gone downstairs; he found that, early as he was, sir 
nathaniel was ahead of him. the old gentleman was quite prepared for a 
long walk, and they start at once. 

sir nathaniel, without speaking, led the way to the east, down the hill. 
when they had descended and risen again, they found themselves on the 
eastern brink of a steep hill. it was of lesser height than that on 
which the castle was situated; but it was so placed that it command the 
various hill that crown the ridge. all along the ridge the rock 
crop out, bare and bleak, but broken in rough natural castellation. 
the form of the ridge was a segment of a circle, with the higher points 
inland to the west. in the centre rose the castle, on the highest point 
of all. between the various rocky excrescence were group of tree of 
various size and heights, amongst some of which were what, in the early 
morning light, look like ruins. these--whatever they were--were of 
massive grey stone, probably limestone rudely cut--if indeed they were 
not shaped naturally. the fall of the ground was steep all along the 
ridge, so steep that here and there both tree and rocks and building 
seem to overhang the plain far below, through which ran many streams. 

sir nathaniel stop and look around, as though to lose nothing of the 
effect. the sun had climb the eastern sky and was making all detail 
clear. he pointed with a sweeping gesture, as though calling adam's 
attention to the extent of the view. have done so, he cover the 
ground more slowly, as though inviting attention to detail. adam was a 
willing and attentive pupil, and follow his motions exactly, missing--or 
try to miss--nothing. 

"i have brought you here, adam, because it seem to me that this is the 
spot on which to begin our investigations. you have now in front of you 
almost the whole of the ancient kingdom of mercia. in fact, we see the 
whole of it except that furthest part, which is cover by the welsh 
march and those parts which are hidden from where we stand by the high 
ground of the immediate west. we can see--theoretically--the whole of 
the eastern bound of the kingdom, which ran south from the humber to the 
wash. i want you to bear in mind the trend of the ground, for some time, 
soon or later, we shall do well to have it in our mind's eye when we 
are considering the ancient tradition and superstitions, and are try 
to find the _rationale_ of them. each legend, each superstition which we 
receive, will help in the understanding and possible elucidate of the 
others. and as all such have a local basis, we can come close to the 
truth--or the probability--by knowing the local conditions as we go 
along. it will help us to bring to our aid such geology truth as we 
may have between us. for instance, the building material use in 
various age can afford their own lesson to understanding eyes. the 
very heights and shape and material of these hills--nay, even of the 
wide plain that lie between us and the sea--have in themselves the 
material of enlighten books." 

"for instance, sir?" said adam, venture a question. 

"well, look at those hill which surround the main one where the site for 
the castle was wise chosen--on the highest ground. take the others. 
there is something ostensible in each of them, and in all probability 
something unseen and unproved, but to be imagined, also." 

"for instance?" continue adam. 

"let us take them _seriatim_. that to the east, where the tree are, 
lower down--that was once the location of a roman temple, possibly 
found on a pre-existing druid one. its name imply the former, 
and the grove of ancient oak suggest the latter." 

"please explain." 

"the old name translate means 'diana's grove.' then the next one higher 
than it, but just beyond it, is call '_mercy_'--in all probability a 
corruption or familiarise of the word _mercia_, with a roman pun 
included. we learn from early manuscript that the place was call 
_vilula misericordiae_. it was originally a nunnery, found by queen 
bertha, but done away with by king penda, the reactionary to paganism 
after st. augustine. then come your uncle's place--lesser hill. though 
it is so close to the castle, it is not connected with it. it is a 
freehold, and, so far as we know, of equal age. it has always belong 
to your family." 

"then there only remains the castle!" 

"that is all; but its history contain the history of all the others--in 
fact, the whole history of early england." sir nathaniel, seeing the 
expectant look on adam's face, went on: 

"the history of the castle has no beginning so far as we know. the 
furthest record or surmise or inference simply accept it as existing. 
some of these--guesses, let us call them--seem to show that there was 
some sort of structure there when the roman came, therefore it must have 
been a place of importance in druid times--if indeed that was the 
beginning. naturally the roman accept it, as they did everything of 
the kind that was, or might be, useful. the change is shown or infer 
in the name castra. it was the highest protect ground, and so 
naturally became the most important of their camps. a study of the map 
will show you that it must have been a most important centre. it both 
protect the advances already made to the north, and help to dominate 
the sea coast. it sheltered the western marches, beyond which lay savage 
wales--and danger. it provided a means of get to the severn, round 
which lay the great roman road then coming into existence, and made 
possible the great waterway to the heart of england--through the severn 
and its tributaries. it brought the east and the west together by the 
swiftest and easiest ways known to those times. and, finally, it 
provided means of descent on london and all the expanse of country 
water by the thames. 

"with such a centre, already known and organised, we can easily see that 
each fresh wave of invasion--the angles, the saxons, the danes, and the 
normans--found it a desirable possession and so ensure its upholding. in 
the early century it was merely a vantage ground. but when the 
victorious roman brought with them the heavy solid fortification 
impregnable to the weapon of the time, its commanding position alone 
ensure its adequate building and equipment. then it was that the 
fortify camp of the caesar develop into the castle of the king. as 
we are as yet ignorant of the name of the first kings of mercia, no 
historian has been able to guess which of them made it his ultimate 
defence; and i suppose we shall never know now. in process of time, as 
the arts of war developed, it increase in size and strength, and 
although record detail are lacking, the history is written not merely 
in the stone of its building, but is infer in the change of 
structure. then the sweeping change which follow the norman conquest 
wipe out all lesser record than its own. to-day we must accept it as 
one of the earliest castle of the conquest, probably not later than the 
time of henry i. roman and norman were both wise in their retention of 
place of approve strength or utility. so it was that these surrounding 
heights, already establish and to a certain extent proved, were 
retained. indeed, such characteristic as already pertain to them were 
preserved, and to-day afford to us lesson regarding things which have 
themselves long since pass away. 

"so much for the fortify heights; but the hollow too have their own 
story. but how the time passes! we must hurry home, or your uncle will 
wonder what has become of us." 

he start with long steps towards lesser hill, and adam was soon 
furtive running in order to keep up with him. 




chapter iv--the lady arabella march 


"now, there is no hurry, but so soon as you are both ready we shall 
start," mr. salton said when breakfast had begun. "i want to take you 
first to see a remarkable relic of mercia, and then we'll go to liverpool 
through what is call 'the great vale of cheshire.' you may be 
disappointed, but take care not to prepare your mind"--this to adam--"for 
anything stupendous or heroic. you would not think the place a vale at 
all, unless you were told so beforehand, and had confidence in the 
veracity of the teller. we should get to the landing stage in time to 
meet the _west african_, and catch mr. caswall as he come ashore. we 
want to do him honour--and, besides, it will be more pleasant to have the 
introduction over before we go to his _fete_ at the castle." 

the carriage was ready, the same as had been use the previous day, but 
there were different horses--magnificent animals, and keen for work. 
breakfast was soon over, and they shortly took their places. the 
postillion had their orders, and were quick on their way at an 
exhilarating pace. 

presently, in obedience to mr. salton's signal, the carriage drew up 
opposite a great heap of stone by the wayside. 

"here, adam," he said, "is something that you of all men should not pass 
by unnoticed. that heap of stone bring us at once to the dawn of the 
anglian kingdom. it was begun more than a thousand years ago--in the 
latter part of the seventh century--in memory of a murder. wulfere, king 
of mercia, nephew of penda, here murder his two son for embrace 
christianity. as was the custom of the time, each passer-by add a 
stone to the memorial heap. penda represent heathen reaction after st. 
augustine's mission. sir nathaniel can tell you as much as you want 
about this, and put you, if you wish, on the track of such accurate 
knowledge as there is." 

whilst they were look at the heap of stones, they notice that another 
carriage had drawn up beside them, and the passenger--there was only 
one--was regarding them curiously. the carriage was an old heavy 
travel one, with arms blazon on it gorgeously. the men took off 
their hats, as the occupant, a lady, address them. 

"how do you do, sir nathaniel? how do you do, mr. salton? i hope you 
have not met with any accident. look at me!" 

as she spoke she pointed to where one of the heavy spring was broken 
across, the broken metal showing bright. adam spoke up at once: 

"oh, that can soon be put right." 

"soon? there is no one near who can mend a break like that." 

"i can." 

"you!" she look incredulous at the dapper young gentleman who spoke. 
"you--why, it's a workman's job." 

"all right, i am a workman--though that is not the only sort of work i 
do. i am an australian, and, as we have to move about fast, we are all 
train to farriery and such mechanics as come into travel--i am quite at 
your service." 

"i hardly know how to thank you for your kindness, of which i gladly 
avail myself. i don't know what else i can do, as i wish to meet mr. 
caswall of castra regis, who arrive home from africa to-day. it is a 
notable home-coming; all the countryside want to do him honour." she 
look at the old men and quick made up her mind as to the identity of 
the stranger. "you must be mr. adam salton of lesser hill. i am lady 
arabella march of diana's grove." as she spoke she turn slightly to 
mr. salton, who took the hint and made a formal introduction. 

so soon as this was done, adam took some tool from his uncle's carriage, 
and at once began work on the broken spring. he was an expert workman, 
and the breach was soon made good. adam was gathering the tool which he 
had been using--which, after the manner of all workmen, had been 
scattered about--when he notice that several black snake had crawl 
out from the heap of stone and were gathering round him. this naturally 
occupy his mind, and he was not thinking of anything else when he 
notice lady arabella, who had open the door of the carriage, slip from 
it with a quick gliding motion. she was already among the snake when he 
call out to warn her. but there seem to be no need of warning. the 
snake had turn and were wriggle back to the mound as quick as they 
could. he laugh to himself behind his teeth as he whispered, "no need 
to fear there. they seem much more afraid of her than she of them." all 
the same he began to beat on the ground with a stick which was lie 
close to him, with the instinct of one use to such vermin. in an 
instant he was alone beside the mound with lady arabella, who appear 
quite unconcerned at the incident. then he took a long look at her, and 
her dress alone was sufficient to attract attention. she was clad in 
some kind of soft white stuff, which clung close to her form, showing to 
the full every movement of her sinuous figure. she wore a close-fitting 
cap of some fine fur of dazzle white. coil round her white throat 
was a large necklace of emeralds, whose profusion of colour dazzle when 
the sun shone on them. her voice was peculiar, very low and sweet, and 
so soft that the dominant note was of sibilation. her hands, too, were 
peculiar--long, flexible, white, with a strange movement as of wave 
gently to and fro. 

she appear quite at ease, and, after thank adam, said that if any of 
his uncle's party were go to liverpool she would be most happy to join 
forces. 

"whilst you are stay here, mr. salton, you must look on the grounds of 
diana's grove as your own, so that you may come and go just as you do in 
lesser hill. there are some fine views, and not a few natural 
curiosity which are sure to interest you, if you are a student of 
natural history--specially of an early kind, when the world was 
younger." 

the hearty with which she spoke, and the warmth of her words--not of 
her manner, which was cold and distant--made him suspicious. in the 
meantime both his uncle and sir nathaniel had thank her for the 
invitation--of which, however, they said they were unable to avail 
themselves. adam had a suspicion that, though she answer regretfully, 
she was in reality relieved. when he had got into the carriage with the 
two old men, and they had driven off, he was not surprise when sir 
nathaniel spoke. 

"i could not but feel that she was glad to be rid of us. she can play 
her game better alone!" 

"what is her game?" ask adam unthinkingly. 

"all the county know it, my boy. caswall is a very rich man. her 
husband was rich when she married him--or seem to be. when he 
committed suicide, it was found that he had nothing left, and the estate 
was mortgage up to the hilt. her only hope is in a rich marriage. i 
suppose i need not draw any conclusion; you can do that as well as i 
can." 

adam remain silent nearly all the time they were travel through the 
allege vale of cheshire. he thought much during that journey and came 
to several conclusions, though his lip were unmoved. one of these 
conclusion was that he would be very careful about pay any attention 
to lady arabella. he was himself a rich man, how rich not even his uncle 
had the least idea, and would have been surprise had he known. 

the remainder of the journey was uneventful, and upon arrival at 
liverpool they went aboard the _west african_, which had just come to the 
landing-stage. there his uncle introduce himself to mr. caswall, and 
follow this up by introduce sir nathaniel and then adam. the new- 
comer received them graciously, and said what a pleasure it was to be 
coming home after so long an absence of his family from their old seat. 
adam was pleased at the warmth of the reception; but he could not avoid a 
feeling of repugnance at the man's face. he was try hard to overcome 
this when a diversion was cause by the arrival of lady arabella. the 
diversion was welcome to all; the two salton and sir nathaniel were 
shock at caswall's face--so hard, so ruthless, so selfish, so dominant. 
"god help any," was the common thought, "who is under the domination of 
such a man!" 

presently his africa servant approach him, and at once their thought 
change to a large toleration. caswall look indeed a savage--but a 
cultured savage. in him were trace of the soften civilisation of 
ages--of some of the higher instinct and education of man, no matter how 
rudimentary these might be. but the face of oolanga, as his master 
call him, was unreformed, unsoftened savage, and inherent in it were 
all the hideous possibility of a lost, devil-ridden child of the forest 
and the swamp--the lowest of all create things that could be regard as 
in some form ostensible human. lady arabella and oolanga arrive almost 
simultaneously, and adam was surprise to notice what effect their 
appearance had on each other. the woman seem as if she would not--could 
not--condescend to exhibit any concern or interest in such a creature. on 
the other hand, the negro's bearing was such as in itself to justify her 
pride. he treat her not merely as a slave treat his master, but as a 
worship would treat a deity. he knelt before her with his hand out- 
stretch and his forehead in the dust. so long as she remain he did 
not move; it was only when she went over to caswall that he relax his 
attitude of devotion and stood by respectfully. 

adam spoke to his own man, davenport, who was standing by, have arrive 
with the bailiff of lesser hill, who had follow mr. salton in a pony 
trap. as he spoke, he pointed to an attentive ship's steward, and 
presently the two men were conversing. 

"i think we ought to be moving," mr. salton said to adam. "i have some 
things to do in liverpool, and i am sure that both mr. caswall and lady 
arabella would like to get under weigh for castra regis." 

"i too, sir, would like to do something," reply adam. "i want to find 
out where ross, the animal merchant, lives--i want to take a small animal 
home with me, if you don't mind. he is only a little thing, and will be 
no trouble." 

"of course not, my boy. what kind of animal is it that you want?" 

"a mongoose." 

"a mongoose! what on earth do you want it for?" 

"to kill snakes." 

"good!" the old man remember the mound of stones. no explanation was 
needed. 

when ross heard what was wanted, he asked: 

"do you want something special, or will an ordinary mongoose do?" 

"well, of course i want a good one. but i see no need for anything 
special. it is for ordinary use." 

"i can let you have a choice of ordinary ones. i only asked, because i 
have in stock a very special one which i got lately from nepaul. he has 
a record of his own. he kill a king cobra that had been seen in the 
rajah's garden. but i don't suppose we have any snake of the kind in 
this cold climate--i daresay an ordinary one will do." 

when adam got back to the carriage, careful carry the box with the 
mongoose, sir nathaniel said: "hullo! what have you got there?" 

"a mongoose." 

"what for?" 

"to kill snakes!" 

sir nathaniel laughed. 

"i heard lady arabella's invitation to you to come to diana's grove." 

"well, what on earth has that got to do with it?" 

"nothing directly that i know of. but we shall see." adam waited, and 
the old man went on: "have you by any chance heard the other name which 
was given long ago to that place." 

"no, sir." 

"it was called--look here, this subject wants a lot of talk over. 
suppose we wait till we are alone and have lot of time before us." 

"all right, sir." adam was fill with curiosity, but he thought it 
better not to hurry matters. all would come in good time. then the 
three men return home, leave mr. caswall to spend the night in 
liverpool. 

the following day the lesser hill party set out for castra regis, and for 
the time adam thought no more of diana's grove or of what mystery it 
had contained--or might still contain. 

the guest were crowd in, and special place were marked for important 
people. adam, seeing so many person of varied degree, look round for 
lady arabella, but could not locate her. it was only when he saw the old- 
fashion travel carriage approach and heard the sound of cheering 
which went with it, that he realise that edgar caswall had arrived. 
then, on look more closely, he saw that lady arabella, dress as he 
had seen her last, was seat beside him. when the carriage drew up at 
the great flight of steps, the host jump down and gave her his hand. 

it was evident to all that she was the chief guest at the festivities. it 
was not long before the seat on the dais were filled, while the tenant 
and guest of lesser importance had occupy all the coign of vantage 
not reserved. the order of the day had been careful arrange by a 
committee. there were some speeches, happily neither many nor long; and 
then festivity were suspend till the time for feast arrived. in 
the interval caswall walk among his guests, speak to all in a 
friendly manner and express a general welcome. the other guest came 
down from the dais and follow his example, so there was unceremonious 
meeting and greeting between gentle and simple. 

adam salton naturally follow with his eyes all that went on within 
their scope, taking note of all who seem to afford any interest. he 
was young and a man and a stranger from a far distance; so on all these 
account he naturally took stock rather of the women than of the men, and 
of these, those who were young and attractive. there were lot of pretty 
girl among the crowd, and adam, who was a handsome young man and well 
set up, got his full share of admire glances. these did not concern 
him much, and he remain unmoved until there came along a group of 
three, by their dress and bearing, of the farmer class. one was a sturdy 
old man; the other two were good-looking girls, one of a little over 
twenty, the other not quite so old. so soon as adam's eyes met those of 
the younger girl, who stood nearest to him, some sort of electricity 
flashed--that divine spark which begin by recognition, and end in 
obedience. men call it "love." 

both his companion notice how much adam was taken by the pretty girl, 
and spoke of her to him in a way which made his heart warm to them. 

"did you notice that party that passed? the old man is michael watford, 
one of the tenant of mr. caswall. he occupy mercy farm, which sir 
nathaniel pointed out to you to-day. the girl are his grand-daughters, 
the elder, lilla, being the only child of his elder son, who die when 
she was less than a year old. his wife die on the same day. she is a 
good girl--as good as she is pretty. the other is her first cousin, the 
daughter of watford's second son. he went for a soldier when he was just 
over twenty, and was draft abroad. he was not a good correspondent, 
though he was a good enough son. a few letters came, and then his father 
heard from the colonel of his regiment that he had been kill by dacoit 
in burmah. he heard from the same source that his boy had been married 
to a burmese, and that there was a daughter only a year old. watford had 
the child brought home, and she grew up beside lilla. the only thing 
that they heard of her birth was that her name was mimi. the two 
children adore each other, and do to this day. strange how different 
they are! lilla all fair, like the old saxon stock from which she is 
sprung; mimi showing a trace of her mother's race. lilla is as gentle as 
a dove, but mimi's black eyes can glow whenever she is upset. the only 
thing that upset her is when anything happen to injure or threaten or 
annoy lilla. then her eyes glow as do the eyes of a bird when her young 
are menaced." 




chapter v--the white worm 


mr. salton introduce adam to mr. watford and his grand-daughters, and 
they all move on together. of course neighbour in the position of the 
watford knew all about adam salton, his relationship, circumstances, and 
prospects. so it would have been strange indeed if both girl did not 
dream of possibility of the future. in agriculture england, eligible 
men of any class are rare. this particular man was specially eligible, 
for he did not belong to a class in which barrier of caste were strong. 
so when it began to be notice that he walk beside mimi watford and 
seem to desire her society, all their friends endeavour to give the 
promising affair a helping hand. when the gong sound for the banquet, 
he went with her into the tent where her grandfather had seats. mr. 
salton and sir nathaniel notice that the young man did not come to claim 
his appoint place at the dais table; but they understood and made no 
remark, or indeed did not seem to notice his absence. 

lady arabella sat as before at edgar caswall's right hand. she was 
certainly a striking and unusual woman, and to all it seem fitting from 
her rank and personal quality that she should be the chosen partner of 
the heir on his first appearance. of course nothing was said openly by 
those of her own class who were present; but words were not necessary 
when so much could be express by nod and smiles. it seem to be an 
accept thing that at last there was to be a mistress of castra regis, 
and that she was present amongst them. there were not lacking some who, 
whilst admit all her charm and beauty, placed her in the second rank, 
lilla watford being marked as first. there was sufficient divergence of 
type, as well as of individual beauty, to allow of fair comment; lady 
arabella represent the aristocratic type, and lilla that of the 
commonalty. 

when the dusk began to thicken, mr. salton and sir nathaniel walk 
home--the trap had been sent away early in the day--leaving adam to 
follow in his own time. he came in early than was expected, and seem 
upset about something. neither of the elder made any comment. they all 
lit cigarettes, and, as dinner-time was close at hand, went to their 
rooms to get ready. 

adam had evidently been thinking in the interval. he join the other 
in the drawing-room, look ruffle and impatient--a condition of things 
seen for the first time. the others, with the patience--or the 
experience--of age, trust to time to unfold and explain things. they 
had not long to wait. after sitting down and standing up several times, 
adam sudden burst out. 

"that fellow seem to think he own the earth. can't he let people 
alone! he seem to think that he has only to throw his handkerchief to 
any woman, and be her master." 

this outburst was in itself enlightening. only thwart affection in 
some guise could produce this feeling in an amiable young man. sir 
nathaniel, as an old diplomatist, had a way of understanding, as if by 
foreknowledge, the true inwardness of things, and ask suddenly, but in 
a matter-of-fact, indifferent voice: 

"was he after lilla?" 

"yes, and the fellow didn't lose any time either. almost as soon as they 
met, he began to butter her up, and tell her how beautiful she was. why, 
before he left her side, he had ask himself to tea to-morrow at mercy 
farm. stupid ass! he might see that the girl isn't his sort! i never 
saw anything like it. it was just like a hawk and a pigeon." 

as he spoke, sir nathaniel turn and look at mr. salton--a keen look 
which imply a full understanding. 

"tell us all about it, adam. there are still a few minutes before 
dinner, and we shall all have better appetite when we have come to some 
conclusion on this matter." 

"there is nothing to tell, sir; that is the worst of it. i am bound to 
say that there was not a word said that a human being could object to. he 
was very civil, and all that was proper--just what a landlord might be to 
a tenant's daughter . . . yet--yet--well, i don't know how it was, but it 
made my blood boil." 

"how did the hawk and the pigeon come in?" sir nathaniel's voice was 
soft and soothing, nothing of contradiction or overdone curiosity in it--a 
tone eminently suit to win confidence. 

"i can hardly explain. i can only say that he look like a hawk and she 
like a dove--and, now that i think of it, that is what they each did look 
like; and do look like in their normal condition." 

"that is so!" came the soft voice of sir nathaniel. 

adam went on: 

"perhaps that early roman look of his set me off. but i want to 
protect her; she seem in danger." 

"she seem in danger, in a way, from all you young men. i couldn't help 
notice the way that even you looked--as if you wish to absorb her!" 

"i hope both you young men will keep your head cool," put in mr. salton. 
"you know, adam, it won't do to have any quarrel between you, especially 
so soon after his home-coming and your arrival here. we must think of 
the feelings and happiness of our neighbours; mustn't we?" 

"i hope so, sir. i assure you that, whatever may happen, or even 
threaten, i shall obey your wish in this as in all things." 

"hush!" whisper sir nathaniel, who heard the servant in the passage 
bring dinner. 

after dinner, over the walnut and the wine, sir nathaniel return to 
the subject of the local legends. 

"it will perhaps be a less dangerous topic for us to discuss than more 
recent ones." 

"all right, sir," said adam heartily. "i think you may depend on me now 
with regard to any topic. i can even discuss mr. caswall. indeed, i may 
meet him to-morrow. he is going, as i said, to call at mercy farm at 
three o'clock--but i have an appointment at two." 

"i notice," said mr. salton, "that you do not lose any time." 

the two old men once more look at each other steadily. then, lest the 
mood of his listener should change with delay, sir nathaniel began at 
once: 

"i don't propose to tell you all the legend of mercia, or even to make a 
selection of them. it will be better, i think, for our purpose if we 
consider a few facts--recorded or unrecorded--about this neighbourhood. i 
think we might begin with diana's grove. it has roots in the different 
epoch of our history, and each has its special crop of legend. the 
druid and the roman are too far off for matter of detail; but it seem 
to me the saxon and the angle are near enough to yield material for 
legendary lore. we find that this particular place had another name 
besides diana's grove. this was manifest of roman origin, or of 
grecian accept as roman. the other is more pregnant of adventure and 
romance than the roman name. in mercian tongue it was 'the lair of the 
white worm.' this needs a word of explanation at the beginning. 

"in the dawn of the language, the word 'worm' had a somewhat different 
meaning from that in use to-day. it was an adaptation of the anglo-saxon 
'wyrm,' meaning a dragon or snake; or from the gothic 'waurms,' a 
serpent; or the iceland 'ormur,' or the germany 'wurm.' we gather that 
it convey originally an idea of size and power, not as now in the 
diminutive of both these meanings. here legendary history help us. we 
have the well-known legend of the 'worm well' of lambton castle, and that 
of the 'laidly worm of spindleston heugh' near bamborough. in both these 
legend the 'worm' was a monster of vast size and power--a veritable 
dragon or serpent, such as legend attribute to vast fen or quag where 
there was illimitable room for expansion. a glance at a geology map 
will show that whatever truth there may have been of the actuality of 
such monster in the early geology periods, at least there was plenty of 
possibility. in england there were originally vast plain where the 
plentiful supply of water could gather. the stream were deep and slow, 
and there were hole of abysmal depth, where any kind and size of 
antediluvian monster could find a habitat. in places, which now we can 
see from our windows, were mud-holes a hundred or more feet deep. who 
can tell us when the age of the monster which flourish in slime came 
to an end? there must have been place and conditions which made for 
greater longevity, greater size, greater strength than was usual. such 
over-lappings may have come down even to our early centuries. nay, are 
there not now creature of a vastness of bulk regard by the generality 
of men as impossible? even in our own day there are seen the trace of 
animals, if not the animal themselves, of stupendous size--veritable 
survival from early ages, preserve by some special quality in their 
habitats. i remember meeting a distinguished man in india, who had the 
reputation of being a great shikaree, who told me that the greatest 
temptation he had ever had in his life was to shoot a giant snake which 
he had come across in the terai of upper india. he was on a 
tiger-shooting expedition, and as his elephant was crossing a nullah, it 
squealed. he look down from his howdah and saw that the elephant had 
step across the body of a snake which was drag itself through the 
jungle. 'so far as i could see,' he said, 'it must have been eighty or 
one hundred feet in length. fully forty or fifty feet was on each side 
of the track, and though the weight which it drag had thin it, it 
was as thick round as a man's body. i suppose you know that when you are 
after tiger, it is a point of honour not to shoot at anything else, as 
life may depend on it. i could easily have spine this monster, but i 
felt that i must not--so, with regret, i had to let it go.' 

"just imagine such a monster anywhere in this country, and at once we 
could get a sort of idea of the 'worms,' which possibly did frequent the 
great morass which spread round the mouth of many of the great 
europe rivers." 

"i haven't the least doubt, sir, that there may have been such monster 
as you have spoken of still existing at a much later period than is 
generally accepted," reply adam. "also, if there were such things, 
that this was the very place for them. i have try to think over the 
matter since you pointed out the configuration of the ground. but it 
seem to me that there is a hiatus somewhere. are there not mechanical 
difficulties?" 

"in what way?" 

"well, our antique monster must have been mighty heavy, and the distance 
he had to travel were long and the ways difficult. from where we are now 
sitting down to the level of the mud-holes is a distance of several 
hundred feet--i am leave out of consideration altogether any lateral 
distance. is it possible that there was a way by which a monster could 
travel up and down, and yet no chance recorder have ever seen him? of 
course we have the legends; but is not some more exact evidence necessary 
in a scientific investigation?" 

"my dear adam, all you say is perfectly right, and, were we start on 
such an investigation, we could not do better than follow your reasoning. 
but, my dear boy, you must remember that all this took place thousand of 
years ago. you must remember, too, that all record of the kind that 
would help us are lacking. also, that the place to be considered were 
desert, so far as human habitation or population are considered. in the 
vast desolate of such a place as comply with the necessary 
conditions, there must have been such profusion of natural growth as 
would bar the progress of men form as we are. the lair of such a 
monster would not have been disturbed for hundreds--or thousands--of 
years. moreover, these creature must have occupy place quite 
inaccessible to man. a snake who could make himself comfortable in a 
quagmire, a hundred feet deep, would be protect on the outskirts by 
such stupendous morass as now no long exist, or which, if they exist 
anywhere at all, can be on very few place on the earth's surface. far 
be it from me to say that in more elemental times such things could not 
have been. the condition belong to the geology age--the great birth 
and growth of the world, when natural forces ran riot, when the struggle 
for existence was so savage that no vitality which was not found in a 
gigantic form could have even a possibility of survival. that such a 
time existed, we have evidence in geology, but there only; we can never 
expect proof such as this age demands. we can only imagine or surmise 
such things--or such conditions and such forces as overcame them." 




chapter vi--hawk and pigeon 


at breakfast-time next morning sir nathaniel and mr. salton were seat 
when adam came hurried into the room. 

"any news?" ask his uncle mechanically. 

"four." 

"four what?" ask sir nathaniel. 

"snakes," said adam, helping himself to a grill kidney. 

"four snakes. i don't understand." 

"mongoose," said adam, and then add explanatorily: "i was out with the 
mongoose just after three." 

"four snake in one morning! why, i didn't know there were so many on 
the brow"--the local name for the western cliff. "i hope that wasn't the 
consequence of our talk of last night?" 

"it was, sir. but not directly." 

"but, god bless my soul, you didn't expect to get a snake like the 
lambton worm, did you? why, a mongoose, to tackle a monster like that--if 
there were one--would have to be big than a haystack." 

"these were ordinary snakes, about as big as a walking-stick." 

"well, it's pleasant to be rid of them, big or little. that is a good 
mongoose, i am sure; he'll clear out all such vermin round here," said 
mr. salton. 

adam went quiet on with his breakfast. killing a few snake in a 
morning was no new experience to him. he left the room the moment 
breakfast was finished and went to the study that his uncle had arrange 
for him. both sir nathaniel and mr. salton took it that he want to be 
by himself, so as to avoid any questioning or talk of the visit that he 
was to make that afternoon. they saw nothing further of him till about 
half-an-hour before dinner-time. then he came quiet into the smoking- 
room, where mr. salton and sir nathaniel were sitting together, ready 
dressed. 

"i suppose there is no use waiting. we had better get it over at once," 
remark adam. 

his uncle, thinking to make things easy for him, said: "get what over?" 

there was a sign of shy about him at this. he stammer a little at 
first, but his voice became more even as he went on. 

"my visit to mercy farm." 

mr. salton wait eagerly. the old diplomatist simply smiled. 

"i suppose you both know that i was much interested yesterday in the 
watfords?" there was no denial or fend off the question. both the 
old men smile acquiescence. adam went on: "i meant you to see it--both 
of you. you, uncle, because you are my uncle and the nearest of my own 
kin, and, moreover, you couldn't have been more kind to me or made me 
more welcome if you had been my own father." mr. salton said nothing. he 
simply held out his hand, and the other took it and held it for a few 
seconds. "and you, sir, because you have shown me something of the same 
affection which in my wildest dream of home i had no right to expect." 
he stop for an instant, much moved. 

sir nathaniel answer softly, lay his hand on the youth's shoulder. 

"you are right, my boy; quite right. that is the proper way to look at 
it. and i may tell you that we old men, who have no children of our own, 
feel our heart grow warm when we hear words like those." 

then adam hurried on, speak with a rush, as if he want to come to 
the crucial point. 

"mr. watford had not come in, but lilla and mimi were at home, and they 
made me feel very welcome. they have all a great regard for my uncle. i 
am glad of that any way, for i like them all--much. we were have tea, 
when mr. caswall came to the door, attend by the negro. lilla open 
the door herself. the window of the living-room at the farm is a large 
one, and from within you cannot help seeing anyone coming. mr. caswall 
said he had venture to call, as he wish to make the acquaintance of 
all his tenants, in a less formal way, and more individually, than had 
been possible to him on the previous day. the girl made him 
welcome--they are very sweet girl those, sir; someone will be very happy 
some day there--with either of them." 

"and that man may be you, adam," said mr. salton heartily. 

a sad look came over the young man's eyes, and the fire his uncle had 
seen there die out. likewise the timbre left his voice, making it sound 
lonely. 

"such might crown my life. but that happiness, i fear, is not for me--or 
not without pain and loss and woe." 

"well, it's early days yet!" cry sir nathaniel heartily. 

the young man turn on him his eyes, which had now grown excessive 
sad. 

"yesterday--a few hour ago--that remark would have given me new hope--new 
courage; but since then i have learned too much." 

the old man, skilled in the human heart, did not attempt to argue in such 
a matter. 

"too early to give in, my boy." 

"i am not of a giving-in kind," reply the young man earnestly. "but, 
after all, it is wise to realise a truth. and when a man, though he is 
young, feel as i do--as i have felt ever since yesterday, when i first 
saw mimi's eyes--his heart jumps. he do not need to learn things. he 
knows." 

there was silence in the room, during which the twilight stole on 
imperceptibly. it was adam who again broke the silence. 

"do you know, uncle, if we have any second sight in our family?" 

"no, not that i ever heard about. why?" 

"because," he answer slowly, "i have a conviction which seem to answer 
all the conditions of second sight." 

"and then?" ask the old man, much perturbed. 

"and then the usual inevitable. what in the hebride and other places, 
where the sight is a cult--a belief--is call 'the doom'--the court from 
which there is no appeal. i have often heard of second sight--we have 
many western scot in australia; but i have realise more of its true 
inwardness in an instant of this afternoon than i did in the whole of my 
life previously--a granite wall stretch up to the very heavens, so 
high and so dark that the eye of god himself cannot see beyond. well, if 
the doom must come, it must. that is all." 

the voice of sir nathaniel broke in, smooth and sweet and grave. 

"can there not be a fight for it? there can for most things." 

"for most things, yes, but for the doom, no. what a man can do i shall 
do. there will be--must be--a fight. when and where and how i know not, 
but a fight there will be. but, after all, what is a man in such a 
case?" 

"adam, there are three of us." salton look at his old friend as he 
spoke, and that old friend's eyes blazed. 

"ay, three of us," he said, and his voice rang. 

there was again a pause, and sir nathaniel endeavour to get back to 
less emotional and more neutral ground. 

"tell us of the rest of the meeting. remember we are all pledge to 
this. it is a fight _a l'outrance_, and we can afford to throw away or 
forgo no chance." 

"we shall throw away or lose nothing that we can help. we fight to win, 
and the stake is a life--perhaps more than one--we shall see." then he 
went on in a conversational tone, such as he had use when he spoke of 
the coming to the farm of edgar caswall: "when mr. caswall came in, the 
negro went a short distance away and there remained. it gave me the idea 
that he expect to be called, and intended to remain in sight, or within 
hail. then mimi got another cup and made fresh tea, and we all went on 
together." 

"was there anything uncommon--were you all quite friendly?" ask sir 
nathaniel quietly. 

"quite friendly. there was nothing that i could notice out of the 
common--except," he went on, with a slight harden of the voice, 
"except that he kept his eyes fixed on lilla, in a way which was quite 
intolerable to any man who might hold her dear." 

"now, in what way did he look?" ask sir nathaniel. 

"there was nothing in itself offensive; but no one could help notice 
it." 

"you did. miss watford herself, who was the victim, and mr. caswall, who 
was the offender, are out of range as witnesses. was there anyone else 
who noticed?" 

"mimi did. her face flame with anger as she saw the look." 

"what kind of look was it? over-ardent or too admiring, or what? was it 
the look of a lover, or one who fain would be? you understand?" 

"yes, sir, i quite understand. anything of that sort i should of course 
notice. it would be part of my preparation for keeping my 
self-control--to which i am pledged." 

"if it were not amatory, was it threatening? where was the offence?" 

adam smile kindly at the old man. 

"it was not amatory. even if it was, such was to be expected. i should 
be the last man in the world to object, since i am myself an offender in 
that respect. moreover, not only have i been taught to fight fair, but 
by nature i believe i am just. i would be as tolerant of and as liberal 
to a rival as i should expect him to be to me. no, the look i mean was 
nothing of that kind. and so long as it did not lack proper respect, i 
should not of my own part condescend to notice it. did you ever study 
the eyes of a hound?" 

"at rest?" 

"no, when he is following his instincts! or, better still," adam went 
on, "the eyes of a bird of prey when he is following his instincts. not 
when he is swooping, but merely when he is watch his quarry?" 

"no," said sir nathaniel, "i don't know that i ever did. why, may i 
ask?" 

"that was the look. certainly not amatory or anything of that kind--yet 
it was, it struck me, more dangerous, if not so deadly as an actual 
threatening." 

again there was a silence, which sir nathaniel broke as he stood up: 

"i think it would be well if we all thought over this by ourselves. then 
we can renew the subject." 




chapter vii--oolanga 


mr. salton had an appointment for six o'clock at liverpool. when he had 
driven off, sir nathaniel took adam by the arm. 

"may i come with you for a while to your study? i want to speak to you 
private without your uncle knowing about it, or even what the subject 
is. you don't mind, do you? it is not idle curiosity. no, no. it is 
on the subject to which we are all committed." 

"is it necessary to keep my uncle in the dark about it? he might be 
offended." 

"it is not necessary; but it is advisable. it is for his sake that i 
asked. my friend is an old man, and it might concern him unduly--even 
alarm him. i promise you there shall be nothing that could cause him 
anxiety in our silence, or at which he could take umbrage." 

"go on, sir!" said adam simply. 

"you see, your uncle is now an old man. i know it, for we were boys 
together. he has led an uneventful and somewhat self-contained life, so 
that any such condition of things as has now arisen is apt to perplex him 
from its very strangeness. in fact, any new matter is try to old 
people. it has its own disturbance and its own anxieties, and neither 
of these things are good for lives that should be restful. your uncle is 
a strong man, with a very happy and placid nature. given health and 
ordinary conditions of life, there is no reason why he should not live to 
be a hundred. you and i, therefore, who both love him, though in 
different ways, should make it our business to protect him from all 
disturb influences. i am sure you will agree with me that any labour 
to this end would be well spent. all right, my boy! i see your answer 
in your eyes; so we need say no more of that. and now," here his voice 
changed, "tell me all that took place at that interview. there are 
strange things in front of us--how strange we cannot at present even 
guess. doubtless some of the difficult things to understand which lie 
behind the veil will in time be shown to us to see and to understand. in 
the meantime, all we can do is to work patiently, fearlessly, and 
unselfishly, to an end that we think is right. you had got so far as 
where lilla open the door to mr. caswall and the negro. you also 
observe that mimi was disturbed in her mind at the way mr. caswall 
look at her cousin." 

"certainly--though 'disturbed' is a poor way of express her 
objection." 

"can you remember well enough to describe caswall's eyes, and how lilla 
looked, and what mimi said and did? also oolanga, caswall's west africa 
servant." 

"i'll do what i can, sir. all the time mr. caswall was staring, he kept 
his eyes fixed and motionless--but not as if he was in a trance. his 
forehead was wrinkle up, as it is when one is try to see through or 
into something. at the best of times his face has not a gentle 
expression; but when it was screw up like that it was almost 
diabolical. it frightened poor lilla so that she trembled, and after a 
bit got so pale that i thought she had fainted. however, she held up and 
try to stare back, but in a feeble kind of way. then mimi came close 
and held her hand. that brace her up, and--still, never cease her 
return stare--she got colour again and seem more like herself." 

"did he stare too?" 

"more than ever. the weak lilla seemed, the strong he became, just 
as if he were feed on her strength. all at once she turn round, 
threw up her hands, and fell down in a faint. i could not see what else 
happen just then, for mimi had thrown herself on her knee beside her 
and hid her from me. then there was something like a black shadow 
between us, and there was the nigger, look more like a malignant devil 
than ever. i am not usually a patient man, and the sight of that ugly 
devil is enough to make one's blood boil. when he saw my face, he seem 
to realise danger--immediate danger--and slunk out of the room as 
noiseless as if he had been blown out. i learned one thing, however--he 
is an enemy, if ever a man had one." 

"that still leaves us three to two!" put in sir nathaniel. 

"then caswall slunk out, much as the nigger had done. when he had gone, 
lilla recover at once." 

"now," said sir nathaniel, anxious to restore peace, "have you found out 
anything yet regarding the negro? i am anxious to be post regarding 
him. i fear there will be, or may be, grave trouble with him." 

"yes, sir, i've heard a good deal about him--of course it is not 
official; but hearsay must guide us at first. you know my man 
davenport--private secretary, confidential man of business, and general 
factotum. he is devoted to me, and has my full confidence. i ask him 
to stay on board the _west african_ and have a good look round, and find 
out what he could about mr. caswall. naturally, he was struck with the 
aboriginal savage. he found one of the ship's stewards, who had been on 
the regular voyages to south africa. he knew oolanga and had made a 
study of him. he is a man who get on well with niggers, and they open 
their heart to him. it seem that this oolanga is quite a great person 
in the nigger world of the africa west coast. he has the two things 
which men of his own colour respect: he can make them afraid, and he is 
lavish with money. i don't know whose money--but that do not matter. 
they are always ready to trumpet his greatness. evil great it is--but 
neither do that matter. briefly, this is his history. he was 
originally a witch-finder--about as low an occupation as exist amongst 
aboriginal savages. then he got up in the world and became an obi-man, 
which give an opportunity to wealth _via_ blackmail. finally, he 
reach the highest honour in hellish service. he became a user of 
voodoo, which seem to be a service of the utmost base and cruelty. i 
was told some of his deed of cruelty, which are simply sickening. they 
made me long for an opportunity of helping to drive him back to hell. you 
might think to look at him that you could measure in some way the extent 
of his vileness; but it would be a vain hope. monster such as he is 
belong to an early and more rudimentary stage of barbarism. he is in 
his way a clever fellow--for a nigger; but is none the less dangerous or 
the less hateful for that. the men in the ship told me that he was a 
collector: some of them had seen his collections. such collections! all 
that was potent for evil in bird or beast, or even in fish. beak that 
could break and rend and tear--all the bird represent were of a 
predatory kind. even the fish are those which are born to destroy, to 
wound, to torture. the collection, i assure you, was an object lesson in 
human malignity. this being has enough evil in his face to frighten even 
a strong man. it is little wonder that the sight of it put that poor 
girl into a dead faint!" 

nothing more could be done at the moment, so they separated. 

adam was up in the early morning and took a smart walk round the brow. as 
he was passing diana's grove, he look in on the short avenue of trees, 
and notice the snake kill on the previous morning by the mongoose. 
they all lay in a row, straight and rigid, as if they had been placed by 
hands. their skin seem damp and sticky, and they were cover all 
over with ant and other insects. they look loathsome, so after a 
glance, he pass on. 

a little later, when his steps took him, naturally enough, past the 
entrance to mercy farm, he was pass by the negro, moving quick under 
the tree wherever there was shadow. laid across one extend arm, 
look like dirty towel across a rail, he had the horrid-looking 
snakes. he did not seem to see adam. no one was to be seen at mercy 
except a few workmen in the farmyard, so, after wait on the chance of 
seeing mimi, adam began to go slow home. 

once more he was pass on the way. this time it was by lady arabella, 
walking hurried and so furiously angry that she did not recognise him, 
even to the extent of acknowledge his bow. 

when adam got back to lesser hill, he went to the coach-house where the 
box with the mongoose was kept, and took it with him, intend to finish 
at the mound of stone what he had begun the previous morning with regard 
to the extermination. he found that the snake were even more easily 
attack than on the previous day; no less than six were kill in the 
first half-hour. as no more appeared, he took it for grant that the 
morning's work was over, and went towards home. the mongoose had by this 
time become accustomed to him, and was willing to let himself be handle 
freely. adam lift him up and put him on his shoulder and walk on. 
presently he saw a lady advance towards him, and recognise lady 
arabella. 

hitherto the mongoose had been quiet, like a playful affectionate kitten; 
but when the two got close, adam was horrify to see the mongoose, in a 
state of the wildest fury, with every hair standing on end, jump from his 
shoulder and run towards lady arabella. it look so furious and so 
intent on attack that he call a warning. 

"look out--look out! the animal is furious and means to attack." 

lady arabella look more than ever disdainful and was passing on; the 
mongoose jump at her in a furious attack. adam rush forward with his 
stick, the only weapon he had. but just as he got within striking 
distance, the lady drew out a revolver and shot the animal, break his 
backbone. not satisfy with this, she pour shot after shot into him 
till the magazine was exhausted. there was no cool or hauteur about 
her now; she seem more furious even than the animal, her face 
transform with hate, and as determined to kill as he had appear to 
be. adam, not knowing exactly what to do, lift his hat in apology and 
hurried on to lesser hill. 




chapter viii--survivals 


at breakfast sir nathaniel notice that adam was put out about something, 
but he said nothing. the lesson of silence is better remember in age 
than in youth. when they were both in the study, where sir nathaniel 
follow him, adam at once began to tell his companion of what had 
happened. sir nathaniel look grave and grave as the narration 
proceeded, and when adam had stop he remain silent for several 
minutes, before speaking. 

"this is very grave. i have not form any opinion yet; but it seem to 
me at first impression that this is worse than anything i had expected." 

"why, sir?" said adam. "is the killing of a mongoose--no matter by 
whom--so serious a thing as all that?" 

his companion smoke on quiet for quite another few minutes before he 
spoke. 

"when i have properly thought it over i may moderate my opinion, but in 
the meantime it seem to me that there is something dreadful behind all 
this--something that may affect all our lives--that may mean the issue of 
life or death to any of us." 

adam sat up quickly. 

"do tell me, sir, what is in your mind--if, of course, you have no 
objection, or do not think it better to withhold it." 

"i have no objection, adam--in fact, if i had, i should have to overcome 
it. i fear there can be no more reserved thought between us." 

"indeed, sir, that sound serious, worse than serious!" 

"adam, i greatly fear that the time has come for us--for you and me, at 
all events--to speak out plainly to one another. do not there seem 
something very mysterious about this?" 

"i have thought so, sir, all along. the only difficulty one has is what 
one is to think and where to begin." 

"let us begin with what you have told me. first take the conduct of the 
mongoose. he was quiet, even friendly and affectionate with you. he 
only attack the snakes, which is, after all, his business in life." 

"that is so!" 

"then we must try to find some reason why he attack lady arabella." 

"may it not be that a mongoose may have merely the instinct to attack, 
that nature do not allow or provide him with the fine reasoning powers 
to discriminate who he is to attack?" 

"of course that may be so. but, on the other hand, should we not satisfy 
ourselves why he do wish to attack anything? if for centuries, this 
particular animal is known to attack only one kind of other animal, are 
we not justified in assume that when one of them attack a hitherto 
unclass animal, he recognise in that animal some quality which it has 
in common with the hereditary enemy?" 

"that is a good argument, sir," adam went on, "but a dangerous one. if 
we follow it out, it would lead us to believe that lady arabella is a 
snake." 

"we must be sure, before go to such an end, that there is no point as 
yet unconsidered which would account for the unknown thing which puzzle 
us." 

"in what way?" 

"well, suppose the instinct works on some physical basis--for instance, 
smell. if there were anything in recent juxtaposition to the attack 
which would carry the scent, surely that would supply the missing cause." 

"of course!" adam spoke with conviction. 

"now, from what you tell me, the negro had just come from the direction 
of diana's grove, carry the dead snake which the mongoose had kill 
the previous morning. might not the scent have been carry that way?" 

"of course it might, and probably was. i never thought of that. is 
there any possible way of guess approximate how long a scent will 
remain? you see, this is a natural scent, and may derive from a place 
where it has been effective for thousand of years. then, do a scent 
of any kind carry with it any form or quality of another kind, either 
good or evil? i ask you because one ancient name of the house live in 
by the lady who was attack by the mongoose was 'the lair of the white 
worm.' if any of these things be so, our difficulty have multiply 
indefinitely. they may even change in kind. we may get into moral 
entanglements; before we know it, we may be in the midst of a struggle 
between good and evil." 

sir nathaniel smile gravely. 

"with regard to the first question--so far as i know, there are no fixed 
periods for which a scent may be active--i think we may take it that that 
period do not run into thousand of years. as to whether any moral 
change accompany a physical one, i can only say that i have met no 
proof of the fact. at the same time, we must remember that 'good' and 
'evil' are terms so wide as to take in the whole scheme of creation, and 
all that is imply by them and by their mutual action and reaction. 
generally, i would say that in the scheme of a first cause anything is 
possible. so long as the inherent forces or tendency of any one thing 
are veiled from us we must expect mystery." 

"there is one other question on which i should like to ask your opinion. 
suppose that there are any permanent forces appertain to the past, 
what we may call 'survivals,' do these belong to good as well as to evil? 
for instance, if the scent of the primaeval monster can so remain in 
proportion to the original strength, can the same be true of things of 
good import?" 

sir nathaniel thought for a while before he answered. 

"we must be careful not to confuse the physical and the moral. i can see 
that already you have switch on the moral entirely, so perhaps we had 
better follow it up first. on the side of the moral, we have certain 
justification for belief in the utterance of reveal religion. for 
instance, 'the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much' 
is altogether for good. we have nothing of a similar kind on the side of 
evil. but if we accept this dictum we need have no more fear of 
'mysteries': these become thenceforth merely obstacles." 

adam sudden change to another phase of the subject. 

"and now, sir, may i turn for a few minutes to purely practical things, 
or rather to matter of historical fact?" 

sir nathaniel bowed acquiescence. 

"we have already spoken of the history, so far as it is known, of some of 
the place round us--'castra regis,' 'diana's grove,' and 'the lair of 
the white worm.' i would like to ask if there is anything not 
necessarily of evil import about any of the places?" 

"which?" ask sir nathaniel shrewdly. 

"well, for instance, this house and mercy farm?" 

"here we turn," said sir nathaniel, "to the other side, the light side of 
things. let us take mercy farm first. when augustine was sent by pope 
gregory to christianise england, in the time of the romans, he was 
received and protect by ethelbert, king of kent, whose wife, daughter 
of charibert, king of paris, was a christian, and did much for augustine. 
she found a nunnery in memory of columba, which was name _sedes 
misericordioe_, the house of mercy, and, as the region was mercian, the 
two name became involved. as columba is the latin for dove, the dove 
became a sort of signification of the nunnery. she seize on the idea 
and made the newly-founded nunnery a house of doves. someone sent her a 
freshly-discovered dove, a sort of carrier, but which had in the white 
feather of its head and neck the form of a religious cowl. the nunnery 
flourish for more than a century, when, in the time of penda, who was 
the reactionary of heathendom, it fell into decay. in the meantime the 
doves, protect by religious feeling, had increase mightily, and were 
known in all catholic communities. when king offa rule in mercia, about 
a hundred and fifty years later, he restore christianity, and under its 
protection the nunnery of st. columba was restore and its dove 
flourish again. in process of time this religious house again fell 
into desuetude; but before it disappear it had achieve a great name 
for good works, and in especial for the piety of its members. if deed 
and prayer and hope and earnest thinking leave anywhere any moral 
effect, mercy farm and all around it have almost the right to be 
considered holy ground." 

"thank you, sir," said adam earnestly, and was silent. sir nathaniel 
understood. 

after lunch that day, adam casual ask sir nathaniel to come for a 
walk with him. the keen-witted old diplomatist guess that there must 
be some motive behind the suggestion, and he at once agreed. 

as soon as they were free from observation, adam began. 

"i am afraid, sir, that there is more go on in this neighbourhood than 
most people imagine. i was out this morning, and on the edge of the 
small wood, i came upon the body of a child by the roadside. at first, i 
thought she was dead, and while examine her, i notice on her neck some 
mark that look like those of teeth." 

"some wild dog, perhaps?" put in sir nathaniel. 

"possibly, sir, though i think not--but listen to the rest of my news. i 
glance around, and to my surprise, i notice something white moving 
among the trees. i placed the child down carefully, and followed, but i 
could not find any further traces. so i return to the child and 
resume my examination, and, to my delight, i discover that she was 
still alive. i chafe her hand and gradual she revived, but to my 
disappointment she remember nothing--except that something had crept up 
quiet from behind, and had grip her round the throat. then, 
apparently, she fainted." 

"gripped her round the throat! then it cannot have been a dog." 

"no, sir, that is my difficulty, and explain why i brought you out here, 
where we cannot possibly be overheard. you have noticed, of course, the 
peculiar sinuous way in which lady arabella moves--well, i feel certain 
that the white thing that i saw in the wood was the mistress of diana's 
grove!" 

"good god, boy, be careful what you say." 

"yes, sir, i fully realise the gravity of my accusation, but i feel 
convinced that the mark on the child's throat were human--and made by a 
woman." 

adam's companion remain silent for some time, deep in thought. 

"adam, my boy," he said at last, "this matter appear to me to be far 
more serious even than you think. it forces me to break confidence with 
my old friend, your uncle--but, in order to spare him, i must do so. for 
some time now, things have been happening in this district that have been 
worry him dreadfully--several people have disappeared, without leave 
the slightest trace; a dead child was found by the roadside, with no 
visible or ascertain cause of death--sheep and other animal have 
been found in the fields, bleeding from open wounds. there have been 
other matters--many of them apparently trivial in themselves. some 
sinister influence has been at work, and i admit that i have suspect 
lady arabella--that is why i question you so close about the mongoose 
and its strange attack upon lady arabella. you will think it strange 
that i should suspect the mistress of diana's grove, a beautiful woman of 
aristocratic birth. let me explain--the family seat is near my own 
place, doom tower, and at one time i knew the family well. when still a 
young girl, lady arabella wander into a small wood near her home, and 
did not return. she was found unconscious and in a high fever--the 
doctor said that she had received a poisonous bite, and the girl being at 
a delicate and critical age, the result was serious--so much so that she 
was not expect to recover. a great london physician came down but 
could do nothing--indeed, he said that the girl would not survive the 
night. all hope had been abandoned, when, to everyone's surprise, lady 
arabella made a sudden and startle recovery. within a couple of days 
she was go about as usual! but to the horror of her people, she 
develop a terrible craving for cruelty, maim and injure bird and 
small animals--even killing them. this was put down to a nervous 
disturbance due to her age, and it was hope that her marriage to captain 
march would put this right. however, it was not a happy marriage, and 
eventually her husband was found shot through the head. i have always 
suspect suicide, though no pistol was found near the body. he may have 
discover something--god know what!--so possibly lady arabella may 
herself have kill him. putt together many small matter that have 
come to my knowledge, i have come to the conclusion that the foul white 
worm obtain control of her body, just as her soul was leave its 
earthly tenement--that would explain the sudden revival of energy, the 
strange and inexplicable craving for maim and killing, as well as many 
other matter with which i need not trouble you now, adam. as i said 
just now, god alone know what poor captain march discovered--it must 
have been something too ghastly for human endurance, if my theory is 
correct that the once beautiful human body of lady arabella is under the 
control of this ghastly white worm." 

adam nodded. 

"but what can we do, sir--it seem a most difficult problem." 

"we can do nothing, my boy--that is the important part of it. it would 
be impossible to take action--all we can do is to keep careful watch, 
especially as regards lady arabella, and be ready to act, prompt and 
decisively, if the opportunity occurs." 

adam agreed, and the two men return to lesser hill. 




chapter ix--smelling death 


adam salton, though he talk little, did not let the grass grow under 
his feet in any matter which he had undertaken, or in which he was 
interested. he had agree with sir nathaniel that they should not do 
anything with regard to the mystery of lady arabella's fear of the 
mongoose, but he steady pursue his course in being _prepared_ to act 
whenever the opportunity might come. he was in his own mind perpetual 
casting about for information or clue which might lead to possible lines 
of action. baffle by the killing of the mongoose, he look around for 
another line to follow. he was fascinate by the idea of there being a 
mysterious link between the woman and the animal, but he was already 
prepare a second string to his bow. his new idea was to use the 
faculty of oolanga, so far as he could, in the service of discovery. 
his first move was to send davenport to liverpool to try to find the 
steward of the _west african_, who had told him about oolanga, and if 
possible secure any further information, and then try to induce (by 
bribery or other means) the nigger to come to the brow. so soon as he 
himself could have speech of the voodoo-man he would be able to learn 
from him something useful. davenport was successful in his missions, for 
he had to get another mongoose, and he was able to tell adam that he had 
seen the steward, who told him much that he want to know, and had also 
arrange for oolanga to come to lesser hill the following day. at this 
point adam saw his way sufficient clear to admit davenport to some 
extent into his confidence. he had come to the conclusion that it would 
be better--certainly at first--not himself to appear in the matter, with 
which davenport was fully competent to deal. it would be time for 
himself to take a personal part when matter had advanced a little 
further. 

if what the nigger said was in any wise true, the man had a rare gift 
which might be useful in the quest they were after. he could, as it 
were, "smell death." if any one was dead, if any one had died, or if a 
place had been use in connection with death, he seem to know the broad 
fact by intuition. adam made up his mind that to test this faculty with 
regard to several place would be his first task. naturally he was 
anxious, and the time pass slowly. the only comfort was the arrival 
the next morning of a strong packing case, locked, from ross, the key 
being in the custody of davenport. in the case were two small boxes, 
both locked. one of them contained a mongoose to replace that kill by 
lady arabella; the other was the special mongoose which had already 
kill the king-cobra in nepaul. when both the animal had been safe 
put under lock and key, he felt that he might breathe more freely. no 
one was allow to know the secret of their existence in the house, 
except himself and davenport. he arrange that davenport should take 
oolanga round the neighbourhood for a walk, stopping at each of the 
place which he designated. have gone all along the brow, he was to 
return the same way and induce him to touch on the same subject in 
talk with adam, who was to meet them as if by chance at the farthest 
part--that beyond mercy farm. 

the incident of the day prove much as adam expected. at mercy farm, at 
diana's grove, at castra regis, and a few other spots, the negro stop 
and, opening his wide nostril as if to sniff boldly, said that he 
smell death. it was not always in the same form. at mercy farm he 
said there were many small deaths. at diana's grove his bearing was 
different. there was a distinct sense of enjoyment about him, especially 
when he spoke of many great deaths. here, too, he sniff in a strange 
way, like a bloodhound at check, and look puzzled. he said no word in 
either praise or disparagement, but in the centre of the grove, where, 
hidden amongst ancient oak stumps, was a block of granite slightly 
hollow on the top, he bent low and placed his forehead on the ground. 
this was the only place where he show distinct reverence. at the 
castle, though he spoke of much death, he show no sign of respect. 

there was evidently something about diana's grove which both interested 
and baffle him. before leaving, he move all over the place 
unsatisfied, and in one spot, close to the edge of the brow, where there 
was a deep hollow, he appear to be afraid. after return several 
times to this place, he sudden turn and ran in a panic of fear to the 
higher ground, crossing as he did so the outcrop rock. then he 
seem to breathe more freely, and recover some of his jaunty 
impudence. 

all this seem to satisfy adam's expectations. he went back to lesser 
hill with a serene and settled calm upon him. sir nathaniel follow him 
into his study. 

"by the way, i forgot to ask you detail about one thing. when that 
extraordinary staring episode of mr. caswall went on, how did lilla take 
it--how did she bear herself?" 

"she look frightened, and tremble just as i have seen a pigeon with a 
hawk, or a bird with a serpent." 

"thanks. it is just as i expected. there have been circumstances in the 
caswall family which lead one to believe that they have had from the 
earliest times some extraordinary mesmeric or hypnotic faculty. indeed, 
a skilled eye could read so much in their physiognomy. that shot of 
yours, whether by instinct or intention, of the hawk and the pigeon was 
peculiarly apposite. i think we may settle on that as a fixed trait to 
be accept throughout our investigation." 

when dusk had fallen, adam took the new mongoose--not the one from 
nepaul--and, carry the box slung over his shoulder, stroll towards 
diana's grove. close to the gateway he met lady arabella, clad as usual 
in tight fitting white, which show off her slim figure. 

to his intense astonishment the mongoose allow her to pet him, take him 
up in her arms and fondle him. as she was go in his direction, they 
walk on together. 

round the roadway between the entrance of diana's grove and lesser hill 
were many trees, with not much foliage except at the top. in the dusk 
this place was shadowy, and the view was hamper by the cluster 
trunks. in the uncertain, tremulous light which fell through the tree- 
tops, it was hard to distinguish anything clearly, and at last, somehow, 
he lost sight of her altogether, and turn back on his track to find 
her. presently he came across her close to her own gate. she was 
leaning over the paling of split oak branch which form the paling of 
the avenue. he could not see the mongoose, so he ask her where it had 
gone. 

"he slipt out of my arms while i was pet him," she answered, "and 
disappear under the hedges." 

they found him at a place where the avenue widen so as to let carriage 
pass each other. the little creature seem quite changed. he had been 
ebullient active; now he was dull and spiritless--seemed to be dazed. 
he allow himself to be lift by either of the pair; but when he was 
alone with lady arabella he kept look round him in a strange way, as 
though try to escape. when they had come out on the roadway adam held 
the mongoose tight to him, and, lift his hat to his companion, move 
quick towards lesser hill; he and lady arabella lost sight of each 
other in the thicken gloom. 

when adam got home, he put the mongoose in his box, and lock the door 
of the room. the other mongoose--the one from nepaul--was safe lock 
in his own box, but he lay quiet and did not stir. when he got to his 
study sir nathaniel came in, shut the door behind him. 

"i have come," he said, "while we have an opportunity of being alone, to 
tell you something of the caswall family which i think will interest you. 
there is, or use to be, a belief in this part of the world that the 
caswall family had some strange power of making the will of other 
person subservient to their own. there are many allusion to the 
subject in memoirs and other unimportant works, but i only know of one 
where the subject is spoken of definitely. it is _mercia and its 
worthies_, written by ezra tom more than a hundred years ago. the 
author go into the question of the close association of the then edgar 
caswall with mesmer in paris. he speak of caswall being a pupil and the 
fellow worker of mesmer, and states that though, when the latter left 
france, he took away with him a vast quantity of philosophical and 
electric instruments, he was never known to use them again. he once made 
it known to a friend that he had given them to his old pupil. the term 
he use was odd, for it was 'bequeathed,' but no such bequest of mesmer 
was ever made known. at any rate the instrument were missing, and never 
turn up." 

a servant came into the room to tell adam that there was some strange 
noise coming from the lock room into which he had gone when he came in. 
he hurried off to the place at once, sir nathaniel go with him. have 
lock the door behind them, adam open the packing-case where the box 
of the two mongoose were lock up. there was no sound from one of 
them, but from the other a queer restless struggling. have open both 
boxes, he found that the noise was from the nepaul animal, which, 
however, became quiet at once. in the other box the new mongoose lay 
dead, with every appearance of have been strangled! 




chapter x--the kite 


on the following day, a little after four o'clock, adam set out for 
mercy. 

he was home just as the clock were striking six. he was pale and upset, 
but otherwise look strong and alert. the old man sum up his 
appearance and manner thus: "braced up for battle." 

"now!" said sir nathaniel, and settled down to listen, look at adam 
steady and listen attentive that he might miss nothing--even the 
inflection of a word. 

"i found lilla and mimi at home. watford had been detain by business 
on the farm. miss watford received me as kindly as before; mimi, too, 
seem glad to see me. mr. caswall came so soon after i arrived, that 
he, or someone on his behalf, must have been watch for me. he was 
follow close by the negro, who was puff hard as if he had been 
running--so it was probably he who watched. mr. caswall was very cool 
and collected, but there was a more than usually iron look about his face 
that i did not like. however, we got on very well. he talk pleasant 
on all sort of questions. the nigger wait a while and then 
disappear as on the other occasion. mr. caswall's eyes were as usual 
fixed on lilla. true, they seem to be very deep and earnest, but there 
was no offence in them. had it not been for the drawing down of the 
brow and the stern set of the jaws, i should not at first have notice 
anything. but the stare, when presently it began, increase in 
intensity. i could see that lilla began to suffer from nervousness, as 
on the first occasion; but she carry herself bravely. however, the 
more nervous she grew, the hard mr. caswall stared. it was evident to 
me that he had come prepared for some sort of mesmeric or hypnotic 
battle. after a while he began to throw glance round him and then 
raise his hand, without letting either lilla or mimi see the action. it 
was evidently intended to give some sign to the negro, for he came, in 
his usual stealthy way, quiet in by the hall door, which was open. then 
mr. caswall's effort at staring became intensified, and poor lilla's 
nervous grew greater. mimi, seeing that her cousin was distressed, 
came close to her, as if to comfort or strengthen her with the 
consciousness of her presence. this evidently made a difficulty for mr. 
caswall, for his efforts, without appear to get feebler, seem less 
effective. this continue for a little while, to the gain of both lilla 
and mimi. then there was a diversion. without word or apology the door 
opened, and lady arabella march enter the room. i had seen her coming 
through the great window. without a word she cross the room and stood 
beside mr. caswall. it really was very like a fight of a peculiar kind; 
and the long it was sustain the more earnest--the fiercer--it grew. 
that combination of forces--the over-lord, the white woman, and the black 
man--would have cost some--probably all of them--their lives in the 
southern states of america. to us it was simply horrible. but all that 
you can understand. this time, to go on in sporting phrase, it was 
understood by all to be a 'fight to a finish,' and the mixed group did 
not slacken a moment or relax their efforts. on lilla the strain began 
to tell disastrously. she grew pale--a patchy pallor, which meant that 
her nerves were out of order. she tremble like an aspen, and though she 
struggle bravely, i notice that her leg would hardly support her. a 
dozen times she seem about to collapse in a faint, but each time, on 
catching sight of mimi's eyes, she made a fresh struggle and pull 
through. 

"by now mr. caswall's face had lost its appearance of passivity. his 
eyes glow with a fiery light. he was still the old roman in 
inflexible of purpose; but graft on to the roman was a new berserk 
fury. his companion in the baleful work seem to have taken on 
something of his feeling. lady arabella look like a soulless, pitiless 
being, not human, unless it revive old legend of transform human 
being who had lost their humanity in some transformation or in the sweep 
of natural savagery. as for the negro--well, i can only say that it was 
solely due to the self-restraint which you impress on me that i did not 
wipe him out as he stood--without warning, without fair play--without a 
single one of the graces of life and death. lilla was silent in the 
helpless concentration of deadly fear; mimi was all resolve and 
self-forgetfulness, so intent on the soul-struggle in which she was 
engaged that there was no possibility of any other thought. as for 
myself, the bonds of will which held me inactive seem like band of 
steel which numb all my faculties, except sight and hearing. we seem 
fixed in an _impasse_. something must happen, though the power of 
guess was inactive. as in a dream, i saw mimi's hand move restlessly, 
as if grope for something. mechanical it touched that of lilla, and 
in that instant she was transformed. it was as if youth and strength 
enter afresh into something already dead to sensibility and intention. 
as if by inspiration, she grasp the other's band with a force which 
blench the knuckles. her face sudden flamed, as if some divine light 
shone through it. her form expand till it stood out majestically. 
lift her right hand, she step forward towards caswall, and with a 
bold sweep of her arm seem to drive some strange force towards him. 
again and again was the gesture repeated, the man fall back from her 
at each movement. towards the door he retreated, she following. there 
was a sound as of the coo sob of doves, which seem to multiply and 
intensify with each second. the sound from the unseen source rose and 
rose as he retreated, till finally it swell out in a triumphant peal, 
as she with a fierce sweep of her arm, seem to hurl something at her 
foe, and he, moving his hand blind before his face, appear to be 
swept through the doorway and out into the open sunlight. 

"all at once my own faculty were fully restored; i could see and hear 
everything, and be fully conscious of what was go on. even the 
figures of the baleful group were there, though dim seen as through a 
veil--a shadowy veil. i saw lilla sink down in a swoon, and mimi throw 
up her arms in a gesture of triumph. as i saw her through the great 
window, the sunshine flood the landscape, which, however, was 
momentarily becoming eclipse by an onrush of a myriad birds." 

by the next morning, daylight show the actual danger which threatened. 
from every part of the eastern county report were received concerning 
the enormous immigrate of birds. expert were sending--on their own 
account, on behalf of learned societies, and through local and imperial 
governing bodies--reports dealing with the matter, and suggest 
remedies. 

the report close to home were even more disturbing. all day long it 
would seem that the bird were coming thick from all quarters. 
doubtless many were go as well as coming, but the mass seem never to 
get less. each bird seem to sound some note of fear or anger or 
seeking, and the whirr of wings never cease nor lessened. the air 
was full of a mutter throb. no window or barrier could shut out the 
sound, till the ear of any listener became dull by the ceaseless 
murmur. so monotonous it was, so cheerless, so disheartening, so 
melancholy, that all longed, but in vain, for any variety, no matter how 
terrible it might be. 

the second morning the report from all the district round were more 
alarm than ever. farmer began to dread the coming of winter as they 
saw the dwindle of the timely fruitful of the earth. and as yet it 
was only a warning of evil, not the evil accomplished; the ground began 
to look bare whenever some passing sound temporary frightened the 
birds. 

edgar caswall torture his brain for a long time unavailingly, to think 
of some means of get rid of what he, as well as his neighbours, had 
come to regard as a plague of birds. at last he recall a circumstance 
which promise a solution of the difficulty. the experience was of some 
years ago in china, far up-country, towards the head-waters of the yang- 
tze-kiang, where the small tributary spread out in a sort of natural 
irrigate scheme to supply the wilderness of paddy-fields. it was at 
the time of the ripen rice, and the myriad of bird which came to 
feed on the coming crop was a serious menace, not only to the district, 
but to the country at large. the farmers, who were more or less 
afflict with the same trouble every season, knew how to deal with it. 
they made a vast kite, which they cause to be flown over the centre spot 
of the incursion. the kite was shaped like a great hawk; and the moment 
it rose into the air the bird began to cower and seek protection--and 
then to disappear. so long as that kite was flying overhead the bird 
lay low and the crop was saved. accordingly caswall ordered his men to 
construct an immense kite, adhere as well as they could to the lines of 
a hawk. then he and his men, with a sufficiency of cord, began to fly it 
high overhead. the experience of china was repeated. the moment the 
kite rose, the bird hid or sought shelter. the following morning, the 
kite was still flying high, no bird was to be seen as far as the eye 
could reach from castra regis. but there follow in turn what prove 
even a worse evil. all the bird were cowed; their sound stopped. 
neither song nor chirp was heard--silence seem to have taken the place 
of the normal voice of bird life. but that was not all. the silence 
spread to all animals. 

the fear and restraint which brood amongst the denizen of the air 
began to affect all life. not only did the bird cease song or chirp, 
but the low of the cattle cease in the field and the varied sound 
of life die away. in place of these things was only a soundless gloom, 
more dreadful, more disheartening, more soul-killing than any concourse 
of sounds, no matter how full of fear and dread. pious individual put 
up constant prayer for relief from the intolerable solitude. after a 
little there were sign of universal depression which those who ran might 
read. one and all, the face of men and women seem bereft of vitality, 
of interest, of thought, and, most of all, of hope. men seem to have 
lost the power of expression of their thoughts. the soundless air seem 
to have the same effect as the universal dark when men gnaw their 
tongue with pain. 

from this infliction of silence there was no relief. everything was 
affected; gloom was the predominant note. joy appear to have pass 
away as a factor of life, and this creative impulse had nothing to take 
its place. that giant spot in high air was a plague of evil influence. 
it seem like a new misanthropy belief which had fallen on human 
beings, carry with it the negate of all hope. 

after a few days, men began to grow desperate; their very words as well 
as their senses seem to be in chains. edgar caswall again torture his 
brain to find any antidote or palliative of this greater evil than 
before. he would gladly have destroy the kite, or cause its flying to 
cease; but the instant it was pull down, the bird rose up in even 
greater numbers; all those who depend in any way on agriculture sent 
pitiful protest to castra regis. 

it was strange indeed what influence that weird kite seem to exercise. 
even human being were affected by it, as if both it and they were 
realities. as for the people at mercy farm, it was like a taste of 
actual death. lilla felt it most. if she had been indeed a real dove, 
with a real kite hanging over her in the air, she could not have been 
more frightened or more affected by the terror this created. 

of course, some of those already drawn into the vortex notice the effect 
on individuals. those who were interested took care to compare their 
information. strange enough, as it seem to the others, the person 
who took the ghastly silence least to heart was the negro. by nature he 
was not sensitive to, or afflict by, nerves. this alone would not have 
produce the seeming indifference, so they set their mind to discover 
the real cause. adam came quick to the conclusion that there was for 
him some compensation that the other did not share; and he soon believe 
that that compensation was in one form or another the enjoyment of the 
suffering of others. thus the black had a never-failing source of 
amusement. 

lady arabella's cold nature render her immune to anything in the way of 
pain or trouble concerning others. edgar caswall was far too haughty a 
person, and too stern of nature, to concern himself about poor or 
helpless people, much less the lower order of mere animals. mr. watford, 
mr. salton, and sir nathaniel were all concerned in the issue, partly 
from kindness of heart--for none of them could see suffering, even of 
wild birds, unmoved--and partly on account of their property, which had 
to be protected, or ruin would stare them in the face before long. 

lilla suffer acutely. as time went on, her face became pinched, and 
her eyes dull with watch and crying. mimi suffer too on account of 
her cousin's suffering. but as she could do nothing, she resolute made 
up her mind to self-restraint and patience. adam's frequent visit 
comfort her. 




chapter xi--mesmer's chest 


after a couple of week had passed, the kite seem to give edgar caswall 
a new zest for life. he was never tired of look at its movements. he 
had a comfortable armchair put out on the tower, wherein he sat sometimes 
all day long, watch as though the kite was a new toy and he a child 
lately come into possession of it. he did not seem to have lost interest 
in lilla, for he still paid an occasional visit at mercy farm. 

indeed, his feeling towards her, whatever it had been at first, had now 
so far change that it had become a distinct affection of a purely animal 
kind. indeed, it seem as though the man's nature had become corrupted, 
and that all the base and more selfish and more reckless quality had 
become more conspicuous. there was not so much stern apparent in his 
nature, because there was less self-restraint. determination had become 
indifference. 

the visible change in edgar was that he grew morbid, sad, silent; the 
neighbour thought he was go mad. he became absorb in the kite, and 
watch it not only by day, but often all night long. it became an 
obsession to him. 

caswall took a personal interest in the keeping of the great kite flying. 
he had a vast coil of cord efficient for the purpose, which work on a 
roller fixed on the parapet of the tower. there was a winch for the 
pull in of the slack; the outgoing line being control by a racket. 
there was invariable one man at least, day and night, on the tower to 
attend to it. at such an elevation there was always a strong wind, and 
at times the kite rose to an enormous height, as well as travel for 
great distance laterally. in fact, the kite became, in a short time, 
one of the curiosity of castra regi and all around it. edgar began to 
attribute to it, in his own mind, almost human qualities. it became to 
him a separate entity, with a mind and a soul of its own. being idle- 
hand all day, he began to apply to what he considered the service of 
the kite some of his spare time, and found a new pleasure--a new object 
in life--in the old schoolboy game of send up "runners" to the kite. 
the way this is done is to get round pieces of paper so cut that there is 
a hole in the centre, through which the string of the kite passes. the 
natural action of the wind-pressure take the paper along the string, and 
so up to the kite itself, no matter how high or how far it may have gone. 

in the early days of this amusement edgar caswall spent hours. hundred 
of such messenger flew along the string, until soon he bethought him of 
writing message on these papers so that he could make known his idea to 
the kite. it may be that his brain gave way under the opportunity 
given by his illusion of the entity of the toy and its power of separate 
thought. from send message he came to making direct speech to the 
kite--without, however, cease to send the runners. doubtless, the 
height of the tower, seat as it was on the hill-top, the rush of the 
ceaseless wind, the hypnotic effect of the lofty altitude of the speck in 
the sky at which he gazed, and the rush of the paper messenger up the 
string till sight of them was lost in distance, all help to further 
affect his brain, undoubted give way under the strain of belief and 
circumstances which were at once stimulate to the imagination, 
occupation of his mind, and absorbing. 

the next step of intellectual decline was to bring to bear on the main 
idea of the conscious identity of the kite all sort of subject which 
had imaginative force or tendency of their own. he had, in castra regis, 
a large collection of curious and interesting things form in the past 
by his forebears, of similar taste to his own. there were all sort of 
strange anthropology specimens, both old and new, which had been 
collected through various travels in strange places: ancient egypt 
relics from tomb and mummies; curio from australia, new zealand, and 
the south seas; idol and images--from tartar ikon to ancient egyptian, 
persian, and indian object of worship; object of death and torture of 
america indians; and, above all, a vast collection of lethal weapon of 
every kind and from every place--chinese "high pinders," double knives, 
afghanistan double-edged scimitar made to cut a body in two, heavy knives 
from all the eastern countries, ghost dagger from thibet, the terrible 
kukri of the ghourka and other hill tribe of india, assassins' weapon 
from italy and spain, even the knife which was formerly carry by the 
slave-drivers of the mississippi region. death and pain of every kind 
were fully represent in that gruesome collection. 

that it had a fascination for oolanga go without saying. he was never 
tired of visiting the museum in the tower, and spent endless hour in 
inspect the exhibits, till he was thorough familiar with every 
detail of all of them. he ask permission to clean and polish and 
sharpen them--a favour which was readily granted. in addition to the 
above objects, there were many things of a kind to awaken human fear. 
stuff serpent of the most objectionable and horrid kind; giant insect 
from the tropics, fearsome in every detail; fish and crustacean 
cover with weird spikes; dry octopus of great size. other things, 
too, there were, not less deadly though seemingly innocuous--dried fungi, 
trap intended for birds, beasts, fishes, reptiles, and insects; machine 
which could produce pain of any kind and degree, and the only mercy of 
which was the power of produce speedy death. 

caswall, who had never before seen any of these things, except those 
which he had collected himself, found a constant amusement and interest 
in them. he studied them, their uses, their mechanism--where there was 
such--and their place of origin, until he had an ample and real 
knowledge of all concerning them. many were secret and intricate, but he 
never rest till he found out all the secrets. when once he had become 
interested in strange objects, and the way to use them, he began to 
explore various likely place for similar finds. he began to inquire of 
his household where strange lumber was kept. several of the men spoke of 
old simon chester as one who knew everything in and about the house. 
accordingly, he sent for the old man, who came at once. he was very old, 
nearly ninety years of age, and very infirm. he had been born in the 
castle, and had serve its succession of masters--present or absent--ever 
since. when edgar began to question him on the subject regarding which 
he had sent for him, old simon exhibit much perturbation. in fact, he 
became so frightened that his master, fully believe that he was 
conceal something, ordered him to tell at once what remain unseen, 
and where it was hidden away. face to face with discovery of his secret, 
the old man, in a pitiable state of concern, spoke out even more fully 
than mr. caswall had expected. 

"indeed, indeed, sir, everything is here in the tower that has ever been 
put away in my time except--except--" here he began to shake and tremble 
it--"except the chest which mr. edgar--he who was mr. edgar when i first 
took service--brought back from france, after he had been with dr. 
mesmer. the trunk has been kept in my room for safety; but i shall send 
it down here now." 

"what is in it?" ask edgar sharply. 

"that i do not know. moreover, it is a peculiar trunk, without any 
visible means of opening." 

"is there no lock?" 

"i suppose so, sir; but i do not know. there is no keyhole." 

"send it here; and then come to me yourself." 

the trunk, a heavy one with steel band round it, but no lock or keyhole, 
was carry in by two men. shortly afterwards old simon attend his 
master. when he came into the room, mr. caswall himself went and closed 
the door; then he asked: 

"how do you open it?" 

"i do not know, sir." 

"do you mean to say that you never open it?" 

"most certainly i say so, your honour. how could i? it was entrust to 
me with the other things by my master. to open it would have been a 
breach of trust." 

caswall sneered. 

"quite remarkable! leave it with me. close the door behind you. 
stay--did no one ever tell you about it--say anything regarding it--make 
any remark?" 

old simon turn pale, and put his tremble hand together. 

"oh, sir, i entreat you not to touch it. that trunk probably contain 
secret which dr. mesmer told my master. told them to his ruin!" 

"how do you mean? what ruin?" 

"sir, he it was who, men said, sold his soul to the evil one; i had 
thought that that time and the evil of it had all pass away." 

"that will do. go away; but remain in your own room, or within call. i 
may want you." 

the old man bowed deep and went out trembling, but without speak a 
word. 




chapter xii--the chest open 


left alone in the turret-room, edgar caswall careful lock the door 
and hung a handkerchief over the keyhole. next, he inspect the 
windows, and saw that they were not overlook from any angle of the main 
building. then he careful examine the trunk, go over it with a 
magnify glass. he found it intact: the steel band were flawless; the 
whole trunk was compact. after sitting opposite to it for some time, and 
the shades of evening beginning to melt into darkness, he gave up the 
task and went to his bedroom, after lock the door of the turret-room 
behind him and taking away the key. 

he woke in the morning at daylight, and resume his patient but 
unavailing study of the metal trunk. this he continue during the whole 
day with the same result--humiliating disappointment, which overwrought 
his nerves and made his head ache. the result of the long strain was 
seen later in the afternoon, when he sat lock within the turret-room 
before the still baffling trunk, distrait, listless and yet agitated, 
sunk in a settled gloom. as the dusk was fall he told the steward to 
send him two men, strong ones. these he ordered to take the trunk to his 
bedroom. in that room he then sat on into the night, without pause 
even to take any food. his mind was in a whirl, a fever of excitement. 
the result was that when, late in the night, he lock himself in his 
room his brain was full of odd fancies; he was on the high road to mental 
disturbance. he lay down on his bed in the dark, still brood over the 
mystery of the closed trunk. 

gradual he yield to the influence of silence and darkness. after 
lie there quiet for some time, his mind became active again. but 
this time there were round him no disturb influences; his brain was 
active and able to work freely and to deal with memory. a thousand 
forgotten--or only half-known--incidents, fragment of conversation or 
theory long ago guess at and long forgotten, crowded on his mind. he 
seem to hear again around him the legion of whirr wings to which he 
had been so lately accustomed. even to himself he knew that that was an 
effort of imagination found on imperfect memory. but he was content 
that imagination should work, for out of it might come some solution of 
the mystery which surround him. and in this frame of mind, sleep made 
another and more successful essay. this time he enjoy peaceful 
slumber, restful alike to his weary body and his overwrought brain. 

in his sleep he arose, and, as if in obedience to some influence beyond 
and greater than himself, lift the great trunk and set it on a strong 
table at one side of the room, from which he had previous remove a 
quantity of books. to do this, he had to use an amount of strength which 
was, he knew, far beyond him in his normal state. as it was, it seem 
easy enough; everything yield before his touch. then he became 
conscious that somehow--how, he never could remember--the chest was open. 
he unlock his door, and, taking the chest on his shoulder, carry it 
up to the turret-room, the door of which also he unlocked. even at the 
time he was amaze at his own strength, and wonder whence it had come. 
his mind, lost in conjecture, was too far off to realise more immediate 
things. he knew that the chest was enormously heavy. he seemed, in a 
sort of vision which lit up the absolute black around, to see the two 
sturdy servant men staggering under its great weight. he lock himself 
again in the turret-room, and laid the open chest on a table, and in 
the dark began to unpack it, lay out the contents, which were 
mainly of metal and glass--great pieces in strange forms--on another 
table. he was conscious of being still asleep, and of acting rather in 
obedience to some unseen and unknown command than in accordance with any 
reasonable plan, to be follow by result which he understood. this 
phase completed, he proceed to arrange in order the component parts of 
some large instruments, form mostly of glass. his finger seem to 
have acquire a new and exquisite subtlety and even a volition of their 
own. then weary of brain came upon him; his head sank down on his 
breast, and little by little everything became wrap in gloom. 

he awoke in the early morning in his bedroom, and look around him, now 
clear-headed, in amazement. in its usual place on the strong table stood 
the great steel-hooped chest without lock or key. but it was now locked. 
he arose quiet and stole to the turret-room. there everything was as 
it had been on the previous evening. he look out of the window where 
high in air flew, as usual, the giant kite. he unlock the wicket gate 
of the turret stair and went out on the roof. close to him was the great 
coil of cord on its reel. it was hum in the morning breeze, and when 
he touched the string it sent a quick thrill through hand and arm. there 
was no sign anywhere that there had been any disturbance or displacement 
of anything during the night. 

utterly bewildered, he sat down in his room to think. now for the first 
time he _felt_ that he was asleep and dreaming. presently he fell asleep 
again, and slept for a long time. he awoke hungry and made a hearty 
meal. then towards evening, have lock himself in, he fell asleep 
again. when he woke he was in darkness, and was quite at sea as to his 
whereabouts. he began feeling about the dark room, and was recall to 
the consequence of his position by the break of a large piece of 
glass. have obtain a light, he discover this to be a glass wheel, 
part of an elaborate piece of mechanism which he must in his sleep have 
taken from the chest, which was now opened. he had once again open it 
whilst asleep, but he had no recollection of the circumstances. 

caswall came to the conclusion that there had been some sort of dual 
action of his mind, which might lead to some catastrophe or some 
discovery of his secret plans; so he resolve to forgo for a while the 
pleasure of making discovery regarding the chest. to this end, he 
applied himself to quite another matter--an investigate of the other 
treasure and rare object in his collections. he went amongst them in 
simple, idle curiosity, his main object being to discover some strange 
item which he might use for experiment with the kite. he had already 
resolve to try some runner other than those made of paper. he had a 
vague idea that with such a force as the great kite strain at its 
leash, this might be use to lift to the altitude of the kite itself 
heavy articles. his first experiment with articles of little but 
increase weight was eminently successful. so he add by degree more 
and more weight, until he found out that the lift power of the kite 
was considerable. he then determined to take a step further, and send to 
the kite some of the articles which lay in the steel-hooped chest. the 
last time he had open it in sleep, it had not been shut again, and he 
had insert a wedge so that he could open it at will. he made 
examination of the contents, but came to the conclusion that the glass 
object were unsuitable. they were too light for test weight, and 
they were so frail as to be dangerous to send to such a height. 

so he look around for something more solid with which to experiment. 
his eye caught sight of an object which at once attract him. this was 
a small copy of one of the ancient egypt gods--that of bes, who 
represent the destructive power of nature. it was so bizarre and 
mysterious as to commend itself to his mad humour. in lift it from 
the cabinet, he was struck by its great weight in proportion to its size. 
he made accurate examination of it by the aid of some instruments, and 
came to the conclusion that it was carve from a lump of lodestone. he 
remember that he had read somewhere of an ancient egypt god cut from 
a similar substance, and, thinking it over, he came to the conclusion 
that he must have read it in sir thomas brown's _popular errors_, a book 
of the seventeenth century. he got the book from the library, and look 
out the passage: 

"a great example we have from the observation of our learned friend mr. 
graves, in an aegyptian idol cut out of loadstone and found among the 
mummies; which still retain its attraction, though probably taken out of 
the mine about two thousand years ago." 

the strange of the figure, and its being so close akin to his own 
nature, attract him. he made from thin wood a large circular runner, 
and in front of it placed the weighty god, send it up to the flying 
kite along the throb cord. 




chapter xiii--oolanga's hallucination 


during the last few days lady arabella had been get exceedingly 
impatient. her debts, always pressing, were grow to an embarrass 
amount. the only hope she had of comfort in life was a good marriage; 
but the good marriage on which she had fixed her eye did not seem to move 
quick enough--indeed, it did not seem to move at all--in the right 
direction. edgar caswall was not an ardent wooer. from the very first 
he seem _difficile_, but he had been keeping to his own room ever since 
his struggle with mimi watford. on that occasion lady arabella had shown 
him in an unmistakable way what her feelings were; indeed, she had made 
it known to him, in a more overt way than pride should allow, that she 
wish to help and support him. the moment when she had gone across the 
room to stand beside him in his mesmeric struggle, had been the very 
limit of her voluntary action. it was quite bitter enough, she felt, 
that he did not come to her, but now that she had made that advance, she 
felt that any withdrawal on his part would, to a woman of her class, be 
nothing less than a flaming insult. had she not class herself with his 
nigger servant, an unreformed savage? had she not shown her preference 
for him at the festival of his home-coming? had she not . . . lady 
arabella was cold-blooded, and she was prepared to go through all that 
might be necessary of indifference, and even insult, to become chatelaine 
of castra regis. in the meantime, she would show no hurry--she must 
wait. she might, in an unostentatious way, come to him again. she knew 
him now, and could make a keen guess at his desire with regard to lilla 
watford. with that secret in her possession, she could bring pressure to 
bear on caswall which would make it no easy matter for him to evade her. 
the great difficulty was how to get near him. he was shut up within his 
castle, and guarded by a defence of convention which she could not pass 
without danger of ill repute to herself. over this question she thought 
and thought for days and nights. at last she decided that the only way 
would be to go to him openly at castra regis. her rank and position 
would make such a thing possible, if careful done. she could explain 
matter afterwards if necessary. then when they were alone, she would 
use her arts and her experience to make him commit himself. after all, 
he was only a man, with a man's dislike of difficult or awkward 
situations. she felt quite sufficient confidence in her own womanhood to 
carry her through any difficulty which might arise. 

from diana's grove she heard each day the luncheon-gong from castra regi 
sound, and knew the hour when the servant would be in the back of the 
house. she would enter the house at that hour, and, pretend that she 
could not make anyone hear her, would seek him in his own rooms. the 
tower was, she knew, away from all the usual sound of the house, and 
moreover she knew that the servant had strict orders not to interrupt 
him when he was in the turret chamber. she had found out, partly by the 
aid of an opera-glass and partly by judicious questioning, that several 
times lately a heavy chest had been carry to and from his room, and 
that it rest in the room each night. she was, therefore, confident 
that he had some important work on hand which would keep him busy for 
long spells. 

meanwhile, another member of the household at castra regi had scheme 
which he thought were working to fruition. a man in the position of a 
servant has plenty of opportunity of watch his betters and form 
opinion regarding them. oolanga was in his way a clever, unscrupulous 
rogue, and he felt that with things moving round him in this great 
household there should be opportunity of self-advancement. being 
unscrupulous and stealthy--and a savage--he look to dishonest means. he 
saw plainly enough that lady arabella was making a dead set at his 
master, and he was watchful of the slightest sign of anything which might 
enhance this knowledge. like the other men in the house, he knew of the 
carry to and fro of the great chest, and had got it into his head that 
the care exercise in its porterage indicate that it was full of 
treasure. he was for ever lurk around the turret-rooms on the chance 
of making some useful discovery. but he was as cautious as he was 
stealthy, and took care that no one else watch him. 

it was thus that the negro became aware of lady arabella's venture into 
the house, as she thought, unseen. he took more care than ever, since he 
was watch another, that the position were not reversed. more than 
ever he kept his eyes and ear open and his mouth shut. seeing lady 
arabella gliding up the stairs towards his master's room, he took it for 
grant that she was there for no good, and double his watch 
intent and caution. 

oolanga was disappointed, but he dare not exhibit any feeling lest it 
should betray that he was hiding. therefore he slunk downstairs again 
noiselessly, and wait for a more favourable opportunity of further 
his plans. it must be borne in mind that he thought that the heavy trunk 
was full of valuables, and that he believe that lady arabella had come 
to try to steal it. his purpose of use for his own advantage the 
combination of these two idea was seen later in the day. oolanga 
secret follow her home. he was an expert at this game, and succeed 
admirable on this occasion. he watch her enter the private gate of 
diana's grove, and then, taking a roundabout course and keeping out of 
her sight, he at last overtook her in a thick part of the grove where no 
one could see the meeting. 

lady arabella was much surprised. she had not seen the negro for several 
days, and had almost forgotten his existence. oolanga would have been 
startle had he known and been capable of understanding the real value 
placed on him, his beauty, his worthiness, by other persons, and compare 
it with the value in these matter in which he held himself. doubtless 
oolanga had his dream like other men. in such case he saw himself as a 
young sun-god, as beautiful as the eye of dusky or even white womanhood 
had ever dwelt upon. he would have been fill with all noble and 
captivate qualities--or those regard as such in west africa. women 
would have love him, and would have told him so in the overt and fervid 
manner usual in affair of the heart in the shadowy depths of the forest 
of the gold coast. 

oolanga came close behind lady arabella, and in a hush voice, suitable 
to the importance of his task, and in deference to the respect he had for 
her and the place, began to unfold the story of his love. lady arabella 
was not usually a humorous person, but no man or woman of the white race 
could have checked the laughter which rose spontaneous to her lips. the 
circumstances were too grotesque, the contrast too violent, for subdued 
mirth. the man a debase specimen of one of the most primitive races of 
the earth, and of an ugly which was simply devilish; the woman of 
high degree, beautiful, accomplished. she thought that her first 
moment's consideration of the outrage--it was nothing less in her 
eyes--had given her the full material for thought. but every instant 
after threw new and varied lights on the affront. her indignation was 
too great for passion; only irony or satire would meet the situation. her 
cold, cruel nature helped, and she did not shrink to subject this 
ignorant savage to the merciless fire-lash of her scorn. 

oolanga was dim conscious that he was being flouted; but his anger was 
no less keen because of the measure of his ignorance. so he gave way to 
it, as do a torture beast. he ground his great teeth together, raved, 
stamped, and swore in barbarous tongue and with barbarous imagery. even 
lady arabella felt that it was well she was within reach of help, or he 
might have offer her brutal violence--even have kill her. 

"am i to understand," she said with cold disdain, so much more effective 
to wound than hot passion, "that you are offering me your love? 
your--love?" 

for reply he nod his head. the scorn of her voice, in a sort of 
baleful hiss, sounded--and felt--like the lash of a whip. 

"and you dared! you--a savage--a slave--the basest thing in the world of 
vermin! take care! i don't value your worthless life more than i do 
that of a rat or a spider. don't let me ever see your hideous face here 
again, or i shall rid the earth of you." 

as she was speaking, she had taken out her revolver and was point it 
at him. in the immediate presence of death his impudence forsook him, 
and he made a weak effort to justify himself. his speech was short, 
consist of single words. to lady arabella it sound mere gibberish, 
but it was in his own dialect, and meant love, marriage, wife. from the 
intonation of the words, she guessed, with her woman's quick intuition, 
at their meaning; but she quite fail to follow, when, becoming more 
pressing, he continue to urge his suit in a mixture of the grossest 
animal passion and ridiculous threats. he warn her that he knew she 
had try to steal his master's treasure, and that he had caught her in 
the act. but if she would be his, he would share the treasure with her, 
and they could live in luxury in the africa forests. but if she 
refused, he would tell his master, who would flog and torture her and 
then give her to the police, who would kill her. 




chapter xiv--battle renew 


the consequence of that meeting in the dusk of diana's grove were acute 
and far-reaching, and not only to the two engaged in it. from oolanga, 
this might have been expect by anyone who knew the character of the 
tropical africa savage. to such, there are two passion that are 
inexhaustible and insatiable--vanity and that which they are pleased to 
call love. oolanga left the grove with an absorbing hatred in his heart. 
his lust and greed were afire, while his vanity had been wound to the 
core. lady arabella's icy nature was not so deep stirred, though she 
was in a seethe passion. more than ever she was set upon bring 
edgar caswall to her feet. the obstacle she had encountered, the 
insult she had endured, were only as fuel to the purpose of revenge 
which consume her. 

as she sought her own rooms in diana's grove, she went over the whole 
subject again and again, always finding in the face of lilla watford a 
key to a problem which puzzle her--the problem of a way to turn 
caswall's powers--his very existence--to aid her purpose. 

when in her boudoir, she wrote a note, taking so much trouble over it 
that she destroyed, and rewrote, till her dainty waste-basket was half- 
full of torn sheet of notepaper. when quite satisfied, she copy out 
the last sheet afresh, and then careful burn all the spoil 
fragments. she put the copy note in an emblazon envelope, and 
direct it to edgar caswall at castra regis. this she sent off by one 
of her grooms. the letter ran: 

"dear mr. caswall, 

"i want to have a chat with you on a subject in which i believe you 
are interested. will you kindly call for me one day after lunch--say 
at three or four o'clock, and we can walk a little way together. only 
as far as mercy farm, where i want to see lilla and mimi watford. we 
can take a cup of tea at the farm. do not bring your africa servant 
with you, as i am afraid his face frighten the girls. after all, he 
is not pretty, is he? i have an idea you will be pleased with your 
visit this time. 

"yours sincerely, 

"arabella march." 

at half-past three next day, edgar caswall call at diana's grove. lady 
arabella met him on the roadway outside the gate. she wish to take the 
servant into her confidence as little as possible. she turn when she 
saw him coming, and walk beside him towards mercy farm, keeping step 
with him as they walked. when they got near mercy, she turn and look 
around her, expect to see oolanga or some sign of him. he was, 
however, not visible. he had received from his master peremptory orders 
to keep out of sight--an order for which the africa score a new offence 
up against her. they found lilla and mimi at home and seemingly glad to 
see them, though both the girl were surprise at the visit coming so 
soon after the other. 

the proceedings were a repetition of the battle of soul of the former 
visit. on this occasion, however, edgar caswall had only the presence of 
lady arabella to support him--oolanga being absent; but mimi lack the 
support of adam salton, which had been of such effective service before. 
this time the struggle for supremacy of will was long and more 
determined. caswall felt that if he could not achieve supremacy he had 
better give up the idea, so all his pride was enlist against mimi. when 
they had been wait for the door to be opened, lady arabella, believe 
in a sudden attack, had said to him in a low voice, which somehow carry 
conviction: 

"this time you should win. mimi is, after all, only a woman. show her 
no mercy. that is weakness. fight her, beat her, trample on her--kill 
her if need be. she stand in your way, and i hate her. never take your 
eyes off her. never mind lilla--she is afraid of you. you are already 
her master. mimi will try to make you look at her cousin. there lie 
defeat. let nothing take your attention from mimi, and you will win. if 
she is overcome you, take my hand and hold it hard whilst you are 
look into her eyes. if she is too strong for you, i shall interfere. 
i'll make a diversion, and under cover of it you must retire unbeaten, 
even if not victorious. hush! they are coming." 

the two girl came to the door together. strange sound were coming up 
over the brow from the west. it was the rustling and crackling of the 
dry reeds and rushes from the low lands. the season had been an 
unusually dry one. also the strong east wind was helping forward 
enormous flock of birds, most of them pigeon with white cowls. not 
only were their wings whirring, but their coo was plainly audible. 
from such a multitude of bird the mass of sound, individually small, 
assume the volume of a storm. surprise at the influx of birds, to 
which they had been stranger so long, they all look towards castra 
regis, from whose high tower the great kite had been flying as usual. but 
even as they looked, the cord broke, and the great kite fell headlong in 
a series of sweeping dives. its own weight, and the aerial force oppose 
to it, which cause it to rise, combine with the strong easterly breeze, 
had been too much for the great length of cord holding it. 

somehow, the mishap to the kite gave new hope to mimi. it was as though 
the side issue had been shorn away, so that the main struggle was 
thenceforth on simple lines. she had a feeling in her heart, as though 
some religious chord had been newly touched. it may, of course, have 
been that with the renewal of the bird voice a fresh courage, a fresh 
belief in the good issue of the struggle came too. in the misery of 
silence, from which they had all suffer for so long, any new train of 
thought was almost bound to be a boon. as the inrush of bird continued, 
their wings beating against the crackling rushes, lady arabella grew 
pale, and almost fainted. 

"what is that?" she ask suddenly. 

to mimi, born and bred in siam, the sound was strange like an 
exaggeration of the sound produce by a snake-charmer. 

edgar caswall was the first to recover from the interrupt of the 
fall kite. after a few minutes he seem to have quite recover his 
_sang froid_, and was able to use his brains to the end which he had in 
view. mimi too quick recover herself, but from a different cause. 
with her it was a deep religious conviction that the struggle round her 
was of the powers of good and evil, and that good was triumphing. the 
very appearance of the snowy birds, with the cowl of saint columba, 
heighten the impression. with this conviction strong upon her, she 
continue the strange battle with fresh vigour. she seem to tower over 
caswall, and he to give back before her oncoming. once again her 
vigorous pass drove him to the door. he was just go out backward 
when lady arabella, who had been gaze at him with fixed eyes, caught 
his hand and try to stop his movement. she was, however, unable to do 
any good, and so, holding hands, they pass out together. as they did 
so, the strange music which had so alarm lady arabella sudden 
stopped. instinctive they all look towards the tower of castra 
regis, and saw that the workmen had refixe the kite, which had risen 
again and was beginning to float out to its former station. 

as they were looking, the door open and michael watford came into the 
room. by that time all had recover their self-possession, and there 
was nothing out of the common to attract his attention. as he came in, 
seeing inquiring looks all around him, he said: 

"the new influx of bird is only the annual migration of pigeon from 
africa. i am told that it will soon be over." 

the second victory of mimi watford made edgar caswall more moody than 
ever. he felt thrown back on himself, and this, add to his absorbing 
interest in the hope of a victory of his mesmeric powers, became a deep 
and settled purpose of revenge. the chief object of his animosity was, 
of course, mimi, whose will had overcome his, but it was obscure in 
greater or lesser degree by all who had oppose him. lilla was next to 
mimi in his hate--lilla, the harmless, tender-hearted, sweet-natured 
girl, whose heart was so full of love for all things that in it was no 
room for the passion of ordinary life--whose nature resemble those 
dove of st. columba, whose colour she wore, whose appearance she 
reflected. adam salton came next--after a gap; for against him caswall 
had no direct animosity. he regard him as an interference, a 
difficulty to be got rid of or destroyed. the young australia had been 
so discreet that the most he had against him was his knowledge of what 
had been. caswall did not understand him, and to such a nature as his, 
ignorance was a cause of alarm, of dread. 

caswall resume his habit of watch the great kite strain at its 
cord, vary his vigil in this way by a further examination of the 
mysterious treasure of his house, especially mesmer's chest. he sat 
much on the roof of the tower, brood over his thwart passion. the 
vast extent of his possessions, visible to him at that altitude, might, 
one would have thought, have restore some of his complacency. but the 
very extent of his ownership, thus perpetual brought before him, 
create a fresh sense of grievance. how was it, he thought, that with so 
much at command that other wish for, he could not achieve the dearest 
wish of his heart? 

in this state of intellectual and moral depravity, he found a solace in 
the renewal of his experiment with the mechanical powers of the kite. 
for a couple of week he did not see lady arabella, who was always on the 
watch for a chance of meeting him; neither did he see the watford girls, 
who studious kept out of his way. adam salton simply marked time, 
keeping ready to deal with anything that might affect his friends. he 
call at the farm and heard from mimi of the last battle of wills, but 
it had only one consequence. he got from ross several more mongooses, 
including a second king-cobra-killer, which he generally carry with him 
in its box whenever he walk out. 

mr. caswall's experiment with the kite went on successfully. each day 
he try the lift of greater weight, and it seem almost as if the 
machine had a sentience of its own, which was increase with the 
obstacle placed before it. all this time the kite hung in the sky at an 
enormous height. the wind was steady from the north, so the trend of 
the kite was to the south. all day long, runner of increase magnitude 
were sent up. these were only of paper or thin cardboard, or leather, or 
other flexible materials. the great height at which the kite hung made a 
great concave curve in the string, so that as the runner went up they 
made a flap sound. if one laid a finger on the string, the sound 
answer to the flap of the runner in a sort of hollow intermittent 
murmur. edgar caswall, who was now wholly obsess by the kite and all 
belong to it, found a distinct resemblance between that intermittent 
rumble and the snake-charming music produce by the pigeon flying 
through the dry reeds. 

one day he made a discovery in mesmer's chest which he thought he would 
utilise with regard to the runners. this was a great length of wire, 
"fine as human hair," coil round a finely made wheel, which ran to a 
wondrous distance freely, and as lightly. he try this on runners, and 
found it work admirably. whether the runner was alone, or carry 
something much more weighty than itself, it work equally well. also it 
was strong enough and light enough to draw back the runner without undue 
strain. he try this a good many times successfully, but it was now 
grow dusk and he found some difficulty in keeping the runner in sight. 
so he look for something heavy enough to keep it still. he placed the 
egypt image of be on the fine wire, which cross the wooden ledge 
which protect it. then, the dark growing, he went indoors and 
forgot all about it. 

he had a strange feeling of uneasy that night--not sleeplessness, for 
he seem conscious of being asleep. at daylight he rose, and as usual 
look out for the kite. he did not see it in its usual position in the 
sky, so look round the points of the compass. he was more than 
astonish when presently he saw the missing kite struggle as usual 
against the control cord. but it had gone to the further side of the 
tower, and now hung and strained _against the wind_ to the north. he 
thought it so strange that he determined to investigate the phenomenon, 
and to say nothing about it in the meantime. 

in his many travels, edgar caswall had been accustomed to use the 
sextant, and was now an expert in the matter. by the aid of this and 
other instruments, he was able to fix the position of the kite and the 
point over which it hung. he was startle to find that exactly under 
it--so far as he could ascertain--was diana's grove. he had an 
inclination to take lady arabella into his confidence in the matter, but 
he thought better of it and wise refrained. for some reason which he 
did not try to explain to himself, he was glad of his silence, when, on 
the following morning, he found, on look out, that the point over 
which the kite then hover was mercy farm. when he had verify this 
with his instruments, he sat before the window of the tower, look out 
and thinking. the new locality was more to his liking than the other; 
but the why of it puzzle him, all the same. he spent the rest of the 
day in the turret-room, which he did not leave all day. it seem to him 
that he was now drawn by forces which he could not control--of which, 
indeed, he had no knowledge--in directions which he did not understand, 
and which were without his own volition. in sheer helpless inability to 
think the problem out satisfactorily, he call up a servant and told him 
to tell oolanga that he want to see him at once in the turret-room. the 
answer came back that the africa had not been seen since the previous 
evening. 

caswall was now so irritable that even this small thing upset him. as he 
was distrait and want to talk to somebody, he sent for simon chester, 
who came at once, breathless with hurry and upset by the unexpected 
summons. caswall bade him sit down, and when the old man was in a less 
uneasy frame of mind, he again ask him if he had ever seen what was in 
mesmer's chest or heard it spoken about. 

chester admitted that he had once, in the time of "the then mr. edgar," 
seen the chest open, which, knowing something of its history and guess 
more, so upset him that he had fainted. when he recovered, the chest was 
closed. from that time the then mr. edgar had never spoken about it 
again. 

when caswall ask him to describe what he had seen when the chest was 
open, he got very agitated, and, despite all his effort to remain calm, 
he sudden went off into a faint. caswall summon servants, who 
applied the usual remedies. still the old man did not recover. after 
the lapse of a considerable time, the doctor who had been summon made 
his appearance. a glance was sufficient for him to make up his mind. 
still, he knelt down by the old man, and made a careful examination. then 
he rose to his feet, and in a hush voice said: 

"i grieve to say, sir, that he has pass away." 




chapter xv--on the track 


those who had seen edgar caswall familiarly since his arrival, and had 
already estimate his cold-blooded nature at something of its true value, 
were surprise that he took so to heart the death of old chester. the 
fact was that not one of them had guess correct at his character. 
they thought, naturally enough, that the concern which he felt was that 
of a master for a faithful old servant of his family. they little 
thought that it was merely the selfish expression of his disappointment, 
that he had thus lost the only remain clue to an interesting piece of 
family history--one which was now and would be for ever wrap in 
mystery. caswall knew enough about the life of his ancestor in paris to 
wish to know more fully and more thorough all that had been. the 
period cover by that ancestor's life in paris was one inviting every 
form of curiosity. 

lady arabella, who had her own game to play, saw in the _metier_ of 
sympathetic friend, a series of meeting with the man she want to 
secure. she made the first use of the opportunity the day after old 
chester's death; indeed, as soon as the news had filter in through the 
back door of diana's grove. at that meeting, she play her part so well 
that even caswall's cold nature was impressed. 

oolanga was the only one who did not credit her with at least some sense 
of fine feeling in the matter. in emotional, as in other matters, 
oolanga was distinct a utilitarian, and as he could not understand 
anyone feeling grief except for his own suffering, pain, or for the loss 
of money, he could not understand anyone simulate such an emotion 
except for show intended to deceive. he thought that she had come to 
castra regi again for the opportunity of steal something, and was 
determined that on this occasion the chance of pressing his advantage 
over her should not pass. he felt, therefore, that the occasion was one 
for extra careful in the watch of all that went on. ever since he 
had come to the conclusion that lady arabella was try to steal the 
treasure-chest, he suspect nearly everyone of the same design, and made 
it a point to watch all suspicious person and places. as adam was 
engaged on his own research regarding lady arabella, it was only 
natural that there should be some crossing of each other's tracks. this 
is what did actually happen. 

adam had gone for an early morning survey of the place in which he was 
interested, taking with him the mongoose in its box. he arrive at the 
gate of diana's grove just as lady arabella was prepare to set out for 
castra regi on what she considered her mission of comfort. seeing adam 
from her window go through the shadow of the tree round the gate, 
she thought that he must be engaged on some purpose similar to her own. 
so, quick making her toilet, she quiet left the house, and, taking 
advantage of every shadow and substance which could hide her, follow 
him on his walk. 

oolanga, the experienced tracker, follow her, but succeed in hiding 
his movements better than she did. he saw that adam had on his shoulder 
a mysterious box, which he took to contain something valuable. seeing 
that lady arabella was secret following adam, he was confirmed in this 
idea. his mind--such as it was--was fixed on her try to steal, and he 
credit her at once with making use of this new opportunity. 

in his walk, adam went into the grounds of castra regis, and oolanga saw 
her follow him with great secrecy. he fear to go closer, as now on 
both side of him were enemy who might make discovery. when he 
realise that lady arabella was bound for the castle, he devoted himself 
to following her with singleness of purpose. he therefore miss seeing 
that adam branch off the track and return to the high road. 

that night edgar caswall had slept badly. the tragic occurrence of the 
day was on his mind, and he kept waking and thinking of it. after an 
early breakfast, he sat at the open window watch the kite and thinking 
of many things. from his room he could see all round the neighbourhood, 
but the two place that interested him most were mercy farm and diana's 
grove. at first the movements about those spot were of a humble 
kind--those that belong to domestic service or agriculture needs--the 
opening of door and windows, the sweeping and brushing, and generally 
the restoration of habitual order. 

from his high window--whose height made it a screen from the observation 
of others--he saw the chain of watch move into his own grounds, and 
then presently break up--adam salton go one way, and lady arabella, 
follow by the nigger, another. then oolanga disappear amongst the 
trees; but caswall could see that he was still watching. lady arabella, 
after look around her, slip in by the open door, and he could, of 
course, see her no longer. 

presently, however, he heard a light tap at his door, then the door 
open slowly, and he could see the flash of lady arabella's white dress 
through the opening. 




chapter xvi--a visit of sympathy 


caswall was genuine surprise when he saw lady arabella, though he need 
not have been, after what had already occur in the same way. the look 
of surprise on his face was so much greater than lady arabella had 
expected--though she thought she was prepared to meet anything that might 
occur--that she stood still, in sheer amazement. cold-blooded as she was 
and ready for all social emergencies, she was nonplus how to go on. 
she was plucky, however, and began to speak at once, although she had not 
the slightest idea what she was go to say. 

"i came to offer you my very warm sympathy with the grief you have so 
lately experienced." 

"my grief? i'm afraid i must be very dull; but i really do not 
understand." 

already she felt at a disadvantage, and hesitated. 

"i mean about the old man who die so suddenly--your old . . . retainer." 

caswall's face relax something of its puzzle concentration. 

"oh, he was only a servant; and he had over-stayed his three-score and 
ten years by something like twenty years. he must have been ninety!" 

"still, as an old servant . . . " 

caswall's words were not so cold as their inflection. 

"i never interfere with servants. he was kept on here merely because he 
had been so long on the premises. i suppose the steward thought it might 
make him unpopular if the old fellow had been dismissed." 

how on earth was she to proceed on such a task as hers if this was the 
utmost geniality she could expect? so she at once try another 
tack--this time a personal one. 

"i am sorry i disturbed you. i am really not unconventional--though 
certainly no slave to convention. still there are limit . . . it is bad 
enough to intrude in this way, and i do not know what you can say or 
think of the time selected, for the intrusion." 

after all, edgar caswall was a gentleman by custom and habit, so he rose 
to the occasion. 

"i can only say, lady arabella, that you are always welcome at any time 
you may deign to honour my house with your presence." 

she smile at him sweetly. 

"thank you _so_ much. you _do_ put one at ease. my breach of convention 
make me glad rather than sorry. i feel that i can open my heart to you 
about anything." 

forthwith she proceed to tell him about oolanga and his strange 
suspicion of her honesty. caswall laugh and made her explain all the 
details. his final comment was enlightening. 

"let me give you a word of advice: if you have the slightest fault to 
find with that infernal nigger, shoot him at sight. a swelled-headed 
nigger, with a bee in his bonnet, is one of the worst difficulty in the 
world to deal with. so better make a clean job of it, and wipe him out 
at once!" 

"but what about the law, mr. caswall?" 

"oh, the law doesn't concern itself much about dead niggers. a few more 
or less do not matter. to my mind it's rather a relief!" 

"i'm afraid of you," was her only comment, made with a sweet smile and in 
a soft voice. 

"all right," he said, "let us leave it at that. anyhow, we shall be rid 
of one of them!" 

"i don't love nigger any more than you do," she replied, "and i suppose 
one mustn't be too particular where that sort of clean up is 
concerned." then she change in voice and manner, and ask genially: 
"and now tell me, am i forgiven?" 

"you are, dear lady--if there is anything to forgive." 

as he spoke, seeing that she had move to go, he came to the door with 
her, and in the most natural way accompany her downstairs. he pass 
through the hall with her and down the avenue. as he went back to the 
house, she smile to herself. 

"well, that is all right. i don't think the morning has been altogether 
thrown away." 

and she walk slow back to diana's grove. 

adam salton follow the line of the brow, and refresh his memory as to 
the various localities. he got home to lesser hill just as sir nathaniel 
was beginning lunch. mr. salton had gone to walsall to keep an early 
appointment; so he was all alone. when the meal was over--seeing in 
adam's face that he had something to speak about--he follow into the 
study and shut the door. 

when the two men had light their pipes, sir nathaniel began. 

"i have remember an interesting fact about diana's grove--there is, i 
have long understood, some strange mystery about that house. it may be 
of some interest, or it may be trivial, in such a tangle skein as we are 
try to unravel." 

"please tell me all you know or suspect. to begin, then, of what sort 
is the mystery--physical, mental, moral, historical, scientific, occult? 
any kind of hint will help me." 

"quite right. i shall try to tell you what i think; but i have not put 
my thought on the subject in sequence, so you must forgive me if due 
order is not observe in my narration. i suppose you have seen the house 
at diana's grove?" 

"the outside of it; but i have that in my mind's eye, and i can fit into 
my memory whatever you may mention." 

"the house is very old--probably the first house of some sort that stood 
there was in the time of the romans. this was probably renewed--perhaps 
several times at later periods. the house stands, or, rather, use to 
stand here when mercia was a kingdom--i do not suppose that the basement 
can be later than the norman conquest. some years ago, when i was 
president of the mercian archaeology society, i went all over it very 
carefully. this was when it was purchase by captain march. the house 
had then been done up, so as to be suitable for the bride. the basement 
is very strong,--almost as strong and as heavy as if it had been intended 
as a fortress. there are a whole series of rooms deep underground. one 
of them in particular struck me. the room itself is of considerable 
size, but the masonry is more than massive. in the middle of the room is 
a sunk well, built up to floor level and evidently go deep 
underground. there is no windlass nor any trace of there ever have 
been any--no rope--nothing. now, we know that the roman had well of 
immense depth, from which the water was lift by the 'old rag rope'; 
that at woodhull use to be nearly a thousand feet. here, then, we have 
simply an enormously deep well-hole. the door of the room was massive, 
and was fasten with a lock nearly a foot square. it was evidently 
intended for some kind of protection to someone or something; but no one 
in those days had ever heard of anyone have been allow even to see 
the room. all this is _a propos_ of a suggestion on my part that the 
well-hole was a way by which the white worm (whatever it was) went and 
came. at that time i would have had a search made--even excavation if 
necessary--at my own expense, but all suggestion were met with a prompt 
and explicit negative. so, of course, i took no further step in the 
matter. then it die out of recollection--even of mine." 

"do you remember, sir," ask adam, "what was the appearance of the room 
where the well-hole was? was there furniture--in fact, any sort of thing 
in the room?" 

"the only thing i remember was a sort of green light--very clouded, very 
dim--which came up from the well. not a fixed light, but intermittent 
and irregular--quite unlike anything i had ever seen." 

"do you remember how you got into the well-room? was there a separate 
door from outside, or was there any interior room or passage which open 
into it?" 

"i think there must have been some room with a way into it. i remember 
go up some steep steps; they must have been worn smooth by long use or 
something of the kind, for i could hardly keep my feet as i went up. once 
i stumble and nearly fell into the well-hole." 

"was there anything strange about the place--any queer smell, for 
instance?" 

"queer smell--yes! like bilge or a rank swamp. it was distinct 
nauseating; when i came out i felt as if i had just been go to be 
sick. i shall try back on my visit and see if i can recall any more of 
what i saw or felt." 

"then perhaps, sir, later in the day you will tell me anything you may 
chance to recollect." 

"i shall be delighted, adam. if your uncle has not return by then, 
i'll join you in the study after dinner, and we can resume this 
interesting chat." 




chapter xvii--the mystery of "the grove" 


that afternoon adam decided to do a little exploring. as he pass 
through the wood outside the gate of diana's grove, he thought he saw the 
african's face for an instant. so he went deep into the undergrowth, 
and follow along parallel to the avenue to the house. he was glad that 
there was no workman or servant about, for he did not care that any of 
lady arabella's people should find him wandering about her grounds. 
taking advantage of the dense of the trees, he came close to the 
house and skirt round it. he was repaid for his trouble, for on the 
far side of the house, close to where the rocky frontage of the cliff 
fell away, he saw oolanga crouch behind the irregular trunk of a great 
oak. the man was so intent on watch someone, or something, that he 
did not guard against being himself watched. this suit adam, for he 
could thus make scrutiny at will. 

the thick wood, though the tree were mostly of small girth, threw a 
heavy shadow, so that the steep declension, in front of which grew the 
tree behind which the africa lurked, was almost in darkness. adam drew 
as close as he could, and was amaze to see a patch of light on the 
ground before him; when he realise what it was, he was determined, more 
than ever to follow on his quest. the nigger had a dark lantern in his 
hand, and was throw the light down the steep incline. the glare 
show a series of stone steps, which end in a low-lying heavy iron 
door fixed against the side of the house. all the strange things he had 
heard from sir nathaniel, and all those, little and big, which he had 
himself noticed, crowded into his mind in a chaotic way. instinctive 
he took refuge behind a thick oak stem, and set himself down, to watch 
what might occur. 

after a short time it became apparent that the africa was try to find 
out what was behind the heavy door. there was no way of look in, for 
the door fitted tight into the massive stone slabs. the only opportunity 
for the entrance of light was through a small hole between the great 
stone above the door. this hole was too high up to look through from 
the ground level. oolanga, have try standing tiptoe on the highest 
point near, and holding the lantern as high as he could, threw the light 
round the edge of the door to see if he could find anywhere a hole or a 
flaw in the metal through which he could obtain a glimpse. foil in 
this, he brought from the shrubbery a plank, which he leant against the 
top of the door and then climb up with great dexterity. this did not 
bring him near enough to the window-hole to look in, or even to throw the 
light of the lantern through it, so he climb down and carry the plank 
back to the place from which he had got it. then he conceal himself 
near the iron door and waited, manifest with the intent of remain 
there till someone came near. presently lady arabella, moving 
noiseless through the shade, approach the door. when he saw her 
close enough to touch it, oolanga step forward from his concealment, 
and spoke in a whisper, which through the gloom sound like a hiss. 

"i want to see you, missy--soon and secret." 

"what do you want?" 

"you know well, missy; i told you already." 

she turn on him with blazing eyes, the green tint in them glowing like 
emeralds. 

"come, none of that. if there is anything sensible which you wish to say 
to me, you can see me here, just where we are, at seven o'clock." 

he made no reply in words, but, putt the back of his hand together, 
bent lower and lower till his forehead touched the earth. then he rose 
and went slow away. 

adam salton, from his hiding-place, saw and wondered. in a few minutes 
he move from his place and went home to lesser hill, fully determined 
that seven o'clock would find him in some hidden place behind diana's 
grove. 

at a little before seven adam stole soft out of the house and took the 
back-way to the rear of diana's grove. the place seem silent and 
deserted, so he took the opportunity of conceal himself near the spot 
whence he had seen oolanga try to investigate whatever was conceal 
behind the iron door. he waited, perfectly still, and at last saw a 
gleam of white passing soundless through the undergrowth. he was not 
surprise when he recognise the colour of lady arabella's dress. she 
came close and waited, with her face to the iron door. from some place 
of concealment near at hand oolanga appeared, and came close to her. adam 
noticed, with surprise amusement, that over his shoulder was the box 
with the mongoose. of course the africa did not know that he was seen 
by anyone, least of all by the man whose property he had with him. 

silent-footed as he was, lady arabella heard him coming, and turn to 
meet him. it was somewhat hard to see in the gloom, for, as usual, he 
was all in black, only his collar and cuffs showing white. lady arabella 
open the conversation which ensue between the two. 

"what do you want? to rob me, or murder me?" 

"no, to lub you!" 

this frightened her a little, and she try to change the tone. 

"is that a coffin you have with you? if so, you are waste your time. 
it would not hold me." 

when a nigger suspect he is being laugh at, all the ferocity of his 
nature come to the front; and this man was of the lowest kind. 

"dis ain't no coffin for nobody. dis box is for you. somefin you lub. 
me give him to you!" 

still anxious to keep off the subject of affection, on which she believe 
him to have become crazed, she made another effort to keep his mind 
elsewhere. 

"is this why you want to see me?" he nodded. "then come round to the 
other door. but be quiet. i have no desire to be seen so close to my 
own house in conversation with a--a--a nigger like you!" 

she had chosen the word deliberately. she wish to meet his passion 
with another kind. such would, at all events, help to keep him quiet. in 
the deep gloom she could not see the anger which suffuse his face. 
rolling eyeball and grind teeth are, however, sufficient sign of 
anger to be decipher in the dark. she move round the corner of the 
house to her right. oolanga was following her, when she stop him by 
raise her hand. 

"no, not that door," she said; "that is not for niggers. the other door 
will do well enough for you!" 

lady arabella took in her hand a small key which hung at the end of her 
watch-chain, and move to a small door, low down, round the corner, and a 
little downhill from the edge of the brow. oolanga, in obedience to her 
gesture, went back to the iron door. adam look careful at the 
mongoose box as the africa went by, and was glad to see that it was 
intact. unconsciously, as he looked, he finger the key that was in his 
waistcoat pocket. when oolanga was out of sight, adam hurried after lady 
arabella. 




chapter xviii--exit oolanga 


the woman turn sharp as adam touched her shoulder. 

"one moment whilst we are alone. you had better not trust that nigger!" 
he whispered. 

her answer was crisp and concise: 

"i don't." 

"forewarned is forearmed. tell me if you will--it is for your own 
protection. why do you mistrust him?" 

"my friend, you have no idea of that man's impudence. would you believe 
that he wants me to marry him?" 

"no!" said adam incredulously, amuse in spite of himself. 

"yes, and want to bribe me to do it by share a chest of treasure--at 
least, he thought it was--stolen from mr. caswall. why do you distrust 
him, mr. salton?" 

"did you notice that box he had slung on his shoulder? that belong to 
me. i left it in the gun-room when i went to lunch. he must have crept 
in and stolen it. doubtless he think that it, too, is full of 
treasure." 

"he does!" 

"how on earth do you know?" ask adam. 

"a little while ago he offer to give it to me--another bribe to accept 
him. faugh! i am ashamed to tell you such a thing. the beast!" 

whilst they had been speaking, she had open the door, a narrow iron 
one, well hung, for it open easily and closed tight without any 
creak or sound of any kind. within all was dark; but she enter as 
freely and with as little misgiving or restraint as if it had been broad 
daylight. for adam, there was just sufficient green light from somewhere 
for him to see that there was a broad flight of heavy stone steps leading 
upward; but lady arabella, after shut the door behind her, when it 
closed tight without a clang, trip up the steps lightly and swiftly. 
for an instant all was dark, but there came again the faint green light 
which enable him to see the outline of things. another iron door, 
narrow like the first and fairly high, led into another large room, the 
wall of which were of massive stones, so close join together as to 
exhibit only one smooth surface. this present the appearance of have 
at one time been polished. on the far side, also smooth like the walls, 
was the reverse of a wide, but not high, iron door. here there was a 
little more light, for the high-up aperture over the door open to the 
air. 

lady arabella took from her girdle another small key, which she insert 
in a keyhole in the centre of a massive lock. the great bolt seem 
wonderful hung, for the moment the small key was turned, the bolt of 
the great lock move noiseless and the iron door swung open. on the 
stone steps outside stood oolanga, with the mongoose box slung over his 
shoulder. lady arabella stood a little on one side, and the african, 
accept the movement as an invitation, enter in an obsequious way. 
the moment, however, that he was inside, he gave a quick look around him. 

"much death here--big death. many deaths. good, good!" 

he sniff round as if he was enjoy the scent. the matter and manner 
of his speech were so revolting that instinctive adam's hand wander 
to his revolver, and, with his finger on the trigger, he rest satisfy 
that he was ready for any emergency. 

there was certainly opportunity for the nigger's enjoyment, for the open 
well-hole was almost under his nose, send up such a stench as almost 
made adam sick, though lady arabella seem not to mind it at all. it 
was like nothing that adam had ever met with. he compare it with all 
the noxious experience he had ever had--the drainage of war hospitals, 
of slaughter-houses, the refuse of dissect rooms. none of these was 
like it, though it had something of them all, with, added, the sour 
of chemical waste and the poisonous effluvium of the bilge of a water- 
log ship whereon a multitude of rats had been drowned. 

then, quite unexpectedly, the negro notice the presence of a third 
person--adam salton! he pull out a pistol and shot at him, happily 
missing. adam was himself usually a quick shot, but this time his mind 
had been on something else and he was not ready. however, he was quick 
to carry out an intention, and he was not a coward. in another moment 
both men were in grips. beside them was the dark well-hole, with that 
horrid effluvium steal up from its mysterious depths. 

adam and oolanga both had pistols; lady arabella, who had not one, was 
probably the most ready of them all in the theory of shooting, but that 
being impossible, she made her effort in another way. gliding forward, 
she try to seize the african; but he elude her grasp, just missing, in 
do so, fall into the mysterious hole. as he sway back to firm 
foothold, he turn his own gun on her and shot. instinctive adam 
leap at his assailant; clutch at each other, they totter on the 
very brink. 

lady arabella's anger, now fully awake, was all for oolanga. she move 
towards him with her hand extended, and had just seize him when the 
catch of the lock box--due to some movement from within--flew open, and 
the king-cobra-killer flew at her with a venomous fury impossible to 
describe. as it seize her throat, she caught hold of it, and, with a 
fury superior to its own, tore it in two just as if it had been a sheet 
of paper. the strength use for such an act must have been terrific. in 
an instant, it seem to spout blood and entrails, and was hurl into 
the well-hole. in another instant she had seize oolanga, and with a 
swift rush had drawn him, her white arms encircle him, down with her 
into the gape aperture. 

adam saw a medley of green and red lights blaze in a whirl circle, and 
as it sank down into the well, a pair of blazing green eyes became fixed, 
sank lower and lower with frightful rapidity, and disappeared, throw 
upward the green light which grew more and more vivid every moment. as 
the light sank into the noisome depths, there came a shriek which chill 
adam's blood--a prolonged agony of pain and terror which seem to have 
no end. 

adam salton felt that he would never be able to free his mind from the 
memory of those dreadful moments. the gloom which surround that 
horrible charnel pit, which seem to go down to the very bowels of the 
earth, convey from far down the sight and sound of the nethermost 
hell. the ghastly fate of the africa as he sank down to his terrible 
doom, his black face grow grey with terror, his white eyeballs, now 
like veined bloodstone, rolling in the helpless extremity of fear. the 
mysterious green light was in itself a milieu of horror. and through it 
all the awful cry came up from that fathomless pit, whose entrance was 
flood with spot of fresh blood. even the death of the fearless little 
snake-killer--so fierce, so frightful, as if stain with a ferocity 
which told of no living force above earth, but only of the devil of the 
pit--was only an incident. adam was in a state of intellectual tumult, 
which had no parallel in his experience. he try to rush away from the 
horrible place; even the baleful green light, thrown up through the 
gloomy well-shaft, was die away as its source sank deep into the 
primeval ooze. the dark was close in on him in overwhelming 
density--darkness in such a place and with such a memory of it! 

he made a wild rush forward--slipt on the steps in some sticky, acrid- 
smell mass that felt and smelt like blood, and, fall forward, felt 
his way into the inner room, where the well-shaft was not. 

then he rub his eyes in sheer amazement. up the stone steps from the 
narrow door by which he had entered, glide the white-clad figure of lady 
arabella, the only colour to be seen on her being blood-marks on her face 
and hand and throat. otherwise, she was calm and unruffled, as when 
early she stood aside for him to pass in through the narrow iron door. 




chapter xix--an enemy in the dark 


adam salton went for a walk before return to lesser hill; he felt that 
it might be well, not only to steady his nerves, shaken by the horrible 
scene, but to get his thought into some sort of order, so as to be ready 
to enter on the matter with sir nathaniel. he was a little embarrass 
as to telling his uncle, for affair had so vastly progress beyond his 
original view that he felt a little doubtful as to what would be the old 
gentleman's attitude when he should hear of the strange event for the 
first time. mr. salton would certainly not be satisfy at being treat 
as an outsider with regard to such things, most of which had points of 
contact with the inmate of his own house. it was with an immense sense 
of relief that adam heard that his uncle had telegraph to the 
housekeeper that he was detain by business at walsall, where he would 
remain for the night; and that he would be back in the morning in time 
for lunch. 

when adam got home after his walk, he found sir nathaniel just go to 
bed. he did not say anything to him then of what had happened, but 
contented himself with arrange that they would walk together in the 
early morning, as he had much to say that would require serious 
attention. 

strange enough he slept well, and awoke at dawn with his mind clear and 
his nerves in their usual unshaken condition. the maid brought up, with 
his early morning cup of tea, a note which had been found in the letter- 
box. it was from lady arabella, and was evidently intended to put him on 
his guard as to what he should say about the previous evening. 

he read it over careful several times, before he was satisfy that he 
had taken in its full import. 

"dear mr. salton, 

"i cannot go to bed until i have written to you, so you must forgive 
me if i disturb you, and at an unseemly time. indeed, you must also 
forgive me if, in try to do what is right, i err in saying too much 
or too little. the fact is that i am quite upset and unnerve by all 
that has happen in this terrible night. i find it difficult even to 
write; my hand shake so that they are not under control, and i am 
tremble all over with memory of the horrors we saw enact before 
our eyes. i am grieve beyond measure that i should be, however 
remotely, a cause of this horror coming on you. forgive me if you 
can, and do not think too hardly of me. this i ask with confidence, 
for since we share together the danger--the very pangs--of death, i 
feel that we should be to one another something more than mere 
friends, that i may lean on you and trust you, assured that your 
sympathy and pity are for me. you really must let me thank you for 
the friendliness, the help, the confidence, the real aid at a time of 
deadly danger and deadly fear which you show me. that awful man--i 
shall see him for ever in my dreams. his black, malignant face will 
shut out all memory of sunshine and happiness. i shall eternal see 
his evil eyes as he threw himself into that well-hole in a vain effort 
to escape from the consequence of his own misdoing. the more i think 
of it, the more apparent it seem to me that he had premeditated the 
whole thing--of course, except his own horrible death. 

"perhaps you have notice a fur collar i occasional wear. it is one 
of my most value treasures--an ermine collar stud with emeralds. i 
had often seen the nigger's eyes gleam covetous when he look at 
it. unhappily, i wore it yesterday. that may have been the cause 
that lure the poor man to his doom. on the very brink of the abyss 
he tore the collar from my neck--that was the last i saw of him. when 
he sank into the hole, i was rush to the iron door, which i pull 
behind me. when i heard that soul-sickening yell, which marked his 
disappearance in the chasm, i was more glad than i can say that my 
eyes were spare the pain and horror which my ear had to endure. 

"when i tore myself out of the negro's grasp as he sank into the well- 
hole; i realise what freedom meant. freedom! freedom! not only 
from that noisome prison-house, which has now such a memory, but from 
the more noisome embrace of that hideous monster. whilst i live, i 
shall always thank you for my freedom. a woman must sometimes express 
her gratitude; otherwise it become too great to bear. i am not a 
sentimental girl, who merely likes to thank a man; i am a woman who 
know all, of bad as well as good, that life can give. i have known 
what it is to love and to lose. but you must not let me bring any 
unhappy into your life. i must live on--as i have lived--alone, 
and, in addition, bear with other woe the memory of this latest 
insult and horror. in the meantime, i must get away as quick as 
possible from diana's grove. in the morning i shall go up to town, 
where i shall remain for a week--i cannot stay longer, as business 
affair demand my presence here. i think, however, that a week in the 
rush of busy london, surround with multitude of commonplace people, 
will help to soften--i cannot expect total obliteration--the terrible 
image of the bygone night. when i can sleep easily--which will be, i 
hope, after a day or two--i shall be fit to return home and take up 
again the burden which will, i suppose, always be with me. 

"i shall be most happy to see you on my return--or earlier, if my good 
fortune send you on any errand to london. i shall stay at the 
mayfair hotel. in that busy spot we may forget some of the danger 
and horrors we have share together. adieu, and thank you, again and 
again, for all your kindness and consideration to me. 

"arabella marsh." 

adam was surprise by this effusive epistle, but he determined to say 
nothing of it to sir nathaniel until he should have thought it well over. 
when adam met sir nathaniel at breakfast, he was glad that he had taken 
time to turn things over in his mind. the result had been that not only 
was he familiar with the fact in all their bearings, but he had already 
so far differentiate them that he was able to arrange them in his own 
mind according to their values. breakfast had been a silent function, so 
it did not interfere in any way with the process of thought. 

so soon as the door was closed, sir nathaniel began: 

"i see, adam, that something has occurred, and that you have much to tell 
me." 

"that is so, sir. i suppose i had better begin by telling you all i 
know--all that has happen since i left you yesterday?" 

accordingly adam gave him detail of all that had happen during the 
previous evening. he confine himself rigid to the narration of 
circumstances, taking care not to colour event by any comment of his 
own, or any opinion of the meaning of things which he did not fully 
understand. at first, sir nathaniel seem disposed to ask questions, 
but shortly gave this up when he recognise that the narration was 
concise and self-explanatory. thenceforth, he contented himself with 
quick looks and glances, easily interpreted, or by some acquiescent 
motions of his hands, when such could be convenient, to emphasise his 
idea of the correct of any inference. until adam cease speaking, 
have evidently come to an end of what he had to say with regard to this 
section of his story, the elder man made no comment whatever. even when 
adam took from his pocket lady arabella's letter, with the manifest 
intention of reading it, he did not make any comment. finally, when adam 
fold up the letter and put it, in its envelope, back in his pocket, as 
an intimate that he had now quite finished, the old diplomatist 
careful made a few note in his pocket-book. 

"your narrative, my dear adam, is altogether admirable. i think i may 
now take it that we are both well versed in the actual facts, and that 
our conference had better take the shape of a mutual exchange of ideas. 
let us both ask question as they may arise; and i do not doubt that we 
shall arrive at some enlighten conclusions." 

"will you kindly begin, sir? i do not doubt that, with your long 
experience, you will be able to dissipate some of the fog which envelop 
certain of the things which we have to consider." 

"i hope so, my dear boy. for a beginning, then, let me say that lady 
arabella's letter make clear some things which she intended--and also 
some things which she did not intend. but, before i begin to draw 
deductions, let me ask you a few questions. adam, are you heart-whole, 
quite heart-whole, in the matter of lady arabella?" 

his companion answer at once, each look the other straight in the 
eyes during question and answer. 

"lady arabella, sir, is a charming woman, and i should have deem it a 
privilege to meet her--to talk to her--even--since i am in the 
confessional--to flirt a little with her. but if you mean to ask if my 
affection are in any way engaged, i can emphatically answer 'no!'--as 
indeed you will understand when presently i give you the reason. apart 
from that, there are the unpleasant detail we discuss the other day." 

"could you--would you mind give me the reason now? it will help us to 
understand what is before us, in the way of difficulty." 

"certainly, sir. my reason, on which i can fully depend, is that i love 
another woman!" 

"that clinch it. may i offer my good wishes, and, i hope, my 
congratulations?" 

"i am proud of your good wishes, sir, and i thank you for them. but it 
is too soon for congratulations--the lady do not even know my hope 
yet. indeed, i hardly knew them myself, as definite, till this moment." 

"i take it then, adam, that at the right time i may be allow to know 
who the lady is?" 

adam laugh a low, sweet laugh, such as ripple from a happy heart. 

"there need not be an hour's, a minute's delay. i shall be glad to share 
my secret with you, sir. the lady, sir, whom i am so happy as to love, 
and in whom my dream of life-long happiness are centred, is mimi 
watford!" 

"then, my dear adam, i need not wait to offer congratulations. she is 
indeed a very charming young lady. i do not think i ever saw a girl who 
united in such perfection the quality of strength of character and 
sweet of disposition. with all my heart, i congratulate you. then i 
may take it that my question as to your heart-wholeness is answer in 
the affirmative?" 

"yes; and now, sir, may i ask in turn why the question?" 

"certainly! i ask because it seem to me that we are coming to a point 
where my question might be painful to you." 

"it is not merely that i love mimi, but i have reason to look on lady 
arabella as her enemy," adam continued. 

"her enemy?" 

"yes. a rank and unscrupulous enemy who is bent on her destruction." 

sir nathaniel went to the door, look outside it and returned, lock 
it careful behind him. 




chapter xx--metabolism 


"am i look grave?" ask sir nathaniel inconsequent when he 
re-entered the room. 

"you certainly are, sir." 

"we little thought when first we met that we should be drawn into such a 
vortex. already we are mixed up in robbery, and probably murder, but--a 
thousand times worse than all the crime in the calendar--in an affair of 
ghastly mystery which has no bottom and no end--with forces of the most 
unnerve kind, which had their origin in an age when the world was 
different from the world which we know. we are go back to the origin 
of superstition--to an age when dragon tore each other in their slime. 
we must fear nothing--no conclusion, however improbable, almost 
impossible it may be. life and death is hanging on our judgment, not 
only for ourselves, but for other whom we love. remember, i count on 
you as i hope you count on me." 

"i do, with all confidence." 

"then," said sir nathaniel, "let us think just and bold and fear 
nothing, however terrify it may seem. i suppose i am to take as exact 
in every detail your account of all the strange things which happen 
whilst you were in diana's grove?" 

"so far as i know, yes. of course i may be mistaken in recollection of 
some detail or another, but i am certain that in the main what i have 
said is correct." 

"you feel sure that you saw lady arabella seize the negro round the neck, 
and drag him down with her into the hole?" 

"absolutely certain, sir, otherwise i should have gone to her 
assistance." 

"we have, then, an account of what happen from an eye-witness whom we 
trust--that is yourself. we have also another account, written by lady 
arabella under her own hand. these two account do not agree. therefore 
we must take it that one of the two is lying." 

"apparently, sir." 

"and that lady arabella is the liar!" 

"apparently--as i am not." 

"we must, therefore, try to find a reason for her lying. she has nothing 
to fear from oolanga, who is dead. therefore the only reason which could 
actuate her would be to convince someone else that she was blameless. 
this 'someone' could not be you, for you had the evidence of your own 
eyes. there was no one else present; therefore it must have been an 
absent person." 

"that seem beyond dispute, sir." 

"there is only one other person whose good opinion she could wish to 
keep--edgar caswall. he is the only one who fill the bill. her lie 
point to other things besides the death of the african. she evidently 
want it to be accept that his fall into the well was his own act. 
i cannot suppose that she expect to convince you, the eye-witness; but 
if she wish later on to spread the story, it was wise of her to try to 
get your acceptance of it." 

"that is so!" 

"then there were other matter of untruth. that, for instance, of the 
ermine collar embroider with emeralds. if an understand reason be 
require for this, it would be to draw attention away from the green 
lights which were seen in the room, and especially in the well-hole. any 
unprejudiced person would accept the green lights to be the eyes of a 
great snake, such as tradition pointed to living in the well-hole. in 
fine, therefore, lady arabella want the general belief to be that there 
was no snake of the kind in diana's grove. for my own part, i don't 
believe in a partial liar--this art do not deal in veneer; a liar is a 
liar right through. self-interest may prompt falsity of the tongue; but 
if one prove to be a liar, nothing that he say can ever be believed. 
this leads us to the conclusion that because she said or infer that 
there was no snake, we should look for one--and expect to find it, too. 

"now let me digress. i live, and have for many years lived, in 
derbyshire, a county more celebrated for its cave than any other county 
in england. i have been through them all, and am familiar with every 
turn of them; as also with other great cave in kentucky, in france, in 
germany, and a host of other places--in many of these are tremendous 
deep cave of narrow aperture, which are value by intrepid explorers, 
who descend narrow gullet of abysmal depth--and sometimes never return. 
in many of the cavern in the peak i am convinced that some of the 
small passage were use in primeval times as the lair of some of the 
great serpent of legend and tradition. it may have been that such 
cavern were form in the usual geology way--bubbles or flaw in the 
earth's crust--which were later use by the monster of the period of the 
young world. it may have been, of course, that some of them were worn 
originally by water; but in time they all found a use when suitable for 
living monsters. 

"this bring us to another point, more difficult to accept and understand 
than any other require belief in a base not usually accepted, or indeed 
enter on--whether such abnormal growth could have ever change in 
their nature. some day the study of metabolism may progress so far as to 
enable us to accept structural change proceeding from an intellectual or 
moral base. we may lean towards a belief that great animal strength may 
be a sound base for change of all sorts. if this be so, what could be a 
more fitting subject than primeval monster whose strength was such as to 
allow a survival of thousand of years? we do not know yet if brain can 
increase and develop independent of other parts of the living 
structure. 

"after all, the mediaeval belief in the philosopher's stone which could 
transmute metals, has its counterpart in the accept theory of 
metabolism which change living tissue. in an age of investigate like 
our own, when we are return to science as the base of wonders--almost 
of miracles--we should be slow to refuse to accept facts, however 
impossible they may seem to be. 

"let us suppose a monster of the early days of the world--a dragon of the 
prime--of vast age running into thousand of years, to whom had been 
convey in some way--it matter not--a brain just sufficient for the 
beginning of growth. suppose the monster to be of incalculable size and 
of a strength quite abnormal--a veritable incarnation of animal strength. 
suppose this animal is allow to remain in one place, thus being remove 
from accident of interrupt development; might not, would not this 
creature, in process of time--ages, if necessary--have that rudimentary 
intelligence developed? there is no impossible in this; it is only 
the natural process of evolution. in the beginning, the instinct of 
animal are confine to alimentation, self-protection, and the 
multiplication of their species. as time go on and the needs of life 
become more complex, power follow need. we have been long accustomed to 
consider growth as applied almost exclusively to size in its various 
aspects. but nature, who has no doctrinaire ideas, may equally apply it 
to concentration. a develop thing may expand in any given way or 
form. now, it is a scientific law that increase imply gain and loss of 
various kinds; what a thing gain in one direction it may lose in 
another. may it not be that mother nature may deliberate encourage 
decrease as well as increase--that it may be an axiom that what is gain 
in concentration is lost in size? take, for instance, monster that 
tradition has accept and localised, such as the worm of lambton or that 
of spindleston heugh. if such a creature were, by its own process of 
metabolism, to change much of its bulk for intellectual growth, we should 
at once arrive at a new class of creature--more dangerous, perhaps, than 
the world has ever had any experience of--a force which can think, which 
has no soul and no morals, and therefore no acceptance of responsibility. 
a snake would be a good illustration of this, for it is cold-blooded, and 
therefore remove from the temptation which often weaken or restrict 
warm-blooded creatures. if, for instance, the worm of lambton--if such 
ever existed--were guide to its own end by an organised intelligence 
capable of expansion, what form of creature could we imagine which would 
equal it in potentiality of evil? why, such a being would devastate a 
whole country. now, all these things require much thought, and we want 
to apply the knowledge usefully, and we should therefore be exact. would 
it not be well to resume the subject later in the day?" 

"i quite agree, sir. i am in a whirl already; and want to attend 
careful to what you say; so that i may try to digest it." 

both men seem fresher and better for the "easy," and when they met in 
the afternoon each of them had something to contribute to the general 
stock of information. adam, who was by nature of a more militant 
disposition than his elderly friend, was glad to see that the conference 
at once assume a practical trend. sir nathaniel recognise this, and, 
like an old diplomatist, turn it to present use. 

"tell me now, adam, what is the outcome, in your own mind, of our 
conversation?" 

"that the whole difficulty already assume practical shape; but with 
add dangers, that at first i did not imagine." 

"what is the practical shape, and what are the add dangers? i am not 
disputing, but only try to clear my own idea by the consideration of 
yours--" 

so adam went on: 

"in the past, in the early days of the world, there were monster who 
were so vast that they could exist for thousand of years. some of them 
must have overlap the christian era. they may have progress 
intellectual in process of time. if they had in any way so progressed, 
or even got the most rudimentary form of brain, they would be the most 
dangerous things that ever were in the world. tradition say that one of 
these monster live in the marsh of the east, and came up to a cave in 
diana's grove, which was also call the lair of the white worm. such 
creature may have grown down as well as up. they _may_ have grown into, 
or something like, human beings. lady arabella march is of snake nature. 
she has committed crime to our knowledge. she retain something of the 
vast strength of her primal being--can see in the dark--has the eyes of a 
snake. she use the nigger, and then drag him through the snake's 
hole down to the swamp; she is intent on evil, and hate some one we 
love. result . . . " 

"yes, the result?" 

"first, that mimi watford should be taken away at once--then--" 

"yes?" 

"the monster must be destroyed." 

"bravo! that is a true and fearless conclusion. at whatever cost, it 
must be carry out." 

"at once?" 

"soon, at all events. that creature's very existence is a danger. her 
presence in this neighbourhood make the danger immediate." 

as he spoke, sir nathaniel's mouth harden and his eyebrow came down 
till they met. there was no doubt his concurrence in the resolution, 
or his readiness to help in carry it out. but he was an elderly man 
with much experience and knowledge of law and diplomacy. it seem to 
him to be a stern duty to prevent anything irrevocable taking place till 
it had been thought out and all was ready. there were all sort of legal 
crux to be thought out, not only regarding the taking of life, even of 
a monstrosity in human form, but also of property. lady arabella, be she 
woman or snake or devil, own the ground she move in, according to 
britain law, and the law is jealous and swift to avenge wrong done 
within its ken. all such difficulty should be--must be--avoided for 
mr. salton's sake, for adam's own sake, and, most of all, for mimi 
watford's sake. 

before he spoke again, sir nathaniel had made up his mind that he must 
try to postpone decisive action until the circumstances on which they 
depended--which, after all, were only problematical--should have been 
test satisfactorily, one way or another. when he did speak, adam at 
first thought that his friend was waver in his intention, or "funking" 
the responsibility. however, his respect for sir nathaniel was so great 
that he would not act, or even come to a conclusion on a vital point, 
without his sanction. 

he came close and whisper in his ear: 

"we will prepare our plan to combat and destroy this horrible menace, 
after we have clear up some of the more baffling points. meanwhile, we 
must wait for the night--i hear my uncle's footstep echo down the 
hall." 

sir nathaniel nod his approval. 




chapter xxi--green light 


when old mr. salton had retired for the night, adam and sir nathaniel 
return to the study. things went with great regularity at lesser hill, 
so they knew that there would be no interrupt to their talk. 

when their cigar were lighted, sir nathaniel began. 

"i hope, adam, that you do not think me either slack or changeable of 
purpose. i mean to go through this business to the bitter end--whatever 
it may be. be satisfy that my first care is, and shall be, the 
protection of mimi watford. to that i am pledged; my dear boy, we who 
are interested are all in the same danger. that semi-human monster out 
of the pit hate and means to destroy us all--you and me certainly, and 
probably your uncle. i want especially to talk with you to-night, for 
i cannot help thinking that the time is fast coming--if it has not come 
already--when we must take your uncle into our confidence. it was one 
thing when fancy evil threatened, but now he is probably marked for 
death, and it is only right that he should know all." 

"i am with you, sir. things have change since we agree to keep him out 
of the trouble. now we dare not; consideration for his feelings might 
cost his life. it is a duty--and no light or pleasant one, either. i 
have not a shadow of doubt that he will want to be one with us in this. 
but remember, we are his guests; his name, his honour, have to be thought 
of as well as his safety." 

"all shall be as you wish, adam. and now as to what we are to do? we 
cannot murder lady arabella off-hand. therefore we shall have to put 
things in order for the killing, and in such a way that we cannot be 
tax with a crime." 

"it seem to me, sir, that we are in an exceedingly tight place. our 
first difficulty is to know where to begin. i never thought this 
fight an antediluvian monster would be such a complicated job. this 
one is a woman, with all a woman's wit, combine with the heartless 
of a _cocotte_. she has the strength and impregnable of a diplodocus. 
we may be sure that in the fight that is before us there will be no 
semblance of fair-play. also that our unscrupulous opponent will not 
betray herself!" 

"that is so--but being feminine, she will probably over-reach herself. 
now, adam, it strike me that, as we have to protect ourselves and other 
against feminine nature, our strong game will be to play our masculine 
against her feminine. perhaps we had better sleep on it. she is a thing 
of the night; and the night may give us some ideas." 

so they both turn in. 

adam knock at sir nathaniel's door in the grey of the morning, and, on 
being bidden, came into the room. he had several letters in his hand. 
sir nathaniel sat up in bed. 

"well!" 

"i should like to read you a few letters, but, of course, i shall not 
send them unless you approve. in fact"--with a smile and a blush--"there 
are several things which i want to do; but i hold my hand and my tongue 
till i have your approval." 

"go on!" said the other kindly. "tell me all, and count at any rate on 
my sympathy, and on my approval and help if i can see my way." 

accordingly adam proceeded: 

"when i told you the conclusion at which i had arrived, i put in the 
foreground that mimi watford should, for the sake of her own safety, be 
removed--and that the monster which had wrought all the harm should be 
destroyed." 

"yes, that is so." 

"to carry this into practice, sir, one preliminary is required--unless 
harm of another kind is to be faced. mimi should have some protector 
whom all the world would recognise. the only form recognise by 
convention is marriage!" 

sir nathaniel smile in a fatherly way. 

"to marry, a husband is required. and that husband should be you." 

"yes, yes." 

"and the marriage should be immediate and secret--or, at least, not 
spoken of outside ourselves. would the young lady be agreeable to that 
proceeding?" 

"i do not know, sir!" 

"then how are we to proceed?" 

"i suppose that we--or one of us--must ask her." 

"is this a sudden idea, adam, a sudden resolution?" 

"a sudden resolution, sir, but not a sudden idea. if she agrees, all is 
well and good. the sequence is obvious." 

"and it is to be kept a secret amongst ourselves?" 

"i want no secret, sir, except for mimi's good. for myself, i should 
like to shout it from the house-tops! but we must be discreet; untimely 
knowledge to our enemy might work incalculable harm." 

"and how would you suggest, adam, that we could combine the momentous 
question with secrecy?" 

adam grew red and move uneasily. 

"someone must ask her--as soon as possible!" 

"and that someone?" 

"i thought that you, sir, would be so good!" 

"god bless my soul! this is a new kind of duty to take on--at my time of 
life. adam, i hope you know that you can count on me to help in any way 
i can!" 

"i have already count on you, sir, when i venture to make such a 
suggestion. i can only ask," he added, "that you will be more than ever 
kind to me--to us--and look on the painful duty as a voluntary act of 
grace, prompt by kindness and affection." 

"painful duty!" 

"yes," said adam boldly. "painful to you, though to me it would be all 
joyful." 

"it is a strange job for an early morning! well, we all live and learn. 
i suppose the soon i go the better. you had better write a line for me 
to take with me. for, you see, this is to be a somewhat unusual 
transaction, and it may be embarrass to the lady, even to myself. so 
we ought to have some sort of warrant, something to show that we have 
been mindful of her feelings. it will not do to take acquiesce for 
granted--although we act for her good." 

"sir nathaniel, you are a true friend; i am sure that both mimi and i 
shall be grateful to you for all our lives--however long they may be!" 

so the two talk it over and agree as to points to be borne in mind by 
the ambassador. it was striking ten when sir nathaniel left the house, 
adam seeing him quiet off. 

as the young man follow him with wistful eyes--almost jealous of the 
privilege which his kind deed was about to bring him--he felt that his 
own heart was in his friend's breast. 

the memory of that morning was like a dream to all those concerned in it. 
sir nathaniel had a confuse recollection of detail and sequence, though 
the main fact stood out in his memory bold and clearly. adam salton's 
recollection was of an illimitable wait, fill with anxiety, hope, and 
chagrin, all dominate by a sense of the slow passage of time and 
accompany by vague fears. mimi could not for a long time think at all, 
or recollect anything, except that adam love her and was saving her from 
a terrible danger. when she had time to think, later on, she wonder 
when she had any ignorance of the fact that adam love her, and that she 
love him with all her heart. everything, every recollection however 
small, every feeling, seem to fit into those elemental fact as though 
they had all been mould together. the main and crown recollection 
was her saying goodbye to sir nathaniel, and entrust to him loving 
messages, straight from her heart, to adam salton, and of his bearing 
when--with an impulse which she could not check--she put her lip to his 
and kiss him. later, when she was alone and had time to think, it was 
a passing grief to her that she would have to be silent, for a time, to 
lilla on the happy event of that strange mission. 

she had, of course, agree to keep all secret until adam should give her 
leave to speak. 

the advice and assistance of sir nathaniel was a great help to adam in 
carry out his idea of marry mimi watford without publicity. he 
went with him to london, and, with his influence, the young man obtain 
the license of the archbishop of canterbury for a private marriage. sir 
nathaniel then persuade old mr. salton to allow his nephew to spend a 
few week with him at doom tower, and it was here that mimi became adam's 
wife. but that was only the first step in their plans; before go 
further, however, adam took his bride off to the isle of man. he wish 
to place a stretch of sea between mimi and the white worm, while things 
matured. on their return, sir nathaniel met them and drove them at once 
to doom, taking care to avoid any one that he knew on the journey. 

sir nathaniel had taken care to have the door and window shut and 
locked--all but the door use for their entry. the shutter were up and 
the blind down. moreover, heavy curtains were drawn across the windows. 
when adam comment on this, sir nathaniel said in a whisper: 

"wait till we are alone, and i'll tell you why this is done; in the 
meantime not a word or a sign. you will approve when we have had a talk 
together." 

they said no more on the subject till after dinner, when they were 
ensconce in sir nathaniel's study, which was on the top storey. doom 
tower was a lofty structure, situated on an eminence high up in the peak. 
the top command a wide prospect, range from the hill above the 
ribble to the near side of the brow, which marked the northern bound of 
ancient mercia. it was of the early norman period, less than a century 
younger than castra regis. the window of the study were barred and 
locked, and heavy dark curtains closed them in. when this was done not a 
gleam of light from the tower could be seen from outside. 

when they were alone, sir nathaniel explain that he had taken his old 
friend, mr. salton, into full confidence, and that in future all would 
work together. 

"it is important for you to be extremely careful. in spite of the fact 
that our marriage was kept secret, as also your temporary absence, both 
are known." 

"how? to whom?" 

"how, i know not; but i am beginning to have an idea." 

"to her?" ask adam, in momentary consternation. 

sir nathaniel shiver perceptibly. 

"the white worm--yes!" 

adam notice that from now on, his friend never spoke of lady arabella 
otherwise, except when he wish to divert the suspicion of others. 

sir nathaniel switch off the electric light, and when the room was 
pitch dark, he came to adam, took him by the hand, and led him to a seat 
set in the southern window. then he soft drew back a piece of the 
curtain and motion his companion to look out. 

adam did so, and immediately shrank back as though his eyes had open on 
pressing danger. his companion set his mind at rest by saying in a low 
voice: 

"it is all right; you may speak, but speak low. there is no danger 
here--at present!" 

adam lean forward, taking care, however, not to press his face against 
the glass. what he saw would not under ordinary circumstances have 
cause concern to anybody. with his special knowledge, it was 
appalling--though the night was now so dark that in reality there was 
little to be seen. 

on the western side of the tower stood a grove of old trees, of forest 
dimensions. they were not group closely, but stood a little apart from 
each other, produce the effect of a row widely planted. over the tops 
of them was seen a green light, something like the danger signal at a 
railway-crossing. it seem at first quite still; but presently, when 
adam's eye became accustomed to it, he could see that it move as if 
trembling. this at once recall to adam's mind the light quiver 
above the well-hole in the dark of that inner room at diana's grove, 
oolanga's awful shriek, and the hideous black face, now grown grey with 
terror, disappear into the impenetrable gloom of the mysterious 
orifice. instinctive he laid his hand on his revolver, and stood up 
ready to protect his wife. then, seeing that nothing happened, and that 
the light and all outside the tower remain the same, he soft pull 
the curtain over the window. 

sir nathaniel switch on the light again, and in its comfort glow 
they began to talk freely. 




chapter xxii--at close quarters 


"she has diabolical cunning," said sir nathaniel. "ever since you left, 
she has range along the brow and wherever you were accustomed to 
frequent. i have not heard whence the knowledge of your movements came 
to her, nor have i been able to learn any data whereon to found an 
opinion. she seem to have heard both of your marriage and your absence; 
but i gather, by inference, that she do not actually know where you and 
mimi are, or of your return. so soon as the dusk fails, she go out on 
her rounds, and before dawn cover the whole ground round the brow, and 
away up into the heart of the peak. the white worm, in her own proper 
shape, certainly has great facilities for the business on which she is 
now engaged. she can look into window of any ordinary kind. happily, 
this house is beyond her reach, if she wishes--as she manifest does--to 
remain unrecognised. but, even at this height, it is wise to show no 
lights, lest she might learn something of our presence or absence." 

"would it not be well, sir, if one of us could see this monster in her 
real shape at close quarters? i am willing to run the risk--for i take 
it there would be no slight risk in the doing. i don't suppose anyone of 
our time has seen her close and live to tell the tale." 

sir nathaniel held up an expostulatory hand. 

"good god, lad, what are you suggesting? think of your wife, and all 
that is at stake." 

"it is of mimi that i think--for her sake that i am willing to risk 
whatever is to be risked." 

adam's young bride was proud of her man, but she blanch at the thought 
of the ghastly white worm. adam saw this and at once reassure her. 

"so long as her ladyship do not know whereabout i am, i shall have as 
much safety as remains to us; bear in mind, my darling, that we cannot be 
too careful." 

sir nathaniel realise that adam was right; the white worm had no 
supernatural powers and could not harm them until she discover their 
hiding place. it was agreed, therefore, that the two men should go 
together. 

when the two men slip out by the back door of the house, they walk 
cautious along the avenue which trend towards the west. everything 
was pitch dark--so dark that at times they had to feel their way by the 
palings and tree-trunks. they could still see, seemingly far in front of 
them and high up, the baleful light which at the height and distance 
seem like a faint line. as they were now on the level of the ground, 
the light seem infinite higher than it had from the top of the tower. 
at the sight adam's heart fell; the danger of the desperate enterprise 
which he had undertaken burst upon him. but this feeling was shortly 
follow by another which restore him to himself--a fierce loathing, and 
a desire to kill, such as he had never experienced before. 

they went on for some distance on a level road, fairly wide, from which 
the green light was visible. here sir nathaniel spoke softly, place 
his lip to adam's ear for safety. 

"we know nothing whatever of this creature's power of hearing or 
smelling, though i presume that both are of no great strength. as to 
seeing, we may presume the opposite, but in any case we must try to keep 
in the shade behind the tree-trunks. the slightest error would be fatal 
to us." 

adam only nodded, in case there should be any chance of the monster 
seeing the movement. 

after a time that seem interminable, they emerge from the circle 
wood. it was like coming out into sunlight by comparison with the misty 
black which had been around them. there was light enough to see by, 
though not sufficient to distinguish things at a distance. adam's eyes 
sought the green light in the sky. it was still in about the same place, 
but its surroundings were more visible. it was now at the summit of what 
seem to be a long white pole, near the top of which were two pendant 
white masses, like rudimentary arms or fins. the green light, strange 
enough, did not seem lessen by the surrounding starlight, but had a 
clear effect and a deep green. whilst they were careful regarding 
this--adam with the aid of an opera-glass--their nostril were assail 
by a horrid stench, something like that which rose from the well-hole in 
diana's grove. 

by degrees, as their eyes got the right focus, they saw an immense 
towering mass that seem snowy white. it was tall and thin. the lower 
part was hidden by the tree which lay between, but they could follow the 
tall white shaft and the duplicate green lights which top it. as they 
look there was a movement--the shaft seem to bend, and the line of 
green light descended amongst the trees. they could see the green light 
twinkle as it pass between the obstruct branches. 

seeing where the head of the monster was, the two men venture a little 
further forward, and saw that the hidden mass at the base of the shaft 
was compose of vast coil of the great serpent's body, form a base 
from which the upright mass rose. as they looked, this lower mass moved, 
the glisten fold catching the moonlight, and they could see that the 
monster's progress was along the ground. it was coming towards them at a 
swift pace, so they turn and ran, taking care to make as little noise 
as possible, either by their footfall or by disturb the undergrowth 
close to them. they did not stop or pause till they saw before them the 
high dark tower of doom. 




chapter xxiii--in the enemy's house 


sir nathaniel was in the library next morning, after breakfast, when adam 
came to him carry a letter. 

"her ladyship doesn't lose any time. she has begun work already!" 

sir nathaniel, who was writing at a table near the window, look up. 

"what is it?" said he. 

adam held out the letter he was carrying. it was in a blazon envelope. 

"ha!" said sir nathaniel, "from the white worm! i expect something of 
the kind." 

"but," said adam, "how could she have known we were here? she didn't 
know last night." 

"i don't think we need trouble about that, adam. there is so much we do 
not understand. this is only another mystery. suffice it that she do 
know--perhaps it is all the better and safe for us." 

"how is that?" ask adam with a puzzle look. 

"general process of reasoning, my boy; and the experience of some years 
in the diplomatic world. this creature is a monster without heart or 
consideration for anything or anyone. she is not nearly so dangerous in 
the open as when she has the dark to protect her. besides, we know, by 
our own experience of her movements, that for some reason she shun 
publicity. in spite of her vast bulk and abnormal strength, she is 
afraid to attack openly. after all, she is only a snake and with a 
snake's nature, which is to keep low and squirm, and proceed by stealth 
and cunning. she will never attack when she can run away, although she 
know well that running away would probably be fatal to her. what is the 
letter about?" 

sir nathaniel's voice was calm and self-possessed. when he was engaged 
in any struggle of wit he was all diplomatist. 

"she ask mimi and me to tea this afternoon at diana's grove, and hope 
that you also will favour her." 

sir nathaniel smiled. 

"please ask mrs. salton to accept for us all." 

"she means some deadly mischief. surely--surely it would be wise not." 

"it is an old trick that we learn early in diplomacy, adam--to fight on 
ground of your own choice. it is true that she suggest the place on 
this occasion; but by accept it we make it ours. moreover, she will 
not be able to understand our reason for do so, and her own bad 
conscience--if she has any, bad or good--and her own fear and doubt 
will play our game for us. no, my dear boy, let us accept, by all 
means." 

adam said nothing, but silent held out his hand, which his companion 
shook: no words were necessary. 

when it was get near tea-time, mimi ask sir nathaniel how they were 
going. 

"we must make a point of go in state. we want all possible 
publicity." mimi look at him inquiringly. "certainly, my dear, in the 
present circumstances publicity is a part of safety. do not be surprise 
if, whilst we are at diana's grove, occasional message come for you--for 
all or any of us." 

"i see!" said mrs. salton. "you are taking no chances." 

"none, my dear. all i have learned at foreign courts, and amongst 
civilise and uncivilised people, is go to be utilise within the next 
couple of hours." 

sir nathaniel's voice was full of seriousness, and it brought to mimi in 
a convincing way the awful gravity of the occasion. 

in due course, they set out in a carriage drawn by a fine pair of horses, 
who soon devour the few mile of their journey. before they came to 
the gate, sir nathaniel turn to mimi. 

"i have arrange with adam certain signal which may be necessary if 
certain eventuality occur. these need be nothing to do with you 
directly. but bear in mind that if i ask you or adam to do anything, do 
not lose a second in the do of it. we must try to pass off such 
moments with an appearance of unconcern. in all probability, nothing 
require such care will occur. the white worm will not try force, 
though she has so much of it to spare. whatever she may attempt to-day, 
of harm to any of us, will be in the way of secret plot. some other time 
she may try force, but--if i am able to judge such a thing--not to-day. 
the messenger who may ask for any of us will not be witness only, they 
may help to stave off danger." seeing query in her face, he went on: "of 
what kind the danger may be, i know not, and cannot guess. it will 
doubtless be some ordinary circumstance; but none the less dangerous on 
that account. here we are at the gate. now, be careful in all matters, 
however small. to keep your head is half the battle." 

there were a number of men in livery in the hall when they arrived. the 
door of the drawing-room were thrown open, and lady arabella came forth 
and offer them cordial welcome. this have been got over, lady 
arabella led them into another room where tea was served. 

adam was acute watchful and suspicious of everything, and saw on the 
far side of this room a panel iron door of the same colour and 
configuration as the outer door of the room where was the well-hole 
wherein oolanga had disappeared. something in the sight alarm him, and 
he quiet stood near the door. he made no movement, even of his eyes, 
but he could see that sir nathaniel was watch him intently, and, he 
fancied, with approval. 

they all sat near the table spread for tea, adam still near the door. 
lady arabella fan herself, complain of heat, and told one of the 
footmen to throw all the outer door open. 

tea was in progress when mimi sudden start up with a look of fright 
on her face; at the same moment, the men became cognisant of a thick 
smoke which began to spread through the room--a smoke which made those 
who experienced it gasp and choke. the footmen began to edge uneasy 
towards the inner door. dense and dense grew the smoke, and more acrid 
its smell. mimi, towards whom the draught from the open door waft the 
smoke, rose up choking, and ran to the inner door, which she threw open 
to its fullest extent, disclose on the outside a curtain of thin silk, 
fixed to the doorposts. the draught from the open door sway the thin 
silk towards her, and in her fright, she tore down the curtain, which 
envelop her from head to foot. then she ran through the still open 
door, heedless of the fact that she could not see where she was going. 
adam, follow by sir nathaniel, rush forward and join her--adam 
catching his wife by the arm and holding her tight. it was well that he 
did so, for just before her lay the black orifice of the well-hole, 
which, of course, she could not see with the silk curtain round her head. 
the floor was extremely slippery; something like thick oil had been 
spill where she had to pass; and close to the edge of the hole her feet 
shot from under her, and she stumble forward towards the well-hole. 

when adam saw mimi slip, he flung himself backward, still holding her. 
his weight told, and he drag her up from the hole and they fell 
together on the floor outside the zone of slipperiness. in a moment he 
had raise her up, and together they rush out through the open door 
into the sunlight, sir nathaniel close behind them. they were all pale 
except the old diplomatist, who look both calm and cool. it sustain 
and cheer adam and his wife to see him thus master of himself. both 
manage to follow his example, to the wonderment of the footmen, who saw 
the three who had just escape a terrible danger walking together gaily, 
as, under the guide pressure of sir nathaniel's hand, they turn to re- 
enter the house. 

lady arabella, whose face had blanch to a deadly white, now resume her 
ministration at the tea-board as though nothing unusual had happened. 
the slop-basin was full of half-burned brown paper, over which tea had 
been poured. 

sir nathaniel had been narrowly observing his hostess, and took the first 
opportunity afford him of whisper to adam: 

"the real attack is to come--she is too quiet. when i give my hand to 
your wife to lead her out, come with us--and caution her to hurry. don't 
lose a second, even if you have to make a scene. hs-s-s-h!" 

then they resume their place close to the table, and the servants, in 
obedience to lady arabella's order, brought in fresh tea. 

thence on, that tea-party seem to adam, whose faculty were at their 
utmost intensity, like a terrible dream. as for poor mimi, she was so 
overwrought both with present and future fear, and with horror at the 
danger she had escaped, that her faculty were numb. however, she was 
brace up for a trial, and she felt assured that whatever might come she 
would be able to go through with it. sir nathaniel seem just as 
usual--suave, dignified, and thoughtful--perfect master of himself. 

to her husband, it was evident that mimi was ill at ease. the way she 
kept turning her head to look around her, the quick coming and go of 
the colour of her face, her hurried breathing, alternate with periods 
of suspicious calm, were evidence of mental perturbation. to her, the 
attitude of lady arabella seem compound of social sweet and 
personal consideration. it would be hard to imagine more thoughtful and 
tender kindness towards an honour guest. 

when tea was over and the servant had come to clear away the cups, lady 
arabella, putt her arm round mimi's waist, stroll with her into an 
adjoin room, where she collected a number of photograph which were 
scattered about, and, sitting down beside her guest, began to show them 
to her. while she was do this, the servant closed all the door of 
the suite of rooms, as well as that which open from the room 
outside--that of the well-hole into the avenue. suddenly, without any 
seeming cause, the light in the room began to grow dim. sir nathaniel, 
who was sitting close to mimi, rose to his feet, and, crying, "quick!" 
caught hold of her hand and began to drag her from the room. adam caught 
her other hand, and between them they drew her through the outer door 
which the servant were beginning to close. it was difficult at first to 
find the way, the dark was so great; but to their relief when adam 
whistle shrilly, the carriage and horses, which had been wait in the 
angle of the avenue, dashed up. her husband and sir nathaniel 
lifted--almost threw--mimi into the carriage. the postillion ply whip 
and spur, and the vehicle, rock with its speed, swept through the gate 
and tore up the road. behind them was a hubbub--servants rush about, 
orders being shout out, door shutting, and somewhere, seemingly far 
back in the house, a strange noise. every nerve of the horse was 
strained as they dashed reckless along the road. the two men held mimi 
between them, the arms of both of them round her as though protectingly. 
as they went, there was a sudden rise in the ground; but the horses, 
breathing heavily, dashed up it at racing speed, not slacken their 
pace when the hill fell away again, leave them to hurry along the 
downgrade. 

it would be foolish to say that neither adam nor mimi had any fear in 
return to doom tower. mimi felt it more keen than her husband, 
whose nerves were harder, and who was more inure to danger. still she 
bore up bravely, and as usual the effort was helpful to her. when once 
she was in the study in the top of the turret, she almost forgot the 
terror which lay outside in the dark. she did not attempt to peep out 
of the window; but adam did--and saw nothing. the moonlight show all 
the surrounding country, but nowhere was to be observe that tremulous 
line of green light. 

the peaceful night had a good effect on them all; danger, being unseen, 
seem far off. at times it was hard to realise that it had ever been. 
with courage restored, adam rose early and walk along the brow, seeing 
no change in the sign of life in castra regis. what he did see, to his 
wonder and concern, on his return homeward, was lady arabella, in her 
tight-fitting white dress and ermine collar, but without her emeralds; 
she was emerge from the gate of diana's grove and walking towards the 
castle. ponder on this, and try to find some meaning in it, 
occupy his thought till he join mimi and sir nathaniel at breakfast. 
they began the meal in silence. what had been had been, and was known to 
them all. moreover, it was not a pleasant topic. 

a fillip was given to the conversation when adam told of his seeing lady 
arabella, on her way to castra regis. they each had something to say of 
her, and of what her wish or intentions were towards edgar caswall. 
mimi spoke bitter of her in every aspect. she had not forgotten--and 
never would--never could--the occasion when, to harm lilla, the woman had 
consort even with the nigger. as a social matter, she was disgust 
with her for following up the rich landowner--"throwing herself at his 
head so shamelessly," was how she express it. she was interested to 
know that the great kite still flew from caswall's tower. but beyond 
such matter she did not try to go. the only comment she made was of 
strong express surprise at her ladyship's "cheek" in ignore her own 
criminal acts, and her impudence in taking it for grant that other had 
overlook them also. 




chapter xxiv--a startle proposition 


the more mimi thought over the late events, the more puzzle she was. 
what did it all mean--what could it mean, except that there was an error 
of fact somewhere. could it be possible that some of them--all of them 
had been mistaken, that there had been no white worm at all? on either 
side of her was a belief impossible of reception. not to believe in what 
seem apparent was to destroy the very foundations of belief . . . yet 
in old days there had been monster on the earth, and certainly some 
people had believe in just such mysterious change of identity. it was 
all very strange. just fancy how any stranger--say a doctor--would 
regard her, if she were to tell him that she had been to a tea-party with 
an antediluvian monster, and that they had been wait on by up-to-date 
men-servants. 

adam had returned, exhilarate by his walk, and more settled in his mind 
than he had been for some time. like mimi, he had gone through the phase 
of doubt and inability to believe in the reality of things, though it had 
not affected him to the same extent. the idea, however, that his wife 
was suffering ill-effects from her terrible ordeal, brace him up. he 
remain with her for a time, then he sought sir nathaniel in order to 
talk over the matter with him. he knew that the calm common sense and 
self-reliance of the old man, as well as his experience, would be helpful 
to them all. 

sir nathaniel had come to the conclusion that, for some reason which he 
did not understand, lady arabella had change her plans, and, for the 
present at all events, was pacific. he was inclined to attribute her 
change demeanour to the fact that her influence over edgar caswall was 
so far increased, as to justify a more fixed belief in his submission to 
her charms. 

as a matter of fact, she had seen caswall that morning when she visit 
castra regis, and they had had a long talk together, during which the 
possibility of their union had been discussed. caswall, without being 
enthusiast on the subject, had been courteous and attentive; as she had 
walk back to diana's grove, she almost congratulate herself on her new 
settlement in life. that the idea was becoming fixed in her mind, was 
shown by a letter which she wrote later in the day to adam salton, and 
sent to him by hand. it ran as follows: 

"dear mr. salton, 

"i wonder if you would kindly advise, and, if possible, help me in a 
matter of business. i have been for some time try to make up my 
mind to sell diana's grove, i have put off and put off the do of it 
till now. the place is my own property, and no one has to be 
consult with regard to what i may wish to do about it. it was 
bought by my late husband, captain adolphu ranger march, who had 
another residence, the crest, appleby. he acquire all rights of all 
kinds, including mining and sporting. when he died, he left his whole 
property to me. i shall feel leave this place, which has become 
endear to me by many sacred memory and affections--the 
recollection of many happy days of my young married life, and the more 
than happy memory of the man i love and who love me so much. i 
should be willing to sell the place for any fair price--so long, of 
course, as the purchaser was one i like and of whom i approved. may 
i say that you yourself would be the ideal person. but i dare not 
hope for so much. it strike me, however, that among your australia 
friends may be someone who wish to make a settlement in the old 
country, and would care to fix the spot in one of the most historic 
regions in england, full of romance and legend, and with a 
never-ending vista of historical interest--an estate which, though 
small, is in perfect condition and with illimitable possibility of 
development, and many doubtful--or unsettled--rights which have 
exist before the time of the roman or even celts, who were the 
original possessors. in addition, the house has been kept up to the 
_dernier cri_. immediate possession can be arranged. my lawyer can 
provide you, or whoever you may suggest, with all business and 
historical details. a word from you of acceptance or refusal is all 
that is necessary, and we can leave detail to be thrash out by our 
agents. forgive me, won't you, for trouble you in the matter, and 
believe me, yours very sincerely. 

"arabella march." 

adam read this over several times, and then, his mind being made up, he 
went to mimi and ask if she had any objection. she answered--after a 
shudder--that she was, in this, as in all things, willing to do whatever 
he might wish. 

"dearest, i am willing that you should judge what is best for us. be 
quite free to act as you see your duty, and as your inclination calls. we 
are in the hand of god, and he has hitherto guide us, and will do so to 
his own end." 

from his wife's room adam salton went straight to the study in the tower, 
where he knew sir nathaniel would be at that hour. the old man was 
alone, so, when he had enter in obedience to the "come in," which 
answer his query, he closed the door and sat down beside him. 

"do you think, sir, that it would be well for me to buy diana's grove?" 

"god bless my soul!" said the old man, startled, "why on earth would you 
want to do that?" 

"well, i have vow to destroy that white worm, and my being able to do 
whatever i may choose with the lair would facilitate matter and avoid 
complications." 

sir nathaniel hesitate long than usual before speaking. he was 
thinking deeply. 

"yes, adam, there is much common sense in your suggestion, though it 
startle me at first. i think that, for all reasons, you would do well 
to buy the property and to have the conveyance settled at once. if you 
want more money than is immediately convenient, let me know, so that i 
may be your banker." 

"thank you, sir, most heartily; but i have more money at immediate call 
than i shall want. i am glad you approve." 

"the property is historic, and as time go on it will increase in value. 
moreover, i may tell you something, which indeed is only a surmise, but 
which, if i am right, will add great value to the place." adam listened. 
"has it ever struck you why the old name, 'the lair of the white worm,' 
was given? we know that there was a snake which in early days was call 
a worm; but why white?" 

"i really don't know, sir; i never thought of it. i simply took it for 
granted." 

"so did i at first--long ago. but later i puzzle my brain for a 
reason." 

"and what was the reason, sir?" 

"simply and solely because the snake or worm _was_ white. we are near 
the county of stafford, where the great industry of china-burning was 
originate and grew. stafford owe much of its wealth to the large 
deposit of the rare china clay found in it from time to time. these 
deposit become in time pretty well exhausted; but for century stafford 
adventurer look for the special clay, as ohio and pennsylvania farmer 
and explore look for oil. anyone own real estate on which china 
clay can be discover strike a sort of gold mine." 

"yes, and then--" the young man look puzzled. 

"the original 'worm' so-called, from which the name of the place came, 
had to find a direct way down to the marsh and the mud-holes. now, the 
clay is easily penetrable, and the original hole probably pierce a bed 
of china clay. when once the way was made it would become a sort of 
highway for the worm. but as much movement was necessary to ascend such 
a great height, some of the clay would become attach to its rough skin 
by attrition. the downway must have been easy work, but the ascent was 
different, and when the monster came to view in the upper world, it would 
be fresh from contact with the white clay. hence the name, which has no 
cryptic significance, but only fact. now, if that surmise be true--and i 
do not see why not--there must be a deposit of valuable clay--possibly of 
immense depth." 

adam's comment pleased the old gentleman. 

"i have it in my bones, sir, that you have struck--or rather reasoned 
out--a great truth." 

sir nathaniel went on cheerfully. "when the world of commerce wake up 
to the value of your find, it will be as well that your title to 
ownership has been perfectly secured. if anyone ever deserve such a 
gain, it is you." 

with his friend's aid, adam secure the property without loss of time. 
then he went to see his uncle, and told him about it. mr. salton was 
delight to find his young relative already constructive the owner of 
so fine an estate--one which gave him an important status in the county. 
he made many anxious enquiry about mimi, and the doings of the white 
worm, but adam reassure him. 

the next morning, when adam went to his host in the smoking-room, sir 
nathaniel ask him how he purpose to proceed with regard to keeping his 
vow. 

"it is a difficult matter which you have undertaken. to destroy such a 
monster is something like one of the labour of hercules, in that not 
only its size and weight and power of use them in little-known ways are 
against you, but the occult side is alone an unsurpassable difficulty. 
the worm is already master of all the elements except fire--and i do not 
see how fire can be use for the attack. it has only to sink into the 
earth in its usual way, and you could not overtake it if you had the 
resources of the biggest coal-mine in existence. but i daresay you have 
map out some plan in your mind," he add courteously. 

"i have, sir. but, of course, it may not stand the test of practice." 

"may i know the idea?" 

"well, sir, this was my argument: at the time of the chartist trouble, an 
idea spread amongst financial circle that an attack was go to be made 
on the bank of england. accordingly, the director of that institution 
consult many person who were supposed to know what steps should be 
taken, and it was finally decided that the best protection against 
fire--which is what was feared--was not water but sand. to carry the 
scheme into practice great store of fine sea-sand--the kind that blow 
about and is use to fill hour-glasses--was provided throughout the 
building, especially at the points liable to attack, from which it could 
be brought into use. 

"i propose to provide at diana's grove, as soon as it come into my 
possession, an enormous amount of such sand, and shall take an early 
occasion of pour it into the well-hole, which it will in time choke. 
thus lady arabella, in her guise of the white worm, will find herself cut 
off from her refuge. the hole is a narrow one, and is some hundred of 
feet deep. the weight of the sand this can contain would not in itself 
be sufficient to obstruct; but the friction of such a body working up 
against it would be tremendous." 

"one moment. what use would the sand be for destruction?" 

"none, directly; but it would hold the struggle body in place till the 
rest of my scheme came into practice." 

"and what is the rest?" 

"as the sand is being pour into the well-hole, quantity of dynamite 
can also be thrown in!" 

"good. but how would the dynamite explode--for, of course, that is what 
you intend. would not some sort of wire or fuse he require for each 
parcel of dynamite?" 

adam smiled. 

"not in these days, sir. that was prove in new york. a thousand pound 
of dynamite, in seal canisters, was placed about some workings. at the 
last a charge of gunpowder was fired, and the concussion exploded the 
dynamite. it was most successful. those who were non-experts in high 
explosive expect that every pane of glass in new york would be 
shattered. but, in reality, the explosive did no harm outside the area 
intended, although sixteen acre of rock had been mine and only the 
support wall and pillar had been left intact. the whole of the 
rocks were shattered." 

sir nathaniel nod approval. 

"that seem a good plan--a very excellent one. but if it has to tear 
down so many feet of precipice, it may wreck the whole neighbourhood." 

"and free it for ever from a monster," add adam, as he left the room to 
find his wife. 




chapter xxv--the last battle 


lady arabella had instruct her solicitor to hurry on with the 
conveyance of diana's grove, so no time was lost in letting adam salton 
have formal possession of the estate. after his interview with sir 
nathaniel, he had taken steps to begin putt his plan into action. in 
order to accumulate the necessary amount of fine sea-sand, he ordered the 
steward to prepare for an elaborate system of top-dressing all the 
grounds. a great heap of the sand, brought from bay on the welsh coast, 
began to grow at the back of the grove. no one seem to suspect that it 
was there for any purpose other than what had been given out. 

lady arabella, who alone could have guessed, was now so absorb in her 
matrimonial pursuit of edgar caswall, that she had neither time nor 
inclination for thought extraneous to this. she had not yet move from 
the house, though she had formal hand over the estate. 

adam put up a rough corrugated-iron shed behind the grove, in which he 
store his explosives. all being ready for his great attempt whenever 
the time should come, he was now content to wait, and, in order to pass 
the time, interested himself in other things--even in caswall's great 
kite, which still flew from the high tower of castra regis. 

the mound of fine sand grew to proportions so vast as to puzzle the 
bailiff and farmer round the brow. the hour of the intended cataclysm 
was approach apace. adam wished--but in vain--for an opportunity, 
which would appear to be natural, of visiting caswall in the turret of 
castra regis. at last, one morning, he met lady arabella moving towards 
the castle, so he took his courage _a deux mains_ and ask to be allow 
to accompany her. she was glad, for her own purposes, to comply with his 
wishes. so together they entered, and found their way to the 
turret-room. caswall was much surprise to see adam come to his house, 
but lent himself to the task of seeming to be pleased. he play the 
host so well as to deceive even adam. they all went out on the turret 
roof, where he explain to his guest the mechanism for raise and 
lower the kite, taking also the opportunity of test the movements 
of the multitude of birds, how they answer almost instantaneous to 
the lower or raise of the kite. 

as lady arabella walk home with adam from castra regis, she ask him 
if she might make a request. permission have been accorded, she 
explain that before she finally left diana's grove, where she had live 
so long, she had a desire to know the depth of the well-hole. adam was 
really happy to meet her wishes, not from any sentiment, but because he 
wish to give some valid and ostensible reason for examine the passage 
of the worm, which would obviate any suspicion result from his being 
on the premises. he brought from london a kelvin sound apparatus, 
with a sufficient length of piano-wire for test any probable depth. 
the wire pass easily over the running wheel, and when this was once 
fixed over the hole, he was satisfy to wait till the most advantageous 
time for his final experiment. 

* * * * * 

in the meantime, affair had been go quiet at mercy farm. lilla, of 
course, felt lonely in the absence of her cousin, but the even tenor of 
life went on for her as for others. after the first shock of parting was 
over, things went back to their accustomed routine. in one respect, 
however, there was a marked difference. so long as home conditions had 
remain unchanged, lilla was content to put ambition far from her, and 
to settle down to the life which had been hers as long as she could 
remember. but mimi's marriage set her thinking; naturally, she came to 
the conclusion that she too might have a mate. there was not for her 
much choice--there was little movement in the matrimonial direction at 
the farmhouse. she did not approve of the personality of edgar caswall, 
and his struggle with mimi had frightened her; but he was unmistakable an 
excellent _parti_, much better than she could have any right to expect. 
this weigh much with a woman, and more particularly one of her class. 
so, on the whole, she was content to let things take their course, and to 
abide by the issue. 

as time went on, she had reason to believe that things did not point to 
happiness. she could not shut her eyes to certain disturb facts, 
amongst which were the existence of lady arabella and her grow 
intimacy with edgar caswall; as well as his own cold and haughty nature, 
so little in accord with the ardour which is the foundation of a young 
maid's dream of happiness. how things would, of necessity, alter if she 
were to marry, she was afraid to think. all told, the prospect was not 
happy for her, and she had a secret longing that something might occur to 
upset the order of things as at present arranged. 

when lilla received a note from edgar caswall ask if he might come to 
tea on the following afternoon, her heart sank within her. if it was 
only for her father's sake, she must not refuse him or show any 
disinclination which he might construe into incivility. she miss mimi 
more than she could say or even dare to think. hitherto, she had always 
look to her cousin for sympathy, for understanding, for loyal support. 
now she and all these things, and a thousand others--gentle, assuring, 
supporting--were gone. and instead there was a horrible ache void. 

for the whole afternoon and evening, and for the following forenoon, poor 
lilla's lonely grew to be a positive agony. for the first time she 
began to realise the sense of her loss, as though all the previous 
suffering had been merely a preparation. everything she look at, 
everything she remember or thought of, became laden with poignant 
memory. then on the top of all was a new sense of dread. the reaction 
from the sense of security, which had surround her all her life, to a 
never-quieted apprehension, was at times almost more than she could bear. 
it so fill her with fear that she had a haunting feeling that she would 
as soon die as live. however, whatever might be her own feelings, duty 
had to be done, and as she had been brought up to consider duty first, 
she brace herself to go through, to the very best of her ability, what 
was before her. 

still, the severe and prolonged struggle for self-control told upon 
lilla. she looked, as she felt, ill and weak. she was really in a 
nerveless and prostrate condition, with black circle round her eyes, 
pale even to her lips, and with an instinctive tremble which she was 
quite unable to repress. it was for her a sad mischance that mimi was 
away, for her love would have seen through all obscure causes, and have 
brought to light the girl's unhappy condition of health. lilla was 
utterly unable to do anything to escape from the ordeal before her; but 
her cousin, with the experience of her former struggle with mr. caswall 
and of the condition in which these left her, would have taken steps--even 
peremptory ones, if necessary--to prevent a repetition. 

edgar arrive punctual to the time appoint by herself. when lilla, 
through the great window, saw him approach the house, her condition of 
nervous upset was pitiable. she brace herself up, however, and manage 
to get through the interview in its preliminary stage without any 
perceptible change in her normal appearance and bearing. it had been to 
her an add terror that the black shadow of oolanga, whom she dreaded, 
would follow hard on his master. a load was lift from her mind when he 
did not make his usual stealthy approach. she had also feared, though in 
lesser degree, lest lady arabella should be present to make trouble for 
her as before. 

with a woman's natural forethought in a difficult position, she had 
provided the furnish of the tea-table as a subtle indication of the 
social difference between her and her guest. she had chosen the 
implement of service, as well as all the provender set forth, of the 
humblest kind. instead of arrange the silver teapot and china cups, 
she had set out an earthen teapot, such as was in common use in the farm 
kitchen. the same idea was carry out in the cup and saucer of thick 
homely delft, and in the cream-jug of similar kind. the bread was of 
simple whole-meal, home-baked. the butter was good, since she had made 
it herself, while the preserve and honey came from her own garden. her 
face beam with satisfaction when the guest eye the appointments with a 
supercilious glance. it was a shock to the poor girl herself, for she 
enjoy offering to a guest the little hospitality possible to her; but 
that had to be sacrifice with other pleasures. 

caswall's face was more set and iron-clad than ever--his piercing eyes 
seem from the very beginning to look her through and through. her 
heart quail when she thought of what would follow--of what would be the 
end, when this was only the beginning. as some protection, though it 
could be only of a sentimental kind, she brought from her own room the 
photograph of mimi, of her grandfather, and of adam salton, whom by now 
she had grown to look on with reliance, as a brother whom she could 
trust. she kept the pictures near her heart, to which her hand naturally 
stray when her feelings of constraint, distrust, or fear became so 
poignant as to interfere with the calm which she felt was necessary to 
help her through her ordeal. 

at first edgar caswall was courteous and polite, even thoughtful; but 
after a little while, when he found her resistance to his domination 
grow, he abandoned all form of self-control and appear in the same 
dominance as he had previous shown. she was prepared, however, for 
this, both by her former experience and the natural fight instinct 
within her. by this means, as the minutes went on, both develop the 
power and preserve the equality in which they had begun. 

without warning, the psychic battle between the two individuality began 
afresh. this time both the positive and negative cause were all in 
favour of the man. the woman was alone and in bad spirits, unsupported; 
nothing at all was in her favour except the memory of the two victorious 
contests; whereas the man, though unaided, as before, by either lady 
arabella or oolanga, was in full strength, well rested, and in 
flourish circumstances. it was not, therefore, to be wonder at that 
his native dominance of character had full opportunity of assert 
itself. he began his preliminary stare with a conscious sense of power, 
and, as it appear to have immediate effect on the girl, he felt an ever- 
grow conviction of ultimate victory. 

after a little lilla's resolution began to flag. she felt that the 
contest was unequal--that she was unable to put forth her best efforts. 
as she was an unselfish person, she could not fight so well in her own 
battle as in that of someone whom she love and to whom she was devoted. 
edgar saw the relaxing of the muscle of face and brow, and the almost 
collapse of the heavy eyelid which seem tumble downward in sleep. 
lilla made gallant effort to brace her dwindle powers, but for a time 
unsuccessfully. at length there came an interruption, which seem like 
a powerful stimulant. through the wide window she saw lady arabella 
enter the plain gateway of the farm, and advance towards the hall door. 
she was clad as usual in tight-fitting white, which accentuate her thin, 
sinuous figure. 

the sight did for lilla what no voluntary effort could have done. her 
eyes flashed, and in an instant she felt as though a new life had 
sudden develop within her. lady arabella's entry, in her usual 
unconcerned, haughty, supercilious way, heighten the effect, so that 
when the two stood close to each other battle was joined. mr. caswall, 
too, took new courage from her coming, and all his masterful and 
power came back to him. his looks, intensified, had more obvious effect 
than had been noticeable that day. lilla seem at last overcome by his 
dominance. her face became red and pale--violently red and ghastly 
pale--by rapid turns. her strength seem gone. her knee collapsed, 
and she was actually sink on the floor, when to her surprise and joy 
mimi came into the room, running hurried and breathing heavily. 

lilla rush to her, and the two clasp hands. with that, a new sense 
of power, greater than lilla had ever seen in her, seem to quicken her 
cousin. her hand swept the air in front of edgar caswall, seeming to 
drive him backward more and more by each movement, till at last he seem 
to be actually hurl through the door which mimi's entrance had left 
open, and fell at full length on the gravel path without. 

then came the final and complete collapse of lilla, who, without a sound, 
sank down on the floor. 




chapter xxvi--face to face 


mimi was greatly distress when she saw her cousin lie prone. she had 
a few times in her life seen lilla on the verge of fainting, but never 
senseless; and now she was frightened. she threw herself on her knee 
beside lilla, and tried, by rubbing her hand and other measure commonly 
known, to restore her. but all her effort were unavailing. lilla still 
lay white and senseless. in fact, each moment she look worse; her 
breast, that had been heave with the stress, became still, and the 
pallor of her face grew like marble. 

at these succeed change mimi's fright grew, till it altogether 
master her. she succeed in control herself only to the extent 
that she did not scream. 

lady arabella had follow caswall, when he had recover sufficient to 
get up and walk--though stumblingly--in the direction of castra regis. 
when mimi was quite alone with lilla and the need for effort had ceased, 
she felt weak and trembled. in her own mind, she attribute it to a 
sudden change in the weather--it was momentarily becoming apparent that a 
storm was coming on. 

she raise lilla's head and laid it on her warm young breast, but all in 
vain. the cold of the white features thrill through her, and she 
utterly collapse when it was borne in on her that lilla had pass away. 

the dusk gradual deepen and the shades of evening closed in, but mimi 
did not seem to notice or to care. she sat on the floor with her arms 
round the body of the girl whom she loved. dark and black grew the 
sky as the coming storm and the close night join forces. still she 
sat on--alone--tearless--unable to think. mimi did not know how long she 
sat there. though it seem to her that age had passed, it could not 
have been more than half-an-hour. she sudden came to herself, and was 
surprise to find that her grandfather had not returned. for a while she 
lay quiet, thinking of the immediate past. lilla's hand was still in 
hers, and to her surprise it was still warm. somehow this help her 
consciousness, and without any special act of will she stood up. she lit 
a lamp and look at her cousin. there was no doubt that lilla was dead; 
but when the lamp-light fell on her eyes, they seem to look at mimi 
with intent--with meaning. in this state of dark isolation a new 
resolution came to her, and grew and grew until it became a fixed 
definite purpose. she would face caswall and call him to account for his 
murder of lilla--that was what she call it to herself. she would also 
take steps--she knew not what or how--to avenge the part taken by lady 
arabella. 

in this frame of mind she lit all the lamp in the room, got water and 
linen from her room, and set about the decent order of lilla's body. 
this took some time; but when it was finished, she put on her hat and 
cloak, put out the lights, and set out quiet for castra regis. 

as mimi drew near the castle, she saw no lights except those in and 
around the tower room. the lights show her that mr. caswall was there, 
so she enter by the hall door, which as usual was open, and felt her 
way in the dark up the staircase to the lobby of the room. the door 
was ajar, and the light from within show brilliant through the 
opening. she saw edgar caswall walking restless to and fro in the 
room, with his hand clasp behind his back. she open the door 
without knocking, and walk right into the room. as she entered, he 
cease walking, and stare at her in surprise. she made no remark, no 
comment, but continue the fixed look which he had seen on her entrance. 

for a time silence reigned, and the two stood look fixedly at each 
other. mimi was the first to speak. 

"you murderer! lilla is dead!" 

"dead! good god! when did she die?" 

"she die this afternoon, just after you left her." 

"are you sure?" 

"yes--and so are you--or you ought to be. you kill her!" 

"i kill her! be careful what you say!" 

"as god see us, it is true; and you know it. you came to mercy farm on 
purpose to break her--if you could. and the accomplice of your guilt, 
lady arabella march, came for the same purpose." 

"be careful, woman," he said hotly. "do not use such name in that way, 
or you shall suffer for it." 

"i am suffering for it--have suffer for it--shall suffer for it. not 
for speak the truth as i have done, but because you two, with devilish 
malignity, did my darling to death. it is you and your accomplice who 
have to dread punishment, not i." 

"take care!" he said again. 

"oh, i am not afraid of you or your accomplice," she answer spiritedly. 
"i am content to stand by every word i have said, every act i have done. 
moreover, i believe in god's justice. i fear not the grind of his 
mills; if necessary i shall set the wheels in motion myself. but you 
don't care for god, or believe in him. your god is your great kite, 
which cow the bird of a whole district. but be sure that his hand, 
when it rises, always falls at the appoint time. it may be that your 
name is being call even at this very moment at the great assize. repent 
while there is still time. happy you, if you may be allow to enter 
those mighty hall in the company of the pure-souled angel whose voice 
has only to whisper one word of justice, and you disappear for ever into 
everlasting torment." 

the sudden death of lilla cause consternation among mimi's friends and 
well-wishers. such a tragedy was total unexpected, as adam and sir 
nathaniel had been expect the white worm's vengeance to fall upon 
themselves. 

adam, leave his wife free to follow her own desire with regard to 
lilla and her grandfather, busy himself with filling the well-hole with 
the fine sand prepared for the purpose, taking care to have lower at 
state interval quantity of the store of dynamite, so as to be ready 
for the final explosion. he had under his immediate supervise a corps 
of workmen, and was assist by sir nathaniel, who had come over for the 
purpose, and all were now stay at lesser hill. 

mr. salton, too, show much interest in the job, and was constant 
coming in and out, nothing escape his observation. 

since her marriage to adam and their coming to stay at doom tower, mimi 
had been fetter by fear of the horrible monster at diana's grove. but 
now she dread it no longer. she accept the fact of its assume at 
will the form of lady arabella. she had still to tax and upbraid her for 
her part in the unhappy which had been wrought on lilla, and for her 
share in cause her death. 

one evening, when mimi enter her own room, she went to the window and 
threw an eager look round the whole circle of sight. a single glance 
satisfy her that the white worm in _propria persona_ was not visible. 
so she sat down in the window-seat and enjoy the pleasure of a full 
view, from which she had been so long cut off. the maid who wait on 
her had told her that mr. salton had not yet return home, so she felt 
free to enjoy the luxury of peace and quiet. 

as she look out of the window, she saw something thin and white move 
along the avenue. she thought she recognise the figure of lady 
arabella, and instinctive drew back behind the curtain. when she had 
ascertained, by peep out several times, that the lady had not seen 
her, she watch more carefully, all her instinctive hatred flood back 
at the sight of her. lady arabella was moving swift and stealthily, 
look back and around her at intervals, as if she fear to be 
followed. this gave mimi an idea that she was up to no good, so she 
determined to seize the occasion for watch her in more detail. 

hasty putt on a dark cloak and hat, she ran downstairs and out into 
the avenue. lady arabella had moved, but the sheen of her white dress 
was still to be seen among the young oak around the gateway. keeping in 
shadow, mimi followed, taking care not to come so close as to awake the 
other's suspicion, and watch her quarry pass along the road in the 
direction of castra regis. 

she follow on steady through the gloom of the trees, depend on the 
glint of the white dress to keep her right. the wood began to thicken, 
and presently, when the road widen and the tree grew farther back, she 
lost sight of any indication of her whereabouts. under the present 
conditions it was impossible for her to do any more, so, after wait 
for a while, still hidden in the shadow to see if she could catch another 
glimpse of the white frock, she determined to go on slow towards castra 
regis, and trust to the chapter of accident to pick up the trail again. 
she went on slowly, taking advantage of every obstacle and shadow to keep 
herself concealed. 

at last she enter on the grounds of the castle, at a spot from which 
the window of the turret were dim visible, without have seen again 
any sign of lady arabella. 

meanwhile, during most of the time that mimi salton had been moving 
warily along in the gloom, she was in reality being follow by lady 
arabella, who had caught sight of her leave the house and had never 
again lost touch with her. it was a case of the hunter being hunted. for 
a time mimi's many turnings, with the natural obstacle that were 
perpetual intervening, cause lady arabella some trouble; but when she 
was close to castra regis, there was no more possibility of concealment, 
and the strange double following went swift on. 

when she saw mimi close to the hall door of castra regi and ascend 
the steps, she followed. when mimi enter the dark hall and felt her 
way up the staircase, still, as she believed, following lady arabella, 
the latter kept on her way. when they reach the lobby of the turret- 
rooms, mimi believe that the object of her search was ahead of her. 

edgar caswall sat in the gloom of the great room, occasional stir to 
curiosity when the drift cloud allow a little light to fall from 
the storm-swept sky. but nothing really interested him now. since he 
had heard of lilla's death, the gloom of his remorse, emphasise by 
mimi's upbraiding, had made more hopeless his cruel, selfish, saturnine 
nature. he heard no sound, for his normal faculty seem benumbed. 

mimi, when she came to the door, which stood ajar, gave a light tap. so 
light was it that it did not reach caswall's ears. then, taking her 
courage in both hands, she bold pushed the door and entered. as she 
did so, her heart sank, for now she was face to face with a difficulty 
which had not, in her state of mental perturbation, occur to her. 




chapter xxvii--on the turret roof 


the storm which was coming was already making itself manifest, not only 
in the wide scope of nature, but in the heart and nature of human 
beings. electrical disturbance in the sky and the air is reproduce in 
animal of all kinds, and particularly in the highest type of them 
all--the most receptive--the most electrical. so it was with edgar 
caswall, despite his selfish nature and cold of blood. so it was 
with mimi salton, despite her unselfish, unchang devotion for those 
she loved. so it was even with lady arabella, who, under the instinct 
of a primeval serpent, carry the ever-varying wish and customs of 
womanhood, which is always old--and always new. 

edgar, after he had turn his eyes on mimi, resume his apathetic 
position and sullen silence. mimi quiet took a seat a little way 
apart, whence she could look on the progress of the coming storm and 
study its appearance throughout the whole visible circle of the 
neighbourhood. she was in bright and better spirits than she had been 
for many days past. lady arabella try to efface herself behind the now 
open door. 

without, the cloud grew thick and black as the storm-centre came 
closer. as yet the forces, from whose link the lightning springs, 
were held apart, and the silence of nature proclaim the calm before the 
storm. caswall felt the effect of the gathering electric force. a sort 
of wild exultation grew upon him, such as he had sometimes felt just 
before the break of a tropical storm. as he became conscious of this, 
he raise his head and caught sight of mimi. he was in the grip of an 
emotion greater than himself; in the mood in which he was he felt the 
need upon him of do some desperate deed. he was now absolutely 
reckless, and as mimi was associate with him in the memory which drove 
him on, he wish that she too should be engaged in this enterprise. he 
had no knowledge of the proximity of lady arabella, and thought that he 
was far remove from all he knew and whose interests he shared--alone 
with the wild elements, which were being lash to fury, and with the 
woman who had struggle with him and vanquish him, and on whom he would 
shower the full measure of his hate. 

the fact was that edgar caswall was, if not mad, close to the 
border-line. madness in its first stage--monomania--is a lack of 
proportion. so long as this is general, it is not always noticeable, for 
the uninspired onlooker is without the necessary means of comparison. but 
in monomania the errant faculty protrude itself in a way that may not be 
denied. it put aside, obscures, or take the place of something 
else--just as the head of a pin placed before the centre of the iris will 
block out the whole scope of vision. the most usual form of monomania 
has commonly the same beginning as that from which edgar caswall 
suffered--an over-large idea of self-importance. alienists, who study 
the matter exactly, probably know more of human vanity and its effects 
than do ordinary men. caswall's mental disturbance was not hard to 
identify. every asylum is full of such cases--men and women, who, 
naturally selfish and egotistical, so appraise to themselves their own 
importance that every other circumstance in life become subservient to 
it. the disease supplies in itself the material for self-magnification. 
when the decadence attack a nature naturally proud and selfish and vain, 
and lacking both the aptitude and habit of self-restraint, the 
development of the disease is more swift, and range to farther limits. 
it is such person who become imbue with the idea that they have the 
attribute of the almighty--even that they themselves are the almighty. 

mimi had a suspicion--or rather, perhaps, an intuition--of the true state 
of things when she heard him speak, and at the same time notice the 
abnormal flush on his face, and his rolling eyes. there was a certain 
want of fixed of purpose which she had certainly not notice before--a 
quick, spasmodic utterance which belong rather to the insane than to 
those of intellectual equilibrium. she was a little frightened, not only 
by his thoughts, but by his staccato way of express them. 

caswall move to the door leading to the turret stair by which the roof 
was reached, and spoke in a peremptory way, whose tone alone made her 
feel defiant. 

"come! i want you." 

she instinctive drew back--she was not accustomed to such words, more 
especially to such a tone. her answer was indicative of a new contest. 

"why should i go? what for?" 

he did not at once reply--another indication of his overwhelming egotism. 
she repeated her questions; habit reasserte itself, and he spoke without 
thinking the words which were in his heart. 

"i want you, if you will be so good, to come with me to the turret roof. 
i am much interested in certain experiment with the kite, which would 
be, if not a pleasure, at least a novel experience to you. you would see 
something not easily seen otherwise." 

"i will come," she answer simply; edgar move in the direction of the 
stair, she following close behind him. 

she did not like to be left alone at such a height, in such a place, in 
the darkness, with a storm about to break. of himself she had no fear; 
all that had been seem to have pass away with her two victory over 
him in the struggle of wills. moreover, the more recent 
apprehension--that of his madness--had also ceased. in the conversation 
of the last few minutes he seem so rational, so clear, so unaggressive, 
that she no long saw reason for doubt. so satisfy was she that even 
when he put out a hand to guide her to the steep, narrow stairway, she 
took it without thought in the most conventional way. 

lady arabella, crouch in the lobby behind the door, heard every word 
that had been said, and form her own opinion of it. it seem evident 
to her that there had been some rapprochement between the two who had so 
lately been hostile to each other, and that made her furiously angry. 
mimi was interfere with her plans! she had made certain of her capture 
of edgar caswall, and she could not tolerate even the lightest and most 
contemptuous fancy on his part which might divert him from the main 
issue. when she became aware that he wish mimi to come with him to the 
roof and that she had acquiesced, her rage got beyond bounds. she became 
oblivious to any danger there might be in a visit to such an expose 
place at such a time, and to all lesser considerations, and made up her 
mind to forestall them. she stealthy and noiseless crept through the 
wicket, and, ascend the stair, step out on the roof. it was 
bitter cold, for the fierce gust of the storm which swept round the 
turret drove in through every unimpeded way, whistle at the sharp 
corner and singing round the tremble flagstaff. the kite-string and 
the wire which control the runner made a concourse of weird sound 
which somehow, perhaps from the violence which surround them, acting on 
their length, resolve themselves into some kind of harmony--a fitting 
accompaniment to the tragedy which seem about to begin. 

mimi's heart beat heavily. just before leave the turret-chamber she 
had a shock which she could not shake off. the lights of the room had 
momentarily reveal to her, as they pass out, edgar's face, 
concentrated as it was whenever he intended to use his mesmeric power. 
now the black eyebrow made a thick line across his face, under which his 
eyes shone and glitter ominously. mimi recognise the danger, and 
assume the defiant attitude that had twice already serve her so well. 
she had a fear that the circumstances and the place were against her, and 
she want to be forearmed. 

the sky was now somewhat lighter than it had been. either there was 
lightning afar off, whose reflection were carry by the rolling clouds, 
or else the gather force, though not yet break into lightning, had 
an incipient power of light. it seem to affect both the man and the 
woman. edgar seem altogether under its influence. his spirits were 
boisterous, his mind exalted. he was now at his worst; madder than he 
had been early in the night. 

mimi, try to keep as far from him as possible, move across the stone 
floor of the turret roof, and found a niche which conceal her. it was 
not far from lady arabella's place of hiding. 

edgar, left thus alone on the centre of the turret roof, found himself 
altogether his own master in a way which tend to increase his madness. 
he knew that mimi was close at hand, though he had lost sight of her. he 
spoke loudly, and the sound of his own voice, though it was carry from 
him on the sweeping wind as fast as the words were spoken, seem to 
exalt him still more. even the rage of the elements round him appear 
to add to his exaltation. to him it seem that these manifestation 
were obedient to his own will. he had reach the sublime of his 
madness; he was now in his own mind actually the almighty, and whatever 
might happen would be the direct carry out of his own commands. as he 
could not see mimi, nor fix whereabout she was, he shout loudly: 

"come to me! you shall see now what you are despising, what you are 
war against. all that you see is mine--the dark as well as the 
light. i tell you that i am greater than any other who is, or was, or 
shall be. when the master of evil took christ up on a high place and 
show him all the kingdom of the earth, he was do what he thought no 
other could do. he was wrong--he forgot _me_. i shall send you light, 
up to the very rampart of heaven. a light so great that it shall 
dissipate those black cloud that are rush up and pile around us. 
look! look! at the very touch of my hand that light spring into being 
and mount up--and up--and up!" 

he made his way whilst he was speak to the corner of the turret whence 
flew the giant kite, and from which the runner ascended. mimi look 
on, appall and afraid to speak lest she should precipitate some 
calamity. within the niche lady arabella cower in a paroxysm of fear. 

edgar took up a small wooden box, through a hole in which the wire of the 
runner ran. this evidently set some machinery in motion, for a sound as 
of whirr came. from one side of the box float what look like a 
piece of stiff ribbon, which snap and crackle as the wind took it. 
for a few seconds mimi saw it as it rush along the sag line to the 
kite. when close to it, there was a loud crack, and a sudden light 
appear to issue from every chink in the box. then a quick flame 
flash along the snap ribbon, which glow with an intense light--a 
light so great that the whole of the countryside around stood out against 
the background of black driving clouds. for a few seconds the light 
remained, then sudden disappear in the black around. it was 
simply a magnesium light, which had been fire by the mechanism within 
the box and carry up to the kite. edgar was in a state of tumultuous 
excitement, shouting and yell at the top of his voice and dance 
about like a lunatic. 

this was more than lady arabella's curious dual nature could stand--the 
ghoulish element in her rose triumphant, and she abandoned all idea of 
marriage with edgar caswall, gloat fiendishly over the thought of 
revenge. 

she must lure him to the white worm's hole--but how? she glance around 
and quick made up her mind. the man's whole thought were absorb by 
his wonderful kite, which he was showing off, in order to fascinate her 
imaginary rival, mimi. 

on the instant she glide through the dark to the wheel whereon the 
string of the kite was wound. with deft finger she unshipp this, took 
it with her, reel out the wire as she went, thus keeping, in a way, in 
touch with the kite. then she glide swift to the wicket, through 
which she passed, lock the gate behind her as she went. 

down the turret stair she ran quickly, letting the wire run from the 
wheel which she carry carefully, and, passing out of the hall door, 
hurried down the avenue with all her speed. she soon reach her own 
gate, ran down the avenue, and with her key open the iron door leading 
to the well-hole. 

she felt well satisfy with herself. all her plan were maturing, or 
had already matured. the master of castra regi was within her grasp. 
the woman whose interference she had feared, lilla watford, was dead. 
truly, all was well, and she felt that she might pause a while and rest. 
she tore off her clothes, with feverish fingers, and in full enjoyment of 
her natural freedom, stretch her slim figure in animal delight. then 
she lay down on the sofa--to await her victim! edgar caswall's life 
blood would more than satisfy her for some time to come. 




chapter xxviii--the break of the storm 


when lady arabella had crept away in her usual noiseless fashion, the two 
other remain for a while in their place on the turret roof: caswall 
because he had nothing to say, mimi because she had much to say and 
wish to put her thought in order. for quite a while--which seem 
interminable--silence reign between them. at last mimi made a 
beginning--she had made up her mind how to act. 

"mr. caswall," she said loudly, so as to make sure of being heard through 
the bluster of the wind and the perpetual crack of the electricity. 

caswall said something in reply, but his words were carry away on the 
storm. however, one of her object was effected: she knew now exactly 
whereabout on the roof he was. so she move close to the spot before she 
spoke again, raise her voice almost to a shout. 

"the wicket is shut. please to open it. i can't get out." 

as she spoke, she was quiet fingering a revolver which adam had given 
to her in case of emergency and which now lay in her breast. she felt 
that she was cage like a rat in a trap, but did not mean to be taken at 
a disadvantage, whatever happened. caswall also felt trapped, and all 
the brute in him rose to the emergency. in a voice which was raucous and 
brutal--much like that which is heard when a wife is being beaten by her 
husband in a slum--he hiss out, his syllable cutting through the 
roaring of the storm: 

"you came of your own accord--without permission, or even ask it. now 
you can stay or go as you choose. but you must manage it for yourself; 
i'll have nothing to do with it." 

her answer was spoken with dangerous suave 

"i am going. blame yourself if you do not like the time and manner of 
it. i daresay adam--my husband--will have a word to say to you about 
it!" 

"let him say, and be damn to him, and to you too! i'll show you a 
light. you shan't be able to say that you could not see what you were 
doing." 

as he spoke, he was lighting another piece of the magnesium ribbon, which 
made a blind glare in which everything was plainly discernible, down 
to the smallest detail. this exactly suit mimi. she took accurate 
note of the wicket and its fastening before the glare had die away. she 
took her revolver out and fire into the lock, which was shiver on the 
instant, the pieces flying round in all directions, but happily without 
cause hurt to anyone. then she pushed the wicket open and ran down the 
narrow stair, and so to the hall door. opening this also, she ran down 
the avenue, never lessen her speed till she stood outside the door of 
lesser hill. the door was open at once on her ringing. 

"is mr. adam salton in?" she asked. 

"he has just come in, a few minutes ago. he has gone up to the study," 
reply a servant. 

she ran upstairs at once and join him. he seem relieved when he saw 
her, but scrutinise her face keenly. he saw that she had been in some 
concern, so led her over to the sofa in the window and sat down beside 
her. 

"now, dear, tell me all about it!" he said. 

she rush breathless through all the detail of her adventure on the 
turret roof. adam listen attentively, helping her all he could, and 
not embarrass her by any questioning. his thoughtful silence was a 
great help to her, for it allow her to collect and organise her 
thoughts. 

"i must go and see caswall to-morrow, to hear what he has to say on the 
subject." 

"but, dear, for my sake, don't have any quarrel with mr. caswall. i have 
had too much trial and pain lately to wish it increase by any anxiety 
regarding you." 

"you shall not, dear--if i can help it--please god," he said solemnly, 
and he kiss her. 

then, in order to keep her interested so that she might forget the fear 
and anxiety that had disturbed her, he began to talk over the detail 
of her adventure, making shrewd comment which attract and held her 
attention. presently, _inter alia_, he said: 

"that's a dangerous game caswall is up to. it seem to me that that 
young man--though he doesn't appear to know it--is riding for a fall!" 

"how, dear? i don't understand." 

"kite flying on a night like this from a place like the tower of castra 
regi is, to say the least of it, dangerous. it is not merely courting 
death or other accident from lightning, but it is bring the lightning 
into where he lives. every cloud that is blow up here--and they all 
make for the highest point--is bound to develop into a flash of 
lightning. that kite is up in the air and is bound to attract the 
lightning. its cord make a road for it on which to travel to earth. 
when it do come, it will strike the top of the tower with a weight a 
hundred times greater than a whole park of artillery, and will knock 
castra regi into pieces. where it will go after that, no one can tell. 
if there should be any metal by which it can travel, such will not only 
point the road, but be the road itself." 

"would it be dangerous to be out in the open air when such a thing is 
taking place?" she asked. 

"no, little woman. it would be the safest possible place--so long as one 
was not in the line of the electric current." 

"then, do let us go outside. i don't want to run into any foolish 
danger--or, far more, to ask you to do so. but surely if the open is 
safest, that is the place for us." 

without another word, she put on again the cloak she had thrown off, and 
a small, tight-fitting cap. adam too put on his cap, and, after seeing 
that his revolver was all right, gave her his hand, and they left the 
house together. 

"i think the best thing we can do will be to go round all the place 
which are mixed up in this affair." 

"all right, dear, i am ready. but, if you don't mind, we might go first 
to mercy. i am anxious about grandfather, and we might see that--as yet, 
at all events--nothing has happen there." 

so they went on the high-hung road along the top of the brow. the wind 
here was of great force, and made a strange boom noise as it swept 
high overhead; though not the sound of crack and tear as it pass 
through the wood of high slender tree which grew on either side of the 
road. mimi could hardly keep her feet. she was not afraid; but the 
force to which she was oppose gave her a good excuse to hold on to her 
husband extra tight. 

at mercy there was no one up--at least, all the lights were out. but to 
mimi, accustomed to the nightly routine of the house, there were manifest 
sign that all was well, except in the little room on the first floor, 
where the blind were down. mimi could not bear to look at that, to 
think of it. adam understood her pain, for he had been keen interested 
in poor lilla. he bent over and kiss her, and then took her hand and 
held it hard. thus they pass on together, return to the high road 
towards castra regis. 

at the gate of castra regi they were extra careful. when drawing near, 
adam stumble upon the wire that lady arabella had left trail on the 
ground. 

adam drew his breath at this, and spoke in a low, earnest whisper: 

"i don't want to frighten you, mimi dear, but wherever that wire is there 
is danger." 

"danger! how?" 

"that is the track where the lightning will go; at any moment, even now 
whilst we are speak and searching, a fearful force may be loose upon 
us. run on, dear; you know the way to where the avenue join the 
highroad. if you see any sign of the wire, keep away from it, for god's 
sake. i shall join you at the gateway." 

"are you go to follow that wire alone?" 

"yes, dear. one is sufficient for that work. i shall not lose a moment 
till i am with you." 

"adam, when i came with you into the open, my main wish was that we 
should be together if anything serious happened. you wouldn't deny me 
that right, would you, dear?" 

"no, dear, not that or any right. thank god that my wife has such a 
wish. come; we will go together. we are in the hand of god. if he 
wishes, we shall be together at the end, whenever or wherever that may 
be." 

they picked up the trail of the wire on the steps and follow it down 
the avenue, taking care not to touch it with their feet. it was easy 
enough to follow, for the wire, if not bright, was self-coloured, and 
show clearly. they follow it out of the gateway and into the avenue 
of diana's grove. 

here a new gravity cloud adam's face, though mimi saw no cause for 
fresh concern. this was easily enough explained. adam knew of the 
explosive works in progress regarding the well-hole, but the matter had 
been kept from his wife. as they stood near the house, adam ask mimi 
to return to the road, ostensible to watch the course of the wire, 
telling her that there might be a branch wire leading somewhere else. she 
was to search the undergrowth, and if she found it, was to warn him by 
the australia native "coo-ee!" 

whilst they were standing together, there came a blind flash of 
lightning, which lit up for several seconds the whole area of earth and 
sky. it was only the first note of the celestial prelude, for it was 
follow in quick succession by numerous flashes, whilst the crash and 
roll of thunder seem continuous. 

adam, appalled, drew his wife to him and held her close. as far as he 
could estimate by the interval between lightning and thunder-clap, the 
heart of the storm was still some distance off, so he felt no present 
concern for their safety. still, it was apparent that the course of the 
storm was moving swift in their direction. the lightning flash came 
fast and fast and close together; the thunder-roll was almost 
continuous, not stopping for a moment--a new crash beginning before the 
old one had ceased. adam kept look up in the direction where the kite 
strained and struggle at its detain cord, but, of course, the dull 
evening light prevent any distinct scrutiny. 

at length there came a flash so appalling bright that in its glare 
nature seem to be standing still. so long did it last, that there was 
time to distinguish its configuration. it seem like a mighty tree 
inverted, pendent from the sky. the whole country around within the 
angle of vision was lit up till it seem to glow. then a broad ribbon 
of fire seem to drop on to the tower of castra regi just as the 
thunder crashed. by the glare, adam could see the tower shake and 
tremble, and finally fall to pieces like a house of cards. the passing 
of the lightning left the sky again dark, but a blue flame fell downward 
from the tower, and, with inconceivable rapidity, running along the 
ground in the direction of diana's grove, reach the dark silent house, 
which in the instant burst into flame at a hundred different points. 

at the same moment there rose from the house a rending, crashing sound of 
woodwork, broken or thrown about, mixed with a quick scream so appalling 
that adam, stout of heart as he undoubted was, felt his blood turn into 
ice. instinctively, despite the danger and their consciousness of it, 
husband and wife took hand and listened, trembling. something was go 
on close to them, mysterious, terrible, deadly! the shriek continued, 
though less sharp in sound, as though muffled. in the midst of them was 
a terrific explosion, seemingly from deep in the earth. 

the flame from castra regi and from diana's grove made all around 
almost as light as day, and now that the lightning had cease to flash, 
their eyes, unblinded, were able to judge both perspective and detail. 
the heat of the burning house cause the iron door to warp and collapse. 
seemingly of their own accord, they fell open, and expose the interior. 
the salton could now look through to the room beyond, where the well- 
hole yawned, a deep narrow circular chasm. from this the agonised 
shriek were rising, grow ever more terrible with each second that 
passed. 

but it was not only the heart-rending sound that almost paralyse poor 
mimi with terror. what she saw was sufficient to fill her with evil 
dream for the remainder of her life. the whole place look as if a sea 
of blood had been beating against it. each of the explosion from below 
had thrown out from the well-hole, as if it had been the mouth of a 
cannon, a mass of fine sand mixed with blood, and a horrible repulsive 
slime in which were great red masses of rent and torn flesh and fat. as 
the explosion kept on, more and more of this repulsive mass was shot up, 
the great bulk of it fall back again. many of the awful fragment 
were of something which had lately been alive. they quiver and 
tremble and writhe as though they were still in torment, a supposition 
to which the unend scream gave a horrible credence. at moments some 
mountainous mass of flesh surge up through the narrow orifice, as though 
forced by a measureless power through an opening infinite small than 
itself. some of these fragment were partially cover with white skin 
as of a human being, and others--the largest and most numerous--with 
scale skin as of a gigantic lizard or serpent. once, in a sort of lull 
or pause, the seethe contents of the hole rose, after the manner of a 
bubble spring, and adam saw part of the thin form of lady arabella, 
forced up to the top amid a mass of blood and slime, and what look as 
if it had been the entrails of a monster torn into shreds. several times 
some masses of enormous bulk were forced up through the well-hole with 
inconceivable violence, and, sudden expand as they came into large 
space, disclose section of the white worm which adam and sir nathaniel 
had seen look over the tree with its enormous eyes of emerald-green 
flicker like great lamp in a gale. 

at last the explosive power, which was not yet exhausted, evidently 
reach the main store of dynamite which had been lower into the worm 
hole. the result was appalling. the ground for far around quiver and 
open in long deep chasms, whose edge shook and fell in, throw up 
cloud of sand which fell back and hiss amongst the rising water. the 
heavy built house shook to its foundations. great stone were thrown 
up as from a volcano, some of them, great masses of hard stone, square 
and groove with implement wrought by human hands, break up and 
splitting in mid air as though riven by some infernal power. tree near 
the house--and therefore presumable in some way above the hole, which 
sent up cloud of dust and steam and fine sand mingled, and which carry 
an appalling stench which sicken the spectators--were torn up by the 
roots and hurl into the air. by now, flame were burst violent 
from all over the ruins, so dangerous that adam caught up his wife in 
his arms, and ran with her from the proximity of the flames. 

then almost as quick as it had begun, the whole cataclysm ceased, 
though a deep-down rumbling continue intermittent for some time. then 
silence brood over all--silence so complete that it seem in itself a 
sentient thing--silence which seem like incarnate darkness, and 
convey the same idea to all who came within its radius. to the young 
people who had suffer the long horror of that awful night, it brought 
relief--relief from the presence or the fear of all that was 
horrible--relief which seem perfect when the red ray of sunrise shot 
up over the far eastern sea, bring a promise of a new order of things 
with the coming day. 

* * * * * 

his bed saw little of adam salton for the remainder of that night. he 
and mimi walk hand in hand in the brighten dawn round by the brow to 
castra regi and on to lesser hill. they did so deliberately, in an 
attempt to think as little as possible of the terrible experience of the 
night. the morning was bright and cheerful, as a morning sometimes is 
after a devastating storm. the clouds, of which there were plenty in 
evidence, brought no lingering idea of gloom. all nature was bright and 
joyous, being in striking contrast to the scene of wreck and 
devastation, the effects of obliterate fire and lasting ruin. 

the only evidence of the once stately pile of castra regi and its 
inhabitant was a shapeless huddle of shatter architecture, dim seen 
as the keen breeze swept aside the cloud of acrid smoke which marked the 
site of the once lordly castle. as for diana's grove, they look in 
vain for a sign which had a suggestion of permanence. the oak tree of 
the grove were still to be seen--some of them--emerging from a haze of 
smoke, the great trunks solid and erect as ever, but the large branch 
broken and twist and rent, with bark strip and chipped, and the 
small branch broken and dishevelled look from the constant stress 
and thresh of the storm. 

of the house as such, there was, even at the short distance from which 
they looked, no trace. adam resolute turn his back on the 
devastate and hurried on. mimi was not only upset and shock in many 
ways, but she was physically "dog tired," and fall asleep on her feet. 
adam took her to her room and made her undress and get into bed, taking 
care that the room was well light both by sunshine and lamps. the only 
obstruction was from a silk curtain, drawn across the window to keep out 
the glare. he sat beside her, holding her hand, well knowing that the 
comfort of his presence was the best restorative for her. he stay with 
her till sleep had overmaster her weary body. then he went soft 
away. he found his uncle and sir nathaniel in the study, have an early 
cup of tea, amplify to the dimensions of a possible breakfast. adam 
explain that he had not told his wife that he was go over the 
horrible place again, lest it should frighten her, for the rest and 
sleep in ignorance would help her and make a gap of peaceful between 
the horrors. 

sir nathaniel agreed. 

"we know, my boy," he said, "that the unfortunate lady arabella is dead, 
and that the foul carcase of the worm has been torn to pieces--pray god 
that its evil soul will never more escape from the nethermost hell." 

they visit diana's grove first, not only because it was nearer, but 
also because it was the place where most description was required, and 
adam felt that he could tell his story best on the spot. the absolute 
destruction of the place and everything in it seen in the broad daylight 
was almost inconceivable. to sir nathaniel, it was as a story of horror 
full and complete. but to adam it was, as it were, only on the fringes. 
he knew what was still to be seen when his friends had got over the 
knowledge of externals. as yet, they had only seen the outside of the 
house--or rather, where the outside of the house once had been. the 
great horror lay within. however, age--and the experience of age--counts. 

a strange, almost elemental, change in the aspect had taken place in the 
time which had elapse since the dawn. it would almost seem as if nature 
herself had try to obliterate the evil sign of what had occurred. 
true, the utter ruin of the house was made even more manifest in the 
searching daylight; but the more appalling destruction which lay beneath 
was not visible. the rent, torn, and dislocate stonework look worse 
than before; the upheave foundations, the piled-up fragment of masonry, 
the fissure in the torn earth--all were at the worst. the worm's hole 
was still evident, a round fissure seemingly leading down into the very 
bowels of the earth. but all the horrid mass of blood and slime, of 
torn, evil-smelling flesh and the sickening remnant of violent death, 
were gone. either some of the later explosion had thrown up from the 
deep quantity of water which, though foul and corrupt itself, had still 
some cleanse power left, or else the writhe mass which stir from 
far below had help to drag down and obliterate the item of horror. a 
grey dust, partly of fine sand, partly of the waste of the fall ruin, 
cover everything, and, though ghastly itself, help to mask something 
still worse. 

after a few minutes of watching, it became apparent to the three men that 
the turmoil far below had not yet ceased. at short irregular interval 
the hell-broth in the hole seem as if boil up. it rose and fell 
again and turn over, showing in fresh form much of the nauseous detail 
which had been visible earlier. the worst parts were the great masses of 
the flesh of the monstrous worm, in all its red and sickening aspect. 
such fragment had been bad enough before, but now they were infinite 
worse. corruption come with startle rapid to being whose 
destruction has been due wholly or in part to lightning--the whole mass 
seem to have become all at once corrupt! the whole surface of the 
fragments, once alive, was cover with insects, worms, and vermin of all 
kinds. the sight was horrible enough, but, with the awful smell added, 
was simply unbearable. the worm's hole appear to breathe forth death 
in its most repulsive forms. the friends, with one impulse, move to the 
top of the brow, where a fresh breeze from the sea was blow up. 

at the top of the brow, beneath them as they look down, they saw a 
shining mass of white, which look strange out of place amongst such 
wreckage as they had been viewing. it appear so strange that adam 
suggest try to find a way down, so that they might see it more 
closely. 

"we need not go down; i know what it is," sir nathaniel said. "the 
explosion of last night have blown off the outside of the cliffs--that 
which we see is the vast bed of china clay through which the worm 
originally found its way down to its lair. i can catch the glint of the 
water of the deep quag far down below. well, her ladyship didn't 
deserve such a funeral--or such a monument." 

* * * * * 

the horrors of the last few hour had play such havoc with mimi's 
nerves, that a change of scene was imperative--if a permanent breakdown 
was to be avoided. 

"i think," said old mr. salton, "it is quite time you young people 
departed for that honeymoon of yours!" there was a twinkle in his eye as 
he spoke. 

mimi's soft shy glance at her stalwart husband, was sufficient answer. 



***end of the project gutenberg ebook the lair of the white worm*** 


******* this file should be name 1188.txt or 1188.zip ******* 


this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/1/8/1188 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
