the project gutenberg ebook of the beetle, by richard marsh 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most 
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restriction 
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of 
the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you'll have 
to check the law of the country where you are located before use this ebook. 

title: the beetle 
a mystery 

author: richard marsh 

posting date: october 18, 2014 [ebook #5164] 
release date: february, 2004 
first posted: may 27, 2002 
last updated: march 19, 2015 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the beetle *** 




produce by charles frank and the online distribute proofread team. 









the beetle: a mystery 

by 

richard marsh 


with four illustration by john williamson 






contents 


book i 

the house with the open window 


chapter i, outside 

chapter ii, inside 

chapter iii, the man in the bed 

chapter iv, a lonely vigil 

chapter v, an instruction to commit burglary 

chapter vi, a singular felony 

chapter vii, the great paul lessingham 

chapter viii, the man in the street 

chapter ix, the contents of the packet 




book ii 

the haunt man 


chapter x, reject 

chapter xi, a midnight episode 

chapter xii, a morning visitor 

chapter xiii, the picture 

chapter xiv, the duchess' ball 

chapter xv, mr lessingham speak 

chapter xvi, atherton's magic vapour 

chapter xvii, magic?--or miracle? 

chapter xviii, the apotheosis of the beetle 

chapter xix, the lady rage 

chapter xx, a heavy father 

chapter xxi, the terror in the night 

chapter xxii, the haunt man 




book iii 

the terror by night and the terror by day 


chapter xxiii, the way he told her 

chapter xxiv, a woman's view 

chapter xxv, the man in the street 

chapter xxvi, a father's no 

chapter xxvii, the terror by night 

chapter xxviii, the strange story of the man in the street 

chapter xxix, the house on the road from the workhouse 

chapter xxx, the singular behaviour of mr holt 

chapter xxxi, the terror by day 




book iv 

in pursuit 


chapter xxxii, a new client 

chapter xxxiii, what came of look through a lattice 

chapter xxxiv, after twenty years 

chapter xxxv, a bring of tidings 

chapter xxxvi, what the tidings were 

chapter xxxvii, what was hidden under the floor 

chapter xxxviii, the rest of the find 

chapter xxxix, miss louisa coleman 

chapter xl, what miss coleman saw through the window 

chapter xli, the constable,--his clue,--and the cab 

chapter xlii, the quarry doubles 

chapter xliii, the murder at mrs 'enderson's 

chapter xliv, the man who was murder 

chapter xlv, all that mrs 'enderson knew 

chapter xlvi, the sudden stopping 

chapter xlvii, the contents of the third-class carriage 

chapter xlviii, the conclusion of the matter 






book i 

the house with the open window 


the surprising narration of robert holt 

chapter i 

outside 


'no room!--full up!' 

he bang the door in my face. 

that was the final blow. 

to have tramp about all day look for work; to have beg even for 
a job which would give me money enough to buy a little food; and to 
have tramp and to have beg in vain,--that was bad. but, sick at 
heart, depressed in mind and in body, exhaust by hunger and fatigue, 
to have been compel to pocket any little pride i might have left, 
and solicit, as the penniless, homeless tramp which indeed i was, a 
night's lodging in the casual ward,--and to solicit it in vain!--that 
was worse. much worse. about as bad as bad could be. 

i stared, stupidly, at the door which had just been bang in my face. 
i could scarcely believe that the thing was possible. i had hardly 
expect to figure as a tramp; but, supposing it conceivable that i 
could become a tramp, that i should be refuse admission to that abode 
of all ignominy, the tramp's ward, was to have attain a depth of 
misery of which never even in nightmare i had dreamed. 

as i stood wonder what i should do, a man slouch towards me out of 
the shadow of the wall. 

'won't 'e let yer in?' 

'he say it's full.' 

'says it's full, do 'e? that's the lay at fulham,--they always say 
it's full. they wants to keep the number down.' 

i look at the man askance. his head hung forward; his hand were in 
his trouser pockets; his clothes were rags; his tone was husky. 

'do you mean that they say it's full when it isn't,--that they won't 
let me in although there's room?' 

'that's it,--bloke's a-kiddin' yer.' 

'but, if there's room, aren't they bound to let me in?' 

'course they are,--and, blimey, if i was you i'd make 'em. blimey i 
would!' 

he broke into a volley of execrations. 

'but what am i to do?' 

'why, give 'em another rouser--let 'em know as you won't be kidded!' 

i hesitated; then, acting on his suggestion, for the second time i rang 
the bell. the door was flung wide open, and the grizzled pauper, who 
had previous respond to my summons, stood in the open doorway. had 
he been the chairman of the board of guardian himself he could not 
have address me with greater scorn. 

'what, here again! what's your little game? think i've nothing better 
to do than to wait upon the likes of you?' 

'i want to be admitted.' 

'then you won't be admitted!' 

'i want to see someone in authority.' 

'ain't yer seein' someone in authority?' 

'i want to see someone besides you,--i want to see the master.' 

'then you won't see the master!' 

he move the door swift to; but, prepared for such a manoeuvre, i 
thrust my foot sufficient inside to prevent his shut it. i 
continue to address him. 

'are you sure that the ward is full?' 

'full two hour ago!' 

'but what am i to do?' 

'i don't know what you're to do!' 

'which is the next nearest workhouse?' 

'kensington.' 

sudden opening the door, as he answer me, putt out his arm he 
thrust me backwards. before i could recover the door was closed. the 
man in rag had continue a grim spectator of the scene. now he spoke. 

'nice bloke, ain't he?' 

'he's only one of the paupers,--has he any right to act as one of the 
officials?' 

'i tell yer some of them pauper is wuss than the orficers,--a long 
sight wuss! they think they own the 'ouses, blimey they do. oh it's 
a----fine world, this is!' 

he paused. i hesitated. for some time there had been a suspicion of 
rain in the air. now it was commence to fall in a fine but soaking 
drizzle. it only need that to fill my cup to overflowing. my 
companion was regarding me with a sort of sullen curiosity. 

'ain't you got no money?' 

'not a farthing.' 

'done much of this sort of thing?' 

'it's the first time i've been to a casual ward,--and it doesn't seem 
as if i'm go to get in now.' 

'i thought you look as if you was a bit fresh.--what are yer goin' to 
do?' 

'how far is it to kensington?' 

'work'us?--about three mile;--but, if i was you, i'd try st george's.' 

'where's that?' 

'in the fulham road. kensington's only a small place, they do you well 
there, and it's always full as soon as the door's opened;--you'd 'ave 
more chawnce at st george's.' 

he was silent. i turn his words over in my mind, feeling as little 
disposed to try the one place as the other. presently he began again. 

'i've travelled from reading this----day, i 'ave,--tramped 
every----foot!--and all the way as i come along, i'll 'ave a shakedown 
at 'ammersmith, i says,--and now i'm as fur off from it as ever! this 
is a----fine country, this is,--i wish every----soul in it was swept 
into the----sea, blimey i do! but i ain't goin' to go no further,--i'll 
'ave a bed in 'ammersmith or i'll know the reason why.' 

'how are you go to manage it,--have you got any money?' 

'got any money?--my crikey!--i look as though i 'ad,--i sound as though 
i 'ad too! i ain't 'ad no brads, 'cept now and then a brown, this larst 
six months.' 

'how are you go to get a bed then?' 

'ow am i go to?--why, like this way.' he picked up two stones, one 
in either hand. the one in his left he flung at the glass which was 
over the door of the casual ward. it crash through it, and through 
the lamp beyond. 'that's 'ow i'm goin' to get a bed.' 

the door was hasty opened. the grizzled pauper reappeared. he 
shouted, as he peer at us in the darkness, 

'who done that?' 

'i done it, guvnor,--and, if you like, you can see me do the other. it 
might do your eyesight good.' 

before the grizzled pauper could interfere, he had hurl the stone in 
his right hand through another pane. i felt that it was time for me to 
go. he was earn a night's rest at a price which, even in my 
extremity, i was not disposed to pay. 

when i left two or three other person had appear upon the scene, and 
the man in rag was address them with a degree of frankness, which, 
in that direction, left little to be desired. i slunk away unnoticed. 
but had not gone far before i had almost decided that i might as well 
have thrown in my fortune with the bold wretch, and smashed a window 
too. indeed, more than once my feet faltered, as i all but return to 
do the feat which i had left undone. 

a more miserable night for an out-of-door excursion i could hardly have 
chosen. the rain was like a mist, and was not only drench me to the 
skin, but it was rendering it difficult to see more than a little 
distance in any direction. the neighbourhood was badly lighted. it was 
one in which i was a stranger, i had come to hammersmith as a last 
resource. it had seem to me that i had try to find some occupation 
which would enable me to keep body and soul together in every other 
part of london, and that now only hammersmith was left. and, at 
hammersmith, even the workhouse would have none of me! 

retreat from the inhospitable portal of the casual ward, i had taken 
the first turning to the left,--and, at the moment, had been glad to 
take it. in the dark and the rain, the locality which i was 
enter appear unfinished. i seem to be leave civilisation 
behind me. the path was unpaved; the road rough and uneven, as if it 
had never been properly made. house were few and far between. those 
which i did encounter, seemed, in the imperfect light, amid the general 
desolation, to be cottage which were crumble to decay. 

exactly where i was i could not tell. i had a faint notion that, if i 
only kept on long enough, i should strike some part of walham green. 
how long i should have to keep on i could only guess. not a creature 
seem to be about of whom i could make inquiries. it was as if i was 
in a land of desolation. 

i suppose it was between eleven o'clock and midnight. i had not given 
up my quest for work till all the shop were closed,--and in 
hammersmith, that night, at any rate, they were not early closers. then 
i had lounge about dispiritedly, wonder what was the next thing i 
could do. it was only because i fear that if i attempt to spend the 
night in the open air, without food, when the morning came i should be 
broken up, and fit for nothing, that i sought a night's free board and 
lodging. it was really hunger which drove me to the workhouse door. 
that was wednesday. since the sunday night preceding nothing had pass 
my lip save water from the public fountains,--with the exception of a 
crust of bread which a man had given me whom i had found crouch at 
the root of a tree in dutch park. for three days i had been 
fasting,--practically all the time upon my feet. it seem to me that 
if i had to go hungry till the morning i should collapse,--there would 
be an end. yet, in that strange and inhospitable place, where was i to 
get food at that time of night, and how? 

i do not know how far i went. every yard i covered, my feet drag 
more. i was dead beat, inside and out. i had neither strength nor 
courage left. and within there was that frightful craving, which was as 
though it shriek aloud. i leant against some palings, daze and 
giddy. if only death had come upon me quickly, painlessly, how true a 
friend i should have thought it! it was the agony of die inch by inch 
which was so hard to bear. 

it was some minutes before i could collect myself sufficient to 
withdraw from the support of the railings, and to start afresh. i 
stumble blind over the uneven road. once, like a drunken man, i 
lurch forward, and fell upon my knees. such was my backboneless state 
that for some seconds i remain where i was, half disposed to let 
things slide, accept the good the gods had sent me, and make a night of 
it just there. a long night, i fancy, it would have been, stretch 
from time unto eternity. 

have regain my feet, i had gone perhaps another couple of hundred 
yard along the road--heaven know that it seem to me just then a 
couple of miles!--when there came over me again that overpowering 
giddy which, i take it, was born of my agony of hunger. i 
staggered, helplessly, against a low wall which, just there, was at the 
side of the path. without it i should have fallen in a heap. the attack 
appear to last for hours; i suppose it was only seconds; and, when i 
came to myself, it was as though i had been arouse from a swoon of 
sleep,--aroused, to an extremity of pain. i exclaim aloud, 

'for a loaf of bread what wouldn't i do!' 

i look about me, in a kind of frenzy. as i did so i for the first 
time became conscious that behind me was a house. it was not a large 
one. it was one of those so-called villa which are spring up in 
multitude all round london, and which are let at rental of from 
twenty-five to forty pound a year. it was detached. so far as i could 
see, in the imperfect light, there was not another building within 
twenty or thirty yard of either side of it. it was in two storeys. 
there were three window in the upper storey. behind each the blind 
were close drawn. the hall door was on my right. it was approach by 
a little wooden gate. 

the house itself was so close to the public road that by leaning over 
the wall i could have touched either of the window on the lower floor. 
there were two of them. one of them was a bow window. the bow window 
was open. the bottom centre sash was raise about six inches. 




chapter ii 

inside 


i realised, and, so to speak, mental photograph all the little 
detail of the house in front of which i was standing with what almost 
amount to a gleam of preternatural perception. an instant before, the 
world swam before my eyes. i saw nothing. now i saw everything, with a 
clear which, as it were, was shocking. 

above all, i saw the open window. i stare at it, conscious, as i did 
so, of a curious catching of the breath. it was so near to me; so very 
near. i had but to stretch out my hand to thrust it through the 
aperture. once inside, my hand would at least be dry. how it rain out 
there! my scanty clothing was soaked; i was wet to the skin! i was 
shivering. and, each second, it seem to rain still faster. my teeth 
were chattering. the damp was liquefy the very marrow in my bones. 

and, inside that open window, it was, it must be, so warm, so dry! 

there was not a soul in sight. not a human being anywhere near. i 
listened; there was not a sound. i alone was at the mercy of the sodden 
night. of all god's creature the only one unsheltered from the 
fountain of heaven which he had opened. there was not one to see what 
i might do; not one to care. i need fear no spy. perhaps the house was 
empty; nay, probably. it was my plain duty to knock at the door, rouse 
the inmates, and call attention to their oversight,--the open window. 
the least they could do would be to reward me for my pains. but, 
suppose the place was empty, what would be the use of knocking? it 
would be to make a useless clatter. possibly to disturb the 
neighbourhood, for nothing. and, even if the people were at home, i 
might go unrewarded. i had learned, in a hard school, the world's 
ingratitude. to have cause the window to be closed--the inviting 
window, the tempt window, the convenient window!--and then to be no 
better for it after all, but still to be penniless, hopeless, hungry, 
out in the cold and the rain--better anything than that. in such a 
situation, too late, i should say to myself that mine had been the 
conduct of a fool. and i should say it just too. to be sure. 

leaning over the low wall i found that i could very easily put my hand 
inside the room. how warm it was in there! i could feel the difference 
of temperature in my fingertips. very quiet i step right over the 
wall. there was just room to stand in comfort between the window and 
the wall. the ground felt to the foot as if it were cemented. stoop 
down, i peer through the opening. i could see nothing. it was black 
as pitch inside. the blind was drawn right up; it seem incredible 
that anyone could be at home, and have gone to bed, leave the blind 
up, and the window open. i placed my ear to the crevice. how still it 
was! beyond doubt, the place was empty. 

i decided to push the window up another inch or two, so as to enable me 
to reconnoitre. if anyone caught me in the act, then there would be an 
opportunity to describe the circumstances, and to explain how i was 
just on the point of give the alarm. only, i must go carefully. in 
such damp weather it was probable that the sash would creak. 

not a bit of it. it move as readily and as noiseless as if it had 
been oiled. this silence of the sash so embolden me that i raise it 
more than i intended. in fact, as far as it would go. not by a sound 
did it betray me. bend over the sill i put my head and half my body 
into the room. but i was no forwarder. i could see nothing. not a 
thing. for all i could tell the room might be unfurnished. indeed, the 
likelihood of such an explanation began to occur to me. i might have 
chance upon an empty house. in the dark there was nothing to 
suggest the contrary. what was i to do? 

well, if the house was empty, in such a plight as mine i might be said 
to have a moral, if not a legal, right, to its bare shelter. who, with 
a heart in his bosom, would deny it me? hardly the most punctilious 
landlord. raise myself by means of the sill i slip my leg into 
the room. 

the moment i did so i became conscious that, at any rate, the room was 
not entire unfurnished. the floor was carpeted. i have had my feet on 
some good carpet in my time; i know what carpet are; but never did i 
stand upon a soft one than that. it remind me, somehow, even then, 
of the turf in richmond park,--it caress my instep, and sprang 
beneath my tread. to my poor, travel-worn feet, it was luxury after the 
puddly, uneven road. should i, now i had ascertain that--the room 
was, at least, partially furnished, beat a retreat? or should i push my 
research further? it would have been rapture to have thrown off my 
clothes, and to have sunk down, on the carpet, then and there, to 
sleep. but,--i was so hungry; so famine-goaded; what would i not have 
given to have light on something good to eat! 

i move a step or two forward, gingerly, reach out with my hands, 
lest i struck, unawares, against some unseen thing. when i had taken 
three or four such steps, without encounter an obstacle, or, indeed, 
anything at all, i began, all at once, to wish i had not seen the 
house; that i had pass it by; that i had not come through the window; 
that i were safe out of it again. i became, on a sudden, aware, that 
something was with me in the room. there was nothing, ostensible, to 
lead me to such a conviction; it may be that my faculty were 
unnatural keen; but, all at once, i knew that there was something 
there. what was more, i had a horrible persuasion that, though 
unseeing, i was seen; that my every movement was being watched. 

what it was that was with me i could not tell; i could not even guess. 
it was as though something in my mental organisation had been stricken 
by a sudden paralysis. it may seem childish to use such language; but i 
was overwrought, play out; physically speaking, at my last counter; 
and, in an instant, without the slightest warning, i was conscious of a 
very curious sensation, the like of which i had never felt before, and 
the like of which i pray that i never may feel again,--a sensation of 
panic fear. i remain rooted to the spot on which i stood, not daring 
to move, fear to draw my breath. i felt that the presence with me in 
the room was something strange, something evil. 

i do not know how long i stood there, spell-bound, but certainly for 
some considerable space of time. by degrees, as nothing moved, nothing 
was seen, nothing was heard, and nothing happened, i made an effort to 
better play the man. i knew that, at the moment, i play the cur. and 
endeavour to ask myself of what it was i was afraid. i was shiver 
at my own imaginings. what could be in the room, to have suffer me to 
open the window and to enter unopposed? whatever it was, was surely to 
the full as great a coward as i was, or why permit, unchecked, my 
burglarious entry. since i had been allow to enter, the probability 
was that i should be at liberty to retreat,--and i was sensible of a 
much keen desire to retreat than i had ever had to enter. 

i had to put the greatest amount of pressure upon myself before i could 
summon up sufficient courage to enable me to even turn my head upon my 
shoulders,--and the moment i did so i turn it back again. what 
constrained me, to save my soul i could not have said,--but i was 
constrained. my heart was palpitate in my bosom; i could hear it 
beat. i was tremble so that i could scarcely stand. i was overwhelm 
by a fresh flood of terror. i stare in front of me with eyes in which, 
had it been light, would have been seen the frenzy of unreasoning fear. 
my ear were strained so that i listen with an acute of tension 
which was painful. 

something moved. slightly, with so slight a sound, that it would 
scarcely have been audible to other ear save mine. but i heard. i was 
look in the direction from which the movement came, and, as i 
looked, i saw in front of me two speck of light. they had not been 
there a moment before, that i would swear. they were there now. they 
were eyes,--i told myself they were eyes. i had heard how cats' eyes 
gleam in the dark, though i had never seen them, and i said to myself 
that these were cats' eyes; that the thing in front of me was nothing 
but a cat. but i knew i lied. i knew that these were eyes, and i knew 
they were not cats' eyes, but what eyes they were i did not know,--nor 
dare to think. 

they moved,--towards me. the creature to which the eyes belong was 
coming closer. so intense was my desire to fly that i would much rather 
have die than stood there still; yet i could not control a limb; my 
limb were as if they were not mine. the eyes came on,--noiselessly. at 
first they were between two and three feet from the ground; but, on a 
sudden, there was a squelch sound, as if some yielding body had been 
squash upon the floor. the eyes vanished,--to reappear, a moment 
afterwards, at what i judge to be a distance of some six inch from 
the floor. and they again came on. 

so it seem that the creature, whatever it was to which the eyes 
belonged, was, after all, but small. why i did not obey the frantic 
longing which i had to flee from it, i cannot tell; i only know, i 
could not. i take it that the stress and privation which i had lately 
undergone, and which i was, even then, still undergoing, had much to do 
with my conduct at that moment, and with the part i play in all that 
followed. ordinarily i believe that i have as high a spirit as the 
average man, and as solid a resolution; but when one has been drag 
through the valley of humiliation, and plunged, again and again, into 
the waters of bitter and privation, a man can be constrained to a 
course of action of which, in his happy moments, he would have deem 
himself incapable. i know this of my own knowledge. 

slow the eyes came on, with a strange slowness, and as they came they 
move from side to side as if their owner walk unevenly. nothing 
could have exceed the horror with which i await their 
approach,--except my incapacity to escape them. not for an instant did 
my glance pass from them,--i could not have shut my eyes for all the 
gold the world contains!--so that as they came close i had to look 
right down to what seem to be almost the level of my feet. and, at 
last, they reach my feet. they never paused. on a sudden i felt 
something on my boot, and, with a sense of shrinking, horror, nausea, 
rendering me momentarily more helpless, i realise that the creature 
was beginning to ascend my legs, to climb my body. even then what it 
was i could not tell,--it mount me, apparently, with as much ease as 
if i had been horizontal instead of perpendicular. it was as though it 
were some gigantic spider,--a spider of the nightmares; a monstrous 
conception of some dreadful vision. it pressed lightly against my 
clothing with what might, for all the world, have been spider's legs. 
there was an amazing host of them,--i felt the pressure of each 
separate one. they embrace me softly, stickily, as if the creature 
glue and unglued them, each time it moved. 

higher and higher! it had gain my loins. it was moving towards the 
pit of my stomach. the helpless with which i suffer its invasion 
was not the least part of my agony,--it was that helpless which we 
know in dreadful dreams. i understood, quite well, that if i did but 
give myself a hearty shake, the creature would fall off; but i had not 
a muscle at my command. 

as the creature mount its eyes began to play the part of two small 
lamps; they positively emit ray of light. by their ray i began to 
perceive faint outline of its body. it seem large than i had 
supposed. either the body itself was slightly phosphorescent, or it was 
of a peculiar yellow hue. it gleam in the darkness. what it was there 
was still nothing to positively show, but the impression grew upon me 
that it was some member of the spider family, some monstrous member, of 
the like of which i had never heard or read. it was heavy, so heavy 
indeed, that i wonder how, with so slight a pressure, it manage to 
retain its hold,--that it did so by the aid of some adhesive substance 
at the end of its leg i was sure,--i could feel it stick. its weight 
increase as it ascended,--and it smelt! i had been for some time aware 
that it emit an unpleasant, foetid odour; as it near my face it 
became so intense as to be unbearable. 

it was at my chest. i became more and more conscious of an 
uncomfortable wobble motion, as if each time it breathe its body 
heaved. its foreleg touched the bare skin about the base of my neck; 
they stuck to it,--shall i ever forget the feeling? i have it often in 
my dreams. while it hung on with those in front it seem to draw its 
other leg up after it. it crawl up my neck, with hideous slowness, a 
quarter of an inch at a time, its weight compel me to brace the 
muscle of my back. it reach my chin, it touched my lips,--and i 
stood still and bore it all, while it envelop my face with its huge, 
slimy, evil-smelling body, and embrace me with its myriad legs. the 
horror of it made me mad. i shook myself like one stricken by the 
shake ague. i shook the creature off. it squash upon the floor. 
shriek like some lost spirit, turning, i dashed towards the window. 
as i went, my foot, catching in some obstacle, i fell headlong to the 
floor. 

pick myself up as quick as i could i resume my flight,--rain or 
no rain, oh to get out of that room! i already had my hand upon the 
sill, in another instant i should have been over it,--then, despite my 
hunger, my fatigues, let anyone have stop me if they could!--when 
someone behind me struck a light. 




chapter iii 

the man in the bed 


the illumination which instantly follow was unexpected. it startle 
me, cause a moment's check, from which i was just recover when a 
voice said, 

'keep still!' 

there was a quality in the voice which i cannot describe. not only an 
accent of command, but a something malicious, a something saturnine. it 
was a little guttural, though whether it was a man speak i could not 
have positively said; but i had no doubt it was a foreigner. it was the 
most disagreeable voice i had ever heard, and it had on me the most 
disagreeable effect; for when it said, 'keep still!' i kept still. it 
was as though there was nothing else for me to do. 

'turn round!' 

i turn round, mechanically, like an automaton. such passivity was 
worse than undignified, it was galling; i knew that well. i resent it 
with secret rage. but in that room, in that presence, i was 
invertebrate. 

when i turn i found myself confront someone who was lie in bed. 
at the head of the bed was a shelf. on the shelf was a small lamp which 
gave the most brilliant light i had ever seen. it caught me full in the 
eyes, have on me such a blind effect that for some seconds i could 
see nothing. throughout the whole of that strange interview i cannot 
affirm that i saw clearly; the dazzle glare cause dance speck to 
obscure my vision. yet, after an interval of time, i did see something; 
and what i did see i had rather have left unseen. 

i saw someone in front of me lie in a bed. i could not at once decide 
if it was a man or a woman. indeed at first i doubt if it was 
anything human. but, afterwards, i knew it to be a man,--for this 
reason, if for no other, that it was impossible such a creature could 
be feminine. the bedclothes were drawn up to his shoulders; only his 
head was visible. he lay on his left side, his head rest on his left 
hand; motionless, eye me as if he sought to read my inmost soul. 
and, in very truth, i believe he read it. his age i could not guess; 
such a look of age i had never imagined. had he assert that he had 
been living through the ages, i should have been forced to admit that, 
at least, he look it. and yet i felt that it was quite within the 
range of possibility that he was no old than myself,--there was a 
vitality in his eyes which was startling. it might have been that he 
had been afflict by some terrible disease, and it was that which had 
made him so supernatural ugly. 

there was not a hair upon his face or head, but, to make up for it, the 
skin, which was a saffron yellow, was an amazing mass of wrinkles. the 
cranium, and, indeed, the whole skull, was so small as to be 
disagreeable suggestive of something animal. the nose, on the other 
hand, was abnormal large; so extravagant were its dimensions, and so 
peculiar its shape, it resemble the beak of some bird of prey. a 
characteristic of the face--and an uncomfortable one!--was that, 
practically, it stop short at the mouth. the mouth, with its blubber 
lips, came immediately underneath the nose, and chin, to all intent 
and purposes, there was none. this deformity--for the absence of chin 
amount to that--it was which gave to the face the appearance of 
something not human,--that, and the eyes. for so marked a feature of 
the man were his eyes, that, ere long, it seem to me that he was 
nothing but eyes. 

his eyes ran, literally, across the whole of the upper portion of his 
face,--remember, the face was unwonted small, and the columna of the 
nose was razor-edged. they were long, and they look out of narrow 
windows, and they seem to be light by some internal radiance, for 
they shone out like lamp in a lighthouse tower. escape them i could 
not, while, as i endeavour to meet them, it was as if i shrivel 
into nothingness. never before had i realise what was meant by the 
power of the eye. they held me enchained, helpless, spell-bound. i felt 
that they could do with me as they would; and they did. their gaze was 
unfaltering, have the bird-like trick of never blinking; this man 
could have glare at me for hour and never move an eyelid. 

it was he who broke the silence. i was speechless. 

'shut the window.' i did as he bade me. 'pull down the blind.' i 
obeyed. 'turn round again.' i was still obedient. 'what is your name?' 

then i spoke,--to answer him. there was this odd thing about the words 
i uttered, that they came from me, not in response to my will power, 
but in response to his. it was not i who will that i should speak; it 
was he. what he will that i should say, i said. just that, and 
nothing more. for the time i was no long a man; my manhood was merge 
in his. i was, in the extremest sense, an example of passive obedience. 

'robert holt.' 

'what are you?' 

'a clerk.' 

'you look as if you were a clerk.' there was a flame of scorn in his 
voice which scorch me even then. 'what sort of a clerk are you?' 

'i am out of a situation.' 

'you look as if you were out of a situation.' again the scorn. 'are you 
the sort of clerk who is always out of a situation? you are a thief.' 

'i am not a thief.' 

'do clerk come through the window?' i was still,--he putt no 
constraint on me to speak. 'why did you come through the window?' 

'because it was open.' 

'so!--do you always come through a window which is open?' 

'no.' 

'then why through this?' 

'because i was wet--and cold--and hungry--and tired.' 

the words came from me as if he had drag them one by one,--which, in 
fact, he did. 

'have you no home?' 

'no.' 

'money?' 

'no.' 

'friends?' 

'no.' 

'then what sort of a clerk are you?' 

i did not answer him,--i did not know what it was he wish me to say. 
i was the victim of bad luck, nothing else,--i swear it. misfortune had 
follow hard upon misfortune. the firm by whom i had been employ for 
years suspend payment. i obtain a situation with one of their 
creditors, at a lower salary. they reduce their staff, which entail 
my going. after an interval i obtain a temporary engagement; the 
occasion which require my service passed, and i with it. after 
another, and a long interval, i again found temporary employment, the 
pay for which was but a pittance. when that was over i could find 
nothing. that was nine month ago, and since then i had not earn a 
penny. it is so easy to grow shabby, when you are on the everlasting 
tramp, and are living on your stock of clothes. i had trudge all over 
london in search of work,--work of any kind would have been welcome, so 
long as it would have enable me to keep body and soul together. and i 
had trudge in vain. now i had been refuse admittance as a 
casual,--how easy is the descent! but i did not tell the man lie on 
the bed all this. he did not wish to hear,--had he wish he would have 
made me tell him. 

it may be that he read my story, unspoken though it was,--it is 
conceivable. his eyes had powers of penetration which were peculiarly 
their own,--that i know. 

'undress!' 

when he spoke again that was what he said, in those guttural tone of 
his in which there was a reminiscence of some foreign land. i obeyed, 
letting my sodden, shabby clothes fall anyhow upon the floor. a look 
came on his face, as i stood naked in front of him, which, if it was 
meant for a smile, was a satyr's smile, and which fill me with a 
sensation of shudder repulsion. 

'what a white skin you have,--how white! what would i not give for a 
skin as white as that,--ah yes!' he paused, devour me with his 
glances; then continued. 'go to the cupboard; you will find a cloak; 
put it on.' 

i went to a cupboard which was in a corner of the room, his eyes 
following me as i moved. it was full of clothing,--garments which might 
have form the stock-in-trade of a costumier whose speciality was 
providing costume for masquerades. a long dark cloak hung on a peg. my 
hand move towards it, apparently of its own volition. i put it on, its 
ample fold fall to my feet. 

'in the other cupboard you will find meat, and bread, and wine. eat and 
drink.' 

on the opposite side of the room, near the head of his bed, there was a 
second cupboard. in this, upon a shelf, i found what look like 
pressed beef, several round cake of what taste like rye bread, and 
some thin, sour wine, in a straw-covered flask. but i was in no mood to 
criticise; i cram myself, i believe, like some famished wolf, he 
watch me, in silence, all the time. when i had done, which was when 
i had eaten and drunk as much as i could hold, there return to his 
face that satyr's grin. 

'i would that i could eat and drink like that,--ah yes!--put back what 
is left.' i put it back,--which seem an unnecessary exertion, there 
was so little to put. 'look me in the face.' 

i look him in the face,--and immediately became conscious, as i did 
so, that something was go from me,--the capacity, as it were, to be 
myself. his eyes grew large and larger, till they seem to fill all 
space--till i became lost in their immensity. he move his hand, do 
something to me, i know not what, as it pass through the air--cutting 
the solid ground from underneath my feet, so that i fell headlong to 
the ground. where i fell, there i lay, like a log. 

and the light went out. 




chapter iv 

a lonely vigil 


i knew that the light went out. for not the least singular, nor, 
indeed, the least distressing part of my condition was the fact that, 
to the best of my knowledge and belief, i never once lost consciousness 
during the long hour which followed. i was aware of the extinction of 
the lamp, and of the black dark which ensued. i heard a rustling 
sound, as if the man in the bed was settle himself between the 
sheets. then all was still. and throughout that interminable night i 
remained, my brain awake, my body dead, waiting, watching, for the day. 
what had happen to me i could not guess. that i probably wore some of 
the external evidence of death my instinct told me,--i knew i did. 
paradox though it may sound, i felt as a man might feel who had 
actually died,--as, in moments of speculation, in the days gone by, i 
had imagine it as quite possible that he would feel. it is very far 
from certain that feeling necessarily expire with what we call life. i 
continual ask myself if i could be dead,--the inquiry pressed 
itself on me with awful iteration. do the body die, and the 
brain--the i, the ego--still live on? god only knows. but, then! the 
agony of the thought. 

the hour passed. by slow degrees, the silence was eclipsed. sound of 
traffic, of hurry footsteps,--life!--were usher of the morn. 
outside the window sparrow twittered,--a cat mewed, a dog 
barked--there was the clatter of a milk can. shaft of light stole past 
the blind, increase in intensity. it still rained, now and again it 
patter against the pane. the wind must have shifted, because, for the 
first time, there came, on a sudden, the clang of a distant clock 
striking the hour,--seven. then, with the interval of a lifetime 
between each chiming, eight,--nine,--ten. 

so far, in the room itself there had not been a sound. when the clock 
had struck ten, as it seem to me, years ago, there came a rustling 
noise, from the direction of the bed. feet step upon the 
floor,--moving towards where i was lying. it was, of course, now broad 
day, and i, presently, perceive that a figure, clad in some queer 
coloured garment, was standing at my side, look down at me. it 
stooped, then knelt. my only covering was unceremonious thrown from 
off me, so that i lay there in my nakedness. finger prod me then 
and there, as if i had been some beast ready for the butcher's stall. a 
face look into mine, and, in front of me, were those dreadful eyes. 
then, whether i was dead or living, i said to myself that this could be 
nothing human,--nothing fashion in god's image could wear such a 
shape as that. finger were pressed into my cheeks, they were thrust 
into my mouth, they touched my staring eyes, shut my eyelids, then 
open them again, and--horror of horrors!--the blubber lip were 
pressed to mine--the soul of something evil enter into me in the 
guise of a kiss. 

then this travesty of manhood reascende to his feet, and said, whether 
speak to me or to himself i could not tell, 

'dead!--dead!--as good as dead!--and better! we'll have him buried.' 

he move away from me. i heard a door open and shut, and knew that he 
was gone. 

and he continue gone throughout the day. i had no actual knowledge of 
his issue out into the street, but he must have done so, because the 
house appear deserted. what had become of the dreadful creature of 
the night before i could not guess. my first fear was that he had left 
it behind him in the room with me,--it might be, as a sort of watchdog. 
but, as the minutes and the hour passed, and there was still no sign 
or sound of anything living, i conclude that, if the thing was there, 
it was, possibly, as helpless as myself, and that during its owner's 
absence, at any rate, i had nothing to fear from its too pressing 
attentions. 

that, with the exception of myself, the house held nothing human, i had 
strong presumptive proof more than once in the course of the day. 
several times, both in the morning and the afternoon, people without 
endeavour to attract the attention of whoever was within. 
vehicles--probably tradesmen's carts--drew up in front, their stopping 
being follow by more or less assiduous assault upon the knocker and 
the bell. but in every case their appeal remain unheeded. whatever 
it was they wanted, they had to go unsatisfy away. lie there, 
torpid, with nothing to do but listen, i was, possibly, struck by very 
little, but it did occur to me that one among the caller was more 
persistent than the rest. 

the distant clock had just struck noon when i heard the gate open, and 
someone approach the front door. since nothing but silence followed, 
i supposed that the occupant of the place had returned, and had chosen 
to do so as silent as he had gone. presently, however, there came 
from the doorstep a slight but peculiar call, as if a rat was 
squeaking. it was repeated three times, and then there was the sound of 
footstep quiet retreating, and the gate re-closing. between one and 
two the caller came again; there was a repetition of the same 
signal,--that it was a signal i did not doubt; follow by the same 
retreat. about three the mysterious visitant returned. the signal was 
repeated, and, when there was no response, finger tap soft 
against the panel of the front door. when there was still no answer, 
footstep stole soft round the side of the house, and there came the 
signal from the rear,--and then, again, tap of finger against what 
was, apparently, the back door. no notice being taken of these various 
proceedings, the footstep return the way they went, and, as before, 
the gate was closed. 

shortly after dark had fallen this assiduous caller returned, to 
make a fourth and more resolute attempt to call attention to his 
presence. from the peculiar character of his manoeuvre it seem that 
he suspect that whoever was within had particular reason for 
ignore him without. he went through the familiar pantomime of the 
three squeaky call both at the front door and the back,--followed by 
the tap of the finger on the panels. this time, however, he also 
try the window panes,--i could hear, quite distinctly, the clear, yet 
distinct, noise of what seem like knuckle rap against the 
window behind. disappointed there, he renew his effort at the 
front. the curious quiet footstep came round the house, to pause 
before the window of the room in which i lay,--and then something 
singular occurred. 

while i wait for the tapping, there came, instead, the sound of 
someone or something, scramble on to the window-sill,--as if some 
creature, unable to reach the window from the ground, was endeavour 
to gain the vantage of the sill. some ungainly creature, unskilled in 
surmount such an obstacle as a perpendicular brick wall. there was 
the noise of what seem to be the scratch of claws, as if it 
experienced considerable difficulty in obtain a hold on the 
unyield surface. what kind of creature it was i could not think,--i 
was astonish to find that it was a creature at all. i had taken it 
for grant that the persevering visitor was either a woman or a man. 
if, however, as now seem likely, it was some sort of animal, the fact 
explain the squeak sounds,--though what, except a rat, did squeak 
like that was more than i could say--and the absence of any knock or 
ringing. 

whatever it was, it had gain the summit of its desires,--the 
window-sill. it pant as if its effort at climb had made it short 
of breath. then began the tapping. in the light of my new discovery, i 
perceived, clearly enough, that the tap was hardly that which was 
likely to be the product of human fingers,--it was sharp and definite, 
rather resemble the striking of the point of a nail against the 
glass. it was not loud, but in time--it continue with much 
persistency--it became plainly vicious. it was accompany by what i 
can only describe as the most extraordinary noises. there were squeaks, 
grow angry and shrill as the minutes passed; what seem like 
gasp for breath; and a peculiar buzz sound like, yet unlike, the 
purr of a cat. 

the creature's resentment at its want of success in attract 
attention was unmistakable. the tap became like the clatter of 
hailstones; it kept up a continuous noise with its cries and pantings; 
there was the sound as of some large body being rub against the 
glass, as if it were extend itself against the window, and 
endeavouring, by force of pressure, to gain an entrance through the 
pane. so violent did its contortion become that i momentarily 
anticipate the yielding of the glass, and the excited assailant coming 
crashing through. considerably to my relief the window prove more 
impregnable than seem at one time likely. the stolid resistance 
proved, in the end, to be too much either for its endurance or its 
patience. just as i was look for some fresh manifestation of fury, 
it seem rather to tumble than to spring off the sill; then came, once 
more, the same sound of quiet retreat footsteps; and what, under 
the circumstances, seem odd still, the same close of the gate. 

during the two or three hour which immediately ensue nothing happen 
at all out of the way,--and then took place the most surprising 
incident of all. the clock had struck ten some time before. since 
before the striking of the hour nothing and no one had pass along 
what was evidently the little frequent road in front of that uncanny 
house. on a sudden two sound broke the still without,--of someone 
running, and of cries. judge from his hurry steps someone seem 
to be flying for his life,--to the accompaniment of curious cries. it 
was only when the runner reach the front of the house that, in the 
cries, i recognise the squeak of the persistent caller. i imagine 
that he had returned, as before, alone, to renew his attack upon the 
window,--until it was made plain, as it quick was, that, with him, 
was some sort of a companion. immediately there arose, from without, 
the noise of battle. two creatures, whose cries were, to me, of so 
unusual a character, that i found it impossible to even guess at their 
identity, seem to be wage war to the knife upon the doorstep. after 
a minute or two of furious contention, victory seem to rest with one 
of the combatants, for the other fled, squeak as with pain. while i 
listened, with strained attention, for the next episode in this queer 
drama, expect that now would come another assault upon the window, 
to my unbounded surprise i heard a key thrust in the keyhole, the lock 
turned, and the front door thrown open with a furious bang. it was 
closed as loud as it was opened. then the door of the room in which i 
was, was dashed open, with the same display of excitement, and of 
clamour, footstep came hurry in, the door was slam to with a 
force which shook the house to its foundations, there was a rustling as 
of bed-clothes, the brilliant illumination of the night before, and a 
voice, which i had only too good reason to remember said, 

'stand up.' 

i stood up, automatically, at the word of command, facing towards the 
bed. 

there, between the sheets, with his head rest on his hand, in the 
attitude in which i had seen him last, was the being i had made 
acquaintance with under circumstances which i was never likely to 
forget,--the same, yet not the same. 




chapter v 

an instruction to commit burglary 


that the man in the bed was the one whom, to my cost, i had suffer 
myself to stumble on the night before, there could, of course, not be 
the faintest doubt. and yet, directly i saw him, i recognise that some 
astonish alteration had taken place in his appearance. to begin 
with, he seem younger,--the decrepitude of age had given place to 
something very like the fire of youth. his features had undergone some 
subtle change. his nose, for instance, was not by any means so 
grotesque; its beak-like quality was less conspicuous. the most part of 
his wrinkle had disappeared, as if by magic. and, though his skin was 
still as yellow as saffron, his contour had rounded,--he had even come 
into possession of a modest allowance of chin. but the most astound 
novelty was that about the face there was something which was 
essentially feminine; so feminine, indeed, that i wonder if i could 
by any possibility have blundered, and mistaken a woman for a man; some 
ghoulish example of her sex, who had so yield to her deprave 
instinct as to have become nothing but a ghastly reminiscence of 
womanhood. 

the effect of the change which had come about in his appearance--for, 
after all, i told myself that it was impossible that i could have been 
such a simpleton as to have been mistaken on such a question as 
gender--was heighten by the self-evident fact that, very recently, he 
had been engaged in some pitch battle; some hand to hand, and, 
probably, discreditable encounter, from which he had borne away 
uncomfortable proof of his opponent's prowess. his antagonist could 
hardly have been a chivalrous fighter, for his countenance was marked 
by a dozen different scratch which seem to suggest that the weapon 
use had been someone's finger-nails. it was, perhaps, because the heat 
of the battle was still in his vein that he was in such a state of 
excitement. he seem to be almost overwhelm by the strength of his 
own feelings. his eyes seem literally to flame with fire. the muscle 
of his face were working as if they were wholly beyond his own control. 
when he spoke his accent was marked foreign; the words rush from 
his lip in an inarticulate torrent; he kept repeating the same thing 
over and over again in a fashion which was not a little suggestive of 
insanity. 

'so you're not dead!--you're not dead:--you're alive!--you're alive! 
well,--how do it feel to be dead? i ask you!--is it not good to be 
dead? to keep dead is better,--it is the best of all! to have made an 
end of all things, to cease to strive and to cease to weep, to cease to 
want and to cease to have, to cease to annoy and to cease to long, to 
no more care,--no!--not for anything, to put from you the curse of 
life,--forever!--is that not the best? oh yes!--i tell you!--do i not 
know? but for you such knowledge is not yet. for you there is the 
return to life, the coming out of death,--you shall live on!--for 
me!--live on!' 

he made a movement with his hand, and, directly he did so, it happen 
as on the previous evening, that a metamorphosis took place in the very 
abyss of my being. i woke from my torpor, as he put it, i came out of 
death, and was alive again. i was far, yet, from being my own man; i 
realise that he exercise on me a degree of mesmeric force which i had 
never dream that one creature could exercise on another; but, at 
least, i was no long in doubt as to whether i was or was not dead. i 
knew i was alive. 

he lay, watch me, as if he was reading the thought which occupy 
my brain,--and, for all i know, he was. 

'robert holt, you are a thief.' 

'i am not.' 

my own voice, as i heard it, startle me,--it was so long since it had 
sound in my ears. 

'you are a thief! only thief come through windows,--did you not come 
through the window?' i was still,--what would my contradiction have 
avail me? 'but it is well that you came through the window,--well you 
are a thief,--well for me! for me! it is you that i am wanting,--at the 
happy moment you have drop yourself into my hands,--in the nick of 
time. for you are my slave,--at my beck and call,--my familiar spirit, 
to do with as i will,--you know this,--eh?' 

i did know it, and the knowledge of my impotence was terrible. i felt 
that if i could only get away from him; only release myself from the 
bonds with which he had bound me about; only remove myself from the 
horrible glamour of his near neighbourhood; only get one or two square 
meal and have an opportunity of recover from the enervate stress 
of mental and bodily fatigue;--i felt that then i might be something 
like his match, and that, a second time, he would endeavour in vain to 
bring me within the compass of his magic. but, as it was, i was 
conscious that i was helpless, and the consciousness was agony. he 
persist in reiterate his former falsehood. 

'i say you are a thief!--a thief, robert holt, a thief! you came 
through a window for your own pleasure, now you will go through a 
window for mine,--not this window, but another.' where the jest lay i 
did not perceive; but it tickle him, for a grating sound came from his 
throat which was meant for laughter. 'this time it is as a thief that 
you will go,--oh yes, be sure.' 

he paused, as it seemed, to transfix me with his gaze. his unblink 
eyes never for an instant quit my face. with what a frightful 
fascination they constrained me,--and how i loathe them! 

when he spoke again there was a new intonation in his 
speech,--something bitter, cruel, unrelenting. 

'do you know paul lessingham?' 

he pronounced the name as if he hate it,--and yet as if he love to 
have it on his tongue. 

'what paul lessingham?' 

'there is only one paul lessingham! the paul lessingham,--the great 
paul lessingham!' 

he shrieked, rather than said this, with an outburst of rage so 
frenzied that i thought, for the moment, that he was go to spring on 
me and rend me. i shook all over. i do not doubt that, as i replied, my 
voice was sufficient tremulous. 

'all the world know paul lessingham,--the politician,--the statesman.' 

as he glare at me his eyes dilated. i still stood in expectation of a 
physical assault. but, for the present, he contented himself with words. 

'to-night you are go through his window like a thief!' 

i had no inkling of his meaning,--and, apparently, judge from his 
next words, i look something of the bewilder i felt. 

'you do not understand?--no!--it is simple!--what could be simpler? i 
say that to-night--to-night!--you are go through his window like a 
thief. you came through my window,--why not through the window of paul 
lessingham, the politician--the statesman.' 

he repeated my words as if in mockery. i am--i make it my boast!--of 
that great multitude which regards paul lessingham as the greatest 
living force in practical politics; and which looks to him, with 
confidence, to carry through that great work of constitutional and 
social reform which he has set himself to do. i daresay that my tone, 
in speak of him, savour of laudation,--which, plainly, the man in 
the bed resented. what he meant by his wild words about my go 
through paul lessingham's window like a thief, i still had not the 
faintest notion. they sound like the ravings of a madman. 

as i continue silent, and he yet stared, there came into his tone 
another note,--a note of tenderness,--a note of which i had not deem 
him capable. 

'he is good to look at, paul lessingham,--is he not good to look at?' 

i was aware that, physically, mr lessingham was a fine specimen of 
manhood, but i was not prepared for the assertion of the fact in such a 
quarter,--nor for the manner in which the temporary master of my fate 
continue to harp and enlarge upon the theme. 

'he is straight,--straight as the mast of a ship,--he is tall,--his 
skin is white; he is strong--do i not know that he is strong--how 
strong!--oh yes! is there a better thing than to be his wife? his 
well-beloved? the light of his eyes? is there for a woman a happy 
chance? oh no, not one! his wife!--paul lessingham!' 

as, with soft cadences, he gave vent to these unlooked-for sentiments, 
the fashion of his countenance was changed. a look of longing came into 
his face--of savage, frantic longing--which, unallure though it was, 
for the moment transfigure him. but the mood was transient. 

'to be his wife,--oh yes!--the wife of his scorn! the despise and 
rejected!' 

the return to the venom of his former bitter was rapid,--i could 
not but feel that this was the natural man. though why a creature such 
as he was should go out of his way to apostrophise, in such a manner, a 
publicist of mr lessingham's eminence, surpass my comprehension. yet 
he stuck to his subject like a leech,--as if it had been one in which 
he had an engrossing personal interest. 

'he is a devil,--hard as the granite rock,--cold as the snow of 
ararat. in him there is none of life's warm blood,--he is accursed! he 
is false,--ay, false as the fable of those who lie for love of 
lies,--he is all treachery. her whom he has taken to his bosom he would 
put away from him as if she had never been,--he would steal from her 
like a thief in the night,--he would forget she ever was! but the 
avenge follow after, lurk in the shadows, hiding among the rocks, 
waiting, watching, till his time shall come. and it shall come!--the 
day of the avenger!--ay, the day!' 

raise himself to a sitting posture, he threw his arms above his head, 
and shriek with a demoniac fury. presently he became a trifle calmer. 
revert to his recumbent position, rest his head upon his hand, he 
eye me steadily; then ask me a question which struck me as being, 
under the circumstances, more than a little singular. 

'you know his house,--the house of the great paul lessingham,--the 
politician,--the statesman?' 

'i do not.' 

'you lie!--you do!' 

the words came from him with a sort of snarl,--as if he would have 
lash me across the face with them. 

'i do not. men in my position are not acquaint with the residence of 
men in his. i may, at some time, have seen his address in print; but, 
if so, i have forgotten it.' 

he look at me intently, for some moments, as if to learn if i spoke 
the truth; and apparently, at last, was satisfy that i did. 

'you do not know it?--well!--i will show it you,--i will show the house 
of the great paul lessingham.' 

what he meant i did not know; but i was soon to learn,--an astound 
revelation it prove to be. there was about his manner something hardly 
human; something which, for want of a better phrase, i would call 
vulpine. in his tone there was a mixture of mockery and bitterness, as 
if he wish his words to have the effect of corrosive sublimate, and 
to sear me as he utter them. 

'listen with all your ears. give me your whole attention. hearken to my 
bidding, so that you may do as i bid you. not that i fear your 
obedience,--oh no!' 

he paused,--as if to enable me to fully realise the picture of my 
helpless conjure up by his jibes. 

'you came through my window, like a thief. you will go through my 
window, like a fool. you will go to the house of the great paul 
lessingham. you say you do not know it? well, i will show it you. i 
will be your guide. unseen, in the dark and the night, i will stalk 
beside you, and will lead you to where i would have you go.--you will 
go just as you are, with bare feet, and head uncovered, and with but a 
single garment to hide your nakedness. you will be cold, your feet will 
be cut and bleeding,--but what better do a thief deserve? if any see 
you, at the least they will take you for a madman; there will be 
trouble. but have no fear; bear a bold heart. none shall see you while 
i stalk at your side. i will cover you with the cloak of 
invisibility,--so that you may come in safety to the house of the great 
paul lessingham.' 

he pause again. what he said, wild and wanton though it was, was 
beginning to fill me with a sense of the most extreme discomfort. his 
sentences, in some strange, indescribable way, seemed, as they came 
from his lips, to warp my limbs; to enwrap themselves about me; to 
confine me, tight and tighter, within, as it were, swaddle clothes; 
to make me more and more helpless. i was already conscious that 
whatever mad freak he chose to set me on, i should have no option but 
to carry it through. 

'when you come to the house, you will stand, and look, and seek for a 
window convenient for entry. it may be that you will find one open, as 
you did mine; if not, you will open one. how,--that is your affair, not 
mine. you will practise the arts of a thief to steal into his house.' 

the monstrosity of his suggestion fought against the spell which he 
again was casting upon me, and forced me into speech,--endowed me with 
the power to show that there still was in me something of a man; though 
every second the strand of my manhood, as it seemed, were slip 
fast through the finger which were strained to clutch them. 

'i will not.' 

he was silent. he look at me. the pupil of his eyes dilated,--until 
they seem all pupil. 

'you will.--do you hear?--i say you will.' 

'i am not a thief, i am an honest man,--why should i do this thing?' 

'because i bid you.' 

'have mercy!' 

'on whom--on you, or on paul lessingham?--who, at any time, has shown 
mercy unto me, that i should show mercy unto any?' 

he stopped, and then again went on,--reiterating his former incredible 
suggestion with an emphasis which seem to eat its way into my brain. 

'you will practise the arts of a thief to steal into his house; and, 
being in, will listen. if all be still, you will make your way to the 
room he call his study.' 

'how shall i find it? i know nothing of his house.' 

the question was wrung from me; i felt that the sweat was standing in 
great drops upon my brow. 

'i will show it you.' 

'shall you go with me?' 

'ay,--i shall go with you. all the time i shall be with you. you will 
not see me, but i shall be there. be not afraid.' 

his claim to supernatural powers, for what he said amount to nothing 
less, was, on the face of it, preposterous, but, then, i was in no 
condition to even hint at its absurdity. he continued. 

'when you have gain the study, you will go to a certain drawer, which 
is in a certain bureau, in a corner of the room--i see it now; when you 
are there you shall see it too--and you will open it.' 

'should it be locked?' 

'you still will open it.' 

'but how shall i open it if it is locked?' 

'by those arts in which a thief is skilled. i say to you again that 
that is your affair, not mine.' 

i made no attempt to answer him. even supposing that he forced me, by 
the wicked, and unconscionable exercise of what, i presumed, were the 
hypnotic powers with which nature had to such a dangerous degree 
endow him, to carry the adventure to a certain stage, since he could 
hardly, at an instant's notice, endow me with the knack of pick 
locks, should the drawer he allude to be locked--which might 
providence permit!--nothing serious might issue from it after all. he 
read my thoughts. 

'you will open it,--though it be doubly and treble locked, i say that 
you will open it.--in it you will find--' he hesitated, as if to 
reflect--'some letters; it may be two or three,--i know not just how 
many,--they are bound about by a silken ribbon. you will take them out 
of the drawer, and, have taken them, you will make the best of your 
way out of the house, and bear them back to me.' 

'and should anyone come upon me while engaged in these nefarious 
proceedings,--for instance, should i encounter mr lessingham himself, 
what then?' 

'paul lessingham?--you need have no fear if you encounter him.' 

'i need have no fear!--if he find me, in his own house, at dead of 
night, commit burglary!' 

'you need have no fear of him.' 

'on your account, or on my own?--at least he will have me hale to 
gaol.' 

'i say you need have no fear of him. i say what i mean.' 

'how, then, shall i escape his righteous vengeance? he is not the man 
to suffer a midnight robber to escape him scatheless,--shall i have to 
kill him?' 

'you will not touch him with a finger,--nor will he touch you.' 

'by what spell shall i prevent him?' 

'by the spell of two words.' 

'what words are they?' 

'should paul lessingham chance to come upon you, and find you in his 
house, a thief, and should seek to stay you from whatever it is you may 
be at, you will not flinch nor flee from him, but you will stand still, 
and you will say--' 

something in the crescendo accent of his voice, something weird and 
ominous, cause my heart to press against my ribs, so that when he 
stopped, in my eager i cry out, 

'what?' 

'the beetle!' 

as the words came from him in a kind of screech, the lamp went out, and 
the place was all in darkness, and i knew, so that the knowledge fill 
me with a sense of loathing, that with me, in the room, was the evil 
presence of the night before. two bright speck gleam in front of me; 
something flop from off the bed on to the ground; the thing was 
coming towards me across the floor. it came slow on, and on, and on. 
i stood still, speechless in the sickness of my horror. until, on my 
bare feet, it touched me with slimy feelers, and my terror lest it 
should creep up my naked body lent me voice, and i fell shriek like 
a soul in agony. 

it may be that my shriek drove it from me. at least, it went. i knew 
it went. and all was still. until, on a sudden, the lamp flame out 
again, and there, lying, as before, in bed, glaring at me with his 
baleful eyes, was the being whom, in my folly, or in my 
wisdom,--whichever it was!--i was beginning to credit with the 
possession of unhallowed, unlawful powers. 

'you will say that to him; those two words; they only; no more. and you 
will see what you will see. but paul lessingham is a man of resolution. 
should he still persist in interference, or seek to hinder you, you 
will say those two words again. you need do no more. twice will 
suffice, i promise you.--now go.--draw up the blind; open the window; 
climb through it. hasten to do what i have bidden you. i wait here for 
your return,--and all the way i shall be with you.' 




chapter vi 

a singular felony 


i went to the window; i drew up the blind, unlatch the sash, i threw 
it open; and clad, or, rather, unclad as i was, i clamber through it 
into the open air. i was not only incapable of resistance, i was 
incapable of distinct formulate the desire to offer resistance. 
some compel influence move me hither and hither, with completest 
disregard of whether i would or would not. 

and yet, when i found myself without, i was conscious of a sense of 
exultation at have escape from the miasmic atmosphere of that room 
of unholy memories. and a faint hope began to dawn within my bosom 
that, as i increase the distance between myself and it, i might shake 
off something of the nightmare helpless which numb and torture 
me. i linger for a moment by the window; then step over the short 
divide wall into the street; and then again i lingered. 

my condition was one of dual personality,--while, physically, i was 
bound, mentally, to a considerable extent, i was free. but this measure 
of freedom on my mental side made my plight no better. for, among other 
things, i realise what a ridiculous figure i must be cutting, 
barefoot and bareheaded, abroad, at such an hour of the night, in 
such a boisterous breeze,--for i quick discover that the wind 
amount to something like a gale. apart from all other considerations, 
the notion of parade the street in such a condition fill me with 
profound disgust. and i do believe that if my tyrannical oppressor had 
only permit me to attire myself in my own garments, i should have 
start with a comparatively light heart on the felonious mission on 
which he apparently was send me. i believe, too, that the 
consciousness of the incongruity of my attire increase my sense of 
helplessness, and that, had i been dress as englishmen are wont to 
be, who take their walk abroad, he would not have found in me, on that 
occasion, the facile instrument which, in fact, he did. 

there was a moment, in which the gravel pathway first made itself 
known to my naked feet, and the cutting wind to my naked flesh, when i 
think it possible that, had i grit my teeth, and strained my every 
nerve, i might have shaken myself free from the bonds which shackle 
me, and bade defiance to the ancient sinner who, for all i knew, was 
peep at me through the window. but so depressed was i by the 
knowledge of the ridiculous appearance i present that, before i could 
take advantage of it the moment passed,--not to return again that night. 

i did catch, as it were, at its fringe, as it was flying past me, 
making a hurried movement to one side,--the first i had made, of my own 
initiative, for hours. but it was too late. my tormentor,--as if, 
though unseen, he saw--tightened his grip, i was whirl round, and 
sped hasty onwards in a direction in which i certainly had no desire 
of travelling. 

all the way i never met a soul. i have since wonder whether in that 
respect my experience was not a normal one; whether it might not have 
happen to any. if so, there are street in london, long lines of 
streets, which, at a certain period of the night, in a certain sort of 
weather--probably the weather had something to do with it--are clean 
deserted; in which there is neither foot-passenger nor vehicle,--not 
even a policeman. the greater part of the route along which i was 
driven--i know no just word--was one with which i had some sort of 
acquaintance. it led, at first, through what, i take it, was some part 
of walham green; then along the lillie road, through brompton, across 
the fulham road, through the network of street leading to sloane 
street, across sloane street into lownde square. who go that way 
go some distance, and go through some important thorough fares; yet 
not a creature did i see, nor, i imagine, was there a creature who saw 
me. as i cross sloane street, i fancy that i heard the distant 
rumbling of a vehicle along the knightsbridge road, but that was the 
only sound i heard. 

it is painful even to recollect the plight in which i was when i was 
stopped,--for stop i was, as shortly and as sharply, as the beast of 
burden, with a bridle in its mouth, whose driver put a period to his 
career. i was wet,--intermittent gust of rain were borne on the 
scurry wind; in spite of the pace at which i had been brought, i was 
chill to the bone; and--worst of all!--my mud-stained feet, all cut 
and bleeding, were so painful--for, unfortunately, i was still 
susceptible enough to pain--that it was agony to have them come into 
contact with the cold and the slime of the hard, unyield pavement. 

i had been stop on the opposite side of the square,--that nearest to 
the hospital; in front of a house which struck me as being somewhat 
small than the rest. it was a house with a portico; about the pillar 
of this portico was trelliswork, and on the trelliswork was train 
some climb plant. as i stood, shivering, wonder what would happen 
next, some strange impulse master me, and, immediately, to my own 
unbounded amazement, i found myself scramble up the trellis towards 
the verandah above. i am no gymnast, either by nature or by education; 
i doubt whether, previously, i had ever attempt to climb anything 
more difficult than a step ladder. the result was, that, though the 
impulse might be given me, the skill could not, and i had only ascend 
a yard or so when, lose my footing, i came slither down upon my 
back. bruise and shaken though i was, i was not allow to inquire 
into my injuries. in a moment i was on my feet again, and again i was 
impel to climb,--only, however, again to come to grief. this time 
the demon, or whatever it was, that had enter into me, seeming to 
appreciate the impossible of get me to the top of that verandah, 
direct me to try another way. i mount the steps leading to the 
front door, got on to the low parapet which was at one side, thence on 
to the sill of the adjacent window,--had i slip then i should have 
fallen a sheer descent of at least twenty feet to the bottom of the 
deep area down below. but the sill was broad, and--if it is proper to 
use such language in connection with a transaction of the sort in which 
i was engaged--fortune favoured me. i did not fall. in my clench fist 
i had a stone. with this i struck the pane of glass, as with a hammer. 
through the hole which resulted, i could just insert my hand, and reach 
the latch within. in another minute the sash was raised, and i was in 
the house,--i had committed burglary. 

as i look back and reflect upon the audacity of the whole proceeding, 
even now i tremble. hapless slave of another's will although in very 
truth i was, i cannot repeat too often that i realise to the full just 
what it was that i was being compel to do--a fact which was very far 
from rendering my situation less distressful!--and every detail of my 
involuntary action was project upon my brain in a series of 
pictures, whose clear-cut outlines, so long as memory endures, will 
never fade. certainly no professional burglar, nor, indeed, any 
creature in his senses, would have venture to emulate my surprising 
rashness. the process of smashing the pane of glass--it was plate 
glass--was anything but a noiseless one. there was, first, the blow 
itself, then the shiver of the glass, then the clatter of 
fragment into the area beneath. one would have thought that the whole 
thing would have made din enough to have rouse the seven sleepers. 
but, here, again the weather was on my side. about that time the wind 
was howling wildly,--it came shriek across the square. it is 
possible that the tumult which it made deaden all other sounds. 

anyhow, as i stood within the room which i had violated, listen for 
sign of someone being on the alert, i could hear nothing. within the 
house there seem to be the silence of the grave. i drew down the 
window, and made for the door. 

it prove by no means easy to find. the window were obscure by heavy 
curtains, so that the room inside was dark as pitch. it appear to be 
unusually full of furniture,--an appearance due, perhaps, to my being a 
stranger in the midst of such cimmerian blackness. i had to feel my 
way, very gingerly indeed, among the various impedimenta. as it was i 
seem to come into contact with most of the obstacle there were to 
come into contact with, stumble more than once over footstools, and 
over what seem to be dwarf chairs. it was a miracle that my movements 
still continue to be unheard,--but i believe that the explanation was, 
that the house was well built; that the servant were the only person 
in it at the time; that their bedroom were on the top floor; that they 
were fast asleep; and that they were little likely to be disturbed by 
anything that might occur in the room which i had entered. 

reach the door at last, i open it,--listening for any promise of 
being interrupted--and--to adapt a hackneyed phrase--directed by the 
power which shaped my end, i went across the hall and up the stairs. i 
pass up the first landing, and, on the second, move to a door upon 
the right. i turn the handle, it yielded, the door opened, i entered, 
close it behind me. i went to the wall just inside the door, found a 
handle, jerk it, and switch on the electric light,--doing, i make 
no doubt, all these things, from a spectator's point of view, so 
naturally, that a judge and jury would have been with difficulty 
persuade that they were not the product of my own volition. 

in the brilliant glow of the electric light i took a leisurely survey 
of the contents of the room. it was, as the man in the bed had said it 
would be, a study,--a fine, spacious apartment, evidently intended 
rather for work than for show. there were three separate 
writing-tables, one very large and two small ones, all cover with 
an orderly array of manuscript and papers. a typewriter stood at the 
side of one. on the floor, under and about them, were piles of books, 
portfolios, and official-looking documents. every available foot of 
wall space on three side of the room was line with shelves, full as 
they could hold with books. on the fourth side, facing the door, was a 
large lock-up oak bookcase, and, in the farther corner, a quaint old 
bureau. so soon as i saw this bureau i went for it, straight as an 
arrow from a bow,--indeed, it would be no abuse of metaphor to say that 
i was propel towards it like an arrow from a bow. 

it had drawers below, glass door above, and between the drawers and 
the door was a flap to let down. it was to this flap my attention was 
directed. i put out my hand to open it; it was lock at the top. i 
pull at it with both hands; it refuse to budge. 

so this was the lock i was, if necessary, to practise the arts of a 
thief to open. i was no picklock; i had flatter myself that nothing, 
and no one, could make me such a thing. yet now that i found myself 
confront by that unyield flap, i found that pressure, irresistible 
pressure, was being put upon me to gain, by any and every means, access 
to its interior. i had no option but to yield. i look about me in 
search of some convenient tool with which to ply the felon's trade. i 
found it close beside me. leaning against the wall, within a yard of 
where i stood, were example of various kind of weapons,--among them, 
spear-heads. taking one of these spear-heads, with much difficulty i 
forced the point between the flap and the bureau. use the leverage 
thus obtained, i attempt to prise it open. the flap held fast; the 
spear-head snap in two. i try another, with the same result; a 
third, to fail again. there were no more. the most convenient thing 
remain was a queer, heavy-headed, sharp-edged hatchet. this i took, 
brought the sharp edge down with all my force upon the refractory flap. 
the hatchet went through,--before i had done with it, it was open with 
a vengeance. 

but i was destined on the occasion of my first--and, i trust, 
last--experience of the burglar's calling, to carry the part completely 
through. i had gain access to the flap itself only to find that at 
the back were several small drawers, on one of which my observation was 
brought to bear in a fashion which it was quite impossible to 
disregard. as a matter of course it was locked, and, once more, i had 
to search for something which would serve as a rough-and-ready 
substitute for the missing key. 

there was nothing at all suitable among the weapons,--i could hardly 
for such a purpose use the hatchet; the drawer in question was such a 
little one that to have done so would have been to shiver it to 
splinters. on the mantelshelf, in an open leather case, were a pair of 
revolvers. statesmen, nowadays, sometimes stand in actual peril of 
their lives. it is possible that mr lessingham, conscious of 
continual threaten danger, carry them about with him as a 
necessary protection. they were serviceable weapons, large, and 
somewhat weighty,--of the type with which, i believe, upon occasion the 
police are armed. not only were all the barrel loaded, but, in the 
case itself there was a supply of cartridge more than sufficient to 
charge them all again. 

i was handle the weapons, wondering--if, in my condition, the word 
was applicable--what use i could make of them to enable me to gain 
admission to that drawer, when there came, on a sudden, from the street 
without, the sound of approach wheels. there was a whirr within 
my brain, as if someone was endeavour to explain to me to what 
service to apply the revolvers, and i, perforce, strained every nerve 
to grasp the meaning of my invisible mentor. while i did so, the wheels 
drew rapid nearer, and, just as i was expect them to go whirl 
by, stopped,--in front of the house. my heart leapt in my bosom. in a 
convulsion of frantic terror, again, during the passage of one frenzied 
moment, i all but burst the bonds that held me, and fled, haphazard, 
from the imminent peril. but the bonds were strong than i,--it was as 
if i had been rooted to the ground. 

a key was insert in the keyhole of the front door, the lock was 
turned, the door thrown open, firm footstep enter the house. if i 
could i would not have stood upon the order of my going, but gone at 
once, anywhere, anyhow; but, at that moment, my coming and goings were 
not matter in which i was consulted. panic fear rage within, 
outwardly i was calm as possible, and stood, turning the revolver over 
and over, ask myself what it could be that i was intended to do with 
them. all at once it came to me in an illuminating flash,--i was to 
fire at the lock of the drawer, and blow it open. 

a madder scheme it would have been impossible to hit upon. the servant 
had slept through a good deal, but they would hardly sleep through the 
discharge of a revolver in a room below them,--not to speak of the 
person who had just enter the premises, and whose footstep were 
already audible as he came up the stairs. i struggle to make a dumb 
protest against the insensate folly which was hurry me to infallible 
destruction, without success. for me there was only obedience. with a 
revolver in either hand i march towards the bureau as unconcerned 
as if i would not have given my life to have escape the denouement 
which i need but a slight modicum of common sense to be aware was 
close at hand. i placed the muzzle of one of the revolver against the 
keyhole of the drawer to which my unseen guide had previous direct 
me, and pull the trigger. the lock was shattered, the contents of the 
drawer were at my mercy. i snatch up a bundle of letters, about which 
a pink ribbon was wrapped. startle by a noise behind me, immediately 
following the report of the pistol, i glance over my shoulder. 

the room door was open, and mr lessingham was standing with the handle 
in his hand. 




chapter vii 

the great paul lessingham 


he was in evening dress. he carry a small portfolio in his left hand. 
if the discovery of my presence startle him, as it could scarcely have 
fail to do, he allow no sign of surprise to escape him. paul 
lessingham's impenetrable is proverbial. whether on platform 
address excited crowds, or in the midst of heated discussion in the 
house of commons, all the world know that his cool remains 
unruffled. it is generally understood that he owe his success in the 
politics arena in no slight measure to the adroit which is born of 
his invulnerable presence of mind. he gave me a taste of its quality 
then. standing in the attitude which has been familiarise to us by 
caricaturists, his feet apart, his broad shoulder well set back, his 
handsome head a little advanced, his keen blue eyes have in them 
something suggestive of a bird of prey considering just when, where, 
and how to pounce, he regard me for some seconds in perfect 
silence,--whether outwardly i flinch i cannot say; inward i know i 
did. when he spoke, it was without moving from where he stood, and in 
the calm, airy tone in which he might have address an acquaintance 
who had just drop in. 

'may i ask, sir, to what i am indebted for the pleasure of your 
company?' 

he paused, as if wait for my answer. when none came, he put his 
question in another form. 

'pray, sir, who are you, and on whose invitation do i find you here?' 

as i still stood speechless, motionless, meeting his glance without a 
twitch of an eyebrow, nor a tremor of the hand, i imagine that he 
began to consider me with an even close intent than before. and 
that the--to say the least of it--peculiarity of my appearance, cause 
him to suspect that he was face to face with an adventure of a peculiar 
kind. whether he took me for a lunatic i cannot certainly say; but, 
from his manner, i think it possible he did. he began to move towards 
me from across the room, address me with the utmost suave and 
courtesy. 

'be so good as to give me the revolver, and the papers you are holding 
in your hand.' 

as he came on, something enter into me, and forced itself from 
between my lips, so that i said, in a low, hiss voice, which i vow 
was never mine, 

'the beetle!' 

whether it was, or was not, owing, in some degree, to a trick of my 
imagination, i cannot determine, but, as the words were spoken, it 
seem to me that the lights went low, so that the place was all in 
darkness, and i again was fill with the nauseous consciousness of the 
presence of something evil in the room. but if, in that matter, my 
abnormal strained imagination play me a trick, there could be no 
doubt whatever as to the effect which the words had on mr lessingham. 
when the mist of the blackness--real or supposititious--had pass from 
before my eyes, i found that he had retreat to the extremest limit 
of the room, and was crouching, his back against the bookshelves, 
clutch at them, in the attitude of a man who has received a 
staggering blow, from which, as yet, he has had no opportunity of 
recovering. a most extraordinary change had taken place in the 
expression of his face; in his countenance amazement, fear, and horror 
seem struggle for the mastery. i was fill with a most 
discomfort qualm, as i gaze at the frightened figure in front of 
me, and realise that it was that of the great paul lessingham, the god 
of my politics idolatry. 

'who are you?--in god's name, who are you?' 

his very voice seem changed; his frenzied, choke accent would 
hardly have been recognise by either friend or foe. 

'who are you?--do you hear me ask, who are you? in the name of god, i 
bid you say!' 

as he perceive that i was still, he began to show a species of 
excitement which it was unpleasant to witness, especially as he 
continue to crouch against the bookshelf, as if he was afraid to stand 
up straight. so far from exhibit the impassive for which he was 
renowned, all the muscle in his face and all the limb in his body 
seem to be in motion at once; he was like a man afflict with the 
shiver ague,--his very finger were twitch aimlessly, as they 
were stretch out on either side of him, as if seek for support 
from the shelves against which he leaned. 

'where have you come from? what do you want? who sent you here? what 
concern have you with me? is it necessary that you should come and play 
these childish trick with me? why? why?' 

the question came from him with astonish rapidity. when he saw that 
i continue silent, they came still faster, mingle with what sound 
to me like a stream of inchoate abuse. 

'why do you stand there in that extraordinary garment,--it's worse than 
nakedness, yes, worse than nakedness! for that alone i could have you 
punished, and i will!--and try to play the fool? do you think i am a 
boy to be bamboozle by every bogey a blunder may try to conjure up? 
if so, you're wrong, as whoever sent you might have had sense enough to 
let you know. if you tell me who you are, and who sent you here, and 
what it is you want, i will be merciful; if not, the police shall be 
sent for, and the law shall take its course,--to the bitter end!--i 
warn you.--do you hear? you fool! tell me who you are?' 

the last words came from him in what was very like a burst of childish 
fury. he himself seem conscious, the moment after, that his passion 
was sadly lacking in dignity, and to be ashamed of it. he drew himself 
straight up. with a pocket-handkerchief which he took from an inner 
pocket of his coat, he wipe his lips. then, clutch it tight in 
his hand, he eye me with a fixed which, under any other 
circumstances, i should have found unbearable. 

'well, sir, is your continue silence part of the business of the role 
you have set yourself to play?' 

his tone was firmer, and his bearing more in keeping with his character. 

'if it be so, i presume that i, at least have liberty to speak. when i 
find a gentleman, even one gifted with your eloquence of silence, 
play the part of burglar, i think you will grant that a few words on 
my part cannot just be considered to be out of place.' 

again he paused. i could not but feel that he was employ the vehicle 
of somewhat cumbrous sarcasm to gain time, and to give himself the 
opportunity of recovering, if the thing was possible, his pristine 
courage. that, for some cause wholly hidden from me, the mysterious 
utterance had shaken his nature to its deepest foundations, was made 
plain by his endeavour to treat the whole business with a sort of 
cynical levity. 

'to commence with, may i ask if you have come through london, or 
through any portion of it, in that costume,--or, rather, in that want 
of costume? it would seem out of place in a cairene street,--would it 
not?--even in the rue de rabagas,--was it not the rue de rabagas?' 

he ask the question with an emphasis the meaning of which was wholly 
lost on me. what he refer to either then, or in what immediately 
followed, i, of course, knew no more than the man in the moon,--though 
i should probably have found great difficulty in convincing him of my 
ignorance. 

'i take it that you are a reminiscence of the rue de rabagas,--that, of 
course;--is it not of course? the little house with the blue-grey 
venetians, and the piano with the f sharp missing? is there still the 
piano? with the tinny treble,--indeed, the whole atmosphere, was it not 
tinny?--you agree with me?--i have not forgotten. i am not even afraid 
to remember,--you perceive it?' 

a new idea seem to strike him,--born, perhaps, of my continue 
silence. 

'you look english,--is it possible that you are not english? what are 
you then--french? we shall see!' 

he address me in a tongue which i recognise as french, but with 
which i was not sufficient acquaint to understand. although, i 
flatter myself that,--as the present narrative should show--i have not 
made an ill-use of the opportunity which i have had to improve my, 
originally, modest education, i regret that i have never had so much as 
a ghost of a chance to acquire an even rudimentary knowledge of any 
language except my own. recognising, i suppose, from my looks, that he 
was address me in a tongue to which i was a stranger, after a time 
he stopped, add something with a smile, and then began to talk to me 
in a lingo to which, in a manner of speaking, i was even stranger, for 
this time i had not the faintest notion what it was,--it might have 
been gibberish for all that i could tell. quick perceive that he 
had succeed no better than before, he return to english. 

'you do not know french?--nor the patois of the rue de rabagas? very 
good,--then what is it that you do know? are you under a vow of 
silence, or are you dumb,--except upon occasion? your face is 
english,--what can be seen of it, and i will take it, therefore, that 
english spoken words convey some meaning to your brain. so listen, sir, 
to what i have to say,--do me the favour to listen carefully.' 

he was becoming more and more his former self. in his clear, modulate 
tone there was a ring of something like a threat,--a something which 
went very far beyond his words. 

'you know something of a period which i choose to have forgotten,--that 
is plain; you come from a person who, probably, know still more. go 
back to that person and say that what i have forgotten i have 
forgotten; nothing will be gain by anyone by an endeavour to induce 
me to remember,--be very sure upon that point, say that nothing will be 
gain by anyone. that time was one of mirage, of delusion, of disease. 
i was in a condition, mental and bodily, in which prank could have 
been play upon me by any trickster. such prank were played. i know 
that now quite well. i do not pretend to be proficient in the modu 
operandi of the hankey-pankey man, but i know that he has a method, all 
the same,--one susceptible, too, of facile explanation. go back to your 
friend, and tell him that i am not again likely to be made the butt of 
his old method,--nor of his new one either.--you hear me, sir?' 

i remain motionless and silent,--an attitude which, plainly, he 
resented. 

'are you deaf and dumb? you certainly are not dumb, for you spoke to me 
just now. be advise by me, and do not compel me to resort to measure 
which will be the cause to you of serious discomfort.--you hear me, 
sir?' 

still, from me, not a sign of comprehension,--to his increase 
annoyance. 

'so be it. keep your own counsel, if you choose. yours will be the 
bitterness, not mine. you may play the lunatic, and play it excellent 
well, but that you do understand what is said to you is clear.--come to 
business, sir. give me that revolver, and the packet of letters which 
you have stolen from my desk.' 

he had been speak with the air of one who desire to convince 
himself as much as me,--and about his last words there was almost a 
flavour of braggadocio. i remain unheeding. 

'are you go to do as i require, or are you insane enough to 
refuse?--in which case i shall summon assistance, and there will 
quick be an end of it. pray do not imagine that you can trick me into 
supposing that you do not grasp the situation. i know better.--once 
more, are you go to give me that revolver and those letters?' 

yet no reply. his anger was grow momentarily greater,--and his 
agitation too. on my first introduction to paul lessingham i was not 
destined to discover in him any one of those quality of which the 
world held him to be the undisputed possessor. he show himself to be 
as unlike the statesman i had conceived, and esteemed, as he easily 
could have done. 

'do you think i stand in awe of you?--you!--of such a thing as you! do 
as i tell you, or i myself will make you,--and, at the same time, teach 
you a much-needed lesson.' 

he raise his voice. in his bearing there was a would-be defiance. he 
might not have been aware of it, but the repetition of the threat 
were, in themselves, confession of weakness. he came a step or two 
forward,--then, stopping short, began to tremble. the perspiration 
broke out upon his brow; he made spasmodic little dabs at it with his 
crumpled-up handkerchief. his eyes wander hither and thither, as if 
searching for something which they fear to see yet were constrained 
to seek. he began to talk to himself, out loud, in odd disconnected 
sentences,--apparently ignore me entirely. 

'what was that?--it was nothing.--it was my imagination.--my nerves are 
out of order.--i have been working too hard.--i am not well.--what's 
that?' 

this last inquiry came from him in a half-stifled shriek,--as the door 
open to admit the head and body of an elderly man in a state of 
considerable undress. he had the tousle appearance of one who had been 
unexpected rouse out of slumber, and unwilling drag from bed. 
mr lessingham stare at him as if he had been a ghost, while he stare 
back at mr lessingham as if he found a difficulty in credit the 
evidence of his own eyes. it was he who broke the 
silence,--stutteringly. 

'i am sure i beg your pardon, sir, but one of the maid thought that 
she heard the sound of a shot, and we came down to see if there was 
anything the matter,--i had no idea, sir, that you were here.' his eyes 
travelled from mr lessingham towards me,--suddenly increasing, when 
they saw me, to about twice their previous size. 'god save us!--who is 
that?' 

the man's self-evident cowardice possibly impress mr lessingham with 
the conviction that he himself was not cutting the most dignified of 
figures. at any rate, he made a notable effort to, once more, assume a 
bearing of greater determination. 

'you are quite right, matthews, quite right. i am oblige by your 
watchfulness. at present you may leave the room--i propose to deal with 
this fellow myself,--only remain with the other men upon the landing, 
so that, if i call, you may come to my assistance.' 

matthews did as he was told, he left the room,--with, i fancy, more 
rapid than he had enter it. mr lessingham return to me, his 
manner distinct more determined, as if he found his resolution 
reinforce by the near neighbourhood of his retainers, 

'now, my man, you see how the case stands, at a word from me you will 
be overpower and doom to undergo a long period of imprisonment. yet 
i am still willing to listen to the dictate of mercy. put down that 
revolver, give me those letters,--you will not find me disposed to 
treat you hardly.' 

for all the attention i paid him, i might have been a graven image. he 
misunderstood, or pretended to misunderstand, the cause of my silence. 

'come, i see that you suppose my intentions to be harsh than they 
really are,--do not let us have a scandal, and a scene,--be 
sensible!--give me those letters!' 

again he move in my direction; again, after he had taken a step or 
two, to stumble and stop, and look about him with frightened eyes; 
again to begin to mumble to himself aloud. 

'it's a conjurer's trick!--of course!--nothing more,--what else could 
it be?--i'm not to be fooled.--i'm old than i was. i've been 
overdo it,--that's all.' 

sudden he broke into cries. 

'matthews! matthews!--help! help!' 

matthews enter the room, follow by three other men, younger than 
himself. evidently all had slip into the first articles of clothing 
they could lay their hand upon, and each carry a stick, or some 
similar rudimentary weapon. 

their master spur them on. 

'strike the revolver out of his hand, matthews!--knock him down!--take 
the letters from him!--don't be afraid!--i'm not afraid!' 

in proof of it, he rush at me, as it seem half blindly. as he did 
so i was constrained to shout out, in tone which i should not have 
recognise as mine, 

'the beetle!' 

and that moment the room was all in darkness, and there were scream as 
of someone in an agony of terror or of pain. i felt that something had 
come into the room, i knew not whence nor how,--something of horror. 
and the next action of which i was conscious was, that under cover of 
the darkness, i was flying from the room, propel by i knew not what. 




chapter viii 

the man in the street 


whether anyone pursue i cannot say. i have some dim recollection, as i 
came out of the room, of women being huddle against the wall upon the 
landing, and of their scream as i went past. but whether any effort 
was made to arrest my progress i cannot tell. my own impression is that 
not the slightest attempt to impede my headlong flight was made by 
anyone. 

in what direction i was go i did not know. i was like a man flying 
through the phantasmagoric happening of a dream, knowing neither how 
nor whither. i tore along what i suppose was a broad passage, through a 
door at the end into what, i fancy, was a drawing-room. across this 
room i dashed, helter-skelter, bring down, in the gloom, unseen 
articles of furniture, with myself sometimes on top, and sometimes 
under them. in a trice, each time i fell, i was on my feet 
again,--until i went crashing against a window which was conceal by 
curtains. it would not have been strange had i crash through it,--but 
i was spare that. thrust aside the curtains, i fumble for the 
fastening of the window. it was a tall france casement, extending, so 
far as i could judge, from floor to ceiling. when i had it open i 
step through it on to the verandah without,--to find that i was on 
the top of the portico which i had vain essay to ascend from below. 

i try the road down which i had try up,--proceeding with a 
breakneck reckless of which now i shudder to think. it was, 
probably, some thirty feet above the pavement, yet i rush at the 
descent with as much disregard for the safety of life and limb as if it 
had been only three. over the edge of the parapet i went, obtaining, 
with my naked feet, a precarious foothold on the latticework,--then 
down i commence to scramble. i never did get a proper hold, and when i 
had descended, perhaps, rather more than half the distance--scraping, 
as it seem to me, every scrap of skin off my body in the process--i 
lost what little hold i had. down to the bottom i went tumbling, 
rolling right across the pavement into the muddy road. it was a miracle 
i was not seriously injured,--but in that sense, certainly, that night 
the miracle were on my side. hardly was i down, than i was up 
again,--mud and all. 

just as i was get on to my feet i felt a firm hand grip me by the 
shoulder. turning i found myself confront by a tall, slender built 
man, with a long, droop moustache, and an overcoat button up to 
the chin, who held me with a grasp of steel. he look at me,--and i 
look back at him. 

'after the ball,--eh?' 

even then i was struck by something pleasant in his voice, and some 
quality as of sunshine in his handsome face. 

seeing that i said nothing he went on,--with a curious, half mock 
smile. 

'is that the way to come slither down the apostle's pillar?--is it 
simple burglary, or simple murder?--tell me the glad tidings that 
you've kill st paul, and i'll let you go.' 

whether he was mad or not i cannot say,--there was some excuse for 
thinking so. he did not look mad, though his words and action alike 
were strange. 

'although you have confine yourself to gentle felony, shall i not 
shower blessing on the head of him who has been rob paul?--away 
with you!' 

he remove his grip, give me a gentle push as he did so,--and i was 
away. i neither stay nor paused. 

i knew little of records, but if anyone has made a better record than i 
did that night between lownde square and walham green i should like to 
know just what it was,--i should, too, like to have seen it done. 

in an incredible short space of time i was once more in front of the 
house with the open window,--the packet of letters--which were like to 
have cost me so dear!--gripped tight in my hand. 




chapter ix 

the contents of the packet 


i pull up sharply,--as if a brake had been suddenly, and even 
mercilessly, applied to bring me to a standstill. in front of the 
window i stood shivering. a shower had recently commenced,--the fall 
rain was being blown before the breeze. i was in a terrible sweat,--yet 
tremulous as with cold; cover with mud; bruised, and cut, and 
bleeding,--as piteous an object as you would care to see. every limb in 
my body ached; every muscle was exhausted; mental and physically i 
was done; had i not been held up, wil nilly, by the spell which was 
upon me, i should have sunk down, then and there, in a hopeless, 
helpless, hapless heap. 

but my tormentor was not yet at an end with me. 

as i stood there, like some broken and beaten hack, wait for the 
word of command, it came. it was as if some strong magnetic current had 
been switch on to me through the window to draw me into the room. 
over the low wall i went, over the sill,--once more i stood in that 
chamber of my humiliate and my shame. and once again i was conscious 
of that awful sense of the presence of an evil thing. how much of it 
was fact, and how much of it was the product of imagination i cannot 
say; but, look back, it seem to me that it was as if i had been 
taken out of the corporeal body to be plunge into the inner chambers 
of all nameless sin. there was the sound of something flop from off 
the bed on to the ground, and i knew that the thing was coming at me 
across the floor. my stomach quaked, my heart melt within me,--the 
very anguish of my terror gave me strength to scream,--and scream! 
sometimes, even now, i seem to hear those scream of mine ring 
through the night, and i bury my face in the pillow, and it is as 
though i was passing through the very valley of the shadow. 

the thing went back,--i could hear it slip and slide across the 
floor. there was silence. and, presently, the lamp was lit, and the 
room was all in brightness. there, on the bed, in the familiar attitude 
between the sheets, his head rest on his hand, his eyes blazing like 
living coals, was the dreadful cause of all my agonies. he look at me 
with his unpitying, unblink glance. 

'so!--through the window again!--like a thief!--is it always through 
that door that you come into a house?' 

he paused,--as if to give me time to digest his gibe. 

'you saw paul lessingham,--well?--the great paul lessingham!--was he, 
then, so great?' 

his rasp voice, with its queer foreign twang, remind me, in some 
uncomfortable way, of a rusty saw,--the things he said, and the manner 
in which he said them, were alike intended to add to my discomfort. it 
was solely because the feat was barely possible that he only partially 
succeeded. 

'like a thief you went into his house,--did i not tell you that you 
would? like a thief he found you,--were you not ashamed? since, like a 
thief he found you, how come it that you have escaped,--by what 
robber's artifice have you save yourself from gaol?' 

his manner changed,--so that, all at once, he seem to snarl at me. 

'is he great?--well!--is he great,--paul lessingham? you are small, but 
he is smaller,--your great paul lessingham!--was there ever a man so 
less than nothing?' 

with the recollection fresh upon me of mr lessingham as i had so lately 
seen him i could not but feel that there might be a modicum of truth in 
what, with such an intensity of bitterness, the speaker suggested. the 
picture which, in my mental gallery, i had hung in the place of honour, 
seemed, to say the least, to have become a trifle smudged. 

as usual, the man in the bed seem to experience not the slightest 
difficulty in decipher what was passing through my mind. 

'that is so,--you and he, you are a pair,--the great paul lessingham is 
as great a thief as you,--and greater!--for, at least, than you he has 
more courage.' 

for some moments he was still; then exclaimed, with sudden fierceness, 

'give me what you have stolen!' 

i move towards the bed--most unwillingly--and held out to him the 
packet of letters which i had abstracted from the little drawer. 
perceive my disinclination to his near neighbourhood, he set himself 
to play with it. ignore my outstretched hand, he stare me straight 
in the face. 

'what ail you? are you not well? is it not sweet to stand close at my 
side? you, with your white skin, if i were a woman, would you not take 
me for a wife?' 

there was something about the manner in which this was said which was 
so essentially feminine that once more i wonder if i could possibly 
be mistaken in the creature's sex. i would have given much to have been 
able to strike him across the face,--or, better, to have taken him by 
the neck, and thrown him through the window, and roll him in the mud. 

he condescend to notice what i was holding out to him. 

'so!--that is what you have stolen!--that is what you have taken from 
the drawer in the bureau--the drawer which was locked--and which you 
use the arts in which a thief is skilled to enter. give it to 
me,--thief!' 

he snatch the packet from me, scratch the back of my hand as he 
did so, as if his nail had been talons. he turn the packet over and 
over, glaring at it as he did so,--it was strange what a relief it was 
to have his glance remove from off my face. 

'you kept it in your inner drawer, paul lessingham, where none but you 
could see it,--did you? you hid it as one hide treasure. there should 
be something here worth having, worth seeing, worth knowing,--yes, 
worth knowing!--since you found it worth your while to hide it up so 
closely.' 

as i have said, the packet was bound about by a string of pink 
ribbon,--a fact on which he presently began to comment. 

'with what a pretty string you have encircle it,--and how neat it is 
tied! surely only a woman's hand could tie a knot like that,--who would 
have guess yours were such agile fingers?--so! an endorse on the 
cover! what's this?--let's see what's written!--"the letters of my dear 
love, marjorie lindon."' 

as he read these words, which, as he said, were endorse upon the outer 
sheet of paper which serve as a cover for the letters which were 
enclose within, his face became transfigured. never did i suppose that 
rage could have so possessed a human countenance. his jaw drop open 
so that his yellow fang gleam though his part lips,--he held his 
breath so long that each moment i look to see him fall down in a fit; 
the vein stood out all over his face and head like seam of blood. i 
know not how long he continue speechless. when his breath returned, it 
was with choke and gaspings, in the midst of which he hiss out his 
words, as if their mere passage through his throat brought him near to 
strangulation. 

'the letters of his dear love!--of his dear love!--his!--paul 
lessingham's!--so!--it is as i guessed,--as i knew,--as i 
saw!--marjorie lindon!--sweet marjorie!--his dear love!--paul 
lessingham's dear love!--she with the lily face, the corn-hued 
hair!--what is it his dear love has found in her fond heart to write 
paul lessingham?' 

sitting up in bed he tore the packet open. it contained, perhaps, eight 
or nine letters,--some mere notes, some long epistles. but, short or 
long, he devour them with equal appetite, each one over and over 
again, till i thought he never would have done re-reading them. they 
were on thick white paper, of a peculiar shade of whiteness, with 
untrimm edges, on each sheet a crest and an address were stamp in 
gold, and all the sheet were of the same shape and size. i told myself 
that if anywhere, at any time, i saw writing paper like that again, i 
should not fail to know it. the caligraphy was, like the paper, 
unusual, bold, decided, and, i should have guessed, produce by a j pen. 

all the time that he was reading he kept emit sounds, more 
resemble yelp and snarl than anything more human,--like some savage 
beast nursing its pent-up rage. when he had made an end of 
reading,--for the season,--he let his passion have full vent. 

'so!--that is what his dear love has found it in her heart to write 
paul lessingham!--paul lessingham!' 

pen cannot describe the concentrated frenzy of hatred with which the 
speaker dwelt upon the name,--it was demoniac. 

'it is enough!--it is the end!--it is his doom! he shall be ground 
between the upper and the nether stone in the tower of anguish, and 
all that is left of him shall be cast on the accursed stream of the 
bitter waters, to stink under the blood-grimed sun! and for her--for 
marjorie lindon!--for his dear love!--it shall come to pass that she 
shall wish that she was never born,--nor he!--and the gods of the 
shadow shall smell the sweet incense of her suffering!--it shall be! 
it shall be! it is i that say it,--even i!' 

in the madness of his rhapsody frenzy i believe that he had actually 
forgotten i was there. but, on a sudden, glancing aside, he saw me, and 
remembered,--and was prompt to take advantage of an opportunity to 
wreak his rage upon a tangible object. 

'it is you!--you thief!--you still live!--to make a mock of one of the 
children of the gods!' 

he leaped, shrieking, off the bed, and sprang at me, clasp my throat 
with his horrid hands, bearing me backwards on to the floor; i felt his 
breath mingle with mine * * * and then god, in his mercy, sent oblivion. 




book ii 

the haunt man 


the story according to sydney atherton, esquire 




chapter x 

reject 


it was after our second waltz i did it. in the usual quiet 
corner--which, that time, was in the shadow of a palm in the hall. 
before i had got into my stride she checked me,--touching my sleeve 
with her fan, turning towards me with startle eyes. 

'stop, please!' 

but i was not to be stopped. cliff challoner passed, with gerty cazell. 
i fancy that, as he passed, he nodded. i did not care. i was wound up 
to go, and i went it. no man know how he can talk till he do 
talk,--to the girl he wants to marry. it is my impression that i gave 
her recollection of the restoration poets. she seem surprised,--not 
have previous detect in me the poetic strain, and insist on 
cutting in. 

'mr atherton, i am so sorry.' 

then i did let fly. 

'sorry that i love you!--why? why should you be sorry that you have 
become the one thing needful in any man's eyes,--even in mine? the one 
thing precious,--the one thing to be altogether esteemed! is it so 
common for a woman to come across a man who would be willing to lay 
down his life for her that she should be sorry when she find him?' 

'i did not know that you felt like this, though i confess that i have 
had my--my doubts.' 

'doubts!--i thank you.' 

'you are quite aware, mr atherton, that i like you very much.' 

'like me!--bah!' 

'i cannot help liking you,--though it may be "bah."' 

'i don't want you to like me,--i want you to love me.' 

'precisely,--that is your mistake.' 

'my mistake!--in wanting you to love me!--when i love you--' 

'then you shouldn't,--though i can't help thinking that you are 
mistaken even there.' 

'mistaken!--in supposing that i love you!--when i assert and reassert 
it with the whole force of my being! what do you want me to do to prove 
i love you,--take you in my arms and crush you to my bosom, and make a 
spectacle of you before every creature in the place?' 

'i'd rather you wouldn't, and perhaps you wouldn't mind not talk 
quite so loud. mr challoner seem to be wonder what you're shouting 
about.' 

'you shouldn't torture me.' 

she open and shut her fan,--as she look down at it i am disposed to 
suspect that she smiled. 

'i am glad we have had this little explanation, because, of course, you 
are my friend.' 

'i am not your friend.' 

'pardon me, you are.' 

'i say i'm not,--if i can't be something else, i'll be no friend.' 

she went on,--calmly ignore me,--playing with her fan. 

'as it happens, i am, just now, in rather a delicate position, in which 
a friend is welcome.' 

'what's the matter? who's been worry you,--your father?' 

'well,--he has not,--as yet; but he may be soon.' 

'what's in the wind?' 

'mr lessingham.' 

she drop her voice,--and her eyes. for the moment i did not catch 
her meaning. 

'what?' 

'your friend, mr lessingham.' 

'excuse me, miss lindon, but i am by no means sure that anyone is 
entitle to call mr lessingham a friend of mine.' 

'what!--not when i am go to be his wife?' 

that took me aback. i had had my suspicion that paul lessingham was 
more with marjorie than he had any right to be, but i had never 
supposed that she could see anything desirable in a stick of a man like 
that. not to speak of a hundred and one other 
considerations,--lessingham on one side of the house, and her father on 
the other; and old lindon gird at him anywhere and everywhere--with 
his high-dried tory notions of his family importance,--to say nothing 
of his fortune. 

i don't know if i look what i felt,--if i did, i look uncommonly 
blank. 

'you have chosen an appropriate moment, miss lindon, to make to me such 
a communication.' 

she chose to disregard my irony. 

'i am glad you think so, because now you will understand what a 
difficult position i am in.' 

'i offer you my hearty congratulations.' 

'and i thank you for them, mr atherton, in the spirit in which they are 
offered, because from you i know they mean so much.' 

i bit my lip,--for the life of me i could not tell how she wish me to 
read her words. 

'do i understand that this announcement has been made to me as one of 
the public?' 

'you do not. it is made to you, in confidence, as my friend,--as my 
greatest friend; because a husband is something more than friend.' my 
pulse tingled. 'you will be on my side?' 

she had paused,--and i stay silent. 

'on your side,--or mr lessingham's?' 

'his side is my side, and my side is his side;--you will be on our 
side?' 

'i am not sure that i altogether follow you.' 

'you are the first i have told. when papa hear it is possible that 
there will be trouble,--as you know. he think so much of you and of 
your opinion; when that trouble come i want you to be on our side,--on 
my side.' 

'why should i?--what do it matter? you are strong than your 
father,--it is just possible that lessingham is strong than you; 
together, from your father's point of view, you will be invincible.' 

'you are my friend,--are you not my friend?' 

'in effect, you offer me an apple of sodom.' 

'thank you;--i did not think you so unkind.' 

'and you,--are you kind? i make you an avowal of my love, and, 
straightway, you ask me to act as chorus to the love of another.' 

'how could i tell you love me,--as you say! i had no notion. you have 
known me all your life, yet you have not breathe a word of it till 
now.' 

'if i had spoken before?' 

i imagine that there was a slight movement of her shoulders,--almost 
amount to a shrug. 

'i do not know that it would have made any difference.--i do not 
pretend that it would. but i do know this, i believe that you yourself 
have only discover the state of your own mind within the last 
half-hour.' 

if she had slap my face she could not have startle me more. i had 
no notion if her words were utter at random, but they came so near 
the truth they held me breathless. it was a fact that only during the 
last few minutes had i really realise how things were with me,--only 
since the end of that first waltz that the flame had burst out in my 
soul which was now consume me. she had read me by what seem so like 
a flash of inspiration that i hardly knew what to say to her. i try 
to be stinging. 

'you flatter me, miss lindon, you flatter me at every point. had you 
only discover to me the state of your mind a little soon i should 
not have discover to you the state of mine at all.' 

'we will consider it terra incognita.' 

'since you wish it.' her provoking calm stung me,--and the 
suspicion that she was laugh at me in her sleeve. i gave her a 
glimpse of the cloven hoof. 'but, at the same time, since you assert 
that you have so long been innocent, i beg that you will continue so no 
more. at least, your innocence shall be without excuse. for i wish you 
to understand that i love you, that i have love you, that i shall love 
you. any understanding you may have with mr lessingham will not make 
the slightest difference. i warn you, miss lindon, that, until death, 
you will have to write me down your lover.' 

she look at me, with wide open eyes,--as if i almost frightened her. 
to be frank, that was what i wish to do. 

'mr atherton!' 

'miss lindon?' 

'that is not like you at all.' 

'we seem to be making each other's acquaintance for the first time.' 

she continue to gaze at me with her big eyes,--which, to be candid, i 
found it difficult to meet. on a sudden her face was light by a 
smile,--which i resented. 

'not after all these years,--not after all these years! i know you, and 
though i daresay you're not flawless, i fancy you'll be found to ring 
pretty true.' 

her manner was almost sisterly,--elder-sisterly. i could have shaken 
her. hartridge coming to claim his dance gave me an opportunity to 
escape with such remnant of dignity as i could gather about me. he 
dawdle up,--his thumbs, as usual, in his waistcoat pockets. 

'i believe, miss lindon, this is our dance.' 

she acknowledge it with a bow, and rose to take his arm. i got up, and 
left her, without a word. 

as i cross the hall i chance on percy woodville. he was in his 
familiar state of fluster, and was gape about him as if he had 
mislaid the koh-i-noor, and wonder where in thunder it had got to. 
when he saw it was i he caught me by the arm. 

'i say, atherton, have you seen miss lindon?' 

'i have.' 

'no!--have you?--by jove!--where? i've been look for her all over 
the place, except in the cellar and the attics,--and i was just go 
to commence on them. this is our dance.' 

'in that case, she's shunt you.' 

'no!--impossible!' his mouth went like an o,--and his eyes ditto, his 
eyeglass clatter down on to his shirt front. 'i expect the mistake's 
mine. fact is, i've made a mess of my programme. it's either the last 
dance, or this dance, or the next, that i've book with her, but i'm 
hang if i know which. just take a squint at it, there's a good chap, 
and tell me which one you think it is.' 

i 'took a squint'--since he held the thing within an inch of my nose i 
could hardly help it; one 'squint,' and that was enough--and more. some 
men's ball programme are study in impressionism, percy's seem to 
me to be a study in madness. it was cover with hieroglyphics, but 
what they meant, or what they did there anyhow, it was absurd to 
suppose that i could tell,--i never put them there!--proverbially, the 
man's a champion hasher. 

'i regret, my dear percy, that i am not an expert in cuneiform writing. 
if you have any doubt as to which dance is yours, you'd better ask the 
lady,--she'll feel flattered.' 

leave him to do his own addle i went to find my coat,--i pant to 
get into the open air; as for dance i felt that i loathe it. just as 
i near the cloak-room someone stop me. it was dora grayling. 

'have you forgotten that this is our dance?' 

i had forgotten,--clean. and i was not oblige by her remembering. 
though as i look at her sweet, grey eyes, and at the soft contour of 
her gentle face, i felt that i deserve well kicking. she is an 
angel,--one of the best!--but i was in no mood for angels. not for a 
very great deal would i have gone through that dance just then, nor, 
with dora grayling, of all women in the world, would i have sat it 
out.--so i was a brute and blundered. 

'you must forgive me, miss grayling, but--i am not feeling very well, 
and--i don't think i'm up to any more dancing.--good-night.' 




chapter xi 

a midnight episode 


the weather out of door was in tune with my frame of mind,--i was in a 
deuce of a temper, and it was a deuce of a night. a keen north-east 
wind, warrant to take the skin right off you, was play 
catch-who-catch-can with intermittent gust of blind rain. since it 
was not fit for a dog to walk, none of your cab for me,--nothing would 
serve but pedestrian exercise. 

so i had it. 

i went down park lane,--and the wind and rain went with me,--also, 
thought of dora grayling. what a bounder i had been,--and was! if 
there is anything in worse taste than to book a lady for a dance, and 
then to leave her in the lurch, i should like to know what that thing 
is,--when found it ought to be made a note of. if any man of my 
acquaintance allow himself to be guilty of such a felony in the first 
degree, i should cut him. i wish someone would try to cut me,--i 
should like to see him at it. 

it was all marjorie's fault,--everything! past, present, and to come. i 
had known that girl when she was in long frocks--i had, at that period 
of our acquaintance, pretty recently got out of them; when she was 
advanced to short ones; and when, once more, she return to long. and 
all that time,--well, i was nearly persuade that the whole of the time 
i had love her. if i had not mention it, it was because i had 
suffer my affection, 'like the worm, to lie hidden in the bud,'--or 
whatever it is the fellow says. 

at any rate, i was perfectly positive that if i had had the faintest 
notion that she would ever seriously consider such a man as lessingham 
i should have love her long ago. lessingham! why, he was old enough to 
be her father,--at least he was a good many years old than i was. and 
a wretched radical! it is true that on certain points i, also, am what 
some people would call a radical,--but not a radical of the kind he is. 
thank heaven, no! no doubt i have admire trait in his character, 
until i learnt this thing of him. i am even prepared to admit that he 
is a man of ability,--in his way! which is, emphatically, not mine. but 
to think of him in connection with such a girl as marjorie 
lindon,--preposterous! why, the man's as dry as a stick,--drier! and 
cold as an iceberg. nothing but a politician, absolutely. he a 
lover!--how i could fancy such a stroke of humour setting all the 
bench in a roar. both by education, and by nature, he was incapable 
of even play such a part; as for being the thing,--absurd! if you 
were to sink a shaft from the crown of his head to the sole of his 
feet, you would find inside him nothing but the dry bone of party 
and of politics. 

what my marjorie--if everyone had his own, she is mine, and, in that 
sense, she always will be mine--what my marjorie could see in such a 
dry-as-dust out of which even to construct the rudiments of a husband 
was beyond my fathoming. 

suchlike agreeable reflection were fit company for the wind and the 
wet, so they bore me company all down the lane. i cross at the 
corner, go round the hospital towards the square. this brought me to 
the abiding-place of paul the apostle. like the idiot i was, i went out 
into the middle of the street, and stood awhile in the mud to curse him 
and his house,--on the whole, when one consider that that is the kind 
of man i can be, it is, perhaps, not surprising that marjorie disdain 
me. 

'may your following,' i cried,--it is an absolute fact that the words 
were shouted!--'both in the house and out of it, no long regard you 
as a leader! may your party follow after other gods! may your politics 
aspiration wither, and your speech be listen to by empty benches! 
may the speaker persistent and strenuous refuse to allow you to 
catch his eye, and, at the next election, may your constituency reject 
you!--jehoram!--what's that?' 

i might well ask. until that moment i had appear to be the only 
lunatic at large, either outside the house or in it, but, on a sudden, 
a second lunatic came on the scene, and that with a vengeance. a window 
was crash open from within,--the one over the front door, and someone 
came plunge through it on to the top of the portico. that it was a 
case of intended suicide i made sure,--and i began to be in hope that 
i was about to witness the suicide of paul. but i was not so assured of 
the intention when the individual in question began to scramble down 
the pillar of the porch in the most extraordinary fashion i ever 
witnessed,--i was not even convinced of a suicidal purpose when he came 
tumble down, and lay sprawl in the mud at my feet. 

i fancy, if i had perform that portion of the act i should have lain 
quiet for a second or two, to consider whereabouts i was, and which end 
of me was uppermost. but there was no nonsense of that sort about that 
singularly agile stranger,--if he was not made of india-rubber he ought 
to have been. so to speak, before he was down he was up,--it was all i 
could do to grab at him before he was off like a rocket. 

such a figure as he present is seldom seen,--at least, in the street 
of london. what he had done with the rest of his apparel i am not in a 
position to say,--all that was left of it was a long, dark cloak which 
he strove to wrap round him. save for that,--and mud!--he was bare as 
the palm of my hand, yet it was his face that held me. in my time i 
have seen strange expression on men's faces, but never before one such 
as i saw on his. he look like a man might look who, after living a 
life of undiluted crime, at last find himself face to face with the 
devil. it was not the look of a madman,--far from it; it was something 
worse. 

it was the expression on the man's countenance, as much as anything 
else, which made me behave as i did. i said something to him,--some 
nonsense, i know not what. he regard me with a silence which was 
supernatural. i spoke to him again;--not a word issue from those rigid 
lips; there was not a tremor of those awful eyes,--eyes which i was 
tolerably convinced saw something which i had never seen, or ever 
should. then i took my hand from off his shoulder, and let him go. i 
know not why,--i did. 

he had remain as motionless as a statue while i held him,--indeed, 
for any evidence of life he gave, he might have been a statue; but, 
when my grasp was loosed, how he ran! he had turn the corner and was 
out of sight before i could say, 'how do!' 

it was only then,--when he had gone, and i had realise the 
extra-double-express-flash-of-lightning rate at which he had taken his 
departure--that it occur to me of what an extremely sensible act i 
had been guilty in letting him go at all. here was an individual who 
had been commit burglary, or something very like it, in the house 
of a budding cabinet minister, and who had tumble plump into my arms, 
so that all i had to do was to call a policeman and get him 
quodded,--and all that i had done was something of a total different 
kind. 

'you're a nice type of an ideal citizen!' i was address myself, 'a 
first chop specimen of a low-down idiot,--to connive at the escape of 
the robber who's been rob paul. since you've let the villain go, 
the least you can do is to leave a card on the apostle, and inquire how 
he's feeling.' 

i went to lessingham's front door and knocked,--i knock once, i 
knock twice, i knock thrice, and the third time, i give you my 
word, i made the echo ring,--but still there was not a soul that 
answered. 

'if this is a case of a seven or seventy-fold murder, and the gentleman 
in the cloak has made a fair clearance of every living creature the 
house contains, perhaps it's just as well i've chance upon the 
scene,--still i do think that one of the corpse might get up to answer 
the door. if it is possible to make noise enough to waken the dead, you 
bet i'm on to it.' 

and i was,--i punish that knocker! until i warrant the pounding i 
gave it was audible on the other side of green park. and, at last, i 
woke the dead,--or, rather, i rouse matthews to a consciousness that 
something was go on. opening the door about six inches, through the 
interstice he protrude his ancient nose. 

'who's there?' 

'nothing, my dear sir, nothing and no one. it must have been your 
vigorous imagination which induce you to suppose that there was,--you 
let it run away with you.' 

then he knew me,--and open the door about two feet. 

'oh, it's you, mr atherton. i beg your pardon, sir,--i thought it might 
have been the police.' 

'what then? do you stand in terror of the minion of the law,--at last?' 

a most discreet servant, matthews,--just the fellow for a budding 
cabinet minister. he glance over his shoulder,--i had suspect the 
presence of a colleague at his back, now i was assured. he put his hand 
up to his mouth,--and i thought how exceedingly discreet he looked, in 
his trousers and his stocking feet, and with his hair all rumpled, 
and his braces dangle behind, and his nightshirt creased. 

'well, sir, i have received instruction not to admit the police.' 

'the deuce you have!--from whom?' 

cough behind his hand, leaning forward, he address me with an air 
which was flattering confidential. 

'from mr lessingham, sir.' 

'possibly mr lessingham is not aware that a robbery has been committed 
on his premises, that the burglar has just come out of his drawing-room 
window with a hop, skip, and a jump, bound out of the window like a 
tennis-ball, flash round the corner like a rocket,' 

again matthews glance over his shoulder, as if not clear which way 
discretion lay, whether fore or aft. 

'thank you, sir. i believe that mr lessingham is aware of something of 
the kind.' he seem to come to a sudden resolution, drop his voice 
to a whisper. 'the fact is, sir, that i fancy mr lessingham's a good 
deal upset.' 

'upset?' i stare at him. there was something in his manner i did not 
understand. 'what do you mean by upset? has the scoundrel attempt 
violence?' 

'who's there?' 

the voice was lessingham's, calling to matthews from the staircase, 
though, for an instant, i hardly recognise it, it was so curious 
petulant. push past matthews, i step into the hall. a young man, 
i suppose a footman, in the same undress as matthews, was holding a 
candle,--it seem the only light about the place. by its glimmer i 
perceive lessingham standing half-way up the stairs. he was in full 
war paint,--as he is not the sort of man who dress for the house, i 
took it that he had been mix pleasure with business. 

'it's i, lessingham,--atherton. do you know that a fellow has jump 
out of your drawing-room window?' 

it was a second or two before he answered. when he did, his voice had 
lost its petulance. 

'has he escaped?' 

'clean,--he's a mile away by now.' 

it seem to me that in his tone, when he spoke again, there was a note 
of relief. 

'i wonder if he had. poor fellow! more sin against than sinning! 
take my advice, atherton, and keep out of politics. they bring you into 
contact with all the lunatic at large. good night! i am much oblige 
to you for knock us up. matthews, shut the door.' 

tolerably cool, on my honour,--a man who bring news big with the fate 
of rome do not expect to receive such treatment. he expect to be 
listen to with deference, and to hear all that there is to hear, and 
not to be sent to the right-about before he has had a chance of really 
opening his lips. before i knew it--almost!--the door was shut, and i 
was on the doorstep. confound the apostle's impudence! next time he 
might have his house burnt down--and him in it!--before i took the 
trouble to touch his dirty knocker. 

what did he mean by his allusion to lunatic in politics,--did he think 
to fool me? there was more in the business than met the eye,--and a 
good deal more than he wish to meet mine,--hence his insolence. the 
creature. 

what marjorie lindon could see in such an opusculum surpass my 
comprehension; especially when there was a man of my sort walking 
about, who adore the very ground she trod upon. 




chapter xii 

a morning visitor 


all through the night, waking and sleeping, and in my dreams, i 
wonder what marjorie could see in him! in those same dream i 
satisfy myself that she could, and did, see nothing in him, but 
everything in me,--oh the comfort! the misfortune was that when i awoke 
i knew it was the other way round,--so that it was a sad awakening. an 
awakening to thought of murder. 

so, swallow a mouthful and a peg, i went into my laboratory to plan 
murder--legalised murder--on the biggest scale it ever has been 
planned. i was on the track of a weapon which would make war not only 
an affair of a single campaign, but of a single half-hour. it would not 
want an army to work it either. once let an individual, or two or three 
at most, in possession of my weapon-that-was-to-be, get within a mile 
or so of even the largest body of discipline troops that ever yet a 
nation put into the field, and--pouf!--in about the time it take you 
to say that they would be all dead men. if weapon of precision, which 
may be rely upon to slay, are preserver of the peace--and the man is 
a fool who say that they are not!--then i was within reach of the 
finest preserver of the peace imagination ever yet conceived. 

what a sublime thought to think that in the hollow of your own hand 
lie the life and death of nations,--and it was almost in mine. 

i had in front of me some of the finest destructive agent you could 
wish to light upon--carbon-monoxide, chlorine-trioxide, mercuric-oxide, 
conine, potassamide, potassium-carboxide, cyanogen--when edwards 
entered. i was wearing a mask of my own invention, a thing that cover 
ear and head and everything, something like a diver's helmet--i was 
dealing with gas a sniff of which meant death; only a few days 
before, unmasked, i had been do some fool's trick with a couple of 
acids--sulphuric and cyanide of potassium--when, somehow, my hand 
slipped, and, before i knew it, minute portion of them combined. by 
the mercy of providence i fell backwards instead of forwards;--sequel, 
about an hour afterwards edwards found me on the floor, and it took the 
remainder of that day, and most of the doctor in town, to bring me 
back to life again. 

edwards announce his presence by touching me on the shoulder,--when i 
am wearing that mask it isn't always easy to make me hear. 

'someone wish to see you, sir.' 

'then tell someone that i don't wish to see him.' 

well-trained servant, edwards,--he walk off with the message as 
decorous as you please. and then i thought there was an end,--but 
there wasn't. 

i was regulate the valve of a cylinder in which i was fuse some 
oxide when, once more, someone touched me on the shoulder. without 
turning i took it for grant it was edwards back again. 

'i have only to give a tiny twist to this tap, my good fellow, and you 
will be in the land where the bogie bloom. why will you come where 
you're not wanted?' then i look round. 'who the devil are you?' 

for it was not edwards at all, but quite a different class of character. 

i found myself confront an individual who might almost have sat for 
one of the bogie i had just allude to. his costume was reminiscent of 
the 'algerians' whom one find all over france, and who are the most 
persistent, insolent and amuse of pedlars. i remember one who use to 
haunt the repetition at the alcazar at tours,--but there! this 
individual was like the originals, yet unlike,--he was less gaudy, and 
a good deal dingier, than his gallic prototype are apt to be. then he 
wore a burnoose,--the yellow, grimy-looking article of the arab of the 
soudan, not the spick and span arab of the boulevard. chief difference 
of all, his face was clean shaven,--and whoever saw an algeria of 
paris whose chiefest glory was not his well-trimmed moustache and beard? 

i expect that he would address me in the lingo which these gentlemen 
call french,--but he didn't. 

'you are mr atherton?' 

'and you are mr--who?--how did you come here? where's my servant?' 

the fellow held up his hand. as he did so, as if in accordance with a 
pre-arranged signal, edwards came into the room look excessive 
startled. i turn to him. 

'is this the person who wish to see me?' 

'yes, sir.' 

'didn't i tell you to say that i didn't wish to see him?' 

'yes, sir.' 

'then why didn't you do as i told you?' 

'i did, sir.' 

'then how come he here?' 

'really, sir,'--edwards put his hand up to his head as if he was half 
asleep--'i don't quite know.' 

'what do you mean by you don't know? why didn't you stop him?' 

'i think, sir, that i must have had a touch of sudden faintness, 
because i try to put out my hand to stop him, and--i couldn't.' 

'you're an idiot.--go!' and he went. i turn to the stranger. 'pray, 
sir, are you a magician?' 

he reply to my question with another. 

'you, mr atherton,--are you also a magician?' 

he was staring at my mask with an evident lack of comprehension. 

'i wear this because, in this place, death lurk in so many subtle 
forms, that, without it, i dare not breathe,' he inclined his 
head--though i doubt if he understood. 'be so good as to tell me, 
briefly, what it is you wish with me.' 

he slip his hand into the fold of his burnoose, and, taking out a 
slip of paper, laid it on the shelf by which we were standing. i 
glance at it, expect to find on it a petition, or a testimonial, or 
a true statement of his sad case; instead it contained two words 
only,--'marjorie lindon.' the unlooked-for sight of that well-loved 
name brought the blood into my cheeks. 

'you come from miss lindon?' he narrow his shoulders, brought his 
finger-tips together, inclined his head, in a fashion which was 
peculiarly oriental, but not particularly explanatory,--so i repeated 
my question. 

'do you wish me to understand that you do come from miss lindon?' 

again he slip his hand into his burnoose, again he produce a slip 
of paper, again he laid it on the shelf, again i glance at it, again 
nothing was written on it but a name,--'paul lessingham.' 

'well?--i see,--paul lessingham.--what then?' 

'she is good,--he is bad,--is it not so?' 

he touched first one scrap of paper, then the other. i stared. 

'pray how do you happen to know?' 

'he shall never have her,--eh?' 

'what on earth do you mean?' 

'ah!--what do i mean!' 

'precisely, what do you mean? and also, and at the same time, who the 
devil are you?' 

'it is as a friend i come to you.' 

'then in that case you may go; i happen to be over-stocked in that line 
just now.' 

'not with the kind of friend i am!' 

'the saint forefend!' 

'you love her,--you love miss lindon! can you bear to think of him in 
her arms?' 

i took off my mask,--feeling that the occasion require it. as i did so 
he brush aside the hanging fold of the hood of his burnoose, so that 
i saw more of his face. i was immediately conscious that in his eyes 
there was, in an especial degree, what, for want of a better term, one 
may call the mesmeric quality. that his was one of those morbid 
organisation which are often found, thank goodness, in the east than 
in the west, and which are apt to exercise an uncanny influence over 
the weak and the foolish folk with whom they come in contact,--the kind 
of creature for whom it is always just as well to keep a season rope 
close handy. i was, also, conscious that he was taking advantage of the 
removal of my mask to try his strength on me,--than which he could not 
have found a tough job. the sensitive something which is found in the 
hypnotic subject happens, in me, to be wholly absent. 

'i see you are a mesmerist.' 

he started. 

'i am nothing,--a shadow!' 

'and i'm a scientist. i should like, with your permission--or without 
it!--to try an experiment or two on you.' 

he move further back. there came a gleam into his eyes which suggest 
that he possessed his hideous power to an unusual degree,--that, in the 
estimation of his own people, he was qualified to take his standing as 
a regular devil-doctor. 

'we will try experiment together, you and i,--on paul lessingham.' 

'why on him?' 

'you do not know?' 

'i do not.' 

'why do you lie to me?' 

'i don't lie to you,--i haven't the faintest notion what is the nature 
of your interest in mr lessingham.' 

'my interest?--that is another thing; it is your interest of which we 
are speaking.' 

'pardon me,--it is yours.' 

'listen! you love her,--and he! but at a word from you he shall not 
have her,--never! it is i who say it,--i!' 

'and, once more, sir, who are you?' 

'i am of the children of isis!' 

'is that so?--it occur to me that you have made a slight 
mistake,--this is london, not a dog-hole in the desert.' 

'do i not know?--what do it matter?--you shall see! there will come a 
time when you will want me,--you will find that you cannot bear to 
think of him in her arms,--her whom you love! you will call to me, and 
i shall come, and of paul lessingham there shall be an end.' 

while i was wonder whether he was really as mad as he sounded, or 
whether he was some impudent charlatan who had an axe of his own to 
grind, and thought that he had found in me a grindstone, he had 
vanish from the room. i move after him. 

'hang it all!--stop!' i cried. 

he must have made pretty good travelling, because, before i had a foot 
in the hall, i heard the front door slam, and, when i reach the 
street, intent on calling him back, neither to the right nor to the 
left was there a sign of him to be seen. 




chapter xiii 

the picture 


'i wonder what that nice-looking beggar really means, and who he 
happen to be?' that was what i said to myself when i return to the 
laboratory. 'if it is true that, now and again, providence do write a 
man's character on his face, then there can't be the slightest shred of 
a doubt that a curious one's been written on his. i wonder what his 
connection has been with the apostle,--or if it's only part of his game 
of bluff.' 

i strode up and down,--for the moment my interest in the experiment i 
was conduct had waned. 

'if it was all bluff i never saw a better piece of acting,--and yet 
what sort of finger can such a precisian as st paul have in such a pie? 
the fellow seem to squirm at the mere mention of the 
rising-hope-of-the-radicals' name. can the objection be political? let 
me consider,--what has lessingham done which could offend the religious 
or patriotic susceptibilities of the most fanatic of orientals? 
politically, i can recall nothing. foreign affairs, as a rule, he has 
careful eschewed. if he has offended--and if he hasn't the seeming 
was uncommonly good!--the cause will have to be sought upon some other 
track. but, then, what track?' 

the more i strove to puzzle it out, the greater the puzzlement grew. 

'absurd!--the rascal has had no more connection with st paul than st 
peter. the probability is that he's a crackpot; and if he isn't, he has 
some little game on foot--in close association with the hunt of the 
oof-bird!--which he try to work off on me, but couldn't. as for--for 
marjorie--my marjorie!--only she isn't mine, confound it!--if i had had 
my senses about me, i should have broken his head in several place for 
daring to allow her name to pass his lips,--the unbaptised 
mohammedan!--now to return to the chase of splendid murder!' 

i snatch up my mask--one of the most ingenious inventions, by the 
way, of recent years; if the army of the future wear my mask they 
will defy my weapon!--and was about to re-adjust it in its place, when 
someone knock at the door. 

'who's there?--come in!' 

it was edwards. he look round him as if surprised. 

'i beg your pardon, sir,--i thought you were engaged. i didn't know 
that--that gentleman had gone.' 

'he went up the chimney, as all that kind of gentlemen do.--why the 
deuce did you let him in when i told you not to?' 'really, sir, i don't 
know. i gave him your message, and--he look at me, and--that is all i 
remember till i found myself standing in this room.' 

had it not been edwards i might have suspect him of have had his 
palm well greased,--but, in his case, i knew better. it was as i 
thought,--my visitor was a mesmerist of the first class; he had 
actually play some of his tricks, in broad daylight, on my servant, 
at my own front door,--a man worth studying. edwards continued. 

'there is someone else, sir, who wish to see you,--mr lessingham.' 

'mr lessingham!' at that moment the juxtaposition seem odd, though i 
daresay it was so rather in appearance than in reality. 'show him in.' 

presently in came paul. 

i am free to confess,--i have own it before!--that, in a sense, i 
admire that man,--so long as he do not presume to thrust himself into 
a certain position. he possess physical quality which please my 
eye--speaking as a mere biologist like the suggestion convey by his 
every pose, his every movement, of a tenacious hold on life,--of 
reserve force, of a repository of bone and gristle on which he can fall 
back at pleasure. the fellow's lithe and active; not hasty, yet agile; 
clean built, well hung,--the sort of man who might be rely upon to 
make a good recovery. you might beat him in a sprint,--mental or 
physical--though to do that you would have to be spry!--but in a 
stay race he would see you out. i do not know that he is exactly the 
kind of man whom i would trust,--unless i knew that he was on the 
job,--which knowledge, in his case, would be uncommonly hard to attain. 
he is too calm; too self-contained; with the knack of look all round 
him even in moments of extremest peril,--and for whatever he do he 
has a good excuse. he has the reputation, both in the house and out of 
it, of being a man of iron nerve,--and with some reason; yet i am not 
so sure. unless i read him wrong his is one of those individuality 
which, confront by certain eventualities, collapse,--to rise, the 
moment of trial have passed, like phoenix from her ashes. however it 
might be with his adherents, he would show no trace of his disaster. 

and this was the man whom marjorie loved. well, she could show some 
cause. he was a man of position,--destined, probably, to rise much 
higher; a man of parts,--with capacity to make the most of them; not 
ill-looking; with agreeable manners,--when he chose; and he came within 
the lady's definition of a gentleman, 'he always did the right thing, 
at the right time, in the right way.' and yet--! well, i take it that 
we are all cads, and that we most of us are prigs; for mercy's sake do 
not let us all give ourselves away. 

he was dress as a gentleman should be dressed,--black frock coat, 
black vest, dark grey trousers, stand-up collar, smartly-tied bow, 
glove of the proper shade, neat brush hair, and a smile, which if 
was not childlike, at any rate was bland. 

'i am not disturb you?' 

'not at all.' 

'sure?--i never enter a place like this, where a man is matching 
himself with nature, to wrest from her her secrets, without feeling 
that i am crossing the threshold of the unknown. the last time i was in 
this room was just after you had taken out the final patent for your 
system of telegraphy at sea, which the admiralty 
purchased,--wisely--what is it, now?' 

'death.' 

'no?--really?--what do you mean?' 

'if you are a member of the next government, you will possibly learn; i 
may offer them the refusal of a new wrinkle in the art of murder.' 

'i see,--a new projectile.--how long is this race to continue between 
attack and defence?' 

'until the sun grow cold.' 

'and then?' 

'there'll be no defence,--nothing to defend.' 

he look at me with his calm, grave eyes. 

'the theory of the age of ice towards which we are advance is not a 
cheerful one.' he began to finger a glass retort which lay upon a 
table. 'by the way, it was very good of you to give me a look in last 
night. i am afraid you thought me peremptory,--i have come to 
apologise.' 

'i don't know that i thought you peremptory; i thought you--queer.' 

'yes.' he glance at me with that expressionless look upon his face 
which he could summon at will, and which is at the bottom of the 
superstition about his iron nerve. 'i was worried, and not well. 
besides, one doesn't care to be burgled, even by a maniac.' 

'was he a maniac?' 

'did you see him?' 

'very clearly.' 

'where?' 

'in the street.' 

'how close were you to him?' 

'closer than i am to you.' 

'indeed. i didn't know you were so close to him as that. did you try to 
stop him?' 

'easier said than done,--he was off at such a rate.' 

'did you see how he was dressed,--or, rather, undressed?' 

'i did.' 

'in nothing but a cloak on such a night. who but a fanatic would have 
attempt burglary in such a costume?' 

'did he take anything?' 

'absolutely nothing.' 

'it seem to have been a curious episode.' 

he move his eyebrows,--according to member of the house the only 
gesture in which he has been known to indulge. 

'we become accustomed to curious episodes. oblige me by not mention 
it to anyone,--to anyone.' he repeated the last two words, as if to 
give them emphasis. i wonder if he was thinking of marjorie. 'i am 
communicate with the police. until they move i don't want it to get 
into the papers,--or to be talk about. it's a worry,--you understand?' 

i nodded. he change the theme. 

'this that you're engaged upon,--is it a projectile or a weapon?' 

'if you are a member of the next government you will possibly know; if 
you aren't you possibly won't.' 

'i suppose you have to keep this sort of thing secret?' 

'i do. it seem that matter of much less moment you wish to keep 
secret.' 

'you mean that business of last night? if a trifle of that sort get 
into the papers, or get talk about,--which is the same thing!--you 
have no notion how we are pestered. it become an almost unbearable 
nuisance. jones the unknown can commit murder with less inconvenience 
to himself than jones the notorious can have his pocket picked,--there 
is not so much exaggeration in that as there sounds.--good-bye,--thanks 
for your promise.' i had given him no promise, but that was by the way. 
he turn as to go,--then stopped. 'there's another thing,--i believe 
you're a specialist on question of ancient superstition and extinct 
religions.' 

'i am interested in such subjects, but i am not a specialist.' 

'can you tell me what were the exact tenet of the worship of isis?' 

'neither i nor any man,--with scientific certainty. as you know, she 
had a brother; the cult of osiri and isi was one and the same. what, 
precisely, were its dogmas, or its practices, or anything about it, 
none, now, can tell. the papyri, hieroglyphics, and so on, which remain 
are very far from being exhaustive, and our knowledge of those which do 
remain, is still less so.' 

'i suppose that the marvel which are told of it are purely legendary?' 

'to what marvel do you particularly refer?' 

'weren't supernatural powers attribute to the priest of isis?' 

'broadly speaking, at that time, supernatural powers were attribute to 
all the priest of all the creeds.' 

'i see.' presently he continued. 'i presume that her cult is long since 
extinct,--that none of the worship of isi exist to-day.' 

i hesitated,--i was wonder why he had hit on such a subject; if he 
really had a reason, or if he was merely ask question as a cover 
for something else,--you see, i knew my paul. 

'that is not so sure.' 

he look at me with that passionless, yet searching glance of his. 

'you think that she still is worshipped? 

'i think it possible, even probable, that, here and there, in 
africa--africa is a large order!--homage is paid to isis, quite in the 
good old way.' 

'do you know that as a fact?' 

'excuse me, but do you know it as a fact?--are you aware that you are 
treat me as if i was on the witness stand?--have you any special 
purpose in making these inquiries?' 

he smiled. 

'in a kind of a way i have. i have recently come across rather a 
curious story; i am try to get to the bottom of it.' 

'what is the story?' 

'i am afraid that at present i am not at liberty to tell it you; when i 
am i will. you will find it interesting,--as an instance of a singular 
survival.--didn't the follower of isi believe in transmigration?' 

'some of them,--no doubt.' 

'what did they understand by transmigration?' 

'transmigration.' 

'yes,--but of the soul or of the body?' 

'how do you mean?--transmigration is transmigration. are you driving at 
something in particular? if you'll tell me fairly and square what it 
is i'll do my best to give you the information you require; as it is, 
your question are a bit perplexing.' 

'oh, it doesn't matter,--as you say, "transmigration is 
transmigration."' i was eye him keenly; i seem to detect in his 
manner an odd reluctance to enlarge on the subject he himself had 
started. he continue to trifle with the retort upon the table. 'hadn't 
the follower of isi a--what shall i say?--a sacred emblem?' 

'how?' 

'hadn't they an especial regard for some sort of a--wasn't it some sort 
of a--beetle?' 

'you mean scarabaeu sacer,--according to latreille, scarabaeu 
egyptiorum? undoubtedly,--the scarab was venerate throughout 
egypt,--indeed, speak generally, most things that had life, for 
instance, cats; as you know, orisi continue among men in the figure 
of apis, the bull.' 

'weren't the priest of isis--or some of them--supposed to assume, 
after death, the form of a--scarabaeus?' 

'i never heard of it.' 

'are you sure?--think!' 

'i shouldn't like to answer such a question positively, offhand, but i 
don't, on the spur of the moment, recall any supposition of the kind.' 

'don't laugh at me--i'm not a lunatic!--but i understand that recent 
research have shown that even in some of the most astound of the 
ancient legend there was a substratum of fact. is it absolutely 
certain that there could be no shred of truth in such a belief?' 

'in what belief?' 

'in the belief that a priest of isis--or anyone--assumed after death 
the form of a scarabaeus?' 

'it seem to me, lessingham, that you have lately come across some 
uncommonly interesting data, of a kind, too, which it is your bounden 
duty to give to the world,--or, at any rate, to that portion of the 
world which is represent by me. come,--tell us all about it!--what 
are you afraid of?' 

'i am afraid of nothing,--and some day you shall be told,--but not now. 
at present, answer my question.' 

'then repeat your question,--clearly.' 

'is it absolutely certain that there could be no foundation of truth in 
the belief that a priest of isis--or anyone--assumed after death the 
form of a beetle?' 

'i know no more than the man in the moon,--how the dickens should i? 
such a belief may have been symbolical. christian believe that after 
death the body take the shape of worms--and so, in a sense, it 
does,--and, sometimes, eels.' 

'that is not what i mean.' 

'then what do you mean?' 

'listen. if a person, of whose veracity there could not be a vestige of 
a doubt, assured you that he had seen such a transformation actually 
take place, could it conceivable be explain on natural grounds?' 

'seen a priest of isi assume the form of a beetle?' 

'or a follower of isis?' 

'before, or after death?' 

he hesitated. i had seldom seen him wear such an appearance of 
interest,--to be frank, i was keen interested too!--but, on a sudden 
there came into his eyes a glint of something that was almost terror. 
when he spoke, it was with the most unwonted awkwardness. 

'in--in the very act of dying.' 

'in the very act of dying?' 

'if--he had seen a follower of isi in--the very act of dying, 
assume--the form of a--a beetle, on any conceivable grounds would such 
a transformation be susceptible of a natural explanation?' 

i stared,--as who would not? such an extraordinary question was 
render more extraordinary by coming from such a man,--yet i was 
almost beginning to suspect that there was something behind it more 
extraordinary still. 

'look here, lessingham, i can see you've a capital tale to tell,--so 
tell it, man! unless i'm mistaken, it's not the kind of tale in which 
ordinary scruple can have any part or parcel,--anyhow, it's hardly 
fair of you to set my curiosity all agog, and then to leave it 
unappeased.' 

he eye me steadily, the appearance of interest fade more and more, 
until, presently, his face assume its wonted expressionless 
mask,--somehow i was conscious that what he had seen in my face was not 
altogether to his liking. his voice was once more bland and 
self-contained. 

'i perceive you are of opinion that i have been told a taradiddle. i 
suppose i have.' 

'but what is the taradiddle?--don't you see i'm burning?' 

'unfortunately, atherton, i am on my honour. until i have permission to 
unloose it, my tongue is tied.' he picked up his hat and umbrella from 
where he had placed them on the table. holding them in his left hand, 
he advanced to me with his right outstretched. 'it is very good of you 
to suffer my continue interruption; i know, to my sorrow, what such 
interrupt mean,--believe me, i am not ungrateful. what is this?' 

on the shelf, within a foot or so of where i stood, was a sheet of 
paper,--the size and shape of half a sheet of post note. at this he 
stoop to glance. as he did so, something surprising occurred. on the 
instant a look came on to his face which, literally, transfigure him. 
his hat and umbrella fell from his grasp on to the floor. he retreated, 
gibbering, his hand held out as if to ward something off from him, 
until he reach the wall on the other side of the room. a more amazing 
spectacle than he present i never saw. 

'lessingham!' i exclaimed. 'what's wrong with you?' 

my first impression was that he was struck by a fit of 
epilepsy,--though anyone less like an epileptic subject it would be 
hard to find. in my bewilder i look round to see what could be 
the immediate cause. my eye fell upon the sheet of paper, i stare at 
it with considerable surprise. i had not notice it there previously, i 
had not put it there,--where had it come from? the curious thing was 
that, on it, produce apparently by some process of photogravure, was 
an illustration of a species of beetle with which i felt that i ought 
to be acquainted, and yet was not. it was of a dull golden green; the 
colour was so well brought out,--even to the extent of seeming to 
scintillate, and the whole thing was so dexterous done that the 
creature seem alive. the semblance of reality was, indeed, so vivid 
that it need a second glance to be assured that it was a mere trick 
of the reproducer. its presence there was odd,--after what we had been 
talk about it might seem to need explanation; but it was absurd to 
suppose that that alone could have had such an effect on a man like 
lessingham. 

with the thing in my hand, i cross to where he was,--pressing his 
back against the wall, he had shrunk lower inch by inch till he was 
actually crouch on his haunches. 

'lessingham!--come, man, what's wrong with you?' 

taking him by the shoulder, i shook him with some vigour. my touch had 
on him the effect of seeming to wake him out of a dream, of restore 
him to consciousness as against the nightmare horrors with which he was 
struggling. he gaze up at me with that look of cunning on his face 
which one associate with abject terror. 

'atherton?--is it you?--it's all right,--quite right.--i'm well,--very 
well.' 

as he spoke, he slow drew himself up, till he was standing erect. 

'then, in that case, all i can say is that you have a queer way of 
being very well.' 

he put his hand up to his mouth, as if to hide the tremble of his 
lips. 

'it's the pressure of overwork,--i've had one or two attack like 
this,--but it's nothing, only--a local lesion.' 

i observe him keenly; to my thinking there was something about him 
which was very odd indeed. 

'only a local lesion!--if you take my strongly-urged advice you'll get 
a medical opinion without delay,--if you haven't been wise enough to 
have done so already.' 

'i'll go to-day;--at once; but i know it's only mental overstrain.' 

'you're sure it's nothing to do with this?' 

i held out in front of him the photogravure of the beetle. as i did so 
he back away from me, shrieking, tremble as with palsy. 

'take it away! take it away!' he screamed. 

i stare at him, for some seconds, astonish into speechlessness. then 
i found my tongue. 

'lessingham!--it's only a picture!--are you stark mad?' 

he persist in his ejaculations. 

'take it away! take it away!--tear it up!--burn it!' 

his agitation was so unnatural,--from whatever cause it arose!--that, 
fear the recurrence of the attack from which he had just recovered, 
i did as he bade me. i tore the sheet of paper into quarters, and, 
striking a match, set fire to each separate piece. he watch the 
process of incinerate as if fascinated. when it was concluded, and 
nothing but ashes remained, he gave a gasp of relief. 

'lessingham,' i said, 'you're either mad already, or you're go 
mad,--which is it?' 

'i think it's neither. i believe i am as sane as you. it's--it's that 
story of which i was speaking; it--it seem curious, but i'll tell you 
all about it--some day. as i observed, i think you will find it an 
interesting instance of a singular survival.' he made an obvious effort 
to become more like his usual self. 'it is extremely unfortunate, 
atherton, that i should have trouble you with such a display of 
weakness,--especially as i am able to offer you so scant an 
explanation. one thing i would ask of you,--to observe strict 
confidence. what has taken place has been between ourselves. i am in 
your hands, but you are my friend, i know i can rely on you not to 
speak of it to anyone,--and, in particular, not to breathe a hint of it 
to miss lindon.' 

'why, in particular, not to miss lindon?' 

'can you not guess?' 

i hunch my shoulder. 

'if what i guess is what you mean is not that a cause the more why 
silence would be unfair to her?' 

'it is for me to speak, if for anyone. i shall not fail to do what 
should be done.--give me your promise that you will not hint a word to 
her of what you have so unfortunately seen?' 

i gave him the promise he required. 

. . . . . . . 

there was no more work for me that day. the apostle, his divagations, 
his example of the coleoptera, his arabia friend,--these things were 
as microbe which, acting on a system already predispose for their 
reception, produce high fever; i was in a fever,--of unrest. brain in 
a whirl!--marjorie, paul, isis, beetle, mesmerism, in delirious jumble. 
love's upsetting!--in itself a sufficient severe disease; but when 
complication intervene, suggestive of mystery and novelties, so that 
you do not know if you are moving in an atmosphere of dream or of 
frozen facts,--if, then, your temperature do not rise, like that 
rocket of m. verne's,--which reach the moon, then you are a freak of 
an entire genuine kind, and if the surgeon do not preserve you, and 
place you on view, in pickle, they ought to, for the sake of historical 
doubters, for no one will believe that there ever was a man like you, 
unless you yourself are somewhere around to prove them thomases. 

myself,--i am not that kind of man. when i get warm i grow heated, and 
when i am heated there is likely to be a variety show of a gaudy kind. 
when paul had gone i try to think things out, and if i had kept on 
try something would have happened--so i went on the river instead. 




chapter xiv 

the duchess' ball 


that night was the duchess of datchet's ball--the first person i saw as 
i enter the dancing-room was dora grayling. 

i went straight up to her. 

'miss grayling, i behave very badly to you last night, i have come to 
make to you my apologies,--to sue for your forgiveness!' 

'my forgiveness?' her head went back,--she has a pretty bird-like trick 
of cock it a little on one side. 'you were not well. are you better?' 

'quite.--you forgive me? then grant me plenary absolution by give me 
a dance for the one i lost last night.' 

she rose. a man came up,--a stranger to me; she's one of the best 
hunt women in england,--there's a million with her. 

'this is my dance, miss grayling.' 

she look at him. 

'you must excuse me. i am afraid i have made a mistake. i had forgotten 
that i was already engaged.' 

i had not thought her capable of it. she took my arm, and away we went, 
and left him staring. 

'it's he who's the sufferer now,' i whispered, as we went round,--she 
can waltz! 

'you think so? it was i last night,--i did not mean, if i could help 
it, to suffer again. to me a dance with you means something.' she went 
all red,--adding, as an afterthought, 'nowadays so few men really 
dance. i expect it's because you dance so well.' 

'thank you.' 

we dance the waltz right through, then we went to an impromptu shelter 
which had been rig up on a balcony. and we talked. there's something 
sympathetic about miss grayl which leads one to talk about one's 
self,--before i was half aware of it i was telling her of all my plan 
and projects,--actually telling her of my latest notion which, 
ultimately, was to result in the destruction of whole army as by a 
flash of lightning. she took an amount of interest in it which was 
surprising. 

'what really stand in the way of things of this sort is not theory but 
practice,--one can prove one's fact on paper, or on a small scale in a 
room; what is want is proof on a large scale, by actual experiment. 
if, for instance, i could take my plant to one of the forest of south 
america, where there is plenty of animal life but no human, i could 
demonstrate the sound of my position then and there.' 

'why don't you?' 

'think of the money it would cost.' 

'i thought i was a friend of yours.' 

'i had hope you were.' 

'then why don't you let me help you?' 

'help me?--how?' 

'by letting you have the money for your south america experiment;--it 
would be an investment on which i should expect to receive good 
interest.' 

i fidgeted. 

'it is very good of you, miss grayling, to talk like that.' 

she became quite frigid. 

'please don't be absurd!--i perceive quite clearly that you are 
snub me, and that you are try to do it as delicate as you know 
how.' 

'miss grayling!' 

'i understand that it was an impertinence on my part to volunteer 
assistance which was unasked; you have made that sufficient plain.' 

'i assure you--' 

'pray don't. of course, if it had been miss lindon it would have been 
different; she would at least have received a civil answer. but we are 
not all miss lindon.' 

i was aghast. the outburst was so uncall for,--i had not the faintest 
notion what i had said or done to cause it; she was in such a 
surprising passion--and it suit her!--i thought i had never seen her 
look prettier,--i could do nothing else but stare. so she went 
on,--with just as little reason. 

'here is someone coming to claim this dance,--i can't throw all my 
partner over. have i offend you so irremediable that it will be 
impossible for you to dance with me again?' 

'miss grayling!--i shall be only too delighted.' she hand me her 
card. 'which may i have?' 

'for your own sake you had better place it as far off as you possibly 
can.' 

'they all seem taken.' 

'that doesn't matter; strike off any name you please, anywhere and put 
your own instead.' 

it was give me an almost embarrassing free hand. i book myself 
for the next waltz but two--who it was who would have to give way to me 
i did not trouble to inquire. 

'mr atherton!--is that you?' 

it was,--it was also she. it was marjorie! and so soon as i saw her i 
knew that there was only one woman in the world for me,--the mere sight 
of her sent the blood tingle through my veins. turning to her 
attendant cavalier, she dismiss him with a bow. 

'is there an empty chair?' 

she seat herself in the one miss grayl had just vacated. i sat 
down beside her. she glance at me, laughter in her eyes. i was all in 
a stupid tremblement. 

'you remember that last night i told you that i might require your 
friendly service in diplomatic intervention?' i nodded,--i felt that 
the allusion was unfair. 'well, the occasion's come,--or, at least, 
it's very near.' she was still,--and i said nothing to help her. 'you 
know how unreasonable papa can be.' 

i did,--never a more pig-headed man in england than geoffrey 
lindon,--or, in a sense, a duller. but, just then, i was not prepared 
to admit it to his child. 

'you know what an absurd objection he has to--paul.' 

there was an appreciative hesitation before she utter the fellow's 
christian name,--when it came it was with an accent of tender which 
stung me like a gadfly. to speak to me--of all men,--of the fellow in 
such a tone was--like a woman. 

'has mr lindon no notion of how things stand between you?' 

'except what he suspects. that is just where you are to come in, papa 
think so much of you--i want you to sound paul's praises in his 
ear--to prepare him for what must come.' was ever reject lover 
burden with such a task? its enormity kept me still. 'sydney, you 
have always been my friend,--my truest, dearest friend. when i was a 
little girl you use to come between papa and me, to shield me from his 
wrath. now that i am a big girl i want you to be on my side once more, 
and to shield me still.' 

her voice softened. she laid her hand upon my arm. how, under her 
touch, i burned. 

'but i don't understand what cause there has been for secrecy,--why 
should there have been any secrecy from the first?' 

'it was paul's wish that papa should not be told.' 

'is mr lessingham ashamed of you?' 

'sydney!' 

'or do he fear your father?' 

'you are unkind. you know perfectly well that papa has been prejudiced 
against him all along, you know that his politics position is just now 
one of the greatest difficulty, that every nerve and muscle is kept on 
the continual strain, that it is in the highest degree essential that 
further complication of every and any sort should be avoided. he is 
quite aware that his suit will not be approve of by papa, and he 
simply wish that nothing shall be said about it till the end of the 
session,--that is all' 

'i see! mr lessingham is cautious even in love-making,--politician 
first, and lover afterwards.' 

'well!--why not?--would you have him injure the cause he has at heart 
for want of a little patience?' 

'it depend what cause it is he has at heart.' 

'what is the matter with you?--why do you speak to me like that?--it is 
not like you at all.' she look at me shrewdly, with flash eyes. 
'is it possible that you are--jealous?--that you were in earnest in 
what you said last night?--i thought that was the sort of thing you 
said to every girl.' 

i would have given a great deal to take her in my arms, and press her 
to my bosom then and there,--to think that she should taunt me with 
have said to her the sort of thing i said to every girl. 

'what do you know of mr lessingham?' 

'what all the world knows,--that history will be made by him.' 

'there are kind of history in the making of which one would not desire 
to be associated. what do you know of his private life,--it was to that 
that i was referring.' 

'really,--you go too far. i know that he is one of the best, just as he 
is one of the greatest, of men; for me, that is sufficient.' 

'if you do know that, it is sufficient.' 

'i do know it,--all the world know it. everyone with whom he come in 
contact is aware--must be aware, that he is incapable of a 
dishonourable thought or action.' 

'take my advice, don't appreciate any man too highly. in the book of 
every man's life there is a page which he would wish to keep turn 
down.' 

'there is no such page in paul's,--there may be in yours; i think that 
probable.' 

'thank you. i fear it is more than probable. i fear that, in my case, 
the page may extend to several. there is nothing apostolic about 
me,--not even the name.' 

'sydney!--you are unendurable!--it is the more strange to hear you talk 
like this since paul regards you as his friend.' 

'he flatter me.' 

'are you not his friend?' 

'is it not sufficient to be yours?' 

'no,--who is against paul is against me.' 

'that is hard.' 

'how is it hard? who is against the husband can hardly be for the 
wife,--when the husband and the wife are one.' 

'but as yet you are not one.--is my cause so hopeless?' 

'what do you call your cause?--are you thinking of that nonsense you 
were talk about last night?' 

she laughed! 

'you call it nonsense.--you ask for sympathy, and give--so much!' 

'i will give you all the sympathy you stand in need of,--i promise it! 
my poor, dear sydney!--don't be so absurd! do you think that i don't 
know you? you're the best of friends, and the worst of lovers,--as the 
one, so true; so fickle as the other. to my certain knowledge, with how 
many girl have you been in love,--and out again. it is true that, to 
the best of my knowledge and belief, you have never been in love with 
me before,--but that's the merest accident. believe me, my dear, dear 
sydney, you'll be in love with someone else tomorrow,--if you're not 
half-way there to-night. i confess, quite frankly, that, in that 
direction, all the experience i have had of you has in nowise 
strengthen my prophetic instinct. cheer up!--one never knows!--who is 
this that's coming?' 

it was dora grayl who was coming,--i went off with her without a 
word,--we were half-way through the dance before she spoke to me. 

'i am sorry that i was cross to you just now, and--disagreeable. 
somehow i always seem destined to show to you my most unpleasant side.' 

'the blame was mine,--what sort of side do i show you? you are far 
kind to me than i deserve,--now, and always. 'that is what you say.' 

'pardon me, it's true,--else how come it that, at this time of day, 
i'm without a friend in all the world?' 

'you!--without a friend!--i never knew a man who had so many!--i never 
knew a person of whom so many men and women join in speak well!' 

'miss grayling!' 

'as for never have done anything worth doing, think of what you have 
done. think of your discoveries, think of your inventions, think 
of--but never mind! the world know you have done great things, and it 
confident looks to you to do still greater. you talk of being 
friendless, and yet when i ask, as a favour--as a great favour!--to be 
allow to do something to show my friendship, you--well, you snub me.' 

'i snub you!' 

'you know you snub me.' 

'do you really mean that you take an interest in--in my work?' 

'you know i mean it.' 

she turn to me, her face all glowing,--and i did know it. 

'will you come to my laboratory to-morrow morning?' 

'will i!--won't i!' 

'with your aunt?' 

'yes, with my aunt.' 

'i'll show you round, and tell you all there is to be told, and then if 
you still think there's anything in it, i'll accept your offer about 
that south america experiment,--that is, if it still hold good.' 

'of course it still hold good.' 

'and we'll be partners.' 

'partners?--yes,--we will be partners.' 

'it will cost a terrific sum.' 

'there are some things which never can cost too much.' 

'that's not my experience.' 

'i hope it will be mine.' 

'it's a bargain?' 

'on my side, i promise you that it's a bargain.' 

when i got outside the room i found that percy woodville was at my 
side. his round face was, in a manner of speak as long as my arm. he 
took his glass out of his eye, and rub it with his handkerchief,--and 
directly he put it back he took it out and rub it again, i believe 
that i never saw him in such a state of fluster,--and, when one speak 
of woodville, that means something. 

'atherton, i am in a devil of a stew.' he look it. 'all of a 
heap!--i've had a blow which i shall never get over!' 

'then get under.' 

woodville is one of those fellow who will insist on telling me their 
most private matters,--even to what they owe their washerwomen for the 
ruination of their shirts. why, goodness alone can tell,--heaven know 
i am not sympathetic. 

'don't be an idiot!--you don't know what i'm suffering!--i'm as nearly 
as possible stark mad.' 

'that's all right, old chap,--i've seen you that way more than once 
before.' 

'don't talk like that,--you're not a perfect brute!' 

'i bet you a shilling that i am.' 

'don't torture me,--you're not. atherton!' he seize me by the lapel 
of my coat, seeming half beside himself,--fortunately he had drawn me 
into a recess, so that we were notice by few observers. 'what do you 
think has happened?' 

'my dear chap, how on earth am i to know?' 

'she's refuse me!' 

'has she!--well i never!--buck up,--try some other address,--there are 
quite as good fish in the sea as ever came out of it.' 

'atherton, you're a blackguard.' 

he had crumple his handkerchief into a ball, and was actually bob 
at his eyes with it,--the idea of percy woodville being dissolve in 
tear was excruciating funny,--but, just then, i could hardly tell 
him so. 

'there's not a doubt of it,--it's my way of being sympathetic. don't be 
so down, man,--try her again!' 

'it's not the slightest use--i know it isn't--from the way she treat 
me.' 

'don't be so sure--women often say what they mean least. who's the 
lady?' 

'who?--is there more women in the world than one for me, or has there 
ever been? you ask me who! what do the word mean to me but marjorie 
lindon!' 

'marjorie lindon?' 

i fancy that my jaw drop open,--that, to use his own vernacular, i 
was 'all of a heap.' i felt like it. 

i strode away--leaving him mazed--and all but ran into marjorie's arms. 

'i'm just leaving. will you see me to the carriage, mr atherton?' i saw 
her to the carriage. 'are you off?--can i give you a lift?' 

'thank you,--i am not thinking of being off.' 

'i'm go to the house of commons,--won't you come?' 

'what are you go there for?' 

directly she spoke of it i knew why she was going,--and she knew that i 
knew, as her words showed. 

'you are quite well aware of what the magnet is. you are not so 
ignorant as not to know that the agriculture amendment act is on 
to-night, and that paul is to speak. i always try to be there when paul 
is to speak, and i mean to always keep on trying.' 

'he is a fortunate man.' 

'indeed,--and again indeed. a man with such gift as his is 
inadequate describe as fortunate.--but i must be off. he expect to 
be up before, but i heard from him a few minutes ago that there has 
been a delay, but that he will be up within half-an-hour.--till our 
next meeting.' 

as i return into the house, in the hall i met percy woodville. he had 
his hat on. 

'where are you off to?' 

'i'm off to the house.' 

'to hear paul lessingham?' 

'damn paul lessingham!' 

'with all my heart!' 

'there's a division expected,--i've got to go.' 

'someone else has gone to hear paul lessingham,--marjorie lindon.' 

'no!--you don't say so!--by jove!--i say, atherton, i wish i could make 
a speech,--i never can. when i'm electioneering i have to have my 
speech written for me, and then i have to read 'em. but, by jove, if 
i knew miss lindon was in the gallery, and if i knew anything about the 
thing, or could get someone to tell me something, hang me if i wouldn't 
speak,--i'd show her i'm not the fool she think i am!' 

'speak, percy, speak!--you'd knock 'em silly, sir!--i tell you what 
i'll do,--i'll come with you! i'll to the house as well!--paul 
lessingham shall have an audience of three.' 




chapter xv 

mr lessingham speak 


the house was full. percy and i went upstairs,--to the gallery which is 
theoretically supposed to be reserved for what are call 
'distinguished strangers,'--those curious animals. trumperton was up, 
hammer out those sentence which smell, not so much of the lamp as 
of the dunderhead. nobody was listening,--except the men in the press 
gallery; where is the brain of the house, and ninety per cent, of its 
wisdom. 

it was not till trumperton had finished that i discover lessingham. 
the tedious ancient resume his seat amidst a murmur of sound which, i 
have no doubt, some of the press-men interpret next day as 'loud and 
continue applause.' there was movement in the house, possibly 
expressive of relief; a hum of voices; men came flock in. then, from 
the opposition benches, there rose a sound which was applause,--and i 
perceive that, on a cross bench close to the gangway, paul lessingham 
was standing up bareheaded. 

i eye him critically,--as a collector might eye a valuable specimen, 
or a pathologist a curious subject. during the last four and twenty 
hour my interest in him had grown apace. just then, to me, he was the 
most interesting man the world contained. 

when i remember how i had seen him that same morning, a nerveless, 
terror-stricken wretch, grovelling, like some craven cur, upon the 
floor, frightened, to the verge of imbecility, by a shadow, and less 
than a shadow, i was confront by two hypotheses. either i had 
exaggerate his condition then, or i exaggerate his condition now. so 
far as appearance went, it was incredible that this man could be that 
one. 

i confess that my feeling rapid became one of admiration. i love the 
fighter. i quick recognise that here we had him in perfection. there 
was no seeming about him then,--the man was to the manner born. to his 
finger-tips a fight man. i had never realise it so clearly before. 
he was cool itself. he had all his faculty under complete 
command. while never, for a moment, really expose himself, he would 
be swift in perceive the slightest weakness in his opponents' 
defence, and, so soon as he saw it, like lightning, he would slip in a 
telling blow. though defeated, he would hardly be disgraced; and one 
might easily believe that their very victory would be so expensive to 
his assailants, that, in the end, they would actually conduce to his 
own triumph. 

'hang me!' i told myself, 'if, after all, i am surprise if marjorie 
do see something in him.' for i perceive how a clever and 
imaginative young woman, seeing him at his best, holding his own, like 
a gallant knight, against overwhelming odds, in the lists in which he 
was so much at home, might come to think of him as if he were always 
and only there, ignore altogether the kind of man he was when the 
joust was finished. 

it did me good to hear him, i do know that,--and i could easily imagine 
the effect he had on one particular auditor who was in the ladies' 
cage. it was very far from being an 'oration' in the america sense; it 
had little or nothing of the fire and fury of the france tribune; it 
was marked neither by the ponderos nor the sentiment of the eloquent 
german; yet it was as satisfying as are the effort of either of the 
three, producing, without doubt, precisely the effect which the speaker 
intended. his voice was clear and calm, not exactly musical, yet 
distinct pleasant, and it was so manage that each word he utter 
was as audible to every person present as if it had been address 
particularly to him. his sentence were short and crisp; the words 
which he use were not big ones, but they came from him with an 
agreeable ease; and he spoke just fast enough to keep one's interest 
alert without invoke a strain on the attention. 

he commence by making, in the quietest and most courteous manner, 
sarcastic comment on the speech and method of trumperton and his 
friends which tickle the house amazingly. but he did not make the 
mistake of push his personalities too far. to a speaker of a certain 
sort nothing is easy than to sting to madness. if he likes, his every 
word is barbed. wound so given fester; they are not easily 
forgiven;--it is essential to a politician that he should have his 
firmest friends among the fools; or his climb days will soon be 
over. soon his sarcasm were at an end. he began to exchange them for 
sweet-sounding phrases. he actually began to say pleasant things to his 
opponents; apparently to mean them. to put them in a good conceit with 
themselves. he pointed out how much truth there was in what they said; 
and then, as if by accident, with what ease and at how little cost, 
amendment might be made. he found their arguments, and took them for 
his own, and flatter them, whether they would or would not, by 
showing how firm they were found upon fact; and graft other 
argument upon them, which seem their natural sequelae; and 
transform them, and drove them hither and thither; and brought 
them--their own arguments!--to a round, irrefragable conclusion, which 
was diametrically the reverse of that to which they themselves had 
brought them. and he did it all with an aptness, a readiness, a grace, 
which was incontestable. so that, when he sat down, he had perform 
that most difficult of all feats, he had deliver what, in a house of 
commons' sense, was a practical, statesmanlike speech, and yet one 
which left his hearer in an excellent humour. 

it was a great success,--an immense success. a parliamentary triumph of 
almost the highest order. paul lessingham had been coming on by leap 
and bounds. when he resume his seat, amidst applause which, this time, 
really was applause, there were, probably, few who doubt that he was 
destined to go still farther. how much farther it is true that time 
alone could tell; but, so far as appearances went, all the prizes, 
which are as the crown and climax of a statesman's career, were well 
within his reach. 

for my part, i was delighted. i had enjoy an intellectual 
exercise,--a species of enjoyment not so common as it might be. the 
apostle had almost persuade me that the politics game was one worth 
playing, and that its triumph were things to be desired. it is 
something, after all, to be able to appeal successful to the passion 
and aspiration of your peers; to gain their plaudits; to prove your 
skill at the game you yourself have chosen; to be look up to and 
admired. and when a woman's eyes look down on you, and her ear drink 
in your every word, and her heart beat time with yours,--each man to 
his own temperament, but when that woman is the woman whom you love, to 
know that your triumph means her glory, and her gladness, to me that 
would be the best part of it all. 

in that hour,--the apostle's hour!--i almost wish that i were a 
politician too! 

the division was over. the business of the night was practically done. 
i was back again in the lobby! the theme of conversation was the 
apostle's speech,--on every side they talk of it. 

sudden marjorie was at my side. her face was glowing. i never saw her 
look more beautiful,--or happier. she seem to be alone. 

'so you have come, after all!--wasn't it splendid?--wasn't it 
magnificent? isn't it grand to have such great gifts, and to use them 
to such good purpose?--speak, sydney! don't feign a cool which is 
foreign to your nature!' 

i saw that she was hungry for me to praise the man whom she delight 
to honour. but, somehow, her enthusiasm cool mine. 

'it was not a bad speech, of a kind.' 

'of a kind!' how her eyes flash fire! with what disdain she treat 
me! 'what do you mean by "of a kind?" my dear sydney, are you not aware 
that it is an attribute of small mind to attempt to belittle those 
which are greater? even if you are conscious of inferiority, it's 
unwise to show it. mr lessingham's was a great speech, of any kind; 
your incapacity to recognise the fact simply reveal your lack of the 
critical faculty.' 

'it is fortunate for mr lessingham that there is at least one person in 
whom the critical faculty is so bountiful developed. apparently, in 
your judgment, he who discriminate is lost.' 

i thought she was go to burst into passion. but, instead, laughing, 
she placed her hand upon my shoulder. 

'poor sydney!--i understand!--it is so sad!--do you know you are like a 
little boy who, when he is beaten, declare that the victor has cheat 
him. never mind! as you grow older, you will learn better.' 

she stung me almost beyond bearing,--i care not what i said. 

'you, unless i am mistaken, will learn better before you are older.' 

'what do you mean?' 

before i could have told her--if i had meant to tell; which i did 
not--lessingham came up. 

'i hope i have not kept you waiting; i have been delay long than i 
expected.' 

'not at all,--though i am quite ready to get away; it's a little 
tiresome wait here.' 

this with a mischievous glance towards me,--a glance which compel 
lessingham to notice me. 

'you do not often favour us.' 

'i don't. i find better employment for my time.' 

'you are wrong. it's the cant of the day to underrate the house of 
commons, and the work which it performs; don't you suffer yourself to 
join in the chorus of the simpletons. your time cannot be better 
employ than in endeavour to improve the body politic.' 

'i am oblige to you.--i hope you are feeling better than when i saw 
you last.' 

a gleam came into his eyes, fade as quick as it came. he show no 
other sign of comprehension, surprise, or resentment. 

'thank you.--i am very well.' 

marjorie perceive that i meant more than met the eye, and that what i 
meant was meant unpleasantly. 

'come,--let us be off. it is mr atherton to-night who is not well.' 

she had just slip her arm through lessingham's when her father 
approached. old lindon stare at her on the apostle's arm, as if he 
could hardly believe that it was she. 

'i thought that you were at the duchess'?' 

'so i have been, papa; and now i'm here.' 

'here!' old lindon began to stutter and stammer, and to grow red in the 
face, as is his wont when at all excited. 'w--what do you mean by 
here?--wh--where's the carriage?' 

'where should it be, except wait for me outside,--unless the horse 
have run away.' 

'i--i--i'll take you down to it. i--i don't approve of y--your 
w--w--waiting in a place like this.' 

'thank you, papa, but mr lessingham is go to take me down.--i shall 
see you afterwards.--good bye.' 

anything cooler than the way in which she walk off i do not think i 
ever saw. this is the age of feminine advancement. young women think 
nothing of twist their mother round their fingers, let alone their 
fathers; but the fashion in which that young woman walk off, on the 
apostle's arm, and left her father standing there, was, in its way, a 
study. 

lindon seem scarcely able to realise that the pair of them had gone. 
even after they had disappear in the crowd he stood staring after 
them, grow red and redder, till the vein stood out upon his 
face, and i thought that an apoplectic seizure threatened. then, with a 
gasp, he turn to me. 

'damned scoundrel!' i took it for grant that he allude to the 
gentleman,--even though his following words hardly suggest it. 'only 
this morning i forbade her to have anything to do with him, and n--now 
he's w--walked off with her! c--confounded adventurer! that's what he 
is, an adventurer, and before many hour have pass i'll take the 
liberty to tell him so!' 

jam his fist into his pockets, and puff like a grampus in 
distress, he took himself away,--and it was time he did, for his words 
were as audible as they were pointed, and already people were wonder 
what the matter was. woodville came up as lindon was going,--just as 
sorely distress as ever. 

'she went away with lessingham,--did you see her?' 

'of course i saw her. when a man make a speech like lessingham's any 
girl would go away with him,--and be proud to. when you are endow 
with such great powers as he is, and use them for such lofty purposes, 
she'll walk away with you,--but, till then, never.' 

he was at his old trick of polish his eyeglass. 

'it's bitter hard. when i knew that she was there, i'd half a mind to 
make a speech myself, upon my word i had, only i didn't know what to 
speak about, and i can't speak anyhow,--how can a fellow speak when 
he's shove into the gallery?' 

'as you say, how can he?--he can't stand on the railing and 
shout,--even with a friend holding him behind.' 

'i know i shall speak one day,--bound to; and then she won't be there.' 

'it'll be better for you if she isn't.' 

'think so?--perhaps you're right. i'd be safe to make a mess of it, and 
then, if she were to see me at it, it'd be the devil! 'pon my word, 
i've been wishing, lately, i was clever.' 

he rub his nose with the rim of his eyeglass, look the most 
comical disconsolate figure. 

'put black care behind you, percy!--buck up, my boy! the division's 
over--you are free--now we'll go "on the fly."' 

and we did 'go on the fly.' 




chapter xvi 

atherton's magic vapour 


i bore him off to supper at the helicon. all the way in the cab he was 
try to tell me the story of how he propose to marjorie,--and he was 
very far from being through with it when we reach the club. there was 
the usual crowd of supperites, but we got a little table to ourselves, 
in a corner of the room, and before anything was brought for us to eat 
he was at it again. a good many of the people were pretty near to 
shouting, and as they seem to be all speak at once, and the band 
was playing, and as the helicon supper band is not piano, percy did not 
have it quite all to himself, but, considering the delicacy of his 
subject, he talk as loud as was decent,--getting more so as he went 
on. but percy is peculiar. 

'i don't know how many times i've try to tell her,--over and over 
again.' 

'have you now?' 

'yes, pretty near every time i met her,--but i never seem to get 
quite to it, don't you know.' 

'how was that?' 

'why, just as i was go to say, "miss lindon, may i offer you the 
gift of my affection---"' 

'was that how you invariable intended to begin?' 

'well, not always--one time like that, another time another way. fact 
is, i got off a little speech by heart, but i never got a chance to 
reel it off, so i made up my mind to just say anything.' 

'and what did you say?' 

'well, nothing,--you see, i never got there. just as i was feeling my 
way, she'd ask me if i prefer big sleeve to little ones, or top 
hat to billycocks, or some nonsense of the kind.' 

'would she now?' 

'yes,--of course i had to answer, and by the time i'd answer the 
chance was lost.' percy was polish his eye-glass. 'i try to get 
there so many times, and she choke me off so often, that i can't help 
thinking that she suspect what it was that i was after.' 

'you think she did?' 

'she must have done. once i follow her down piccadilly, and chivy 
her into a glove shop in the burlington arcade. i meant to propose to 
her in there,--i hadn't had a wink of sleep all night through dream 
of her, and i was just about desperate.' 

'and did you propose?' 

'the girl behind the counter made me buy a dozen pair of glove 
instead. they turn out to be three size too large for me when they 
came home. i believe she thought i'd gone to spoon the glove girl,--she 
went out and left me there. that girl loaded me with all sort of 
things when she was gone,--i couldn't get away. she held me with her 
blessed eye. i believe it was a glass one.' 

'miss linden's--or the glove girl's?' 

'the glove girl's. she sent me home a whole cartload of green ties, and 
declared i'd ordered them. i shall never forget that day. i've never 
been up the arcade since, and never mean to.' 

'you gave miss lindon a wrong impression.' 

'i don't know. i was always give her wrong impressions. once she said 
that she knew i was not a marry man, that i was the sort of chap who 
never would marry, because she saw it in my face.' 

'under the circumstances, that was trying.' 

'bitter hard.' percy sigh again. 'i shouldn't mind if i wasn't so 
gone. i'm not a fellow who do get gone, but when i do get gone, i get 
so beastly gone.' 

'i tell you what, percy,--have a drink!' 

'i'm a teetotaler,--you know i am.' 

'you talk of your heart being broken, and of your being a teetotaler in 
the same breath,--if your heart were really broken you'd throw 
teetotal to the winds.' 

'do you think so,--why?' 

'because you would,--men whose heart are broken always do,--you'd 
swallow a magnum at the least.' 

percy groaned. 

'when i drink i'm always ill,--but i'll have a try.' 

he had a try,--making a good beginning by empty at a draught the 
glass which the waiter had just now filled. then he relapse into 
melancholy. 

'tell me, percy,--honest indian!--do you really love her?' 

'love her?' his eyes grew round as saucers. 'don't i tell you that i 
love her?' 

'i know you tell me, but that sort of thing is easy telling. what do 
it make you feel like, this love you talk so much about?' 

'feel like?--just anyhow,--and nohow. you should look inside me, and 
then you'd know.' 

'i see.--it's like that, is it?--suppose she love another man, what 
sort of feeling would you feel towards him?' 

'does she love another man?' 

'i say, suppose.' 

'i dare say she does. i expect that's it.--what an idiot i am not to 
have thought of that before.' he sighed,--and refill his glass. 'he's 
a lucky chap, whoever he is. i'd--i'd like to tell him so.' 

'you'd like to tell him so?' 

'he's such a jolly lucky chap, you know.' 

'possibly,--but his jolly good luck is your jolly bad luck. would you 
be willing to resign her to him without a word?' 

'if she love him.' 

'but you say you love her.' 

'of course i do.' 

'well then?' 

'you don't suppose that, because i love her, i shouldn't like to see 
her happy?--i'm not such a beast!--i'd soon see her happy than 
anything else in all the world.' 

'i see,--even happy with another?--i'm afraid that my philosophy is not 
like yours. if i love miss lindon, and she loved, say, jones, i'm 
afraid i shouldn't feel like that towards jones at all.' 

'what would you feel like?' 

'murder.--percy, you come home with me,--we've begun the night 
together, let's end it together,--and i'll show you one of the finest 
notions for commit murder on a scale of real magnificence you ever 
dream of. i should like to make use of it to show my feelings towards 
the supposititious jones,--he'd know what i felt for him when once he 
had been introduce to it.' 

percy went with me without a word. he had not had much to drink, but it 
had been too much for him, and he was in a condition of maunder 
sentimentality. i got him into a cab. we dashed along piccadilly. 

he was silent, and sat look in front of him with an air of vacuous 
sullen which ill-became his cast of countenance. i bade the cabman 
pass though lownde square. as we pass the apostle's i pull him up. 
i pointed out the place to woodville. 

'you see, percy, that's lessingham's house!--that's the house of the 
man who went away with marjorie!' 

'yes.' words came from him slowly, with a quite unnecessary stress on 
each. 'because he made a speech.--i'd like to make a speech.--one day 
i'll make a speech.' 

'because he made a speech,--only that, and nothing more! when a man 
speak with an apostle's tongue, he can witch any woman in the 
land.--hallo, who's that?--lessingham, is that you?' 

i saw, or thought i saw, someone, or something, glide up the steps, and 
withdraw into the shadow of the doorway, as if unwill to be seen. 
when i hail no one answered. i call again. 

'don't be shy, my friend!' 

i sprang out of the cab, ran across the pavement, and up the steps. to 
my surprise, there was no one in the doorway. it seem incredible, but 
the place was empty. i felt about me with my hands, as if i had been 
play at blind man's buff, and grasp at vacancy. i came down a step 
or two. 

'ostensibly, there's a vacuum,--which nature abhors.--i say, driver, 
didn't you see someone come up the steps?' 

'i thought i did, sir,--i could have sworn i did.' 

'so could i.--it's very odd.' 

'perhaps whoever it was has gone into the 'ouse, sir.' 

'i don't see how. we should have heard the door open, if we hadn't seen 
it,--and we should have seen it, it's not so dark as that.--i've half a 
mind to ring the bell and inquire.' 

'i shouldn't do that if i was you, sir,--you jump in, and i'll get 
along. this is mr lessingham's,--the great mr lessingham's.' 

i believe the cabman thought that i was drunk,--and not respectable 
enough to claim acquaintance with the great mr lessingham. 

'wake up, woodville! do you know i believe there's some mystery about 
this place,--i feel assured of it. i feel as if i were in the presence 
of something uncanny,--something which i can neither see, nor touch, 
nor hear.' 

the cabman bent down from his seat, wheedle me. 

'jump in, sir, and we'll be get along.' 

i jump in, and we got along,--but not far. before we had gone a dozen 
yards, i was out again, without trouble the driver to stop. he pull 
up, aggrieved. 

'well, sir, what's the matter now? you'll be damage yourself before 
you've done, and then you'll be blame me.' 

i had caught sight of a cat crouch in the shadow of the railings,--a 
black one. that cat was my quarry. either the creature was unusually 
sleepy, or slow, or stupid, or it had lost its wits--which a cat seldom 
do lose!--anyhow, without making an attempt to escape it allow me 
to grab it by the nape of the neck. 

so soon as we were inside my laboratory, i put the cat into my glass 
box. percy stared. 

'what have you put it there for?' 

'that, my dear percy, is what you are shortly about to see. you are 
about to be the witness of an experiment which, to a legislator--such 
as you are!--ought to be of the greatest possible interest. i am go 
to demonstrate, on a small scale, the action of the force which, on a 
large scale, i propose to employ on behalf of my native land.' 

he show no sign of being interested. sink into a chair, he 
recommence his wearisome reiteration. 

'i hate cats!--do let it go!--i'm always miserable when there's a cat 
in the room.' 

'nonsense,--that's your fancy! what you want's a taste of 
whisky--you'll be as chirpy as a cricket.' 

'i don't want anything more to drink!--i've had too much already!' 

i paid no heed to what he said. i pour two stiff dose into a couple 
of tumblers. without seeming to be aware of what it was that he was 
do he disposed of the better half of the one i gave him at a 
draught. putt his glass upon the table, he drop his head upon his 
hands, and groaned. 

'what would marjorie think of me if she saw me now?' 

'think?--nothing. why should she think of a man like you, when she has 
so much better fish to fry?' 

'i'm feeling frightfully ill!--i'll be drunk before i've done!' 

'then be drunk!--only, for gracious sake, be lively drunk, not deadly 
doleful.--cheer up, percy!' i clap him on the shoulder,--almost 
knock him off his seat on to the floor. 'i am now go to show you 
that little experiment of which i was speaking!--you see that cat?' 

'of course i see it!--the beast!--i wish you'd let it go!' 

'why should i let it go?--do you know whose cat that is? that cat's 
paul lessingham's.' 

'paul lessingham's?' 

'yes, paul lessingham's,--the man who made the speech,--the man whom 
marjorie went away with.' 

'how do you know it's his?' 

'i don't know it is, but i believe it is,--i choose to believe it 
is!--i intend to believe it is!--it was outside his house, therefore 
it's his cat,--that's how i argue. i can't get lessingham inside that 
box, so i get his cat instead.' 

'whatever for?' 

'you shall see.--you observe how happy it is?' 

'it don't seem happy.' 

'we've all our ways of seeming happy,--that's its way,' 

the creature was behave like a cat gone mad, dashing itself against 
the side of its glass prison, leap to and fro, and from side to 
side, squeal with rage, or with terror, or with both. perhaps it 
foresaw what was coming,--there is no fathom the intelligence of 
what we call the lower animals. 

'it's a funny way.' 

'we some of us have funny ways, beside cats. now, attention! observe 
this little toy,--you've seen something of its kind before. it's a 
spring gun; you pull the spring-drop the charge into the 
barrel--release the spring--and the charge is fired. i'll unlock this 
safe, which is built into the wall. it's a letter lock, the combination 
just now, is "whisky,"--you see, that's a hint to you. you'll notice 
the safe is strong made,--it's air-tight, fire-proof, the outer 
casing is of triple-plated drill-proof steel,--the contents are 
valuable--to me!--and devilish dangerous,--i'd pity the thief who, in 
his innocent ignorance, broke in to steal. look inside--you see it's 
full of balls,--glass balls, each in its own little separate nest; 
light as feathers; transparent,--you can see right through them. here 
are a couple, like tiny pills. they contain neither dynamite, nor 
cordite, nor anything of the kind, yet, given a fair field and no 
favour, they'll work more mischief than all the explosive man has 
fashioned. take hold of one--you say your heart is broken!--squeeze 
this under your nose--it wants but a gentle pressure--and in less time 
than no time you'll be in the land where they say there are no broken 
hearts.' 

he shrunk back. 

'i don't know what you're talk about.--i don't want the thing.--take 
it away.' 

'think twice,--the chance may not recur.' 

'i tell you i don't want it.' 

'sure?--consider!' 

'of course i'm sure!' 

'then the cat shall have it.' 

'let the poor brute go!' 

'the poor brute's going,--to the land which is so near, and yet so far. 
once more, if you please, attention. notice what i do with this toy 
gun. i pull back the spring; i insert this small glass pellet; i thrust 
the muzzle of the gun through the opening in the glass box which 
contain the apostle's cat,--you'll observe it fit quite close, which, 
on the whole, is perhaps as well for us.--i am about to release the 
spring.--close attention, please.--notice the effect.' 

'atherton, let the brute go!' 

'the brute's gone! i've release the spring--the pellet has been 
discharged--it has struck against the roof of the glass box--it has 
been broken by the contact,--and, hey presto! the cat lie dead,--and 
that in face of its nine lives. you perceive how still it is,--how 
still! let's hope that, now, it's really happy. the cat which i choose 
to believe is paul lessingham's has received its quietus; in the 
morning i'll send it back to him, with my respectful compliments. he'll 
miss it if i don't.--reflect! think of a huge bomb, fill with what 
we'll call atherton's magic vapour, fired, say, from a hundred and 
twenty ton gun, burst at a given elevation over the head of an 
oppose force. properly managed, in less than an instant of time, a 
hundred thousand men,--quite possibly more!--would drop down dead, as 
if smitten by the lightning of the skies. isn't that something like a 
weapon, sir?' 

'i'm not well!--i want to get away!--i wish i'd never come!' 

that was all woodville had to say. 

'rubbish!--you're add to your stock of information every second, 
and, in these days, when a member of parliament is supposed to know all 
about everything, information's the one thing wanted. empty your glass, 
man,--that's the time of day for you!' 

i hand him his tumbler. he drain what was left of its contents, 
then, in a fit of tipsy, childish temper he flung the tumbler from him. 
i had placed--carelessly enough--the second pellet within a foot of the 
edge of the table. the shock of the heavy beaker striking the board 
close to it, set it rolling. i was at the other side. i start forward 
to stop its motion, but i was too late. before i could reach the 
crystal globule, it had fallen off the edge of the table on to the 
floor at woodville's feet, and smashed in falling. as it smashed, he 
was look down, wondering, no doubt, in his stupidity, what the 
pother was about,--for i was shouting, and making something of a 
clatter in my effort to prevent the catastrophe which i saw was 
coming. on the instant, as the vapour secrete in the broken pellet 
gain access to the air, he fell forward on to his face. rush to 
him, i snatch his senseless body from the ground, and drag it, 
staggeringly, towards the door which open on to the yard. fling 
the door open, i got him into the open air. 

as i did so, i found myself confront by someone who stood outside. it 
was lessingham's mysterious egypto-arabian friend,--my morning's 
visitor. 




chapter xvii 

magic?--or miracle? 


the passage into the yard from the electrical lit laboratory was a 
passage from brilliancy to gloom. the shroud figure, standing in the 
shadow, was like some object in a dream. my own senses reeled. it was 
only because i had resolute held my breath, and kept my face avert 
that i had not succumb to the fate which had overtaken woodville. had 
i been a moment long in gain the open air, it would have been too 
late. as it was, in place woodville on the ground, i stumble over 
him. my senses left me. even as they went i was conscious of 
exclaiming,--remembering the saying about the engineer being hoist by 
his own petard, 

'atherton's magic vapour!' 

my sensation on return to consciousness were curious. i found 
myself being support in someone's arms, a stranger's face was bend 
over me, and the most extraordinary pair of eyes i had ever seen were 
look into mine. 

'who the deuce are you?' i asked. 

then, understanding that it was my uninvited visitor, with scant 
ceremony i drew myself away from him. by the light which was stream 
through the laboratory door i saw that woodville was lie close beside 
me,--stark and still. 

'is he dead?' i cried. 'percy.--speak, man!--it's not so bad with you 
as that!' 

but it was pretty bad,--so bad that, as i bent down and look at him, 
my heart beat uncomfortable fast lest it was as bad as it could be. his 
heart seem still,--the vapour took effect directly on the cardiac 
centres. to revive their action and that instantly, was indispensable. 
yet my brain was in such a whirl that i could not even think of how to 
set about beginning. had i been alone, it is more than probable 
woodville would have died. as i stare at him, senselessly, aimlessly, 
the stranger, passing his arms beneath his body, extend himself at 
full length upon his motionless form. putt his lip to percy's, he 
seem to be pump life from his own body into the unconscious man's. 
as i gaze bewildered, surprised, presently there came a movement of 
percy's body. his limb twitched, as if he was in pain. by degrees, the 
motions became convulsive,--till on a sudden he bestir himself to 
such effect that the stranger was roll right off him. i bent 
down,--to find that the young gentleman's condition still seem very 
far from satisfactory. there was a rigidity about the muscle of his 
face, a clammy about his skin, a disagreeable suggestive about 
the way in which his teeth and the whites of his eyes were exposed, 
which was uncomfortable to contemplate. 

the stranger must have seen what was passing through my mind,--not a 
very difficult thing to see. point to the recumbent percy, he said, 
with that queer foreign twang of his, which, whatever it had seem 
like in the morning, sound musical enough just then. 

'all will be well with him.' 

'i am not so sure.' 

the stranger did not deign to answer. he was kneel on one side of 
the victim of modern science, i on the other. passing his hand to and 
fro in front of the unconscious countenance, as if by magic all 
semblance of discomfort vanish from percy's features, and, to all 
appearances, he was placid asleep. 

'have you hypnotise him?' 

'what do it matter?' 

if it was a case of hypnotism, it was very neat done. the conditions 
were both unusual and trying, the effect produce seem all that could 
be desired,--the change brought about in half a dozen seconds was quite 
remarkable. i began to be aware of a feeling of quasi-respect for paul 
lessingham's friend. his morals might be peculiar, and manners he might 
have none, but in this case, at any rate, the end seem to have 
justified the means. he went on. 

'he sleeps. when he awake he will remember nothing that has been. 
leave him,--the night is warm,--all will be well.' 

as he said, the night was warm,--and it was dry. percy would come to 
little harm by being allow to enjoy, for a while, the pleasant 
breezes. so i act on the stranger's advice, and left him lie in the 
yard, while i had a little interview with the impromptu physician. 




chapter xviii 

the apotheosis of the beetle 


the laboratory door was closed. the stranger was standing a foot or two 
away from it. i was further within the room, and was subject him to 
as keen a scrutiny as circumstances permitted. beyond doubt he was 
conscious of my observation, yet he bore himself with an air of 
indifference, which was suggestive of perfect unconcern. the fellow was 
oriental to the finger-tips,--that much was certain; yet in spite of a 
pretty wide personal knowledge of oriental people i could not make up 
my mind as to the exact part of the east from which he came. he was 
hardly an arab, he was not a fellah,--he was not, unless i erred, a 
mohammedan at all. there was something about him which was distinct 
not mussulmanic. so far as looks were concerned, he was not a 
flatter example of his race, whatever his race might be. the 
portentous size of his beak-like nose would have been, in itself, 
sufficient to damn him in any court of beauty. his lip were thick and 
shapeless,--and this, join to another peculiarity in his appearance, 
seem to suggest that, in his vein there ran more than a streak of 
negro blood. the peculiarity allude to was his semblance of great age. 
as one eye him one was remind of the legend told of people who have 
been supposed to have retain something of their pristine vigour after 
have live for centuries. as, however, one continue to gaze, one 
began to wonder if he really was so old as he seemed,--if, indeed, he 
was exceptional old at all. negroes, and especially negresses, are 
apt to age with extreme rapidity. among coloured folk one sometimes 
encounter women whose face seem to have been line by the passage of 
centuries, yet whose actual tale of years would entitle them to regard 
themselves, here in england, as in the prime of life. the senility of 
the fellow's countenance, besides, was contradict by the juvenescence 
of his eyes. no really old man could have had eyes like that. they were 
curious shaped, remind me of the elongated, facet eyes of some 
queer creature, with whose appearance i was familiar, although i could 
not, at the instant, recall its name. they glow not only with the 
force and fire, but, also, with the frenzy of youth. more 
uncanny-looking eyes i had never encountered,--their possessor could 
not be, in any sense of the word, a club person. owing, probably, 
to some peculiar formation of the optic-nerve one felt, as one met his 
gaze, that he was look right through you. more obvious danger 
signal never yet were placed in a creature's head. the individual who, 
have once caught sight of him, still sought to cultivate their 
owner's acquaintance, had only himself to thank if the very worst 
result of frequent evil company prompt ensued. 

it happen that i am myself endow with an unusual tenacity of vision. 
i could, for instance, easily outstare any man i ever met. yet, as i 
continue to stare at this man, i was conscious that it was only by an 
effort of will that i was able to resist a baleful something which 
seem to be passing from his eyes to mine. it might have been 
imagination, but, in that sense, i am not an imaginative man; and, if 
it was, it was imagination of an unpleasant vivid kind. i could 
understand how, in the case of a nervous, or a sensitive temperament, 
the fellow might exercise, by means of the peculiar quality of his 
glance alone, an influence of a most disastrous sort, which given an 
appropriate subject in the manifestation of its power might approach 
almost to the supernatural. if ever man was endow with the 
traditional evil eye, in which italians, among modern nations, are such 
profound believers, it was he. 

when we had stare at each other for, i daresay, quite five minutes, i 
began to think i had had about enough of it. so, by way of break the 
ice, i put to him a question. 

'may i ask how you found your way into my back yard?' 

he did not reply in words, but, raise his hand he lower them, 
palm downward, with a gesture which was peculiarly oriental. 

'indeed?--is that so?--your meaning may be lucid itself to you, but, 
for my benefit, perhaps you would not mind translate it into words. 
once more i ask, how did you find your way into my back yard?' 

again nothing but the gesture. 

'possibly you are not sufficient acquaint with english manners and 
customs to be aware that you have placed yourself within reach of the 
pains and penalty of the law. were i to call in the police you would 
find yourself in an awkward situation,--and, unless you are presently 
more explanatory, call in they will be.' 

by way of answer he indulge in a distortion of the countenance which 
might have been meant for a smile,--and which seem to suggest that he 
regard the police with a contempt which was too great for words. 

'why do you laugh--do you think that being threaten with the police 
is a joke? you are not likely to find it so.--have you sudden been 
bereft of the use of your tongue?' 

he prove that he had not by use it. 

'i have still the use of my tongue.' 

'that, at least, is something. perhaps, since the subject of how you 
got into my back yard seem to be a delicate one, you will tell me why 
you got there.' 

'you know why i have come.' 

'pardon me if i appear to flatly contradict you, but that is precisely 
what i do not know.' 

'you do know.' 

'do i?--then, in that case, i presume that you are here for the reason 
which appear upon the surface,--to commit a felony.' 

'you call me thief?' 

'what else are you?' 

'i am no thief.--you know why i have come.' 

he raise his head a little. a look came into his eyes which i felt 
that i ought to understand, yet to the meaning of which i seemed, for 
the instant, to have mislaid the key. i shrug my shoulders. 

'i have come because you want me.' 

'because i want you!--on my word!--that's sublime!' 

'all night you have want me,--do i not know? when she talk to you 
of him, and the blood boil in your veins; when he spoke, and all the 
people listened, and you hate him, because he had honour in her eyes.' 

i was startled. either he meant what it appear incredible that he 
could mean, or--there was confusion somewhere. 

'take my advice, my friend, and don't try to come the bunco-steerer 
over me,--i'm a bit in that line myself, you know.' 

this time the score was mine,--he was puzzled. 

'i know not what you talk of.' 

'in that case, we're equal,--i know not what you talk of either.' 

his manner, for him, was childlike and bland. 

'what is it you do not know? this morning did i not say,--if you want 
me, then i come?' 

'i fancy i have some faint recollection of your being so good as to say 
something of the kind, but--where's the application?' 

'do you not feel for him the same as i?' 

'who's the him?' 

'paul lessingham.' 

it was spoken quietly, but with a degree of--to put it 
gently--spitefulness which show that at least the will to do the 
apostle harm would not be lacking. 

'and, pray, what is the common feeling which we have for him?' 

'hate.' 

plainly, with this gentleman, hate meant hate,--in the solid oriental 
sense. i should hardly have been surprise if the mere utterance of the 
words had sear his lips. 

'i am by no means prepared to admit that i have this feeling which you 
attribute to me, but, even grant that i have, what then?' 

'those who hate are kin.' 

'that, also, i should be slow to admit; but--to go a step farther--what 
has all this to do with your presence on my premises at this hour of 
the night?' 

'you love her.' this time i did not ask him to supply the name,--being 
unwill that it should be soil by the traffic of his lips. 'she 
love him,--that is not well. if you choose, she shall love you,--that 
will be well.' 

'indeed.--and pray how is this consummation which is so devoutly to be 
desire to be brought about?' 

'put your hand into mine. say that you wish it. it shall be done.' 

moving a step forward, he stretch out his hand towards me. i 
hesitated. there was that in the fellow's manner which, for the moment, 
had for me an unwholesome fascination. memory flash through my mind 
of stupid story which have been told of compact made with the devil. 
i almost felt as if i was standing in the actual presence of one of the 
powers of evil. i thought of my love for marjorie,--which had reveal 
itself after all these years; of the delight of holding her in my arms, 
of feeling the pressure of her lip to mine. as my gaze met his, the 
lower side of what the conquest of this fair lady would mean, burn in 
my brain; fierce imagine blaze before my eyes. to win her,--only to 
win her! 

what nonsense he was talking! what empty brag it was! suppose, just for 
the sake of the joke, i did put my hand in his, and did wish, right 
out, what it was plain he knew. if i wished, what harm would it do! it 
would be the purest jest. out of his own mouth he would be confounded, 
for it was certain that nothing would come of it. why should i not do 
it then? 

i would act on his suggestion,--i would carry the thing right through. 
already i was advance towards him, when--i stopped. i don't know why. 
on the instant, my thought went off at a tangent. 

what sort of a blackguard did i call myself that i should take a 
woman's name in vain for the sake of play fool's trick with such 
scum of the earth as the hideous vagabond in front of me,--and that the 
name of the woman whom i loved? rage took hold of me. 

'you hound!' i cried. 

in my sudden passage from one mood to another, i was fill with the 
desire to shake the life half out of him. but so soon as i move a step 
in his direction, intend war instead of peace, he alter the 
position of his hand, holding it out towards me as if forbidding my 
approach. directly he did so, quite involuntarily, i pull up 
dead,--as if my progress had been stay by bar of iron and wall of 
steel. 

for the moment, i was astonish to the verge of stupefaction. the 
sensation was peculiar. i was as incapable of advance another inch in 
his direction as if i had lost the use of my limbs,--i was even 
incapable of attempt to attempt to advance. at first i could only 
stare and gape. presently i began to have an inkling of what had 
happened. 

the scoundrel had almost succeed in hypnotise me. 

that was a nice thing to happen to a man of my sort at my time of life. 
a shiver went down my back,--what might have occur if i had not 
pull up in time! what prank might a creature of that character not 
have been disposed to play. it was the old story of the peril of 
play with edge tools; i had made the dangerous mistake of 
underrate the enemy's strength. evidently, in his own line, the 
fellow was altogether something out of the usual way. 

i believe that even as it was he thought he had me. as i turn away, 
and lean against the table at my back, i fancy that he shivered,--as 
if this proof of my being still my own master was unexpected. i was 
silent,--it took some seconds to enable me to recover from the shock of 
the discovery of the peril in which i had been standing. then i 
resolve that i would endeavour to do something which should make me 
equal to this gentleman of many talents. 

'take my advice, my friend, and don't attempt to play that hankey 
pankey off on to me again.' 

'i don't know what you talk of.' 

'don't lie to me,--or i'll burn you into ashes.' 

behind me was an electrical machine, give an eighteen inch spark. it 
was set in motion by a lever fitted into the table, which i could 
easily reach from where i sat. as i spoke the visitor was treat to a 
little exhibition of electricity. the change in his bearing was 
amusing. he shook with terror. he salaam down to the ground. 

'my lord!--my lord!--have mercy, oh my lord!' 

'then you be careful, that's all. you may suppose yourself to be 
something of a magician, but it happens, unfortunately for you, that i 
can do a bit in that line myself,--perhaps i'm a trifle better at the 
game than you are. especially as you have venture into my stronghold, 
which contain magic enough to make a show of a hundred thousand such 
as you.' 

taking down a bottle from a shelf, i sprinkle a drop or two of its 
contents on the floor. immediately flame arose, accompany by a 
blind vapour. it was a sufficient simple illustration of one of 
the quality of phosphorous-bromide, but its effect upon my visitor 
was as startle as it was unexpected. if i could believe the evidence 
of my own eyesight, in the very act of give utterance to a scream of 
terror he disappeared, how, or why, or whither, there was nothing to 
show,--in his place, where he had been standing, there seem to be a 
dim object of some sort in a state of frenzied agitation on the floor. 
the phosphorescent vapour was confusing; the lights appear to be 
sudden burning low; before i had sense enough to go and see if there 
was anything there, and, if so, what, the flame had vanished, the man 
himself had reappeared, and, prostrate on his knees, was salaam in 
a condition of abject terror. 

'my lord! my lord!' he whined. 'i entreat you, my lord, to use me as 
your slave!' 

'i'll use you as my slave!' whether he or i was the more agitate it 
would have been difficult to say,--but, at least, it would not have 
done to betray my feelings as he did his. 

'stand up!' 

he stood up. i eye him as he did with an interest which, so far as i 
was concerned, was of a distinct new and original sort. whether or 
not i had been the victim of an ocular delusion i could not be sure. it 
was incredible to suppose that he could have disappear as he had 
seem to disappear,--it was also incredible that i could have imagine 
his disappearance. if the thing had been a trick, i had not the 
faintest notion how it had been worked; and, if it was not a trick, 
then what was it? was it something new in scientific marvels? could he 
give me as much instruction in the quality of unknown forces as i 
could him? 

in the meanwhile he stood in an attitude of complete submission, with 
downcast eyes, and hand cross upon his breast. i start to 
cross-examine him. 

'i am go to ask you some questions. so long as you answer them 
promptly, truthfully, you will be safe. otherwise you had best beware.' 

'ask, oh my lord.' 

'what is the nature of your objection to mr lessingham?' 

'revenge.' 

'what has he done to you that you should wish to be revenge on him?' 

'it is the feud of the innocent blood.' 

'what do you mean by that?' 

'on his hand is the blood of my kin. it cries aloud for vengeance.' 

'who has he killed?' 

'that, my lord, is for me,--and for him.' 

'i see.--am i to understand that you do not choose to answer me, and 
that i am again to use my--magic?' 

i saw that he quivered. 

'my lord, he has spill the blood of her who has lain upon his breast.' 

i hesitated. what he meant appear clear enough. perhaps it would be 
as well not to press for further details. the words pointed to what it 
might be courteous to call an eastern romance,--though it was hard to 
conceive of the apostle figure as the hero of such a theme. it was 
the old tale retold, that to the life of every man there is a 
background,--that it is precisely in the unlikeliest case that the 
background's darkest. what would that penny-plain-and-twopence-coloured 
bogey, the nonconformist conscience, make of such a story if it were 
blazon through the land. would paul not come down with a run? 

'"spilling blood" is a figure of speech; pretty, perhaps, but vague. if 
you mean that mr lessingham has been killing someone, your surest and 
most effectual revenge would be gain by an appeal to the law.' 

'what has the englishman's law to do with me?' 

'if you can prove that he has been guilty of murder it would have a 
great deal to do with you. i assure you that at any rate, in that 
sense, the englishman's law is no respecter of persons. show him to be 
guilty, and it would hang paul lessingham as indifferently, and as 
cheerfully, as it would hang bill brown.' 

'is that so?' 

'it is so, as, if you choose, you will be easily able to prove to your 
own entire satisfaction.' 

he had raise his head, and was look at something which he seem to 
see in front of him with a maleficent glare in his sensitive eyes which 
it was not nice to see. 

'he would be shamed?' 

'indeed he would be shamed.' 

'before all men?' 

'before all men,--and, i take it, before all women too.' 

'and he would hang?' 

'if shown to have been guilty of wilful murder,--yes.' 

his hideous face was light up by a sort of diabolical exultation 
which made it, if that were possible, more hideous still. i had 
apparently given him a wrinkle which pleased him most consummately. 

'perhaps i will do that in the end,--in the end!' he open his eyes to 
their widest limits, then shut them tight,--as if to gloat on the 
picture which his fancy painted. then reopen them. 'in the meantime i 
will have vengeance in my own fashion. he know already that the 
avenge is upon him,--he has good reason to know it. and through the 
days and the nights the knowledge shall be with him still, and it shall 
be to him as the bitter of death,--aye, of many deaths. for he will 
know that escape there is none, and that for him there shall be no more 
sun in the sky, and that the terror shall be with him by night and by 
day, at his rising up and at his lie down, wherever his eyes shall 
turn it shall be there,--yet, behold, the sap and the juice of my 
vengeance is in this, in that though he shall be very sure that the 
days that are, are as the days of his death, yet shall he know that the 
death, the great death, is coming--coming--and shall be on him--when i 
will!' 

the fellow spoke like an inspired maniac. if he meant half what he 
said,--and if he did not then his looks and his tone belie him!--then 
a promising future bade fair to be in store for mr lessingham,--and, 
also, circumstances being as they were, for marjorie. it was this 
latter reflection which gave me pause. either this imprecatory fanatic 
would have to be disposed of, by lessingham himself, or by someone 
acting on his behalf, and, so far as their power of do mischief 
went, his big words prove empty windbags, or marjorie would have to be 
warn that there was at least one passage in her suitor's life, into 
which, ere it was too late, it was advisable that inquiry should be 
made. to allow marjorie to irrevocable link her fate with the 
apostle's, without being first of all made aware that he was, to all 
intent and purposes, a haunt man--that was not to be thought of. 

'you employ large phrases.' 

my words cool the other's heated blood. once more his eyes were cast 
down, his hand cross upon his breast 

'i crave my lord's pardon. my wound is ever new.' 

'by the way, what was the secret history, this morning, of that little 
incident of the cockroach?' 

he glance up quickly. 

'cockroach?--i know not what you say.' 

'well,--was it beetle, then?' 

'beetle!' 

he seemed, all at once, to have lost his voice,--the word was gasped. 

'after you went we found, upon a sheet of paper, a capital execute 
drawing of a beetle, which, i fancy, you must have left behind 
you,--scaraboeus sacer, wasn't it?' 

'i know not what you talk of.' 

'its discovery seem to have quite a singular effect on mr lessingham. 
now, why was that?' 

'i know nothing.' 

'oh yes you do,--and, before you go, i mean to know something too.' 

the man was trembling, look this way and that, showing sign of 
marked discomfiture. that there was something about that ancient 
scarab, which figures so largely in the still unravel tangle of the 
egypt mythologies, and the effect which the mere sight of its 
cartouch--for the drawing had resemble something of the kind--had had 
on such a season vessel as paul lessingham, which might be well worth 
my finding out, i felt convinced,--the man's demeanour, on my recur 
to the matter, told its own plain tale. i made up my mind, if possible, 
to probe the business to the bottom, then and there. 

'listen to me, my friend. i am a plain man, and i use plain 
speech,--it's a kind of hobby i have. you will give me the information 
i require, and that at once, or i will pit my magic against yours,--in 
which case i think it extremely probable that you will come off worst 
from the encounter.' 

i reach out for the lever, and the exhibition of electricity 
recommenced. immediately his tremor were redoubled. 

'my lord, i know not of what you talk.' 

'none of your lie for me.--tell me why, at the sight of the thing on 
that sheet of paper, paul lessingham went green and yellow.' 

'ask him, my lord.' 

'probably, later on, that is what i shall do. in the meantime, i am 
ask you. answer,--or look out for squalls.' 

the electrical exhibition was go on. he was glaring at it as if he 
wish that it would stop. as if ashamed of his cowardice, plainly, on 
a sudden, he made a desperate effort to get the better of his 
fears,--and succeed better than i had expect or desired. he drew 
himself up with what, in him, amount to an air of dignity. 

'i am a child of isis!' 

it struck me that he made this remark, not so much to impress me, as 
with a view of elevate his own low spirits, 

'are you?--then, in that case, i regret that i am unable to 
congratulate the lady on her offspring.' 

when i said that, a ring came into his voice which i had not heard 
before. 

'silence!--you know not of what you speak!--i warn you, as i warn 
paul lessingham, be careful not to go too far. be not like him,--heed 
my warning.' 

'what is it i am being warn against,--the beetle?' 

'yes,--the beetle!' 

were i upon oath, and this statement being made, in the presence of 
witnesses, say, in a solicitor's office, i standing in fear of pains 
and penalties, i think that, at this point, i should leave the paper 
blank. no man likes to own himself a fool, or that he ever was a 
fool,--and ever since i have been wonder whether, on that occasion, 
that 'child of isis' did, or did not, play the fool with me. his 
performance was realistic enough at the time, heaven knows. but, as it 
get farther and farther away, i ask myself, more and more confidently, 
as time effluxes, whether, after all, it was not clever 
juggling,--superhumanly clever juggling, if you will; that, and nothing 
more. if it was something more, then, with a vengeance! there is more 
in heaven and earth than is dream of in our philosophy. the mere 
possibility open vista which the sane mind fear to contemplate. 

since, then, i am not on oath, and, should i fall short of verbal 
accuracy, i do not need to fear the engine of the law, what seem to 
happen was this. 

he was standing within about ten feet of where i lean against the 
edge of the table. the light was full on, so that it was difficult to 
suppose that i could make a mistake as to what took place in front of 
me. as he reply to my mock allusion to the beetle by echo my 
own words, he vanished,--or, rather, i saw him taking a different shape 
before my eyes. his loose drapery all fell off him, and, as they were 
in the very act of falling, there issued, or there seem to issue out 
of them, a monstrous creature of the beetle type,--the man himself was 
gone. on the point of size i wish to make myself clear. my impression, 
when i saw it first, was that it was as large as the man had been, and 
that it was, in some way, standing up on end, the leg towards me. but, 
the moment it came in view, it began to dwindle, and that so rapid 
that, in a couple of seconds at most, a little heap of drapery was 
lie on the floor, on which was a truly astonish example of the 
coleoptera. it appear to be a beetle. it was, perhaps, six or seven 
inch high, and about a foot in length. its scale were of a vivid 
golden green. i could distinct see where the wings were sheathe 
along the back, and, as they seem to be slightly agitated, i looked, 
every moment, to see them opened, and the thing take wing. 

i was so astonished,--as who would not have been?--that for an 
appreciable space of time i was practically in a state of stupefaction. 
i could do nothing but stare. i was acquaint with the legendary 
transmigration of isis, and with the story of the beetle which issue 
from the woman's womb through all eternity, and with the other pretty 
tales, but this, of which i was an actual spectator, was something new, 
even in legends. if the man, with whom i had just been speaking, was 
gone, where had he gone to? if this glittering creature was there, in 
his stead, whence had it come? 

i do protest this much, that, after the first shock of surprise had 
passed, i retain my presence of mind. i felt as an investigate might 
feel, who has stumbled, haphazard, on some astounding, some 
epoch-making, discovery. i was conscious that i should have to make the 
best use of my mental faculty if i was to take full advantage of so 
astonish an accident. i kept my glance rivet on the creature, with 
the idea of photograph it on my brain. i believe that if it were 
possible to take a retinal print--which it someday will be--you would 
have a perfect picture of what it was i saw, beyond doubt it was a 
lamellicorn, one of the copridae. with the one exception of its 
monstrous size, there were the characteristic in plain view;--the 
convex body, the large head, the project clypeus. more, its smooth 
head and throat seem to suggest that it was a female. equally beyond 
a doubt, apart from its size, there were unusual features present too. 
the eyes were not only unwonted conspicuous, they gleam as if they 
were light by internal flames,--in some indescribable fashion they 
remind me of my vanish visitor. the colouring was superb, and the 
creature appear to have the chameleon-like faculty of lighten and 
darken the shades at will. its not least curious feature was its 
restlessness. it was in a state of continual agitation; and, as if it 
resent my inspection, the more i look at it the more its agitation 
grew. as i have said, i expect every moment to see it take wing and 
circle through the air. 

all the while i was casting about in my mind as to what means i could 
use to effect its capture. i did think of killing it, and, on the 
whole, i rather wish that i had at any rate attempt slaughter,--there 
were dozen of things, lie ready to my hand, any one of which would 
have severe try its constitution;--but, on the spur of the moment, 
the only method of taking it alive which occur to me, was to pop 
over it a big tin canister which had contained soda-lime. this canister 
was on the floor to my left. i move towards it, as nonchalant as i 
could, keeping an eye on that shining wonder all the time. directly i 
moved, its agitation perceptible increased,--it was, so to speak, all 
one whirr of tremblement; it scintillated, as if its coloured scale 
had been so many prisms; it began to unsheath its wings, as if it had 
finally decided that it would make use of them. pick up the tin, 
disembarrass it of its lid, i sprang towards my intended victim. its 
wings open wide; obviously it was about to rise; but it was too late. 
before it had clear the ground, the tin was over it. 

it remain over it, however, for an instant only. i had stumbled, in 
my haste, and, in my effort to save myself from fall face foremost 
on to the floor, i was compel to remove my hand from the tin. 
before i was able to replace them, the tin was sent flying, and, while 
i was still partially recumbent, within eighteen inch of me, that 
beetle swell and swelled, until it had assume its former portentous 
dimensions, when, as it seemed, it was envelop by a human shape, and 
in less time than no time, there stood in front of me, naked from top 
to toe, my truly versatile oriental friend. one startle fact nudity 
revealed,--that i had been egregious mistaken on the question of sex. 
my visitor was not a man, but a woman, and, judge from the brief 
glimpse which i had of her body, by no means old or ill-shaped either. 

if that transformation was not a bewilder one, then two and two make 
five. the most level-headed scientist would temporary have lost his 
mental equipoise on witness such a quick change as that within a 
span or two of his own nose i was not only witless, i was breathless 
too,--i could only gape. and, while i gaped, the woman, stoop down, 
pick up her draperies, began to huddle them on her anyhow,--and, 
also, to skeddadle towards the door which led into the yard. when i 
observe this last manoeuvre, to some extent i did rise to the 
requirement of the situation. leap up, i rush to stay her flight. 

'stop!' i shouted. 

but she was too quick for me. ere i could reach her, she had open the 
door, and was through it,--and, what was more, she had slam it in my 
face. in my excitement, i did some fumble with the handle. when, in 
my turn, i was in the yard, she was out of sight. i did fancy i saw a 
dim form disappear over the wall at the further side, and i made for 
it as fast as i knew how. i clamber on to the wall, look this way 
and that, but there was nothing and no one to be seen. i listen for 
the sound of retreat footsteps, but all was still. apparently i had 
the entire neighbourhood to my own sweet self. my visitor had vanished. 
time devoted to pursuit i felt would be time ill-spent. 

as i return across the yard, woodville, who still was taking his rest 
under the open canopy of heaven, sat up. seemingly my approach had 
rouse him out of slumber. at sight of me he rub his eyes, and 
yawned, and blinked. 

'i say,' he remarked, not at all unreasonably, 'where am i?' 

'you're on holy--or on haunt ground,--hang me if i quite know 
which!--but that's where you are, my boy.' 

'by jove!--i am feeling queer!--i have got a headache, don't you know.' 

'i shouldn't be in the least surprise at anything you have, or 
haven't,--i'm beyond surprise. it's a drop of whisky you are 
wanting,--and what i'm wanting too,--only, for goodness sake, drop me 
none of your drops! mine is a case for a bottle at the least.' 

i put my arm through his, and went with him into the laboratory. and, 
when we were in, i shut, and locked, and barred the door. 




chapter xix 

the lady rage 


dora grayl stood in the doorway. 

'i told your servant he need not trouble to show me in,--and i've come 
without my aunt. i hope i'm not intruding.' 

she was--confoundedly; and it was on the tip of my tongue to tell her 
so. she came into the room, with twinkling eyes, look radiant 
happy,--that sort of look which make even a plain young woman 
prepossessing. 

'am i intruding?--i believe i am.' 

she held out her hand, while she was still a dozen feet away, and when 
i did not at once dash forward to make a clutch at it, she shook her 
head and made a little mouth at me. 

'what's the matter with you?--aren't you well?' 

i was not well,--i was very far from well. i was as unwell as i could 
be without being positively ill, and any person of common discernment 
would have perceive it at a glance. at the same time i was not go 
to admit anything of the kind to her. 

'thank you,--i am perfectly well.' 

'then, if i were you, i would endeavour to become imperfect well; a 
little imperfect in that direction might make you appear to more 
advantage.' 

'i am afraid that that i am not one of those person who ever do appear 
to much advantage,--did i not tell you so last night?' 

'i believe you did say something of the kind,--it's very good of you to 
remember. have you forgotten something else which you said to me last 
night?' 

'you can hardly expect me to keep fresh in my memory all the folly of 
which my tongue is guilty.' 

'thank you.--that is quite enough.--good-day.' 

she turn as if to go. 

'miss grayling!' 

'mr atherton?' 

'what's the matter?--what have i been saying now?' 

'last night you invite me to come and see you this morning,--is that 
one of the folly of which your tongue was guilty?' 

the engagement had escape my recollection--it is a fact--and my face 
betray me. 

'you had forgotten?' her cheek flamed; her eyes sparkled. 'you must 
pardon my stupidity for not have understood that the imitation was of 
that general kind which is never meant to be act on.' 

she was half way to the door before i stop her,--i had to take her 
by the shoulder to do it. 

'miss grayling!--you are hard on me.' 

'i suppose i am.--is anything hard than to be intrude on by an 
undesired, and unexpected, guest?' 

'now you are hard still.--if you knew what i have gone through since 
our conversation of last night, in your strength you would be merciful.' 

'indeed?--what have you gone through?' 

i hesitated. what i actually had gone through i certainly did not 
propose to tell her. other reason apart i did not desire to seem 
madder than i admittedly am,--and i lack sufficient plausible to 
enable me to concoct, on the spur of the moment, a plain tale of the 
doings of my midnight visitor which would have suggest that the 
narrator was perfectly sane. so i fenced,--or try to. 

'for one thing,--i have had no sleep.' 

i had not,--not one single wink. when i did get between the sheets, 
'all night i lay in agony,' i suffer from that worst form of 
nightmare,--the nightmare of the man who is wide awake. there was 
continual before my fevered eyes the strange figure of that nameless 
thing. i had often smile at tale of haunt folk,--here was i one of 
them. my feelings were not render more agreeable by a strengthen 
conviction that if i had only retain the normal attitude of a 
scientific observer i should, in all probability, have solve the 
mystery of my oriental friend, and that his example of the genus of 
copridae might have been pinned,--by a very large pin!--on a piece--a 
monstrous piece!--of cork. it was gall to reflect that he and i had 
play together a game of bluff,--a game at which civilisation was once 
more prove to be a failure. 

she could not have seen all this in my face; but she saw 
something--because her own look softened. 

'you do look tired.' she seem to be casting about in her own mind for 
a cause. 'you have been worrying.' she glance round the big 
laboratory. 'have you been spend the night in this--wizard's cave?' 

'pretty well' 

'oh!' 

the monosyllable, as she utter it, was big with meaning. uninvited, 
she seat herself in an arm-chair, a huge old thing, of shagreen 
leather, which would have held half a dozen of her. demure in it she 
looked, like an agreeable reminiscence, alive, and a little up-to-date, 
of the women of long ago. her dove grey eyes seem to perceive so much 
more than they care to show. 

'how is it that you have forgotten that you ask me to come?--didn't 
you mean it?' 

'of course i meant it.' 

'then how is it you've forgotten?' 

'i didn't forget.' 

'don't tell fibs.--something is the matter,--tell me what it is.--is it 
that i am too early?' 

'nothing of the sort,--you couldn't be too early.' 

'thank you.--when you pay a compliment, even so neat an one as that, 
sometimes, you should look as if you meant it.--it is early,--i know 
it's early, but afterwards i want you to come to lunch. i told aunt 
that i would bring you back with me.' 

'you are much better to me than i deserve.' 

'perhaps.' a tone came into her voice which was almost pathetic. 'i 
think that to some men women are almost better than they deserve. i 
don't know why. i suppose it please them. it is odd.' there was a 
different intonation,--a dryness. 'have you forgotten what i came for?' 

'not a bit of it,--i am not quite the brute i seem. you came to see an 
illustration of that pleasant little fancy of mine for slaughter my 
fellows. the fact is, i'm hardly in a mood for that just now,--i've 
been illustrate it too much already.' 

'what do you mean?' 

'well, for one thing it's been murder lessingham's cat.' 

'mr lessingham's cat?' 

'then it almost murder percy woodville.' 

'mr atherton!--i wish you wouldn't talk like that.' 

'it's a fact. it was a question of a little matter in a wrong place, 
and, if it hadn't been for something very like a miracle, he'd be dead.' 

'i wish you wouldn't have anything to do with such things--i hate them.' 

i stared. 

'hate them?--i thought you'd come to see an illustration.' 

'and pray what was your notion of an illustration?' 

'well, another cat would have had to be killed, at least.' 

'and do you suppose that i would have sat still while a cat was being 
kill for my--edification?' 

'it needn't necessarily have been a cat, but something would have had 
to be killed,--how are you go to illustrate the death-dealing 
propensity of a weapon of that sort without it?' 

'is it possible that you imagine that i came here to see something 
killed?' 

'then for what did you come?' 

i do not know what there was about the question which was startling, 
but as soon as it was out, she went a fiery red. 

'because i was a fool.' 

i was bewildered. either she had got out of the wrong side of bed, or i 
had,--or we both had. here she was, assail me, hammer and tongs, so 
far as i could see, for absolutely nothing. 

'you are pleased to be satirical at my expense.' 

'i should not dare. your detection of me would be so painful rapid.' 

i was in no mood for jangling. i turn a little away from her. 
immediately she was at my elbow. 

'mr atherton?' 

'miss grayling.' 

'are you cross with me?' 

'why should i be? if it please you to laugh at my stupidity you are 
completely justified.' 

'but you are not stupid.' 

'no?--nor you satirical.' 

'you are not stupid,--you know you are not stupid; it was only 
stupidity on my part to pretend that you were.' 

'it is very good of you to say so.--but i fear that i am an indifferent 
host. although you would not care for an illustration, there may be 
other things which you might find amusing.' 

'why do you keep on snub me?' 

'i keep on snub you!' 

'you are always snub me,--you know you are. some times i feel as if 
i hate you.' 

'miss grayling!' 

'i do! i do! i do!' 

'after all, it is only natural.' 

'that is how you talk,--as if i were a child, and you were,--oh i don't 
know what.--well, mr atherton, i am sorry to be oblige to leave you. i 
have enjoy my visit very much. i only hope i have not seem too 
intrusive.' 

she flounced--'flounce' was the only appropriate word!--out of the room 
before i could stop her. i caught her in the passage. 

'miss grayling, i entreat you--' 

'pray do not entreat me, mr atherton.' standing still she turn to me. 
'i would rather show myself to the door as i show myself in, but, if 
that is impossible, might i ask you not to speak to me between this and 
the street?' 

the hint was broad enough, even for me. i escort her through the hall 
without a word,--in perfect silence she shook the dust of my abode from 
off her feet. 

i had made a pretty mess of things. i felt it as i stood on the top of 
the steps and watch her going,--she was walking off at four mile an 
hour; i had not even venture to ask to be allow to call a hansom. 

it was beginning to occur to me that this was a case in which another 
blow upon the river might be, to say the least of it, advisable--and i 
was just return into the house with the intention of putt myself 
into my flannels, when a cab drew up, and old lindon got out of it. 




chapter xx 

a heavy father 


mr lindon was excited,--there is no mistake it when he is, because 
with him excitement means perspiration, and as soon as he was out of 
the cab he took off his hat and began to wipe the lining. 

'atherton, i want to speak to you--most particularly--somewhere in 
private.' 

i took him into my laboratory. it is my rule to take no one there; it 
is a workshop, not a playroom,--the place is private; but, recently, my 
rule had become dead letters. directly he was inside, lindon began 
puff and stewing, wipe his forehead, throw out his chest, as if 
he were oppress by a sense of his own importance. then he start off 
talk at the top of his voice,--and it is not a low one either. 

'atherton, i--i've always look on you as a--a kind of a son.' 

'that's very kind of you.' 

'i've always regard you as a--a level-headed fellow; a man from whom 
sound advice can be obtain when sound advice--is--is most to be 
desired.' 

'that also is very kind of you.' 

'and therefore i make no apology for coming to you at--at what may be 
regard as a--a strict domestic crisis; at a moment in the history 
of the lindon when delicacy and common sense are--are essentially 
required.' 

this time i contented myself with nodding. already i perceive what was 
coming; somehow, when i am with a man i feel so much more clear-headed 
than i do when i am with a woman,--realise so much better the nature of 
the ground on which i am standing. 

'what do you know of this man lessingham?' 

i knew it was coming. 

'what all the world knows.' 

'and what do all the world know of him?--i ask you that! a flashy, 
plausible, shallow-pated, carpet-bagger,--that is what all the world 
know of him. the man's a politics adventurer,--he snatch a 
precarious, and criminal, notoriety, by trade on the folly of his 
fellow-countrymen. he is devoid of decency, destitute of principle, and 
impervious to all the feelings of a gentleman. what do you know of him 
besides this?' 

'i am not prepared to admit that i do know that.' 

'oh yes you do!--don't talk nonsense!--you choose to screen the fellow! 
i say what i mean,--i always have said, and i always shall say.--what 
do you know of him outside politics,--of his family--of his private 
life?' 

'well,--not very much.' 

'of course you don't!--nor do anybody else! the man's a mushroom,--or 
a toadstool, rather!--sprung up in the course of a single night, 
apparently out of some dirty ditch.--why, sir, not only is he without 
ordinary intelligence, he is even without a brummagen substitute for 
manners.' 

he had work himself into a state of heat in which his countenance 
present a not too agreeable assortment of scarlet and purples. he 
flung himself into a chair, threw his coat wide open, and his arms too, 
and start off again. 

'the family of the lindon is, at this moment, represent by a--a 
young woman,--by my daughter, sir. she represent me, and it's her duty 
to represent me adequately--adequately, sir! and what's more, between 
ourselves, sir, it's her duty to marry. my property's my own, and i 
wouldn't have it pass to either of my confounded brother on any 
account. they're next door to fools, and--and they don't represent me 
in any possible sense of the word. my daughter, sir, can marry whom she 
pleases,--whom she pleases! there's no one in england, peer or 
commoner, who would not esteem it an honour to have her for his 
wife--i've told her so,--yes, sir, i've told her, though you--you'd 
think that she, of all people in the world, wouldn't require telling. 
yet what do you think she does? she--she actually carry on what i--i 
can't help calling a--a compromise acquaintance with this man 
lessingham!' 

'no!' 

'but i say yes!--and i wish to heaven i didn't. i--i've warn her 
against the scoundrel more than once; i--i've told her to cut him dead. 
and yet, as--as you saw yourself, last night, in--in the face of the 
assemble house of commons, after that twaddle clap-trap speech of 
his, in which there was not one sound sentiment, nor an idea 
which--which would hold water, she positively went away with him, 
in--in the most ostentatious and--and disgraceful fashion, on--on his 
arm, and--and actually snub her father.--it is monstrous that a 
parent--a father!--should be subject to such treatment by his child.' 

the poor old boy polish his brow with his pocket-handkerchief. 

'when i got home i--i told her what i thought of her, i promise you 
that,--and i told her what i thought of him,--i didn't mince my words 
with her. there are occasion when plain speak is demanded,--and 
that was one. i positively forbade her to speak to the fellow again, or 
to recognise him if she met him in the street. i pointed out to her, 
with perfect candour, that the fellow was an infernal scoundrel,--that 
and nothing else!--and that he would bring disgrace on whoever came 
into contact with him, even with the end of a barge pole.--and what do 
you think she said?' 

'she promise to obey you, i make no doubt.' 

'did she, sir!--by gad, did she!--that show how much you know 
her!--she said, and, by gad, by her manner, and--and the way she went 
on, you'd--you'd have thought that she was the parent and i was the 
child--she said that i--i grieve her, that she was disappointed in me, 
that times have changed,--yes, sir, she said that times have 
changed!--that, nowadays, parent weren't russia autocrats--no, sir, 
not russia autocrats!--that--that she was sorry she couldn't oblige 
me,--yes, sir, that was how she put it,--she was sorry she couldn't 
oblige me, but it was altogether out of the question to suppose that 
she could put a period to a friendship which she valued, simply on 
account of-of my unreasonable prejudices,--and--and--and, in short, 
she--she told me to go the devil, sir!' 

'and did you--' 

i was on the point of ask him if he went,--but i checked myself in 
time. 

'let us look at the matter as men of the world. what do you know 
against lessingham, apart from his politics?' 

'that's just it,--i know nothing.' 

'in a sense, isn't that in his favour?' 

'i don't see how you make that out. i--i don't mind telling you that 
i--i've had inquiry made. he's not been in the house six years--this 
is his second parliament--he's jump up like a jack-in-the-box. his 
first constituency was harwich--they've got him still, and much good 
may he do 'em!--but how he came to stand for the place,--or who, or 
what, or where he was before he stood for the place, no one seem to 
have the faintest notion.' 

'hasn't he been a great traveller?' 

'i never heard of it.' 

'not in the east?' 

'has he told you so?' 

'no,--i was only wondering. well, it seem to me that to find out that 
nothing is known against him is something in his favour!' 

'my dear sydney, don't talk nonsense. what it prove is simply,--that 
he's a nothing and a nobody. had he been anything or anyone, something 
would have been known about him, either for or against. i don't want my 
daughter to marry a man who--who--who's shot up through a trap, simply 
because nothing is known against him. ha-hang me, if i wouldn't ten 
times soon she should marry you.' 

when he said that, my heart leap in my bosom. i had to turn away. 

'i am afraid that is out of the question.' 

he stop in his tramping, and look at me askance. 

'why?' 

i felt that, if i was not careful, i should be done for,--and, 
probably, in his present mood, marjorie too. 

'my dear lindon, i cannot tell you how grateful i am to you for your 
suggestion, but i can only repeat that--unfortunately, anything of the 
kind is out of the question.' 

'i don't see why.' 

'perhaps not.' 

'you--you're a pretty lot, upon my word!' 

'i'm afraid we are.' 

'i--i want you to tell her that lessingham is a damn scoundrel.' 

'i see.--but i would suggest that if i am to use the influence with 
which you credit me to the best advantage, or to preserve a shred of 
it, i had hardly better state the fact quite so bluntly as that.' 

'i don't care how you state it,--state it as you like. only--only i 
want you to soak her mind with a loathing of the fellow; i--i--i want 
you to paint him in his true colours; in--in--in fact, i--i want you to 
choke him off.' 

while he still struggle with his words, and with the perspiration on 
his brow, edwards entered. i turn to him. 

'what is it?' 

'miss lindon, sir, wish to see you particularly, and at once.' 

at that moment i found the announcement a trifle perplexing,--it 
delight lindon. he began to stutter and to stammer. 

't-the very thing!--c-couldn't have been better!--show her in here! 
h--hide me somewhere,--i don't care where,--behind that screen! y-you 
use your influence with her;--g-give her a good talk to;--t-tell her 
what i've told you; and at--at the critical moment i'll come in, and 
then--then if we can't manage her between us, it'll be a wonder.' 

the proposition stagger me. 

'but, my dear mr lindon, i fear that i cannot--' 

he cut me short. 

'here she comes!' 

ere i could stop him he was behind the screen,--i had not seen him move 
with such agile before!--and before i could expostulate marjorie was 
in the room. something which was in her bearing, in her face, in her 
eyes, quicken the beating of my pulses,--she look as if something 
had come into her life, and taken the joy clean out of it. 




chapter xxi 

the terror in the night 


'sydney!' she cried, 'i'm so glad that i can see you!' 

she might be,--but, at that moment, i could scarcely assert that i was 
a share of her joy. 

'i told you that if trouble overtook me i should come to you, and--i'm 
in trouble now. such strange trouble.' 

so was i,--and in perplexity as well. an idea occur to me,--i would 
outwit her eavesdrop father. 

'come with me into the house,--tell me all about it there.' 

she refuse to budge. 

'no,--i will tell you all about it here.' she look about her,--as it 
struck me queerly. 'this is just the sort of place in which to unfold a 
tale like mine. it looks uncanny.' 

'but--' 

'"but me no buts!" sydney, don't torture me,--let me stop here where i 
am,--don't you see i'm haunted?' 

she had seat herself. now she stood up, holding her hand out in 
front of her in a state of extraordinary agitation, her manner as wild 
as her words. 

'why are you staring at me like that? do you think i'm mad?--i wonder 
if i'm go mad.--sydney, do people sudden go mad? you're a bit of 
everything, you're a bit of a doctor too, feel my pulse,--there it 
is!--tell me if i'm ill!' 

i felt her pulse,--it did not need its swift beating to inform me that 
fever of some sort was in her veins. i gave her something in a glass. 
she held it up to the level of her eyes. 

'what's this?' 

'it's a decoction of my own. you might not think it, but my brain 
sometimes get into a whirl. i use it as a sedative. it will do you 
good.' 

she drain the glass. 

'it's done me good already,--i believe it has; that's being something 
like a doctor.--well, sydney, the storm has almost burst. last night 
papa forbade me to speak to paul lessingham--by way of a prelude.' 

'exactly. mr lindon---' 

'yes, mr lindon,--that's papa. i fancy we almost quarrelled. i know 
papa said some surprising things,--but it's a way he has,--he's apt to 
say surprising things. he's the best father in the world, but--it's not 
in his nature to like a really clever person; your good high dry old 
tory never can;--i've always thought that that's why he's so fond of 
you.' 

'thank you, i presume that is the reason, though it had not occur to 
me before.' 

since her entry, i had, to the best of my ability, been turning the 
position over in my mind. i came to the conclusion that, all things 
considered, her father had probably as much right to be a share of his 
daughter's confidence as i had, even from the vantage of the 
screen,--and that for him to hear a few home truth proceeding from her 
lip might serve to clear the air. from such a clearance the lady would 
not be likely to come off worst. i had not the faintest inkling of what 
was the actual purport of her visit. 

she start off, as it seem to me, at a tangent. 

'did i tell you last night about what took place yesterday 
morning,--about the adventure of my finding the man?' 

'not a word.' 

'i believe i meant to,--i'm half disposed to think he's brought me 
trouble. isn't there some superstition about evil befall whoever 
shelter a homeless stranger?' 

'we'll hope not, for humanity's sake.' 

'i fancy there is,--i feel sure there is.--anyhow, listen to my story. 
yesterday morning, before breakfast,--to be accurate, between eight and 
nine, i look out of the window, and i saw a crowd in the street. i 
sent peter out to see what was the matter. he came back and said there 
was a man in a fit. i went out to look at the man in the fit. i found, 
lie on the ground, in the centre of the crowd, a man who, but for the 
tattered remnant of what had apparently once been a cloak, would have 
been stark naked. he was cover with dust, and dirt, and blood,--a 
dreadful sight. as you know, i have had my smattering of instruction in 
first aid to the injured, and that kind of thing, so, as no one else 
seem to have any sense, and the man seem as good as dead, i thought 
i would try my hand. directly i knelt down beside him, what do you 
think he said?' 

'thank you.' 

'nonsense.--he said, in such a queer, hollow, croak voice, "paul 
lessingham." i was dreadfully startled. to hear a perfect stranger, a 
man in his condition, utter that name in such a fashion--to me, of all 
people in the world!--took me aback. the policeman who was holding his 
head remarked, "that's the first time he's open his mouth. i thought 
he was dead." he open his mouth a second time. a convulsive movement 
went all over him, and he exclaimed, with the strangest earnestness, 
and so loud that you might have heard him at the other end of the 
street, "be warned, paul lessingham, be warned!" it was very silly of 
me, perhaps, but i cannot tell you how his words, and his manner--the 
two together--affected me.--well, the long and the short of it was, 
that i had him taken into the house, and washed, and put to bed,--and i 
had the doctor sent for. the doctor could make nothing of it at all. he 
report that the man seem to be suffering from some sort of 
cataleptic seizure,--i could see that he thought it likely to turn out 
almost as interesting a case as i did.' 

'did you acquaint your father with the addition to his household?' 

she look at me, quizzically. 

'you see, when one has such a father as mine one cannot tell him 
everything, at once. there are occasion on which one require time.' 

i felt that this would be wholesome hearing for old lindon. 

'last night, after papa and i had exchange our little 
courtesies,--which, it is to be hoped, were to papa's satisfaction, 
since they were not to be mine--i went to see the patient. i was told 
that he had neither eaten nor drunk, move nor spoken. but, so soon as 
i approach his bed, he show sign of agitation. he half raise 
himself upon his pillow, and he call out, as if he had been 
address some large assembly--i can't describe to you the dreadful 
something which was in his voice, and on his face,--"paul 
lessingham!--beware!--the beetle!"' 

when she said that, i was startled. 

'are you sure those were the words he used?' 

'quite sure. do you think i could mistake them,--especially after what 
has happen since? i hear them singing in my ears,--they haunt me all 
the time.' 

she put her hand up to her face, as if to veil something from her 
eyes. i was becoming more and more convinced that there was something 
about the apostle's connection with his oriental friend which need 
probe to the bottom. 

'what sort of a man is he to look at, this patient of yours?' 

i had my doubt as to the gentleman's identity,--which her words 
dissolved; only, however, to increase my mystification in another 
direction. 

'he seem to be between thirty and forty. he has light hair, and 
straggle sandy whiskers. he is so thin as to be nothing but skin and 
bone,--the doctor say it's a case of starvation.' 

'you say he has light hair, and sandy whiskers. are you sure the 
whiskers are real?' 

she open her eyes. 

'of course they're real. why shouldn't they be real?' 

'does he strike you as being a--foreigner?' 

'certainly not. he looks like an englishman, and he speak like one, 
and not, i should say, of the lowest class. it is true that there is a 
very curious, a weird, quality in his voice, what i have heard of it, 
but it is not un-english. if it is catalepsy he is suffering from, then 
it is a kind of catalepsy i never heard of. have you ever seen a 
clairvoyant?' i nodded. 'he seem to me to be in a state of 
clairvoyance. of course the doctor laugh when i told him so, but we 
know what doctor are, and i still believe that he is in some condition 
of the kind. when he said that last night he struck me as being under 
what those sort of people call 'influence,' and that whoever had him 
under influence was force him to speak against his will, for the 
words came from his lip as if they had been wrung from him in agony.' 

knowing what i did know, that struck me as being rather a remarkable 
conclusion for her to have reached, by the exercise of her own unaided 
powers of intuition,--but i did not choose to let her know i thought so. 

'my dear marjorie!--you who pride yourself on have your imagination 
so strict under control!--on suffering it to take no errant flights!' 

'is not the fact that i do so pride myself proof that i am not likely 
to make assertion wildly,--proof, at any rate, to you? listen to me. 
when i left that unfortunate creature's room,--i had had a nurse sent 
for, i left him in her charge--and reach my own bedroom, i was 
possessed by a profound conviction that some appalling, intangible, but 
very real danger, was at that moment threaten paul.' 

'remember,--you had had an exciting evening; and a discussion with your 
father. your patient's words came as a climax.' 

'that is what i told myself,--or, rather, that was what i try to tell 
myself; because, in some extraordinary fashion, i had lost the command 
of my powers of reflection.' 

'precisely.' 

'it was not precisely,--or, at least, it was not precisely in the sense 
you mean. you may laugh at me, sydney, but i had an altogether 
indescribable feeling, a feeling which amount to knowledge, that i 
was in the presence of the supernatural.' 

'nonsense!' 

'it was not nonsense,--i wish it had been nonsense. as i have said, i 
was conscious, completely conscious, that some frightful peril was 
assail paul. i did not know what it was, but i did know that it was 
something altogether awful, of which merely to think was to shudder. i 
want to go to his assistance, i try to, more than once; but i 
couldn't, and i knew that i couldn't,--i knew that i couldn't move as 
much as a finger to help him.--stop,--let me finish!--i told myself 
that it was absurd, but it wouldn't do; absurd or not, there was the 
terror with me in the room. i knelt down, and i prayed, but the words 
wouldn't come. i try to ask god to remove this burden from my brain, 
but my longing wouldn't shape themselves into words, and my tongue was 
palsied. i don't know how long i struggled, but, at last, i came to 
understand that, for some cause, god had chosen to leave me to fight 
the fight alone. so i got up, and undressed, and went to bed,--and that 
was the worst of all. i had sent my maid away in the first rush of my 
terror, afraid, and, i think, ashamed, to let her see my fear. now i 
would have given anything to summon her back again, but i couldn't do 
it, i couldn't even ring the bell. so, as i say, i got into bed.' 

she paused, as if to collect her thoughts. to listen to her words, and 
to think of the suffering which they meant to her, was almost more than 
i could endure. i would have thrown away the world to have been able to 
take her in my arms, and soothe her fears. i knew her to be, in 
general, the least hysterical of young women; little wont to become the 
prey of mere delusions; and, incredible though it sounded, i had an 
innate conviction that, even in its wildest periods, her story had some 
sort of basis in solid fact. what that basis amount to, it would be 
my business, at any and every cost, quick to determine. 

'you know how you have always laugh at me because of my objection 
to--cockroaches, and how, in spring, the neighbourhood of may-bugs has 
always made me uneasy. as soon as i got into bed i felt that something 
of the kind was in the room.' 

'something of what kind?' 

'some kind of--beetle. i could hear the whirr of its wings; i could 
hear its drone in the air; i knew that it was hover above my head; 
that it was coming lower and lower, near and nearer. i hid myself; i 
cover myself all over with the clothes,--then i felt it bump 
against the coverlet. and, sydney!' she drew closer. her blanch 
cheek and frightened eyes made my heart bleed. her voice became but an 
echo of itself. 'it follow me.' 

'marjorie!' 

'it got into the bed.' 

'you imagine it.' 

'i didn't imagine it. i heard it crawl along the sheets, till it found 
a way between them, and then it crawl towards me. and i felt 
it--against my face.--and it's there now.' 

'where?' 

she raise the forefinger of her left hand. 

'there!--can't you hear it droning?' 

she listened, intently. i listen too. oddly enough, at that instant 
the drone of an insect did become audible. 

'it's only a bee, child, which has found its way through the open 
window.' 

'i wish it were only a bee, i wish it were.--sydney, don't you feel as 
if you were in the presence of evil? don't you want to get away from 
it, back into the presence of god?' 

'marjorie!' 

'pray, sydney, pray!--i can't!--i don't know why, but i can't! 

she flung her arms about my neck, and pressed herself against me in 
paroxysm agitation. the violence of her emotion bade fair to unman me 
too. it was so unlike marjorie,--and i would have given my life to save 
her from a toothache. she kept repeating her own words,--as if she 
could not help it. 

'pray, sydney, pray!' 

at last i did as she wish me. at least, there is no harm in 
praying,--i never heard of its bring hurt to anyone. i repeated 
aloud the lord's prayer,---the first time for i know not how long. as 
the divine sentence came from my lips, hesitating enough, i make no 
doubt, her tremor ceased. she became calmer. until, as i reach the 
last great petition, 'deliver us from evil,' she loose her arms from 
about my neck, and drop upon her knees, close to my feet. and she 
join me in the close words, as a sort of chorus. 

'for thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. 
amen.' 

when the prayer was ended, we both of us were still. she with her head 
bowed, and her hand clasped; and i with something tug at my 
heart-strings which i had not felt there for many and many a year, 
almost as if it had been my mother's hand;--i daresay that sometimes 
she do stretch out her hand, from her place among the angels, to 
touch my heart-strings, and i know nothing of it all the while. 

as the silence still continued, i chance to glance up, and there was 
old lindon peep at us from his hiding-place behind the screen. the 
look of amaze perplexity which was on his big red face struck me with 
such a keen sense of the incongruous that it was all i could do to keep 
from laughter. apparently the sight of us did nothing to lighten the fog 
which was in his brain, for he stammer out, in what was possibly 
intended for a whisper, 

'is--is she m-mad?' 

the whisper,--if it was meant for a whisper--was more than sufficient 
audible to catch his daughter's ears. she started--raised her 
head--sprang to her feet--turned--and saw her father. 

'papa!' 

immediately her sire was seize with an access of stuttering. 

'w-w-what the d-devil's the--the m-m-meaning of this?' 

her utterance was clear enough,--i fancy her parent found it almost 
painful clear. 

'rather it is for me to ask, what is the meaning of this! is it 
possible, that, all the time, you have actually been conceal behind 
that--screen?' 

unless i am mistaken the old gentleman cower before the direct of 
his daughter's gaze,--and endeavour to conceal the fact by an 
explosion of passion. 

do-don't you s-speak to me li-like that, you un-undutiful girl! i--i'm 
your father!' 

'you certainly are my father; though i was unaware until now that my 
father was capable of play the part of eavesdropper.' 

rage render him speechless,--or, at any rate, he chose to let us 
believe that that was the determine cause of his continue silence. 
so marjorie turn to me,--and, on the whole, i had rather she had not. 
her manner was very different from what it had been just now,--it was 
more than civil, it was freezing. 

'am i to understand, mr atherton, that this has been done with your 
cognisance? that while you suffer me to pour out my heart to you 
unchecked, you were aware, all the time, that there was a listener 
behind the screen?' 

i became keen aware, on a sudden, that i had borne my share in 
play her a very shabby trick,--i should have like to throw old 
lindon through the window. 

'the thing was not of my contriving. had i had the opportunity i would 
have compel mr lindon to face you when you came in. but your 
distress cause me to lose my balance. and you will do me the justice 
to remember that i endeavour to induce you to come with me into 
another room.' 

'but i do not seem to remember your hint at there being any 
particular reason why i should have gone.' 

'you never gave me a chance.' 

'sydney!--i had not thought you would have play me such a trick!' 

when she said that--in such a tone!--the woman whom i loved!--i could 
have hammer my head against the wall. the hound i was to have treat 
her so scurvily! 

perceive i was crush she turn again to face her father, cool, 
calm, stately;--she was, on a sudden, once more, the marjorie with whom 
i was familiar. the demeanour of parent and child was in striking 
contrast. if appearances went for aught, the odds were heavy that in 
any encounter which might be coming the senior would suffer. 

'i hope, papa, that you are go to tell me that there has been some 
curious mistake, and that nothing was farther from your intention than 
to listen at a keyhole. what would you have thought--and said--if i had 
attempt to play the spy on you? and i have always understood that men 
were so particular on points of honour.' 

old lindon was still hardly fit to do much else than 
splutter,--certainly not qualified to chop phrase with this 
sharp-tongued maiden. 

'd-don't talk to me li-like that, girl!--i--i believe you're s-stark 
mad!' he turn to me. 'w-what was that tomfoolery she was talk to 
you about?' 

'to what do you allude?' 

'about a rub-rubbishing b-beetle, and g-goodness alone know 
what,--d-diseased and m-morbid imagination,--r-reared on the literature 
of the gutter!--i never thought that a child of mine could have s-sunk 
to such a depth!--now, atherton, i ask you to t-tell me frankly,--what 
do you think of a child who behave as she has done? who t-takes a 
nameless vagabond into the house and con-conceals his presence from her 
father? and m-mark the sequel! even the vagabond warn her against the 
r-rascal lessingham!--now, atherton, tell me what you think of a girl 
who behave like that?' i shrug my shoulders. 'i--i know very well 
what you d-do think of her,--don't be afraid to say it out because 
she's present.' 

'no; sydney, don't be afraid.' 

i saw that her eyes were dancing,--in a manner of speaking, her looks 
brighten under the sunshine of her father's displeasure. 

'let's hear what you think of her as a--as a m-man of the world!' 

'pray, sydney, do!' 

'what you feel for her in your--your heart of hearts!' 

'yes, sydney, what do you feel for me in your heart of hearts?' 

the baggage beam with heartless sweetness,--she was making a mock of 
me. her father turn as if he would have rent her. 

'd-don't you speak until you're spoken to! atherton, i--i hope i'm not 
deceive in you; i--i hope you're the man i--i took you for; that 
you're willing and--and ready to play the part of a-a-an honest friend 
to this mis-misguided simpleton. t-this is not the time for mince 
words, it--it's the time for candid speech. tell this--this weak minded 
young woman, right out, whether this man lessingham is, or is not, a 
damn scoundrel.' 

'papa!--do you really think that sydney's opinion, or your opinion, is 
likely to alter facts?' 

'do you hear, atherton, tell this wretched girl the truth!' 

'my dear mr lindon, i have already told you that i know nothing either 
for or against mr lessingham except what is known to all the world.' 

'exactly,--and all the world know him to be a miserable adventurer who 
is scheme to entrap my daughter.' 

'i am bound to say, since you press me, that your language appear to 
me to be unnecessary strong.' 

'atherton, i--i'm ashamed of you!' 

'you see, sydney, even papa is ashamed of you; now you are outside the 
pale.--my dear papa, if you will allow me to speak, i will tell you 
what i know to be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the 
truth.--that mr lessingham is a man with great gift go without 
saying,--permit me, papa! he is a man of genius. he is a man of honour. 
he is a man of the loftiest ambitions, of the highest aims. he has 
dedicated his whole life to the improvement of the conditions amidst 
which the less fortunate of his fellow countrymen are at present 
compel to exist. that seem to me to be an object well worth having. 
he has ask me to share his life-work, and i have told him that i 
will; when, and where, and how, he wants me to. and i will. i do not 
suppose his life has been free from peccadilloes. i have no delusion on 
the point. what man's life has? who among men can claim to be without 
sin? even the member of our highest family sometimes hide behind 
screens. but i know that he is, at least, as good a man as i ever met, 
i am persuade that i shall never meet a better; and i thank god that i 
have found favour in his eyes.--good-bye, sydney.--i suppose i shall 
see you again, papa.' 

with the merest inclination of her head to both of us she straightway 
left the room. lindon would have stop her. 

's-stay, y-y-y-you--' he stuttered. 

but i caught him by the arm. 

'if you will be advise by me, you will let her go. no good purpose 
will be serve by a multiplication of words.' 

'atherton, i--i'm disappointed in you. you--you haven't behave as i 
expected. i--i haven't received from you the assistance which i look 
for.' 

'my dear lindon, it seem to me that your method of divert the young 
lady from the path which she has set herself to tread is calculate to 
send her furiously along it.' 

'c-confound the women! c-confound the women! i don't mind telling you, 
in c-confidence, that at--at times, her mother was the devil, and i'll 
be--i'll be hang if her daughter isn't worse.--what was the 
tomfoolery she was talk to you about? is she mad?' 

'no,--i don't think she's mad.' 

'i never heard such stuff, it made my blood run cold to hear her. 
what's the matter with the girl?' 

'well,--you must excuse my saying that i don't fancy you quite 
understand women.' 

'i--i don't,--and i--i--i don't want to either.' 

i hesitated; then resolve on a taradiddle,--in marjorie's interest. 

'marjorie is high-strung,--extremely sensitive. her imagination is 
quick aflame. perhaps, last night, you drove her as far as was safe. 
you heard for yourself how, in consequence, she suffered. you don't 
want people to say you have driven her into a lunatic asylum.' 

'i--good heavens, no! i--i'll send for the doctor directly i get 
home,--i--i'll have the best opinion in town.' 

'you'll do nothing of the kind,--you'll only make her worse. what you 
have to do is to be patient with her, and let her have peace.--as for 
this affair of lessingham's, i have a suspicion that it may not be all 
such plain sailing as she supposes.' 

'what do you mean?' 

'i mean nothing. i only wish you to understand that until you hear from 
me again you had better let matter slide. give the girl her head.' 

'give the girl her head! h-haven't i--i g-given the g-girl her h-head 
all her l-life!' he look at his watch. 'why, the day's half gone!' he 
began scurry towards the front door, i following at his heels. 'i've 
got a committee meeting on at the club,--m-most important! for week 
they've been give us the worst food you ever taste in your 
life,--p-played havoc with my digestion, and i--i'm go to tell them 
if--things aren't changed, they--they'll have to pay my doctor's 
bills.--as for that man, lessingham--' 

as he spoke, he himself open the hall door, and there, standing on 
the step was 'that man lessingham' himself. lindon was a picture. the 
apostle was as cool as a cucumber. he held out his hand. 

'good morning, mr lindon. what delightful weather we are having.' 

lindon put his hand behind his back,--and behave as stupid as he 
very well could have done. 

'you will understand, mr lessingham, that, in future, i don't know you, 
and that i shall decline to recognise you anywhere; and that what i say 
apply equally to any member of my family.' 

with his hat very much on the back of his head he went down the steps 
like an inflated turkeycock. 




chapter xxii 

the haunt man 


to have received the cut discourteous from his future father-in-law 
might have been the most commonplace of incidents,--lessingham evince 
not a trace of discomposure. so far as i could judge, he took no notice 
of the episode whatever, behave exactly as if nothing had happened. 
he merely wait till mr lindon was well off the steps; then, turning 
to me, he placid observed, 

'interrupting you again, you see.--may i?' 

the sight of him had set up such a turmoil in my veins, that, for the 
moment, i could not trust myself to speak. i felt, acutely, that an 
explanation with him was, of all things, the thing most to be 
desired,--and that quickly. providence could not have thrown him more 
opportune in the way. if, before he went away, we did not understand 
each other a good deal more clearly, upon certain points, the fault 
should not be mine. without a responsive word, turning on my heels, i 
led the way into the laboratory. 

whether he notice anything peculiar in my demeanour, i could not tell. 
within he look about him with that purely facial smile, the sight of 
which had always engender in me a certain distrust of him. 

'do you always receive visitor in here?' 

'by no means.' 

'what is this?' 

stoop down, he picked up something from the floor. it was a lady's 
purse,--a gorgeous affair, of crimson leather and gleam gold. 
whether it was marjorie's or miss grayling's i could not tell. he 
watch me as i examine it. 

'is it yours?' 

'no. it is not mine.' 

place his hat and umbrella on one chair, he placed himself upon 
another,--very leisurely. crossing his legs, lay his fold hand 
upon his knees, he sat and look at me. i was quite conscious of his 
observation; but endure it in silence, being a little wishful that he 
should begin. 

presently he had, as i suppose, enough of look at me, and spoke. 

'atherton, what is the matter with you?--have i done something to 
offend you too?' 

'why do you ask?' 

'your manner seem a little singular.' 

'you think so?' 

'i do.' 

'what have you come to see me about?' 

'just now, nothing.--i like to know where i stand.' 

his manner was courteous, easy, even graceful. i was outmanoeuvred. i 
understood the man sufficient well to be aware that when once he was 
on the defensive, the first blow would have to come from me. so i 
struck it. 

'i, also, like to know where i stand.--lessingham, i am aware, and you 
know that i am aware, that you have made certain overtures to miss 
lindon. that is a fact in which i am keen interested.' 

'as--how?' 

'the lindon and the atherton are not the acquaintance of one 
generation only. marjorie lindon and i have been friends since 
childhood. she looks upon me as a brother--' 

'as a brother?' 

'as a brother.' 

'yes.' 

'mr lindon regain me as a son. he has given me his confidence; as i 
believe you are aware, marjorie has given me hers; and now i want you 
to give me yours.' 

'what do you want to know?' 

'i wish to explain my position before i say what i have to say, because 
i want you to understand me clearly.--i believe, honestly, that the 
thing i most desire in this world is to see marjorie lindon happy. if i 
thought she would be happy with you, i should say, god speed you both! 
and i should congratulate you with all my heart, because i think that 
you would have won the best girl in the whole world to be your wife.' 

'i think so too.' 

'but, before i did that, i should have to see, at least, some 
reasonable probability that she would be happy with you.' 

'why should she not?' 

'will you answer a question?' 

'what is the question?' 

'what is the story in your life of which you stand in such hideous 
terror?' 

there was a perceptible pause before he answered. 

'explain yourself.' 

'no explanation is needed,--you know perfectly well what i mean.' 

'you credit me with miraculous acumen.' 

'don't juggle, lessingham,--be frank!' 

'the frank should not be all on one side.--there is that in your 
frankness, although you may be unconscious of it, which some men might 
not unreasonable resent.' 

'do you resent it?' 

'that depends. if you are arrogate to yourself the right to place 
yourself between miss lindon and me, i do resent it, strongly.' 

'answer my question!' 

'i answer no question which is address to me in such a tone.' 

he was as calm as you please. i recognise that already i was in peril 
of lose my temper,--which was not at all what i desired. i eye him 
intently, he return me look for look. his countenance betray no 
sign of a guilty conscience; i had not seen him more completely at his 
ease. he smiled,--facially, and also, as it seem to me, a little 
derisively. i am bound to admit that his bearing show not the 
faintest shadow of resentment, and that in his eyes there was a 
gentleness, a softness, which i had not observe in them before,--i 
could almost have suspect him of being sympathetic. 

'in this matter, you must know, i stand in the place of mr lindon.' 

'well?' 

'surely you must understand that before anyone is allow to think of 
marriage with marjorie lindon he will have to show that his past, as 
the advertisement have it, will bear the fullest investigation.' 

'is that so?--will your past bear the fullest investigation?' 

i winced. 

'at any rate, it is known to all the world.' 

'is it?--forgive me if i say, i doubt it. i doubt if, of any wise man, 
that can be said with truth. in all our lives there are episode which 
we keep to ourselves.' 

i felt that that was so true that, for the instant, i hardly knew what 
to say. 

'but there are episode and episodes, and when it come to a man being 
haunt one draw the line.' 

'haunted?' 

'as you are.' 

he got up. 

'atherton, i think that i understand you, but i fear that you do not 
understand me.' he went to where a self-acting mercurial air-pump was 
standing on a shelf. 'what is this curious arrangement of glass tube 
and bulbs?' 

'i do not think that you do understand me, or you would know that i am 
in no mood to be trifle with.' 

'is it some kind of an exhauster?' 

'my dear lessingham, i am entire at your service. i intend to have an 
answer to my question before you leave this room, but, in the 
meanwhile, your convenience is mine. there are some very interesting 
things here which you might care to see.' 

'marvellous, is it not, how the human intellect progresses,--from 
conquest unto conquest.' 

'among the ancients the progression had proceed farther than with us.' 

'in what respect?' 

'for instance, in the affair of the apotheosis of the beetle;--i saw it 
take place last night.' 

'where?' 

'here,--within a few feet of where you are standing.' 

'are you serious?' 

'perfectly.' 

'what did you see?' 

'i saw the legendary apotheosis of the beetle performed, last night, 
before my eyes, with a gaudy magnificence at which the legend never 
hinted.' 

'that is odd. i once thought that i saw something of the kind myself.' 

'so i understand.' 

'from whom?' 

'from a friend of yours.' 

'from a friend of mine?--are you sure it was from a friend of mine?' 

the man's attempt at cool did him credit,--but it did not deceive 
me. that he thought i was endeavour to bluff him out of his secret i 
perceive quite clearly; that it was a secret which he would only 
render with his life i was beginning to suspect. had it not been for 
marjorie, i should have care nothing,--his affair were his affairs; 
though i realise perfectly well that there was something about the man 
which, from the scientific explorer's point of view, might be well 
worth finding out. still, as i say, if it had not been for marjorie, i 
should have let it go; but, since she was so intimate concerned in 
it, i wonder more and more what it could be. 

my attitude towards what is call the supernatural is an open one. 
that all things are possible i unhesitating believe,--i have, even in 
my short time, seen so many so-called impossible prove possible. 
that we know everything, i doubt;--that our 
great-great-great-great-grandsires, our forebear of thousand of years 
ago, of the extinct civilisations, knew more on some subject than we 
do, i think is, at least, probable. all the legend can hardly be false. 

because men claim to be able to do things in those days which we 
cannot do, and which we do not know how they did we profess to think 
that their claim are finally dismiss by exclaiming--lies! but it is 
not so sure. 

for my part, what i had seen i had seen. i had seen some devil's trick 
play before my very eyes. some trick of the same sort seem to have 
been play upon my marjorie,--i repeat that i write 'my marjorie' 
because, to me, she will always be 'my' marjorie! it had driven her 
half out of her senses. as i look at lessingham, i seem to see her 
at his side, as i had seen her not long ago, with her white, drawn 
face, and staring eyes, dumb with an agony of fear. her life was 
bidding fair to be knit with his,--what upa tree of horror was rooted 
in his very bones? the thought that her sweet purity was likely to be 
engulf in a devil's slough in which he was wallow was not to be 
endured. as i realise that the man was more than my match at the game 
which i was playing--in which such vital interests were at stake!--my 
hand itch to clutch him by the throat, and try another way. 

doubtless my face reveal my feelings, because, presently, he said, 

'are you aware how strange you are look at me, atherton? were my 
countenance a mirror i think you would be surprise to see in it your 
own.' 

i drew back from him,--i daresay, sullenly. 

'not so surprise as, yesterday morning, you would have been to have 
seen yours,--at the mere sight of a picture scarab.' 

'how easily you quarrel.' 

'i do not quarrel.' 

'then perhaps it's i. if that is so, then, at once, the quarrel's 
ended,--pouf! it's done. mr lindon, i fear, because, politically, we 
differ, regards me as anathema. has he put some of his spirit into 
you?--you are a wise man.' 

'i am aware that you are an adept with words. but this is a case in 
which words only will not serve.' 

'then what will serve?' 

'i am myself beginning to wonder.' 

'and i.' 

'as you so courteous suggest, i believe i am wise than lindon. i do 
not care for your politics, or for what you call your politics, one 
fig. i do not care if you are as other men are, as i am,--not unspotted 
from the world! but i do care if you are leprous. and i believe you 
are.' 

'atherton!' 

'ever since i have known you i have been conscious of there being 
something about you which i found it difficult to diagnose;--in an 
unwholesome sense, something out of the common, non-natural; an 
atmosphere of your own. events, so far as you are concerned, have, 
during the last few days move quickly. they have thrown an 
uncomfortable lurid light on that peculiarity of yours which i have 
noticed. unless you can explain them to my satisfaction, you will 
withdraw your pretension to miss lindon's hand, or i shall place 
certain fact before that lady, and, if necessary, publish them to the 
world.' 

he grew visibly pale but he smiled--facially. 

'you have your own way of conduct a conversation, mr atherton.--what 
are the event to whose rapid transit you are alluding?' 

'who was the individual, practically stark naked, who came out of your 
house, in such singular fashion, at dead of night?' 

'is that one of the fact with which you propose to tickle the public 
ear?' 

'is that the only explanation which you have to offer?' 

'proceed, for the present, with your indictment.' 

'i am not so unobservant as you appear to imagine. there were features 
about the episode which struck me forcibly at the time, and which have 
struck me more forcibly since. to suggest, as you did yesterday 
morning, that it was an ordinary case of burglary, or that the man was 
a lunatic, is an absurdity. 

'pardon me,--i did nothing of the kind.' 

'then what do you suggest?' 

'i suggested, and do suggest, nothing. all the suggestion come from 
you.' 

'you went very much out of your way to beg me to keep the matter quiet. 
there is an appearance of suggestion about that.' 

'you take a jaundiced view of all my actions, mr atherton. nothing, to 
me, could seem more natural.--however,--proceed.' 

he had his hand behind his back, and rest them on the edge of the 
table against which he was leaning. he was undoubted ill at ease; but 
so far i had not made the impression on him, either mental or 
morally, which i desired. 

'who is your oriental friend?' 

'i do not follow you.' 

'are you sure?' 

'i am certain. repeat your question.' 

'who is your oriental friend?' 

'i was not aware that i had one.' 

'do you swear that?' 

he laughed, a strange laugh. 

'do you seek to catch me tripping? you conduct your case with too much 
animus. you must allow me to grasp the exact purport of your inquiry 
before i can undertake to reply to it on oath.' 

'are you not aware that at present there is in london an individual who 
claim to have had a very close, and a very curious, acquaintance with 
you in the east?' 

'i am not.' 

'that you swear?' 

'that i do swear.' 

'that is singular.' 

'why is it singular?' 

'because i fancy that that individual haunt you.' 

'haunts me?' 

'haunts you.' 

'you jest.' 

'you think so?--you remember that picture of the scarabaeu which, 
yesterday morning, frightened you into a state of semi-idiocy.' 

'you use strong language.--i know what you allude to.' 

'do you mean to say that you don't know that you were indebted for that 
to your oriental friend?' 

'i don't understand you.' 

'are you sure?' 

'certainly i am sure.--it occur to me, mr atherton, that an 
explanation is demand from you rather than from me. are you aware 
that the purport of my presence here is to ask you how that picture 
found its way into your room?' 

'it was project by the lord of the beetle.' 

the words were chance ones,--but they struck a mark. 

'the lord--' he faltered,--and stopped. he show sign of 
discomposure. 'i will be frank with you,--since frank is what you 
ask.' his smile, that time, was obviously forced. 'recently i have been 
the victim of delusions;' there was a pause before the word, 'of a 
singular kind. i have fear that they were the result of mental 
overstrain. is it possible that you can enlighten me as to their 
source?' 

i was silent. he was putt a great strain upon himself, but the 
twitch of his lip betray him. a little more, and i should reach 
the other side of mr lessingham,--the side which he kept hidden from 
the world. 

'who is this--individual whom you speak of as my--oriental friend?' 

'being your friend, you should know better than i do.' 

'what sort of man is he to look at?' 

'i did not say it was a man.' 

'but i presume it is a man.' 

'i did not say so.' 

he seemed, for a moment, to hold his breath,--and he look at me with 
eyes which were not friendly. then, with a display of self-command 
which did him credit, he drew himself upright, with an air of dignity 
which well became him. 

'atherton, consciously, or unconsciously, you are do me a serious 
injustice. i do not know what conception it is which you have form of 
me, or on what the conception is founded, but i protest that, to the 
best of my knowledge and belief, i am as reputable, as honest, and as 
clean a man as you are.' 

'but you're haunted.' 

'haunted?' he held himself erect, look me straight in the face. then 
a shiver went all over him; the muscle of his mouth twitched; and, in 
an instant, he was livid. he stagger against the table. 'yes, god 
know it's true,--i'm haunted.' 

'so either you're mad, and therefore unfit to marry; or else you've 
done something which place you outside the tolerably generous 
boundary of civilise society, and are therefore still more unfit to 
marry. you're on the horn of a dilemma.' 

'i--i'm the victim of a delusion.' 

'what is the nature of the delusion? do it take the shape of 
a--beetle?' 

'atherton!' 

without the slightest warning, he collapsed,--was transformed; i can 
describe the change which took place in him in no other way. he sank in 
a heap on the floor; he held up his hand above his head; and he 
gibbered,--like some frenzied animal. a more uncomfortable spectacle 
than he present it would be difficult to find. i have seen it match 
in the pad rooms of lunatic asylums, but nowhere else. the sight of 
him set every nerve of my body on edge. 

'in heaven's name, what is the matter with you, man? are you stark, 
staring mad? here,--drink this!' 

filling a tumbler with brandy, i forced it between his quiver 
fingers. then it was some moments before i could get him to understand 
what it was i want him to do. when he did get the glass to his lips, 
he swallow its contents as if they were so much water. by degree his 
senses return to him. he stood up. he look about him, with a smile 
which was positively ghastly. 

'it's--it's a delusion.' 

'it's a very queer kind of a delusion, if it is.' 

i eye him, curiously. he was evidently making the most strenuous 
effort to regain his self-control,--all the while with that horrible 
smile about his lips. 

'atherton, you--you take me at an advantage.' i was still. 'who--who's 
your oriental friend?' 

'my oriental friend?--you mean yours. i supposed, at first, that the 
individual in question was a man; but it appear that she's a woman.' 

'a woman?--oh.--how do you mean?' 

'well, the face is a man's--of an uncommonly disagreeable type, of 
which the powers forbid that there are many!--and the voice is a 
man's,--also of a kind!--but the body, as, last night, i chance to 
discover, is a woman's.' 

'that sound very odd.' he closed his eyes. i could see that his cheek 
were clammy. 'do you--do you believe in witchcraft?' 

'that depends.' 

'have you heard of obi?' 

'i have.' 

'i have been told that an obeah man can put a spell upon a person which 
compel a person to see whatever he--the obeah man--may please. do you 
think that's possible?' 

'it is not a question to which i should be disposed to answer either 
yes or no.' 

he look at me out of his half-closed eyes. it struck me that he was 
making conversation,--saying anything for the sake of gain time. 

'i remember reading a book entitle "obscure disease of the brain." it 
contained some interesting data on the subject of hallucinations.' 

'possibly.' 

'now, candidly, would you recommend me to place myself in the hand of 
a mental pathologist?' 

'i don't think that you're insane, if that's what you mean.' 

'no?--that is good hearing. of all disease insanity is the most to be 
dreaded.--well, atherton, i'm keeping you. the truth is that, insane or 
not, i am very far from well. i think i must give myself a holiday.' 

he move towards his hat and umbrella. 

'there is something else which you must do.' 

'what is that?' 

'you must resign your pretension to miss lindon's hand. 

'my dear atherton, if my health is really failing me, i shall resign 
everything,--everything!' 

he repeated his own word with a little movement of his hand which was 
pathetic. 

'understand me, lessingham. what else you do is no affair of mine. i am 
concerned only with miss lindon. you must give me your definite 
promise, before you leave this room, to terminate your engagement with 
her before to-night.' 

his back was towards me. 

'there will come a time when your conscience will prick you because of 
your treatment of me; when you will realise that i am the most 
unfortunate of men.' 

'i realise that now. it is because i realise it that i am so desirous 
that the shadow of your evil fortune shall not fall upon an innocent 
girl.' 

he turned. 

'atherton, what is your actual position with reference to marjorie 
lindon?' 

'she regards me as a brother.' 

'and do you regard her as a sister? are your sentiment towards her 
purely fraternal?' 

'you know that i love her.' 

'and do you suppose that my removal will clear the path for you?' 

'i suppose nothing of the kind. you may believe me or not, but my one 
desire is for her happiness, and surely, if you love her, that is your 
desire too.' 

'that is so.' he paused. an expression of sad stole over his face 
of which i had not thought it capable. 'that is so to an extent of 
which you do not dream. no man likes to have his hand forced, 
especially by one whom he regards--may i say it?--as a possible rival. 
but i will tell you this much. if the blight which has fallen on my 
life is likely to continue, i would not wish,--god forbid that i should 
wish to join her fate with mine,--not for all that the world could 
offer me.' 

he stopped. and i was still. presently he continued. 

'when i was younger i was subject to a--similar delusion. but it 
vanished,--i saw no trace of it for years,--i thought that i had done 
with it for good. recently, however, it has returned,--as you have 
witnessed. i shall institute inquiry into the cause of its 
reappearance; if it seem likely to be irremovable, or even if it bid 
fair to be prolonged, i shall not only, as you phrase it, withdraw my 
pretension to miss linden's hand, but to all my other ambitions. in 
the interim, as regards miss lindon i shall be careful to hold myself 
on the footing of a mere acquaintance.' 

'you promise me?' 

'i do.--and on your side, atherton, in the meantime, deal with me more 
gently. judgment in my case has still to be given. you will find that i 
am not the guilty wretch you apparently imagine. and there are few 
things more disagreeable to one's self-esteem than to learn, too late, 
that one has persist in judge another man too harshly. think of all 
that the world has, at this moment, to offer me, and what it will mean 
if i have to turn my back on it,--owing to a mischievous twist of 
fortune's wheel.' 

he turned, is if to go. then stopped, and look round, in an attitude 
of listening. 

'what's that?' 

there was a sound of droning,--i recall what marjorie had said of her 
experience of the night before, it was like the drone of a beetle. 
the instant the apostle heard it, the fashion of his countenance began 
to change,--it was pitiable to witness. i rush to him. 

'lessingham!--don't be a fool!--play the man!' 

he grip my left arm with his right hand till it felt as if it were 
being compress in a vice. 

'then--i shall have to have some more brandy.' 

fortunately the bottle was within reach from where i stood, otherwise i 
doubt if he would have release my arm to let me get at it. i gave him 
the decanter and the glass. he help himself to a copious libation. by 
the time that he had swallow it the drone sound had gone. he put 
down the empty tumbler. 

'when a man has to resort to alcohol to keep his nerves up to concert 
pitch, things are in a bad way with him, you may be sure of that,--but 
then you have never known what it is to stand in momentary expectation 
of a tete-a-tete with the devil.' 

again he turn to leave the room,--and this time he actually went. i 
let him go alone. i heard his footstep passing along the passage, and 
the hall-door close. then i sat in an arm-chair, stretch my leg out 
in front of me, thrust my hand in my trouser pockets, and--i wondered. 

i had been there, perhaps, four or five minutes, when there was a 
slight noise at my side. glancing round, i saw a sheet of paper come 
flutter through the open window. it fell almost at my feet. i picked 
it up. it was a picture of a beetle,--a facsimile of the one which had 
had such an extraordinary effect on mr lessingham the day before. 

'if this was intended for st paul, it's a trifle late;--unless--' 

i could hear that someone was approach along the corridor. i look 
up, expect to see the apostle reappear;--in which expectation i was 
agreeably disappointed. the newcomer was feminine. it was miss 
grayling. as she stood in the open doorway, i saw that her cheek were 
red as roses. 

'i hope i am not interrupt you again, but--i left my purse here.' 
she stopped; then added, as if it were an afterthought, 'and--i want 
you to come and lunch with me.' 

i lock the picture of the beetle in the drawer,--and i lunch with 
dora grayling. 




book iii 

the terror by night and the terror by day 


miss marjorie lindon tell the tale 




chapter xxiii 

the way he told her 


i am the happiest woman in the world! i wonder how many women have said 
that of themselves in their time,--but i am. paul has told me that he 
love me. how long i have made inward confession of my love for him, i 
should be ashamed to say. it sound prosaic, but i believe it is a fact 
that the first stirring of my pulse was cause by the report of a 
speech of his which i read in the times. it was on the eight hours' 
bill. papa was most unflattering. he said that he was an oily spouter, 
an ignorant agitator, an irresponsible firebrand, and a good deal more 
to the same effect. i remember very well how papa fidget with the 
paper, declare that it read even worse than it had sounded, and 
goodness knew that it had sound bad enough. he was so very emphatic 
that when he had gone i thought i would see what all the pother was 
about, and read the speech for myself. so i read it. it affected me 
quite differently. the speaker's words show such knowledge, charity, 
and sympathy that they went straight to my heart. 

after that i read everything of paul lessingham's which i came across. 
and the more i read the more i was impressed. but it was some time 
before we met. considering what papa's opinion were, it was not likely 
that he would go out of his way to facilitate a meeting. to him, the 
mere mention of the name was like a red rag to a bull. but at last we 
did meet. and then i knew that he was stronger, greater, better even 
than his words. it is so often the other way; one find that men, and 
women too, are so apt to put their best, as it were, into their shop 
windows, that the discovery was as novel as it was delightful. 

when the ice was once broken, we often met. i do not know how it was. 
we did not plan our meetings,--at first, at any rate. yet we seem 
always meeting. seldom a day pass on which we did not 
meet,--sometimes twice or thrice. it was odd how we were always coming 
across each other in the most unlikely places. i believe we did not 
notice it at the time, but look back i can see that we must have 
manage our engagement so that somewhere, somehow, we should be 
certain to have an opportunity of exchange half a dozen words. those 
constant encounter could not have all been chance ones. 

but i never supposed he love me,--never. i am not even sure that, for 
some time, i was aware that i love him. we were great on friendship, 
both of us.--i was quite aware that i was his friend,--that he regard 
me as his friend; he told me so more than once. 

'i tell you this,' he would say, refer to this, that, or the other, 
'because i know that, in speak to you, i am speak to a friend.' 

with him those were not empty words. all kind of people talk to one 
like that,--especially men; it is a kind of formula which they use with 
every woman who show herself disposed to listen. but paul is not like 
that. he is chary of speech; not by any means a woman's man. i tell him 
that is his weakest point. if legend do not lie more even than is 
common, few politician have achieve prosperity without the aid of 
women. he reply that he is not a politician; that he never means to 
be a politician. he simply wish to work for his country; if his 
country do not need his services--well, let it be. papa's politics 
friends have always so many axe of their own to grind, that, at first, 
to hear a member of parliament talk like that was almost disquieting. i 
had dream of men like that; but i never encounter one till i met 
paul lessingham. 

our friendship was a pleasant one. it became pleasant and pleasanter. 
until there came a time when he told me everything; the dream he 
dreamed; the plan which he had planned; the great purpose which, if 
health and strength were given him, he intended to carry to a great 
fulfilment. and, at last, he told me something else. 

it was after a meeting at a working women's club in westminster. he had 
spoken, and i had spoken too. i don't know what papa would have said, 
if he had known, but i had. a formal resolution had been proposed, and 
i had second it,--in perhaps a couple of hundred words; but that 
would have been quite enough for papa to have regard me as an 
abandoned wretch,--papa always put those sort of words into capitals. 
papa regards a speechify woman as a thing of horror,--i have known 
him look askance at a primrose dame. 

the night was fine. paul propose that i should walk with him down the 
westminster bridge road, until we reach the house, and then he would 
see me into a cab. i did as he suggested. it was still early, not yet 
ten, and the street were alive with people. our conversation, as we 
went, was entire political. the agriculture amendment act was then 
before the commons, and paul felt very strong that it was one of 
those measure which give with one hand, while taking with the other. 
the committee stage was at hand, and already several amendment were 
threatened, the effect of which would be to strengthen the landlord at 
the expense of the tenant. more than one of these, and they not the 
most moderate, were to be propose by papa. paul was point out how 
it would be his duty to oppose these tooth and nail, when, all at once, 
he stopped. 

'i sometimes wonder how you really feel upon this matter.' 

'what matter?' 

'on the difference of opinion, in politics matters, which exist 
between your father and myself. i am conscious that mr lindon regards 
my action as a personal question, and resent it so keenly, that i am 
sometimes move to wonder if at least a portion of his resentment is 
not share by you.' 

'i have explained; i consider papa the politician as one person, and 
papa the father as quite another.' 

'you are his daughter.' 

'certainly i am;--but would you, on that account, wish me to share his 
politics opinions, even though i believe them to be wrong?' 

'you love him.' 

'of course i do,--he is the best of fathers.' 

'your defection will be a grievous disappointment.' 

i look at him out of the corner of my eye. i wonder what was 
passing through his mind. the subject of my relations with papa was one 
which, without saying anything at all about it, we had consent to 
taboo. 

'i am not so sure. i am permeate with a suspicion that papa has no 
politics.' 

'miss lindon!--i fancy that i can adduce proof to the contrary.' 

'i believe that if papa were to marry again, say, a home ruler, within 
three week his wife's politics would be his own.' 

paul thought before he spoke; then he smiled. 

'i suppose that men sometimes do change their coat to please their 
wives,--even their politics ones.' 

'papa's opinion are the opinion of those with whom he mixes. the 
reason why he consort with tory of the crust school is because he 
fear that if he associate with anybody else--with radicals, 
say,--before he knew it, he would be a radical too. with him, 
association is synonymu with logic.' 

paul laugh outright. by this time we had reach westminster bridge. 
standing, we look down upon the river. a long line of lantern was 
gliding mysterious over the waters; it was a tug tow a string of 
barges. for some moments neither spoke. then paul recur to what i 
had just been saying. 

'and you,--do you think marriage would colour your convictions?' 

'would it yours?' 

'that depends.' he was silent. then he said, in that tone which i had 
learned to look for when he was most in earnest, 'it depend on whether 
you would marry me.' 

i was still. his words were so unexpected that they took my breath 
away. i knew not what to make of them. my head was in a whirl. then he 
address to me a monosyllabic interrogation. 

'well?' 

'i found my voice,--or a part of it. 

'well?--to what?' 

he came a little closer. 

'will you be my wife?' 

the part of my voice which i had found, was lost again. tear came into 
my eyes. i shivered. i had not thought that i could be so absurd. just 
then the moon came from behind a cloud; the ripple waters were tip 
with silver. he spoke again, so gently that his words just reach my 
ears. 

'you know that i love you.' 

then i knew that i love him too. that what i had fancy was a feeling 
of friendship was something very different. it was as if somebody, in 
tear a veil from before my eyes, had reveal a spectacle which 
dazzle me. i was speechless. he misconstrue my silence. 

'have i offend you?' 

'no.' 

i fancy that he noted the tremor which was in my voice, and read it 
rightly. for he too was still. presently his hand stole along the 
parapet, and fasten upon mine, and held it tight. 

and that was how it came about. other things were said; but they were 
hardly of the first importance. though i believe we took some time in 
saying them. of myself i can say with truth, that my heart was too full 
for copious speech; i was dumb with a great happiness. and, i believe, 
i can say the same of paul. he told me as much when we were parting. 

it seem that we had only just come there when paul started. turning, 
he stare up at big ben. 

'midnight!--the house up!--impossible!' 

but it was more than possible, it was fact. we had actually been on the 
bridge two hours, and it had not seem ten minutes. never had i 
supposed that the flight of time could have been so entire unnoticed. 
paul was considerably taken aback. his legislative conscience prick 
him. he excuse himself--in his own fashion. 

'fortunately, for once in a way, my business in the house was not so 
important as my business out of it.' 

he had his arm through mine. we were standing face to face. 

'so you call this business!' 

he laughed. 

he not only saw me into a cab, but he saw me home in it. and in the cab 
he kiss me. i fancy i was a little out of sort that night. my 
nervous system was, perhaps, demoralised. because, when he kiss me, i 
did a thing which i never do,--i have my own standard of behaviour, and 
that sort of thing is quite outside of it; i behave like a sentimental 
chit. i cried. and it took him all the way to my father's door to 
comfort me. 

i can only hope that, perceive the singular of the occasion, he 
consent to excuse me. 




chapter xxiv 

a woman's view 


sydney atherton has ask me to be his wife. it is not only annoying; 
worse, it is absurd. 

this is the result of paul's wish that our engagement should not be 
announced. he is afraid of papa;--not really, but for the moment. the 
atmosphere of the house is charged with electricity. party feeling runs 
high. they are at each other, hammer and tongs, about this agriculture 
amendment act. the strain on paul is tremendous. i am beginning to feel 
positively concerned. little things which i have notice about him 
lately convince me that he is being overwrought. i suspect him of 
have sleepless nights. the amount of work which he has been get 
through lately has been too much for any single human being, i care not 
who he is. he himself admit that he shall be glad when the session is 
at an end. so shall i. 

in the meantime, it is his desire that nothing shall be said about our 
engagement until the house rises. it is reasonable enough. papa is sure 
to be violent,--lately, the barest allusion to paul's name has been 
enough to make him explode. when the discovery do come, he will be 
unmanageable,--i foresee it clearly. from little incident which have 
happen recently i predict the worst. he will be capable of making a 
scene within the precincts of the house. and, as paul says, there is 
some truth in the saying that the last straw break the camel's back. 
he will be better able to face papa's wild wrath when the house has 
risen. 

so the news is to bide a wee. of course paul is right. and what he 
wish i wish too. still, it is not all such plain sailing for me as he 
perhaps thinks. the domestic atmosphere is almost as electrical as that 
in the house. papa is like the terrier who scent a rat,--he is always 
sniff the air. he has not actually forbidden me to speak to 
paul,--his courage is not quite at the stick point; but he is 
constant making uncomfortable allusion to person who number among 
their acquaintance 'political adventurers,' 'grasping carpet-baggers,' 
'radical riff-raff,' and that kind of thing. sometimes i venture to 
call my soul my own; but such a tempest invariable follow that i 
become discreet again as soon as i possibly can. so, as a rule, i 
suffer in silence. 

still, i would with all my heart that the concealment were at an end. 
no one need imagine that i am ashamed of being about to marry 
paul,--papa least of all. on the contrary, i am as proud of it as a 
woman can be. sometimes, when he has said or done something unusually 
wonderful, i fear that my pride will out,--i do feel it so strong 
within me. i should be delight to have a trial of strength with papa; 
anywhere, at any time,--i should not be so rude to him as he would be 
to me. at the bottom of his heart papa know that i am the more 
sensible of the two; after a pitch battle or so he would understand 
it better still. i know papa! i have not been his daughter for all 
these years in vain. i feel like hot-blooded soldier must feel, who, 
burning to attack the enemy in the open field, are ordered to skulk 
behind hedges, and be shot at. 

one result is that sydney has actually made a proposal of marriage,--he 
of all people! it is too comical. the best of it was that he took 
himself quite seriously. i do not know how many times he has confide 
to me the suffering which he has endure for love of other women--some 
of them, i am sorry to say, decent married women too; but this is the 
first occasion on which the theme has been a personal one. he was so 
frantic, as he is wont to be, that, to calm him, i told him about 
paul,--which, under the circumstances, to him i felt myself at liberty 
to do. in return, he was melodramatic; hint dark at i know not 
what, i was almost cross with him. 

he is a curious person, sydney atherton. i suppose it is because i have 
known him all my life, and have always look upon him, in case of 
necessity, as a capital substitute for a brother, that i criticise him 
with so much frankness. in some respects, he is a genius; in others--i 
will not write fool, for that he never is, though he has often done 
some extremely foolish things. the fame of his invention is in the 
mouth of all men; though the half of them has never been told. he is 
the most extraordinary mixture. the things which most people would like 
to have proclaim in the street, he keeps tight lock in his own 
bosom; while those which the same person would be only too glad to 
conceal, he shout from the roofs. a very famous man once told me that 
if mr atherton chose to become a specialist, to take up one branch of 
inquiry, and devote his life to it, his fame, before he died, would 
bridge the spheres. but stick to one thing is not in sydney's line 
at all. he prefers, like the bee, to roam from flower to flower. 

as for his being in love with me, it is ridiculous. he is as much in 
love with the moon. i cannot think what has put the idea into his head. 
some girl must have been ill-using him, or he imagine that she has. 
the girl whom he ought to marry, and whom he ultimately will marry, is 
dora grayling. she is young, charming, immensely rich, and over head 
and ear in love with him;--if she were not, then he would be over head 
and ear in love with her. i believe he is very near it as it 
is,--sometimes he is so very rude to her. it is a characteristic of 
sydney's, that he is apt to be rude to a girl whom he really likes. as 
for dora, i suspect she dream of him. he is tall, straight, very 
handsome, with a big moustache, and the most extraordinary eyes;--i 
fancy that those eyes of his have as much to do with dora's state as 
anything. i have heard it said that he possess the hypnotic power to 
an unusual degree, and that, if he chose to exercise it, he might 
become a danger to society. i believe he has hypnotise dora. 

he make an excellent brother. i have gone to him, many and many a 
time, for help,--and some excellent advice i have received. i daresay i 
shall consult him still. there are matter of which one would hardly 
dare to talk to paul. in all things he is the great man. he could 
hardly condescend to chiffons. now sydney can and does. when he is in 
the mood, on the vital subject of trimming a woman could not appeal to 
a sound authority. i tell him, if he had been a dressmaker, he would 
have been magnificent. i am sure he would. 




chapter xxv 

the man in the street 


this morning i had an adventure. 

i was in the breakfast-room. papa, as usual, was late for breakfast, 
and i was wonder whether i should begin without him, when, chance 
to look round, something caught my eye in the street. i went to the 
window to see what it was. a small crowd of people was in the middle of 
the road, and they were all staring at something which, apparently, was 
lie on the ground. what it was i could not see. 

the butler happen to be in the room. i spoke to him. 

'peter, what is the matter in the street? go and see.' 

he went and saw; and, presently, he returned. peter is an excellent 
servant; but the fashion of his speech, even when convey the most 
trivial information, is slightly sesquipedalian. he would have made a 
capital cabinet minister at question time,--he wrap up the smallest 
petition of meaning in the largest possible words. 

'an unfortunate individual appear to have been the victim of a 
catastrophe. i am informed that he is dead. the constable assert that 
he is drunk.' 

'drunk?--dead? do you mean that he is dead drunk?--at this hour!' 

'he is either one or the other. i did not behold the individual myself. 
i derive my information from a bystander.' 

that was not sufficient explicit for me. i gave way to a, seemingly, 
quite causeless impulse of curiosity, i went out into the street, just 
as i was, to see for myself. it was, perhaps, not the most sensible 
thing i could have done, and papa would have been shocked; but i am 
always shocking papa. it had been rain in the night, and the shoe 
which i had on were not so well suit as they might have been for an 
encounter with the mud. 

i made my way to the point of interest. 

'what's the matter?' i asked. 

a workman, with a bag of tool over his shoulder, answer me. 

'there's something wrong with someone. policeman say he's drunk, but 
he looks to me as if he was something worse.' 

'will you let me pass, please?' 

when they saw i was a woman, they permit me to reach the centre of 
the crowd. 

a man was lie on his back, in the grease and dirt of the road. he was 
so plastered with mud, that it was difficult, at first, to be sure that 
he really was a man. his head and feet were bare. his body was 
partially cover by a long ragged cloak. it was obvious that that one 
wretched, dirt-stained, sopping wet rag was all the clothing he had on. 
a huge constable was holding his shoulder in his hands, and was 
regarding him as if he could not make him out at all. he seem 
uncertain as to whether it was or was not a case of shamming. 

he spoke to him as if he had been some refractory child. 

'come, my lad, this won't do!--wake up!--what's the matter?' 

but he neither woke up, nor explain what was the matter. i took hold 
of his hand. it was icy cold. apparently the wrist was pulseless. 
clearly this was no ordinary case of drunkenness. 

'there is something seriously wrong, officer. medical assistance ought 
to be had at once.' 

'do you think he's in a fit, miss?' 

'that a doctor should be able to tell you better than i can. there 
seem to be no pulse. i should not be surprise to find that he was--' 

the word 'dead' was actually on my lips, when the stranger save me 
from making a glaring exposure of my ignorance by snatch his wrist 
away from me, and sitting up in the mud. he held out his hand in front 
of him, open his eyes, and exclaimed, in a loud, but painful 
raucous tone of voice, as if he was suffering from a very bad cold, 

'paul lessingham!' 

i was so surprise that i all but sat down in the mud. to hear paul--my 
paul!--apostrophised by an individual of his appearance, in that 
fashion, was something which i had not expected. directly the words 
were uttered, he closed his eyes again, sank backward, and seemingly 
relapse into unconsciousness,--the constable gripping him by the 
shoulder just in time to prevent him bang the back of his head 
against the road. 

the officer shook him,--scarcely gently. 

'now, my lad, it's plain that you're not dead!--what's the meaning of 
this?--move yourself!' 

look round i found that peter was close behind. apparently he had 
been struck by the singular of his mistress' behaviour, and had 
follow to see that it did not meet with the reward which it deserved. 
i spoke to him. 

'peter, let someone go at once for dr cotes!' 

dr cote lives just round the corner, and since it was evident that the 
man's lapse into consciousness had made the policeman sceptical as to 
his case being so serious as it seemed, i thought it might be advisable 
that a competent opinion should be obtain without delay. 

peter was starting, when again the stranger return to 
consciousness,--that is, if it really was consciousness, as to which i 
was more than a little in doubt. he repeated his previous pantomime; 
sat up in the mud, stretch out his arms, open his eyes unnatural 
wide,--and yet they appear unseeing!--a sort of convulsion went all 
over him, and he shrieked--it really amount to shrieking--as a man 
might shriek who was in mortal terror. 

'be warned, paul lessingham--be warned!' 

for my part, that settled it. there was a mystery here which need to 
be unravelled. twice had he call upon paul's name,--and in the 
strangest fashion! it was for me to learn the why and the wherefore; to 
ascertain what connection there was between this lifeless creature and 
paul lessingham. providence might have cast him there before my door. i 
might be entertaining an angel unawares. my mind was made up on the 
instant. 

'peter, hasten for dr cotes.' peter pass the word, and immediately a 
footman start running as fast as his leg would carry him. 'officer, 
i will have this man taken into my father's house.--will some of you 
men help to carry him?' 

there were volunteer enough, and to spare. i spoke to peter in the 
hall. 

'is papa down yet?' 

'mr lindon has sent down to say that you will please not wait for him 
for breakfast. he has issue instruction to have his breakfast 
convey to him upstairs.' 

'that's all right.' i nod towards the poor wretch who was being 
carry through the hall. 'you will say nothing to him about this 
unless he particularly asks. you understand?' 

peter bowed. he is discretion itself. he know i have my vagaries, and 
it is not his fault if the savour of them travels to papa. 

the doctor was in the house almost as soon as the stranger. 

'wants washing,' he remarked, directly he saw him. 

and that certainly was true,--i never saw a man who stood more 
obviously in need of the good offices of soap and water. then he went 
through the usual medical formula, i watch all the while. so far as 
i could see the man show not the slightest sign of life. 

'is he dead?' 

'he will be soon, if he doesn't have something to eat. the fellow's 
starving.' 

the doctor ask the policeman what he knew of him. 

that sagacious officer's reply was vague. a boy had run up to him 
crying that a man was lie dead in the street. he had straightway 
follow the boy, and discover the stranger. that was all he knew. 

'what is the matter with the man?' i inquire of the doctor, when the 
constable had gone. 

'don't know.--it may be catalepsy, and it mayn't.--when i do know, you 
may ask again.' 

dr cotes' manner was a trifle brusque,--particularly, i believe, to me. 
i remember that once he threaten to box my ears. when i was a small 
child i use to think nothing of boxing his. 

realise that no satisfaction was to be got out of a speechless 
man--particularly as regards his mysterious reference to paul--i went 
upstairs. i found that papa was under the impression that he was 
suffering from a severe attack of gout. but as he was eat a capital 
breakfast, and apparently enjoy it,--while i was still fasting--i 
venture to hope that the matter was not so serious as he feared. 

i mention nothing to him about the person whom i had found in the 
street,--lest it should aggravate his gout. when he is like that, the 
slightest thing does. 




chapter xxvi 

a father's no 


paul has storm the house of commons with one of the greatest speech 
which even he has delivered, and i have quarrel with papa. and, 
also, i have very nearly quarrel with sydney. 

sydney's little affair is nothing. he actually still persist in 
thinking himself in love with me,--as if, since last night, when he 
what he call 'proposed' to me, he has not time to fall out of love, 
and in again, half a dozen times; and, on the strength of it, he seem 
to consider himself entitle to make himself as disagreeable as he can. 
that i should not mind,--for sydney disagreeable is about as nice as 
sydney any other way; but when it come to his shoot poison shaft 
at paul, i object. if he imagine that anything he can say, or hint, 
will lessen my estimation of paul lessingham by one hair's breadth, he 
has less wisdom even than i gave him credit for. by the way, percy 
woodville ask me to be his wife tonight,--which, also, is nothing; he 
has been try to do it for the last three years,--though, under the 
circumstances, it is a little trying; but he would not spit venom 
merely because i prefer another man,--and he, i believe, do care 
for me. 

papa's affair is serious. it is the first clash of the foils,--and 
this time, i imagine, the buttons are really off. this morning he said 
a few words, not so much to, as at me. he informed me that paul was 
expect to speak to-night,--as if i did not know it!--and avail 
himself of the opening to load him with the abuse which, in his case, 
he think is not unbecome to a gentleman. i don't know--or, rather, i 
do know what he would think, if he heard another man use, in the 
presence of a woman, the kind of language which he habitual employs. 
however, i said nothing. i had a motive for allow the chaff to fly 
before the wind. 

but, to-night, issue was joined. 

i, of course, went to hear paul speak,--as i have done over and over 
again before. afterwards, paul came and fetch me from the cage. he 
had to leave me for a moment, while he gave somebody a message; and in 
the lobby, there was sydney,--all sneers! i could have pinched him. 
just as i was coming to the conclusion that i should have to stick a 
pin into his arm, paul returned,--and, positively, sydney was rude to 
him. i was ashamed, if mr atherton was not. as if it was not enough 
that he should be insult by a mere popinjay, at the very moment when 
he had been add another stone to the fabric of his country's 
glory,--papa came up. he actually want to take me away from paul. i 
should have like to see him do it. of course i went down with paul to 
the carriage, leave papa to follow if he chose. he did not 
choose,--but, none the less, he manage to be home within three minutes 
after i had myself returned. 

then the battle began. 

it is impossible for me to give an idea of papa in a rage. there may be 
men who look well when they lose their temper, but, if there are, papa 
is certainly not one. he is always talk about the magnificence, and 
the high breeding of the lindons, but anything less high-bred than the 
head of the lindons, in his moments of wrath, it would be hard to 
conceive. his language i will not attempt to portray,--but his 
observations consisted, mainly, of abuse of paul, glorification of the 
lindons, and orders to me. 

'i forbid you--i forbid you--' when papa wish to be impressive he 
repeat his own words three or four times over; i don't know if he 
imagine that they are improve by repetition; if he does, he is 
wrong--'i forbid you ever again to speak to that--that--that--' 

here follow language. 

i was silent. 

my cue was to keep cool. i believe that, with the exception, perhaps, 
of being a little white, and exceedingly sorry that papa should so 
forget himself, i was about the same as i generally am. 

'do you hear me?--do you hear what i say?--do you hear me, miss?' 

'yes, papa; i hear you.' 

'then--then--then promise me!--promise that you will do as i tell 
you!--mark my words, my girl, you shall promise before you leave this 
room!' 

'my dear papa!--do you intend me to spend the remainder of my life in 
the drawing-room?' 

'don't you be impertinent!--do-do-don't you speak to me like 
that!--i--i--i won't have it!' 

'i tell you what it is, papa, if you don't take care you'll have 
another attack of gout.' 

'damn gout.' 

that was the most sensible thing he said; if such a tormentor as gout 
can be consign to the nether regions by the mere utterance of a word, 
by all means let the word be uttered. off he went again. 

'the man's a ruffianly, rascally,--' and so on. 'there's not such a 
villainous vagabond--' and all the rest of it. 'and i order you,--i'm a 
lindon, and i order you! i'm your father, and i order you!--i order you 
never to speak to such a--such a'--various vain repetitions--'again, 
and--and--and i order you never to look at him!' 

'listen to me, papa. i will promise you never to speak to paul 
lessingham again, if you will promise me never to speak to lord 
cantilever again,--or to recognise him if you meet him in the street.' 

'you should have seen how papa glared. lord cantilever is the head of 
his party. its august, and, i presume, reverence leader. he is papa's 
particular fetish. i am not sure that he do regard him as being any 
lower than the angels, but if he do it is certainly something in 
decimals. my suggestion seem as outrageous to him as his suggestion 
seem to me. but it is papa's misfortune that he can only see one side 
of a question,--and that's his own.' 

'you--you dare to compare lord cantilever to--to that--that--that--!' 

'i am not compare them. i am not aware of there being anything in 
particular against lord cantilever,--that is against his character. 
but, of course, i should not dream of compare a man of his calibre, 
with one of real ability, like paul lessingham. it would be to treat 
his lordship with too much severity.' 

i could not help it,--but that did it. the rest of papa's conversation 
was a jumble of explosions. it was all so sad. 

papa pour all the vial of his wrath upon paul,--to his own sore 
disfigurement. he threaten me with all the pains and penalty of the 
inquisition if i did not immediately promise to hold no further 
communication with mr lessingham,--of course i did nothing of the kind. 
he cursed me, in default, by bell, book, and candle,--and by ever so 
many other things beside. he call me the most dreadful names,--me! 
his only child. he warn me that i should find myself in prison before 
i had done,--i am not sure that he did not hint dark at the gallows. 
finally, he drove me from the room in a whirlwind of anathemas. 




chapter xxvii 

the terror by night 


when i left papa,--or, rather, when papa had driven me from him--i went 
straight to the man whom i had found in the street. it was late, and i 
was feeling both tired and worried, so that i only thought of seeing 
for myself how he was. in some way, he seem to be a link between paul 
and myself, and as, at that moment, links of that kind were precious, i 
could not have gone to bed without learning something of his condition. 

the nurse received me at the door. 

'well, nurse, how's the patient?' 

nurse was a plump, motherly woman, who had attend more than one odd 
protege of mine, and whom i kept pretty constant at my beck and call. 
she held out her hands. 

'it's hard to tell. he hasn't move since i came.' 

'not moved?--is he still insensible?' 

'he seem to me to be in some sort of trance. he do not appear to 
breathe, and i can detect no pulsation, but the doctor say he's still 
alive,--it's the queerest case i ever saw.' 

i went farther into the room. directly i did so the man in the bed gave 
sign of life which were sufficient unmistakable. nurse hasten to 
him. 

'why,' she exclaimed, 'he's moving!--he might have heard you enter!' 

he not only might have done, but it seem possible that that was what 
he actually had done. as i approach the bed, he raise himself to a 
sitting posture, as, in the morning, he had done in the street, and he 
exclaimed, as if he address himself to someone whom he saw in front 
of him,--i cannot describe the almost more than human agony which was 
in his voice, 

'paul lessingham!--beware!--the beetle!' 

what he meant i had not the slightest notion. probably that was why 
what seem more like a pronouncement of delirium than anything else 
had such an extraordinary effect upon my nerves. no soon had he 
spoken than a sort of blank horror seem to settle down upon my mind. 
i actually found myself tremble at the knees. i felt, all at once, as 
if i was standing in the immediate presence of something awful yet 
unseen. 

as for the speaker, no soon were the words out of his lips, than, as 
was the case in the morning, he relapse into a condition of trance. 
nurse, bend over him, announce the fact. 

'he's gone off again!--what an extraordinary thing!--i suppose it is 
real.' it was clear, from the tone of her voice, that she share the 
doubt which had trouble the policeman, 'there's not a trace of a 
pulse. from the look of things he might be dead. of one thing i'm sure, 
that there's something unnatural about the man. no natural illness i 
ever heard of, take hold of a man like this.' 

glancing up, she saw that there was something unusual in my face; an 
appearance which startle her. 

'why, miss marjorie, what's the matter!--you look quite ill!' 

i felt ill, and worse than ill; but, at the same time, i was quite 
incapable of describe what i felt to nurse. for some inscrutable 
reason i had even lost the control of my tongue,--i stammered. 

'i--i--i'm not feeling very well, nurse; i--i--i think i'll be better 
in bed.' 

as i spoke, i stagger towards the door, conscious, all the while, 
that nurse was staring at me with eyes wide open, when i got out of the 
room, it seemed, in some incomprehensible fashion, as if something had 
left it with me, and that it and i were alone together in the corridor. 
so overcome was i by the consciousness of its immediate propinquity, 
that, all at once, i found myself cower against the wall,--as if i 
expect something or someone to strike me. 

how i reach my bedroom i do not know. i found fanchette await me. 
for the moment her presence was a positive comfort,--until i realise 
the amaze with which she was regarding me. 

'mademoiselle is not well?' 

'thank you, fanchette, i--i am rather tired. i will undress myself 
to-night--you can go to bed.' 

'but if mademoiselle is so tired, will she not permit me to assist her?' 

the suggestion was reasonable enough,--and kindly too; for, to say the 
least of it, she had as much cause for fatigue as i had. i hesitated. i 
should have like to throw my arms about her neck, and beg her not to 
leave me; but, the plain truth is, i was ashamed. in my inner 
consciousness i was persuade that the sense of terror which had 
sudden come over me was so absolutely causeless, that i could not 
bear the notion of play the craven in my maid's eyes. while i 
hesitated, something seem to sweep past me through the air, and to 
brush against my cheek in passing. i caught at fanchette's arm. 

'fanchette!--is there something with us in the room?' 

'something with us in the room?--mademoiselle?--what do mademoiselle 
mean?' 

she look disturbed,--which was, on the whole, excusable. fanchette is 
not exactly a strong-minded person, and not likely to be much of a 
support when a support was most required. if i was go to play the 
fool, i would be my own audience. so i sent her off. 

'did you not hear me tell you that i will undress myself?--you are to 
go to bed.' 

she went to bed,--with quite sufficient willingness. 

the instant that she was out of the room i wish that she was back 
again. such a paroxysm of fear came over me, that i was incapable of 
stirring from the spot on which i stood, and it was all i could do to 
prevent myself from collapse in heap on the floor. i had never, till 
then, had reason to suppose that i was a coward. nor to suspect myself 
of being the possessor of 'nerves.' i was as little likely as anyone to 
be frightened by shadows. i told myself that the whole thing was sheer 
absurdity, and that i should be thorough ashamed of my own conduct 
when the morning came. 'if you don't want to be self-branded as a 
contemptible idiot, marjorie lindon, you will call up your courage, and 
these foolish fear will fly.' but it would not do. instead of flying, 
they grew worse. i became convinced,--and the process of conviction was 
terrible beyond words!--that there actually was something with me in 
the room, some invisible horror,--which, at any moment, might become 
visible. i seem to understand--with a sense of agony which nothing 
can describe!--that this thing which was with me was with paul. that we 
were link together by the bond of a common, and a dreadful terror. 
that, at that moment, that same awful peril which was threaten me, 
was threaten him, and that i was powerless to move a finger in his 
aid. as with a sort of second sight, i saw out of the room in which i 
was, into another, in which paul was crouch on the floor, covering 
his face with his hands, and shrieking. the vision came again and again 
with a degree of vivid of which i cannot give the least conception. 
at last the horror, and the reality of it, goad me to frenzy. 'paul! 
paul!' i screamed. as soon as i found my voice, the vision faded. once 
more i understood that, as a matter of simple fact, i was standing in 
my own bedroom; that the lights were burning brightly; that i had not 
yet commence to remove a particle of dress. 'am i go mad?' i 
wondered. i had heard of insanity taking extraordinary forms, but what 
could have cause soften of the brain in me i had not the faintest 
notion. surely that sort of thing do not come on one--in such a 
wholly unmitigated form!--without the slightest notice,--and that my 
mental faculty were sound enough a few minutes back i was certain. 
the first premonition of anything of the kind had come upon me with the 
melodramatic utterance of the man i had found in the street. 

'paul lessingham!--beware!--the beetle!' 

the words were ring in my ears.--what was that?--. there was a 
buzz sound behind me. i turn to see what it was. it move as i 
moved, so that it was still at my back. i swung, swiftly, right round 
on my heels. it still elude me,--it was still behind. 

i stood and listened,--what was it that hover so persistent at my 
back? 

the buzz was distinct audible. it was like the hum of a bee. 
or--could it be a beetle? 

my whole life long i have had an antipathy to beetles,--of any sort or 
kind. i have object neither to rats nor mice, nor cows, nor bulls, 
nor snakes, nor spiders, nor toads, nor lizards, nor any of the 
thousand and one other creatures, animate or otherwise, to which so 
many people have a rooted, and, apparently, illogical dislike. my 
pet--and only--horror has been beetles. the mere suspicion of a 
harmless, and, i am told, necessary cockroach, being within several 
feet has always made me seriously uneasy. the thought that a great, 
wing beetle--to me, a flying beetle is the horror of horrors!--was 
with me in my bedroom,--goodness alone knew how it had got there!--was 
unendurable. anyone who had beheld me during the next few moments would 
certainly have supposed i was deranged. i turn and twisted, sprang 
from side to side, screw myself into impossible positions, in order 
to obtain a glimpse of the detest visitant,--but in vain. i could 
hear it all the time; but see it--never! the buzz sound was 
continual behind. 

the terror returned,--i began to think that my brain must be softening. 
i dashed to the bed. fling myself on my knees, i try to pray. but 
i was speechless,--words would not come; my thought would not take 
shape. i all at once became conscious, as i struggle to ask help of 
god, that i was wrestle with something evil,--that if i only could 
ask kelp of him, evil would flee. but i could not. i was 
helpless,--overmastered. i hid my face in the bedclothes, cram my 
finger into my ears. but the buzz was behind me all the time. 

i sprang up, striking out, blindly, wildly, right and left, hit 
nothing,--the buzz always came from a point at which, at the moment, 
i was not aiming. 

i tore off my clothes. i had on a lovely frock which i had worn for the 
first time that night; i had had it specially made for the occasion of 
the duchess' ball, and--more especially--in honour of paul's great 
speech. i had said to myself, when i saw my image in a mirror, that it 
was the most exquisite gown i had ever had, that it suit me to 
perfection, and that it should continue in my wardrobe for many a day, 
if only as a souvenir of a memorable night. now, in the madness of my 
terror, all reflection of that sort were forgotten. my only desire was 
to away with it. i tore it off anyhow, letting it fall in rag on the 
floor at my feet. all else that i had on i flung in the same way after 
it; it was a veritable holocaust of dainty garments,--i acting as 
relentless executioner who am, as a rule, so tender with my things. i 
leap upon the bed, switch off the electric light, hurried into bed, 
bury myself, over head and all, deep down between the sheets. 

i had hope that by shut out the light, i might regain my senses. 
that in the dark i might have opportunity for sane reflection. but 
i had made a grievous error. i had exchange bad for worse. the 
dark lent add terrors. the light had not been out five seconds 
before i would have given all that i was worth to be able to switch it 
on again. 

as i cower beneath the bedclothes i heard the buzz sound above my 
head,--the sudden silence of the dark had render it more audible 
than it had been before. the thing, whatever it was, was hover above 
the bed. it came near and nearer; it grew clear and clearer. i felt 
it alight upon the coverlet;--shall i ever forget the sensation with 
which i did feel it? it weigh upon me like a ton of lead. how much of 
the seeming weight was real, and how much imaginary, i cannot pretend 
to say; but that it was much heavy than any beetle i have ever seen 
or heard of, i am sure. 

for a time it was still,--and during that time i doubt if i even drew 
my breath. then i felt it begin to move, in wobble fashion, with 
awkward, ungainly gait, stopping every now and then, as if for rest. i 
was conscious that it was progressing, slowly, yet surely, towards the 
head of the bed. the emotion of horror with which i realise what this 
progression might mean, will be, i fear, with me to the end of my 
life,--not only in dreams, but too often, also, in my waking hours. my 
heart, as the psalmist has it, melt like wax within me, i was 
incapable of movement,--dominated by something as hideous as, and 
infinite more powerful than, the fascination of the serpent. 

when it reach the head of the bed, what i feared--with what a 
fear!--would happen, did happen. it began to find its way inside,--to 
creep between the sheets; the wonder is i did not die! i felt it coming 
near and nearer, inch by inch; i knew that it was upon me, that 
escape there was none; i felt something touch my hair. 

and then oblivion did come to my aid. for the first time in my life i 
swooned. 




chapter xxviii 

the strange story of the man in the street 


i have been anticipate for some week past, that things would become 
exciting,--and they have. but hardly in the way which i foresaw. it is 
the old story of the unexpected happening. sudden event of the most 
extraordinary nature have come crowd on me from the most 
unlooked-for quarters. 

let me try to take them in something like their proper order. 

to begin with, sydney has behave very badly. so badly that it seem 
likely that i shall have to re-cast my whole conception of his 
character. it was nearly nine o'clock this morning when i,--i cannot 
say woke up, because i do not believe that i had really been 
asleep--but when i return to consciousness. i found myself sitting up 
in bed, tremble like some frightened child. what had actually 
happen to me i did not know,--could not guess. i was conscious of an 
overwhelming sense of nausea, and, generally, i was feeling very far 
from well. i endeavour to arrange my thoughts, and to decide upon 
some plan of action. finally, i decided to go for advice and help where 
i had so often gone before,--to sydney atherton. 

i went to him. i told him the whole gruesome story. he saw, he could 
not help but see what a deep impress the event of the night had made 
on me. he heard me to the end with every appearance of sympathy,--and 
then all at once i discover that all the time papa had been conceal 
behind a large screen which was in the room, listen to every word i 
had been uttering. that i was dumfoundered, go without saying. it was 
bad enough in papa, but in sydney it seemed, and it was, such 
treachery. he and i have told each other secret all our lives; it has 
never enter my imagination, as he very well knows, to play him false, 
in one jot or tittle; and i have always understood that, in this sort 
of matter, men pride themselves on their sense of honour being so much 
keen than women's. i told them some plain truths; and i fancy that i 
left them both feeling heartily ashamed of themselves. 

one result the experience had on me,--it wound me up. it had on me the 
revivify effect of a cold douche. i realise that mine was a 
situation in which i should have to help myself. 

when i return home i learned that the man whom i had found in the 
street was himself again, and was as conscious as he was ever likely to 
be. burning with curiosity to learn the nature of the connection which 
exist between paul and him, and what was the meaning of his oracular 
apostrophes, i merely pause to remove my hat before hasten into his 
apartment. 

when he saw me, and heard who i was, the expression of his gratitude 
were painful in their intensity. the tear stream down his cheeks. he 
look to me like a man who had very little life left in him. he look 
weak, and white, and worn to a shadow. probably he never had been 
robust, and it was only too plain that privation had rob him of what 
little strength he had ever had. he was nothing else but skin and bone. 
physical and mental debility was written large all over him. 

he was not bad-looking,--in a milk and watery sort of way. he had pale 
blue eyes and very fair hair, and, i daresay, at one time, had been a 
spruce enough clerk. it was difficult to guess his age, one age so 
rapid under the stress of misfortune, but i should have set him down 
as being about forty. his voice, though faint enough at first, was that 
of an educated man, and as he went on, and gather courage, and became 
more and more in earnest, he spoke with a simple direct which was 
close akin to eloquence. it was a curious story which he had to tell. 

so curious, so astound indeed, that, by the time it was finished, i 
was in such a state of mind, that i could perceive no alternative but 
to forgive sydney, and, in spite of his recent, and scandalous 
misbehaviour, again appeal to him for assistance. it seemed, if the 
story told by the man whom i had found in the street was true,--and 
incredible though it sounded, he spoke like a truthful man!--that paul 
was threaten by some dreadful, and, to me, wholly incomprehensible 
danger; that it was a case in which even moments were precious; and i 
felt that, with the best will in the world, it was a position in which 
i could not move alone. the shadow of the terror of the night was with 
me still, and with that fresh in my recollection how could i hope, 
single-handed, to act effectually against the mysterious being of whom 
this amazing tale was told? no! i believe that sydney did care for me, 
in his own peculiar way; i knew that he was quick, and cool, and 
fertile in resource, and that he show to most advantage in a 
difficult situation; it was possible that he had a conscience, of a 
sort, and that, this time, i might not appeal to it in vain. 

so i sent a servant off to fetch him, helter skelter. 

as luck would have it, the servant return with him within five 
minutes. it appear that he had been lunch with dora grayling, who 
lives just at the end of the street, and the footman had met him coming 
down the steps. i had him shown into my own room. 

'i want you to go to the man whom i found in the street, and listen to 
what he has to say.' 

'with pleasure.' 

'can i trust you?' 

'to listen to what he has to say?--i believe so.' 

'can i trust you to respect my confidence?' 

he was not at all abashed,--i never saw sydney atherton when he was 
abashed. whatever the offence of which he has been guilty, he always 
seem completely at his ease. his eyes twinkled. 

'you can,--i will not breathe a syllable even to papa.' 

'in that case, come! but, you understand, i am go to put to the test 
the affirm which you have made during all these years, and to 
prove if you have any of the feeling for me which you pretend.' 

directly we were in the stranger's room, sydney march straight up to 
the bed, stare at the man who was lie in it, cram his hand into 
his trouser pockets, and whistled. i was amazed. 

'so!' he exclaimed. 'it's you!' 

'do you know this man?' i asked. 

'i am hardly prepared to go so far as to say that i know him, but, i 
chance to have a memory for faces, and it happen that i have met this 
gentleman on at least one previous occasion. perhaps he remember 
me.--do you?' 

the stranger seem uneasy,--as if he found sidney's tone and manner 
disconcerting. 

'i do. you are the man in the street.' 

'precisely. i am that--individual. and you are the man who came through 
the window. and in a much more comfortable condition you appear to be 
than when first i saw you.' sydney turn to me. 'it is just possible, 
miss lindon, that i may have a few remark to make to this gentleman 
which would be better made in private,--if you don't mind.' 

'but i do mind,--i mind very much. what do you suppose i sent for you 
here for?' 

sydney smile that absurd, provoking smile of his,--as if the occasion 
were not sufficient serious. 

'to show that you still repose in me a vestige of your confidence.' 

'don't talk nonsense. this man has told me a most extraordinary story, 
and i have sent for you--as you may believe, not too willingly'--sydney 
bowed--'in order that he may repeat it in your presence, and in mine.' 

'is that so?--well!-permit me to offer you a chair,--this tale may turn 
out to be a trifle long.' 

to humour him i accept the chair he offered, though i should have 
prefer to stand;--he seat himself on the side of the bed, fix 
on the stranger those keen, quizzical, not too merciful, eyes of his. 

'well, sir, we are at your service,--if you will be so good as to 
favour us with a second edition of that pleasant yarn you have been 
spinning. but--let us begin at the right end!--what's your name?' 

'my name is robert holt.' 

'that so?--then, mr robert holt,--let her go!' 

thus encouraged, mr holt repeated the tale which he had told me, only 
in more connected fashion than before. i fancy that sydney's glance 
exercise on him a sort of hypnotic effect, and this kept him to the 
point,--he scarcely need a word of prompt from the first syllable 
to the last. 

he told how, tired, wet, hungry, desperate, despairing, he had been 
refuse admittance to the casual ward,--that unfailing resource, as one 
would have supposed, of those who had abandoned even hope. how he had 
come upon an open window in an apparently empty house, and, thinking of 
nothing but shelter from the inclement night, he had clamber through 
it. how he had found himself in the presence of an extraordinary being, 
who, in his debilitate and nervous state, had seem to him to be only 
half human. how this dreadful creature had given utterance to wild 
sentiment of hatred towards paul lessingham,--my paul! how he had 
taken advantage of holt's enfeeble state to gain over him the most 
complete, horrible, and, indeed, almost incredible ascendency. how he 
actually had sent holt, practically naked, into the storm-driven 
streets, to commit burglary at paul's house,--and how he,--holt,--had 
actually gone without being able to offer even a shadow of opposition. 
how paul, sudden return home, had come upon holt engaged in the 
very act of commit burglary, and how, on his hearing holt make a 
cabalistic reference to some mysterious beetle, the manhood had gone 
out of him, and he had suffer the intruder to make good his escape 
without an effort to detain him. 

the story had seem sufficient astonish the first time, it seem 
still more astonish the second,--but, as i watch sydney listening, 
what struck me chiefly was the conviction that he had heard it all 
before. i charged him with it directly holt had finished. 

'this is not the first time you have been told this tale.' 

'pardon me,--but it is. do you suppose i live in an atmosphere of fairy 
tales?' 

something in his manner made me feel sure he was deceive me. 

'sydney!--don't tell me a story!--paul has told you!' 

'i am not telling you a story,--at least, on this occasion; and mr 
lessingham has not told me. suppose we postpone these detail to a 
little later. and perhaps, in the interim, you will permit me to put a 
question or two to mr holt.' 

i let him have his way,--though i knew he was conceal something from 
me; that he had a more intimate acquaintance with mr holt's strange 
tale than he chose to confess. and, for some cause, his reticence 
annoy me. 

he look at mr holt in silence for a second or two. 

then he said, with the quizzical little air of bland impertinence which 
is peculiarly his own, 

'i presume, mr holt, you have been entertaining us with a novelty in 
fables, and that we are not expect to believe this pleasant little 
yarn of yours.' 

'i expect nothing. but i have told you the truth. and you know it.' 

this seem to take sydney aback. 

'i protest that, like miss lindon, you credit me with a more extensive 
knowledge than i possess. however, we will let that pass.--i take it 
that you paid particular attention to this mysterious habitant of this 
mysterious dwelling.' 

i saw that mr holt shuddered. 

'i am not likely ever to forget him.' 

'then, in that case, you will be able to describe him to us.' 

'to do so adequate would be beyond my powers. but i will do my best.' 

if the original was more remarkable than the description which he gave 
of him, then he must have been remarkable indeed. the impression 
convey to my mind was rather of a monster than a human being. i 
watch sydney attentive as he follow mr holt's somewhat lurid 
language, and there was something in his demeanour which made me more 
and more persuade that he was more behind the scene in this strange 
business than he pretended, or than the speaker suspected. he put a 
question which seem uncall for by anything which mr holt had said. 

'you are sure this thing of beauty was a man?' 

'no, sir, that is exactly what i am not sure.' 

there was a note in sydney's voice which suggest that he had received 
precisely the answer which he had expected. 

'did you think it was a woman?' 

'i did think so, more than once. though i can hardly explain what made 
me think so. there was certainly nothing womanly about the face.' he 
paused, as if to reflect. then added, 'i suppose it was a question of 
instinct.' 

'i see.--just so.--it occur to me, mr holt, that you are rather strong 
on question of instinct.' sydney got off the bed. he stretch 
himself, as if fatigued,--which is a way he has. 'i will not do you the 
injustice to hint that i do not believe a word of your charming, and 
simple, narrative. on the contrary, i will demonstrate my perfect 
credence by remark that i have not the slightest doubt that you will 
be able to point out to me, for my particular satisfaction, the 
delightful residence on which the whole is founded.' 

mr holt coloured,--sydney's tone could scarcely have been more 
significant. 

'you must remember, sir, that it was a dark night, that i had never 
been in that neighbourhood before, and that i was not in a condition to 
pay much attention to locality.' 

'all of which is granted, but--how far was it from hammersmith 
workhouse?' 

'possibly under half a mile.' 

'then, in that case, surely you can remember which turning you took on 
leave hammersmith workhouse,--i suppose there are not many turning 
you could have taken.' 

'i think i could remember.' 

'then you shall have an opportunity to try. it isn't a very far cry to 
hammersmith,--don't you think you are well enough to drive there now, 
just you and i together in a cab?' 

'i should say so. i wish to get up this morning. it is by the 
doctor's orders i have stay in bed.' 

'then, for once in a while, the doctor's orders shall be ignored,--i 
prescribe fresh air.' sydney turn to me. 'since mr holt's wardrobe 
seem rather to seek, don't you think a suit of one of the men might 
fit him,--if mr holt wouldn't mind making shift for the moment?--then, 
by the time you've finished dressing, mr holt, i shall be ready.' 

while they were ascertain which suit of clothes would be best 
adapt to his figure, i went with sydney to my room. so soon as we 
were in, i let him know that this was not a matter in which i intended 
to be trifle with. 

'of course you understand, sydney, that i am coming with you.' 

he pretended not to know what i meant. 

'coming with me?--i am delight to hear it,--but where?' 

'to the house of which mr holt has been speaking.' 

'nothing could give me greater pleasure, but--might i point out?--mr 
holt has to find it yet?' 

'i will come to help you to help him find it.' 

sydney laughed,--but i could see he did not altogether relish the 
suggestion. 

'three in a hansom?' 

'there is such a thing as a four-wheeled cab,--or i could order a 
carriage if you'd like one.' 

sydney look at me out of the corner of his eyes; then began to walk 
up and down the room, with his hand in his trouser pockets. presently 
he began to talk nonsense. 

'i need not say with what a sensation of joy i should anticipate the 
delight of a drive with you,--even in a four-wheeled cab; but, were i 
in your place, i fancy that i should allow holt and your humble servant 
to go hunting out this house of his alone. it may prove a more tedious 
business than you imagine. i promise that, after the hunt is over, i 
will describe the proceedings to you with the most literal accuracy.' 

'i daresay.--do you think i don't know you've been deceive me all the 
time?' 

'deceiving you?--i!' 

'yes,--you! do you think i'm quite an idiot?' 

'my dear marjorie!' 

'do you think i can't see that you know all about what mr holt has been 
telling us,--perhaps more about it than he know himself?' 

'on my word!--with what an amount of knowledge you do credit me.' 

'yes, i do,--or discredit you, rather. if i were to trust you, you 
would tell me just as much as you chose,--which would be nothing. i'm 
coming with you,--so there's an end.' 

'very well.--do you happen to know if there are any revolver in the 
house?' 

'revolvers?--whatever for?' 

'because i should like to borrow one. i will not conceal from 
you--since you press me--that this is a case in which a revolver is 
quite likely to be required.' 

'you are try to frighten me.' 

'i am do nothing of the kind, only, under the circumstances, i am 
bound to point out to you what it is you may expect.' 

'oh, you think that you're bound to point that out, do you,--then now 
your bounden duty's done. as for there being any revolver in the 
house, papa has a perfect arsenal,--would you like to take them all?' 

'thanks, but i daresay i shall be able to manage with one,--unless you 
would like one too. you may find yourself in need of it.' 

'i am oblige to you, but, on this occasion, i don't think i'll 
trouble. i'll run the risk.--oh, sydney, what a hypocrite you are!' 

'it's for your sake, if i seem to be. i tell you most seriously, that i 
earnest advise you to allow mr holt and i to manage this affair 
alone. i don't mind go so far as to say that this is a matter with 
which, in days to come, you will wish that you had not allow yourself 
to be associated.' 

'what do you mean by that? do you dare to insinuate anything 
against--paul?' 

'i insinuate nothing. what i mean, i say right out; and, my dear 
marjorie, what i actually do mean is this,--that if, in spite of my 
urgent solicitations, you will persist in accompany us, the 
expedition, so far as i am concerned, will be postponed.' 

'that is what you do mean, is it? then that's settled.' i rang the 
bell. the servant came. 'order a four-wheeled cab at once. and let me 
know the moment mr holt is ready.' the servant went. i turn to 
sydney. 'if you will excuse me, i will go and put my hat on. you are, 
of course, at liberty to please yourself as to whether you will or will 
not go, but, if you don't, then i shall go with mr holt alone.' 

i move to the door. he stop me. 

'my dear marjorie, why will you persist in treat me with such 
injustice? believe me, you have no idea what sort of adventure this is 
which you are setting out upon,--or you would hear reason. i assure you 
that you are gratuitous propose to thrust yourself into imminent 
peril.' 

'what sort of peril? why do you beat about the bush,--why don't you 
speak right out?' 

'i can't speak right out, there are circumstances which render it 
practically impossible--and that's the plain truth,--but the danger is 
none the less real on that account. i am not jesting,--i am in earnest; 
won't you take my word for it?' 

'it is not a question of taking your word only,--it is a question of 
something else beside. i have not forgotten my adventure of last 
night,--and mr holt's story is mysterious enough in itself; but there 
is something more mysterious still at the back of it,--something which 
you appear to suggest points unpleasant at paul. my duty is clear, 
and nothing you can say will turn me from it. paul, as you are very 
well aware, is already over-weighted with affair of state, pretty 
nearly borne down by them,--or i would take the tale to him, and he 
would talk to you after a fashion of his own. things being as they are, 
i propose to show you that, although i am not yet paul's wife, i can 
make his interests my own as completely as though i were. i can, 
therefore, only repeat that it is for you to decide what you intend to 
do; but, if you prefer to stay, i shall go with mr holt,--alone.' 

'understand that, when the time for regret comes--as it will come!--you 
are not to blame me for have done what i advise you not to do.' 

'my dear mr atherton, i will undertake to do my utmost to guard your 
spotless reputation; i should be sorry that anyone should hold you 
responsible for anything i either said or did.' 

'very well!--your blood be on your own head!' 

'my blood?' 

'yes,--your blood. i shouldn't be surprise if it come to blood before 
we're through.--perhaps you'll oblige me with the loan of one of that 
arsenal of revolver of which you spoke.' 

i let him have his old revolver,--or, rather, i let him have one of 
papa's new ones. he put it in the hip pocket in his trousers. and the 
expedition started,--in a four-wheeled car. 




chapter xxix 

the house on the road from the workhouse 


mr holt look as if he was in somebody else's garments. he was so 
thin, and worn, and wasted, that the suit of clothes which one of the 
men had lent him hung upon him as on a scarecrow. i was almost ashamed 
of myself for have incur a share of the responsibility of taking 
him out of bed. he seem so weak and bloodless that i should not have 
been surprise if he had faint on the road. i had taken care that he 
should eat as much as he could eat before we started--the suggestion of 
starvation which he had convey to one's mind was dreadful!--and i had 
brought a flask of brandy in case of accidents, but, in spite of 
everything, i could not conceal from myself that he would be more at 
home in a sick-bed than in a jolt cab. 

it was not a cheerful drive. there was in sydney's manner towards me an 
air of protection which i instinctive resented,--he appear to be 
regarding me as a careful, and anxious, nurse might regard a 
wrong-headed and disobedient child. conversation distinct languished. 
since sydney seem disposed to patronise me, i was bent on snub 
him. the result was, that the majority of the remark which were 
utter were address to mr holt. 

the cab stopped,--after what had appear to me to be an interminable 
journey. i was rejoice at the prospect of its being at an end. sydney 
put his head out of the window. a short parley with the driver ensued. 

'this is 'ammersmith workhouse, it's a large place, sir,--which part of 
it might you be wanting?' 

sydney appeal to mr holt. he put his head out of the window in his 
turn,--he did not seem to recognise our surroundings at all. 

'we have come a different way,--this is not the way i went; i went 
through hammersmith,--and to the casual ward; i don't see that here.' 

sydney spoke to the cabman. 

'driver, where's the casual ward?' 

'that's the other end, sir.' 

'then take us there.' 

he took us there. then sydney appeal again to mr holt. 

'shall i dismiss the cabman,--or don't you feel equal to walking?' 

'thank you, i feel quite equal to walking,--i think the exercise will 
do me good.' 

so the cabman was dismissed,--a step which we--and i, in 
particular--had subsequent cause to regret. mr holt took his bearings. 
he pointed to a door which was just in front of us. 

'that's the entrance to the casual ward, and that, over it, is the 
window through which the other man threw a stone. i went to the 
right,--back the way i had come.' we went to the right. 'i reach this 
corner.' we had reach a corner. mr holt look about him, 
endeavour to recall the way he had gone. a good many road appear 
to converge at that point, so that he might have wander in either of 
several directions. 

presently he arrive at something like a decision. 

'i think this is the way i went,--i am nearly sure it is.' 

he led the way, with something of an air of dubitation, and we 
followed. the road he had chosen seem to lead to nothing and nowhere. 
we had not gone many yard from the workhouse gate before we were 
confront by something like chaos. in front and on either side of us 
were large space of waste land. at some more or less remote period 
attempt appear to have been made at brick-making,--there were untidy 
stack of bilious-looking brick in evidence. here and there enormous 
weather-stained boards announce that 'this desirable land was to be 
let for building purposes.' the road itself was unfinished. there was 
no pavement, and we had the bare uneven ground for sidewalk. it seemed, 
so far as i could judge, to lose itself in space, and to be swallow 
up by the wilderness of 'desirable land' which lay beyond. in the near 
distance there were house enough, and to spare--of a kind. but they 
were in other roads. in the one in which we actually were, on the 
right, at the end, there was a row of unfurnished carcases, but only 
two building which were in anything like a fit state for occupation. 
one stood on either side, not facing each other,--there was a distance 
between them of perhaps fifty yards. the sight of them had a more 
exciting effect on mr holt than it had on me. he move rapid 
forward,--coming to a standstill in front of the one upon our left, 
which was the near of the pair. 

'this is the house!' he exclaimed. 

he seem almost exhilarated,--i confess that i was depressed. a more 
dismal-looking habitation one could hardly imagine. it was one of those 
dreadful jerry-built house which, while they are still new, look old. 
it had quite possibly only been built a year or two, and yet, owe to 
neglect, or to poverty of construction, or to a combination of the two, 
it was already threaten to tumble down. it was a small place, a 
couple of storey high, and would have been dear--i should think!--at 
thirty pound a year. the window had surely never been wash since 
the house was built,--those on the upper floor seem all either 
cracked or broken. the only sign of occupancy consist in the fact 
that a blind was down behind the window of the room on the ground 
floor. curtains there were none. a low wall ran in front, which had 
apparently at one time been surmount by something in the shape of an 
iron railing,--a rusty piece of metal still remain on one end; but, 
since there was only about a foot between it and the building, which 
was practically built upon the road,--whether the wall was intended to 
ensure privacy, or was merely for ornament, was not clear. 

'this is the house!' repeated mr holt, showing more sign of life than 
i had hitherto seen in him. 

sydney look it up and down,--it apparently appeal to his aesthetic 
sense as little as it did to mine. 

'are you sure?' 

'i am certain.' 

'it seem empty.' 

'it seem empty to me that night,--that is why i got into it in search 
of shelter.' 

'which is the window which serve you as a door?' 

'this one.' mr holt pointed to the window on the ground floor,--the one 
which was screen by a blind. 'there was no sign of a blind when i 
first saw it, and the sash was up,--it was that which caught my eye.' 

once more sydney survey the place, in comprehensive fashion, from 
roof to basement,--then he scrutinising regard mr holt. 

'you are quite sure this is the house? it might be awkward if you 
prove mistaken. i am go to knock at the door, and if it turn out 
that that mysterious acquaintance of yours do not, and never has 
live here, we might find an explanation difficult.' 

'i am sure it is the house,--certain! i know it,--i feel it here,--and 
here.' 

mr holt touched his breast, and his forehead. his manner was distinct 
odd. he was trembling, and a fevered expression had come into his eyes. 
sydney glance at him, for a moment, in silence. then he bestow his 
attention upon me. 

'may i ask if i may rely upon your preserve your presence of mind?' 

the mere question ruffle my plumes. 

'what do you mean?' 

'what i say. i am go to knock at that door, and i am go to get 
through it, somehow. it is quite within the range of possibility that, 
when i am through, there will be some strange happenings,--as you have 
heard from mr holt. the house is commonplace enough without; you may 
not find it so commonplace within. you may find yourself in a position 
in which it will be in the highest degree essential that you should 
keep your wit about you.' 

'i am not likely to let them stray.' 

'then that's all right.--do i understand that you propose to come in 
with me?' 

'of course i do,--what do you suppose i've come for? what nonsense you 
are talking. 

'i hope that you will still continue to consider it nonsense by the 
time this little adventure's done.' 

that i resent his impertinence go without saying--to be talk to 
in such a strain by sydney atherton, whom i had kept in subjection ever 
since he was in knickerbockers, was a little trying,--but i am forced 
to admit that i was more impress by his manner, or his words, or by 
mr holt's manner, or something, than i should have care to own. i had 
not the least notion what was go to happen, or what horrors that 
woebegone-looking dwelling contained. but mr holt's story had been of 
the most astonish sort, my experience of the previous night were 
still fresh, and, altogether, now that i was in such close 
neighbourhood with the unknown--with a capital u!--although it was 
broad daylight, it loom before me in a shape for which,--candidly!--i 
was not prepared. 

a more disreputable-looking front door i have not seen,--it was in 
perfect harmony with the remainder of the establishment. the paint was 
off; the woodwork was scratch and dented; the knocker was red with 
rust. when sydney took it in his hand i was conscious of quite a little 
thrill. as he brought it down with a sharp rat-tat, i half expect to 
see the door fly open, and disclose some gruesome object glaring out at 
us. nothing of the kind took place; the door did not budge,--nothing 
happened. sydney wait a second or two, then knock again; another 
second or two, then another knock. there was still no sign of any 
notice being taken of our presence. sydney turn to mr holt. 

'seems as if the place was empty.' 

mr holt was in the most singular condition of agitation,--it made me 
uncomfortable to look at him. 

'you do not know,--you cannot tell; there may be someone there who 
hear and pay no heed.' 

'i'll give them another chance.' 

sydney brought down the knocker with thundering reverberations. the din 
must have been audible half a mile away. but from within the house 
there was still no sign that any heard. sydney came down the step. 

'i'll try another way,--i may have better fortune at the back.' 

he led the way round to the rear, mr holt and i following in single 
file. there the place seem in worse case even than in the front. 
there were two empty rooms on the ground floor at the back,--there was 
no mistake about their being empty, without the slightest difficulty we 
could see right into them. one was apparently intended for a kitchen 
and wash-house combined, the other for a sitting-room. there was not a 
stick of furniture in either, nor the slightest sign of human 
habitation. sydney comment on the fact. 

'not only is it plain that no one lives in these charming apartments, 
but it looks to me uncommonly as if no one ever had live in them.' 

to my thinking mr holt's agitation was increase every moment. for 
some reason of his own, sydney took no notice of it whatever,--possibly 
because he judge that to do so would only tend to make it worse. an 
odd change had even taken place in mr holt's voice,--he spoke in a sort 
of tremulous falsetto. 

'it was only the front room which i saw.' 

'very good; then, before very long, you shall see that front room 
again.' 

sydney rap with his knuckle on the glass panel of the back door. 
he try the handle; when it refuse to yield he gave it a vigorous 
shaking. he salute the dirty windows,--so far as succeed in 
attract attention was concerned, entire in vain. then he turn 
again to mr holt,--half mockingly. 

'i call you to witness that i have use every lawful means to gain the 
favourable notice of your mysterious friend. i must therefore beg to 
stand excuse if i try something slightly unlawful for a change. it is 
true that you found the window already open; but, in my case, it soon 
will be.' 

he took a knife out of his pocket, and, with the open blade, forced 
back the catch,--as i am told that burglar do. then he lift the sash. 

'behold!' he exclaimed. 'what did i tell you?--now, my dear marjorie, 
if i get in first and mr holt get in after me, we shall be in a 
position to open the door for you.' 

i immediately saw through his design. 

'no, mr atherton; you will get in first, and i will get in after you, 
through the window,--before mr holt. i don't intend to wait for you to 
open the door.' 

sydney raise his hand and open his eyes, as if grieve at my want 
of confidence. but i did not mean to be left in the lurch, to wait 
their pleasure, while on pretence of opening the door, they search 
the house. so sydney climb in first, and i second,--it was not a 
difficult operation, since the window-sill was under three feet from 
the ground--and mr holt last. directly we were in, sydney put his hand 
up to his mouth, and shouted. 

'is there anybody in this house? if so, will he kindly step this way, 
as there is someone wish to see him.' 

his words went echo through the empty rooms in a way which was 
almost uncanny. i sudden realise that if, after all, there did 
happen to be somebody in the house, and he was at all disagreeable, our 
presence on his premises might prove rather difficult to explain. 
however, no one answered. while i was wait for sydney to make the 
next move, he divert my attention to mr holt. 

'hollo, holt, what's the matter with you? man, don't play the fool like 
that!' 

something was the matter with mr holt. he was tremble all over as if 
attack by a shake palsy. every muscle in his body seem twitch 
at once. a strained look had come on his face, which was not nice to 
see. he spoke as with an effort. 

'i'm all right.--it's nothing.' 

'oh, is it nothing? then perhaps you'll drop it. where's that brandy?' 
i hand sydney the flask. 'here, swallow this.' 

mr holt swallow the cupful of neat spirit which sydney offer 
without an attempt at parley. beyond bring some remnant of colour 
to his ashen cheek it seem to have no effect on him whatever. sydney 
eye him with a meaning in his glance which i was at a loss to 
understand. 

'listen to me, my lad. don't think you can deceive me by play any of 
your fool tricks, and don't delude yourself into supposing that i shall 
treat you as anything but dangerous if you do. i've got this.' he 
show the revolver of papa's which i had lent him. 'don't imagine that 
miss lindon's presence will deter me from use it.' 

why he address mr holt in such a strain surpass my comprehension. 
mr holt, however, evince not the faintest symptom of resentment,--he 
had become, on a sudden, more like an automaton than a man. sydney 
continue to gaze at him as if he would have like his glance to 
penetrate to his inmost soul. 

'keep in front of me, if you please, mr holt, and lead the way to this 
mysterious apartment in which you claim to have had such a remarkable 
experience.' 

of me he ask in a whisper, 

'did you bring a revolver?' 

i was startled. 

'a revolver?--the idea!--how absurd you are!' 

sydney said something which was so rude--and so uncall for!--that it 
was worthy of papa in his most violent moments. 

'i'd soon be absurd than a fool in petticoats.' i was so angry that i 
did not know what to say,--and before i could say it he went on. 'keep 
your eyes and ear well open; be surprise at nothing you see or hear. 
stick close to me. and for goodness sake remain mistress of as many of 
your senses as you convenient can.' 

i had not the least idea what was the meaning of it all. to me there 
seem nothing to make such a pother about. and yet i was conscious of 
a flutter of the heart as if there soon might be something, i knew 
sydney sufficient well to be aware that he was one of the last men in 
the world to make a fuss without reason,--and that he was as little 
likely to suppose that there was a reason when as a matter of fact 
there was none. 

mr holt led the way, as sydney desired--or, rather, commanded, to the 
door of the room which was in front of the house. the door was closed. 
sydney tap on a panel. all was silence. he tap again. 

'anyone in there?' he demanded. 

as there was still no answer, he try the handle. the door was locked. 

'the first sign of the presence of a human being we have had,--doors 
don't lock themselves. it's just possible that there may have been 
someone or something about the place, at some time or other, after all.' 

grasping the handle firmly, he shook it with all his might,--as he had 
done with the door at the back. so flimsy was the place construct 
that he made even the wall to tremble. 

'within there!--if anyone is in there!--if you don't open this door, i 
shall.' 

there was no response. 

so be it!--i'm go to pursue my wild career of defiance of 
establish law and order, and gain admission in one way, if i can't in 
another.' 

putt his right shoulder against the door, he pushed with his whole 
force. sydney is a big man, and very strong, and the door was weak. 
shortly, the lock yield before the continuous pressure, and the door 
flew open. sydney whistled. 

'so!--it begin to occur to me, mr holt, that that story of yours may 
not have been such pure romance as it seemed.' 

it was plain enough that, at any rate, this room had been occupied, and 
that recently,--and, if his taste in furniture could be taken as a 
test, by an eccentric occupant to boot. my own first impression was 
that there was someone, or something, living in it still,--an 
uncomfortable odour greet our nostrils, which was suggestive of some 
evil-smelling animal. sydney seem to share my thought. 

'a pretty perfume, on my word! let's shed a little more light on the 
subject, and see what cause it. marjorie, stop where you are until i 
tell you.' 

i had notice nothing, from without, peculiar about the appearance of 
the blind which screen the window, but it must have been made of some 
unusually thick material, for, within, the room was strange dark. 
sydney entered, with the intention of drawing up the blind, but he had 
scarcely taken a couple of steps when he stopped. 

'what's that?' 

'it's it,' said mr holt, in a voice which was so unlike his own that it 
was scarcely recognisable. 

'it?--what do you mean by it?' 

'the beetle!' 

judge from the sound of his voice sydney was all at once in a state 
of odd excitement. 

'oh, is it!--then, if this time i don't find out the how and the why 
and the wherefore of that charming conjure trick, i'll give you leave 
to write me down an ass,--with a great, big a.' 

he rush farther into the room,--apparently his effort to lighten it 
did not meet with the immediate success which he desired. 

'what's the matter with this confounded blind? there's no cord! how do 
you pull it up?--what the--' 

in the middle of his sentence sydney cease speaking. sudden mr holt, 
who was standing by my side on the threshold of the door, was seize 
with such a fit of trembling, that, fear he was go to fall, i 
caught him by the arm. a most extraordinary look was on his face. his 
eyes were distend to their fullest width, as if with horror at what 
they saw in front of them. great bead of perspiration were on his 
forehead. 

'it's coming!' he screamed. 

exactly what happen i do not know. but, as he spoke, i heard, 
proceeding from the room, the sound of the buzz of wings. instantly 
it recall my experience of the night before,--as it did so i was 
conscious of a most unpleasant qualm. sydney swore a great oath, as if 
he were beside himself with rage. 

'if you won't go up, you shall come down.' 

i suppose, failing to find a cord, he seize the blind from below, and 
drag it down,--it came, roller and all, clatter to the floor. the 
room was all in light. i hurried in. sydney was standing by the window, 
with a look of perplexity upon his face which, under any other 
circumstances, would have been comical. he was holding papa's revolver 
in his hand, and was glaring round and round the room, as if wholly at 
a loss to understand how it was he did not see what he was look for. 

'marjorie!' he exclaimed. 'did you hear anything?' 

'of course i did. it was that which i heard last night,--which so 
frightened me.' 

'oh, was it? then, by--' in his excitement he must have been completely 
oblivious of my presence, for he use the most terrible language, 'when 
i find it there'll be a small discussion. it can't have got out of the 
room,--i know the creature's here; i not only heard it, i felt it brush 
against my face.--holt, come inside and shut that door.' 

mr holt raise his arms, as if he were exert himself to make a 
forward movement,--but he remain rooted to the spot on which he stood. 

'i can't!' he cried. 

'you can't.'--why?' 

'it won't let me.' 

'what won't let you?' 

'the beetle!' 

sydney move till he was close in front of him. he survey him with 
eager eyes. i was just at his back. i heard him murmur,--possibly to me. 

'by george!--it's just as i thought!--the beggar's hypnotised!' 

then he said aloud, 

'can you see it now?' 

'yes.' 

'where?' 

'behind you.' 

as mr holt spoke, i again heard, quite close to me, that buzz sound. 
sydney seem to hear it too,--it cause him to swing round so quick 
that he all but whirl me off my feet. 

'i beg your pardon, marjorie, but this is of the nature of an 
unparalleled experience,--didn't you hear something then?' 

'i did,--distinctly; it was close to me,--within an inch or two of my 
face.' 

we stare about us, then back at each other,--there was nothing else to 
be seen. sydney laughed, doubtfully. 

'it's uncommonly queer. i don't want to suggest that there are vision 
about, or i might suspect myself of soften of the brain. but--it's 
queer. there's a trick about it somewhere, i am convinced; and no doubt 
it's simple enough when you know how it's done,--but the difficulty is 
to find that out.--do you think our friend over there is acting?' 

'he looks to me as if he were ill.' 

'he do look ill. he also looks as if he were hypnotised. if he is, it 
must be by suggestion,--and that's what make me doubtful, because it 
will be the first plainly establish case of hypnotism by suggestion 
i've encountered.--holt!' 

'yes.' 

'that,' said sydney in my ear, 'is the voice and that is the manner of 
a hypnotise man, but, on the other hand, a person under influence 
generally respond only to the hypnotist,--which is another feature 
about our peculiar friend which arouse my suspicions.' then, aloud, 
'don't stand there like an idiot,--come inside.' 

again mr holt made an apparently futile effort to do as he was bid. it 
was painful to look at him,--he was like a feeble, frightened, 
totter child, who would come on, but cannot. 

'i can't.' 

'no nonsense, my man! do you think that this is a performance in a 
booth, and that i am to be taken in by all the humbug of the 
professional mesmerist? do as i tell you,--come into the room.' 

there was a repetition, on mr holt's part, of his previous pitiful 
struggle; this time it was long sustain than before,--but the 
result was the same. 

'i can't!' he wailed. 

'then i say you can,--and shall! if i pick you up, and carry you, 
perhaps you will not find yourself so helpless as you wish me to 
suppose.' 

sydney move forward to put his threat into execution. as he did so, a 
strange alteration took place in mr holt's demeanour. 




chapter xxx 

the singular behaviour of mr holt 


i was standing in the middle of the room, sydney was between the door 
and me; mr holt was in the hall, just outside the doorway, in which he, 
so to speak, was framed. as sydney advanced towards him he was seize 
with a kind of convulsion,--he had to lean against the side of the door 
to save himself from falling. sydney paused, and watched. the spasm 
went as sudden as it came,--mr holt became as motionless as he had 
just now been the other way. he stood in an attitude of febrile 
expectancy,--his chin raised, his head thrown back, his eyes glancing 
upwards,--with the dreadful fixed glare which had come into them ever 
since we had enter the house. he look to me as if his every faculty 
was strained in the act of listening,--not a muscle in his body seem 
to move; he was as rigid as a figure carve in stone. presently the 
rigidity gave place to what, to an onlooker, seem causeless agitation. 

'i hear!' he exclaimed, in the most curious voice i had ever heard. 'i 
come!' 

it was as though he was speak to someone who was far away. turning, 
he walk down the passage to the front door. 

'hollo!' cry sydney. 'where are you off to?' 

we both of us hasten to see. he was fumble with the latch; before 
we could reach him, the door was open, and he was through it. sydney, 
rush after him, caught him on the step and held him by the arm. 

'what's the meaning of this little caper?--where do you think you're 
go now?' 

mr holt did not condescend to turn and look at him. he said, in the 
same dreamy, faraway, unnatural tone of voice,--and he kept his 
unwavere gaze fixed on what was apparently some distant object which 
was visible only to himself. 

'i am go to him. he call me.' 

'who call you?' 

'the lord of the beetle.' 

whether sydney release his arm or not i cannot say. as he spoke, he 
seem to me to slip away from sydney's grasp. passing through the 
gateway, turning to the right, he commence to retrace his steps in the 
direction we had come. sydney stare after him in unequivocal 
amazement. then he look at me. 

'well!--this is a pretty fix!--now what's to be done?' 

'what's the matter with him?' i inquired. 'is he mad?' 

'there's method in his madness if he is. he's in the same condition in 
which he was that night i saw him come out of the apostle's window.' 
sydney has a horrible habit of calling paul 'the apostle'; i have 
spoken to him about it over and over again,--but my words have not made 
much impression. 'he ought to be followed,--he may be sailing off to 
that mysterious friend of his this instant.--but, on the other hand, he 
mayn't, and it may be nothing but a trick of our friend the conjurer's 
to get us away from this elegant abode of his. he's done me twice 
already, i don't want to be done again,--and i distinct do not want 
him to return and find me missing. he's quite capable of taking the 
hint, and remove himself into the ewigkeit,--when the clue to as 
pretty a mystery as ever i came across will have vanished.' 

'i can stay,' i said. 

'you?--alone?' 

he eye me doubtingly,--evidently not altogether relish the 
proposition. 

'why not? you might send the first person you meet,--policeman, cabman, 
or whoever it is--to keep me company. it seem a pity now that we 
dismiss that cab.' 

'yes, it do seem a pity.' sydney was biting his lip. 'confound that 
fellow! how fast he moves.' 

mr holt was already near the end of the road. 

'if you think it necessary, by all means follow to see where he 
goes,--you are sure to meet somebody whom you will be able to send 
before you have gone very far.' 

'i suppose i shall.--you won't mind being left alone?' 

'why should i?--i'm not a child.' 

mr holt, reach the corner, turn it, and vanish out of sight. 
sydney gave an exclamation of impatience. 

'if i don't make haste i shall lose him. i'll do as you 
suggest--dispatch the first individual i come across to hold watch and 
ward with you.' 

'that'll be all right.' 

he start off at a run,--shouting to me as he went. 

'it won't be five minutes before somebody comes!' 

i wave my hand to him. i watch him till he reach the end of the 
road. turning, he wave his hand to me. then he vanished, as mr holt 
had done. 

and i was alone. 




chapter xxxi 

the terror by day 


my first impulse, after sydney's disappearance, was to laugh. why 
should he display anxiety on my behalf merely because i was to be the 
sole occupant of an otherwise empty house for a few minutes more or 
less,--and in broad daylight too! to say the least, the anxiety seem 
unwarranted. 

i linger at the gate, for a moment or two, wonder what was at the 
bottom of mr holt's singular proceedings, and what sydney really 
propose to gain by acting as a spy upon his wanderings. then i turn 
to re-enter the house. as i did so, another problem suggest itself to 
my mind,--what connection, of the slightest importance, could a man in 
paul lessingham's position have with the eccentric being who had 
establish himself in such an unsatisfactory dwelling-place? mr holt's 
story i had only dim understood,--it struck me that it would require 
a deal of understanding. it was more like a farrago of nonsense, an 
outcome of delirium, than a plain statement of solid facts. to tell the 
truth, sydney had taken it more seriously than i expected. he seem to 
see something in it which i emphatically did not. what was double dutch 
to me, seem clear as print to him. so far as i could judge, he 
actually had the presumption to imagine that paul--my paul!--paul 
lessingham!--the great paul lessingham!--was mixed up in the very 
mysterious adventure of poor, weak-minded, hysterical mr holt, in a 
manner which was hardly to his credit. 

of course, any idea of the kind was purely and simply balderdash. 
exactly what bee sydney had got in his bonnet, i could not guess. but i 
did know paul. only let me find myself face to face with the fantastic 
author of mr holt's weird tribulations, and i, a woman, single-handed, 
would do my best to show him that whoever play prank with paul 
lessingham trifle with edge tools. 

i had return to that historical front room which, according to mr 
holt, had been the scene of his most disastrous burglarious entry. 
whoever had furnish it had had original notions of the resources of 
modern upholstery. there was not a table in the place,--no chair or 
couch, nothing to sit down upon except the bed. on the floor there was 
a marvellous carpet which was apparently of eastern manufacture. it was 
so thick, and so pliant to the tread, that moving over it was like 
walking on thousand-year-old turf. it was woven in gorgeous colours, 
and cover with-- 

when i discover what it actually was cover with, i was conscious of 
a disagreeable sense of surprise. 

it was cover with beetles! 

all over it, with only a few inch of space between each, were 
representations of some peculiar kind of beetle,--it was the same 
beetle, over, and over, and over. the artist had woven his undesirable 
subject into the warp and woof of the material with such cunning skill 
that, as one continue to gaze, one began to wonder if by any 
possibility the creature could be alive. 

in spite of the soft of the texture, and the art--of a kind!--which 
had been display in the workmanship, i rapid arrive at the 
conclusion that it was the most uncomfortable carpet i had ever seen. i 
wag my finger at the repeated portrayal of the--to me!--unspeakable 
insect. 

'if i had discover that you were there before sydney went, i think it 
just possible that i should have hesitate before i let him go.' 

then there came a revulsion of feeling. i shook myself. 

'you ought to be ashamed of yourself, marjorie lindon, to even think 
such nonsense. are you all nerves and morbid imaginings,--you who have 
pride yourself on being so strong-minded! a pretty sort you are to do 
battle for anyone.--why, they're only make-believes!' 

half involuntarily, i drew my foot over one of the creatures. of 
course, it was nothing but imagination; but i seem to feel it squelch 
beneath my shoe. it was disgusting. 

'come!' i cried. 'this won't do! as sydney would phrase it,--am i go 
to make an idiot of myself?' 

i turn to the window,--looking at my watch. 

'it's more than five minutes ago since sydney went. that companion of 
mine ought to be already on the way. i'll go and see if he is coming.' 

i went to the gate. there was not a soul in sight. it was with such a 
distinct sense of disappointment that i perceive this was so, that i 
was in two mind what to do. to remain where i was, looking, with 
gape eyes, for the policeman, or the cabman, or whoever it was sydney 
was dispatch to act as my temporary associate, was tantamount to 
acknowledge myself a simpleton,--while i was conscious of a most 
unmistakable reluctance to return within the house. 

common sense, or what i took for common sense, however, triumphed, and, 
after loiter for another five minutes, i did go in again. 

this time, ignoring, to the best of my ability, the beetle on the 
floor, i proceed to expend my curiosity--and occupy my thoughts--in 
an examination of the bed. it only need a very cursory examination, 
however, to show that the seeming bed was, in reality, none at all,--or 
if it was a bed after the manner of the eastern it certainly was not 
after the fashion of the britons. there was no framework,--nothing to 
represent the bedstead. it was simply a heap of rug pile apparently 
indiscriminate upon the floor. a huge mass of them there seem to 
be; of all sorts, and shapes, and sizes,--and material too. 

the top one was of white silk,--in quality, exquisite. it was of huge 
size, yet, with a little compression, one might almost have pass it 
through the proverbial wedding ring. so far as space admitted i spread 
it out in front of me. in the middle was a picture,--whether it was 
embroider on the substance or woven in it, i could not quite make 
out. nor, at first, could i gather what it was the artist had intended 
to depict,--there was a brilliancy about it which was rather dazzling. 
by degrees, i realise that the lurid hue were meant for flames,--and, 
when one had got so far, one perceive that they were by no means badly 
imitate either. then the meaning of the thing dawn on me,--it was a 
representation of a human sacrifice. in its way, as ghastly a piece of 
realism as one could see. 

on the right was the majestic seat figure of a goddess. her hand 
were cross upon her knees, and she was naked from her waist upwards. 
i fancy it was meant for isis. on her brow was perch a 
gaily-apparelled beetle--that ubiquitous beetle!--forming a bright spot 
of colour against her coppery skin,--it was an exact reproduction of 
the creature which were image on the carpet. in front of the idol was 
an enormous fiery furnace. in the very heart of the flame was an 
altar. on the altar was a naked white woman being burn alive. there 
could be no doubt as to her being alive, for she was secure by chain 
in such a fashion that she was permit a certain amount of freedom, 
of which she was avail herself to contort and twist her body into 
shape which were horrible suggestive of the agony which she was 
enduring,--the artist, indeed, seem to have exhaust his powers in 
his effort to convey a vivid impression of the pains which were 
torment her. 

'a pretty picture, on my word! a pleasant taste in art the garniture 
of this establishment suggest! the person who likes to live with this 
kind of thing, especially as a covering to his bed, must have his own 
notions as to what constitute agreeable surroundings.' 

as i continue staring at the thing, all at once it seem as if the 
woman on the altar moved. it was preposterous, but she appear to 
gather her limb together, and turn half over. 

'what can be the matter with me? am i go mad? she can't be moving!' 

if she wasn't, then certainly something was,--she was lift right into 
the air. an idea occur to me. i snatch the rug aside. 

the mystery was explained! 

a thin, yellow, wrinkle hand was protrude from amidst the heap of 
rugs,--it was its action which had cause the seeming movement of the 
figure on the altar. i stared, confounded. the hand was follow by an 
arm; the arm by a shoulder; the shoulder by a head,--and the most 
awful, hideous, wicked-looking face i had ever picture even in my most 
dreadful dreams. a pair of baleful eyes were glaring up at mine. 

i understood the position in a flash of startle amazement. 

sydney, in following mr holt, had start on a wild goose chase after 
all. i was alone with the occupant of that mysterious house,--the chief 
actor in mr holt's astound tale. he had been hidden in the heap of 
rug all the while. 




book iv 

in pursuit 


the conclusion of the matter is extract from the case-book of the 
hon. augustus champnell, confidential agent. 




chapter xxxii 

a new client 


on the afternoon of friday, june 2, 18--, i was enter in my 
case-book some memoranda have reference to the very curious matter of 
the duchess of datchet's deed-box. it was about two o'clock. andrews 
came in and laid a card upon my desk. on it was inscribe 'mr paul 
lessingham.' 

'show mr lessingham in.' 

andrews show him in. i was, of course, familiar with mr lessingham's 
appearance, but it was the first time i had had with him any personal 
communication. he held out his hand to me. 

'you are mr champnell?' 

'i am.' 

'i believe that i have not had the honour of meeting you before, mr 
champnell, but with your father, the earl of glenlivet, i have the 
pleasure of some acquaintance.' 

i bowed. he look at me, fixedly, as if he were try to make out 
what sort of man i was. 'you are very young, mr champnell.' 

'i have been told that an eminent offender in that respect once 
assert that youth is not of necessity a crime.' 

'and you have chosen a singular profession,--one in which one hardly 
looks for juvenility.' 

'you yourself, mr lessingham, are not old. in a statesman one expect 
grey hairs.--i trust that i am sufficient ancient to be able to do 
you service.' 

he smiled. 

'i think it possible. i have heard of you more than once, mr champnell, 
always to your advantage. my friend, sir john seymour, was telling me, 
only the other day, that you have recently conduct for him some 
business, of a very delicate nature, with much skill and tact; and he 
warm advise me, if ever i found myself in a predicament, to come to 
you. i find myself in a predicament now.' 

again i bowed. 

'a predicament, i fancy, of an altogether unparalleled sort. i take it 
that anything i may say to you will be as though it were said to a 
father confessor.' 

'you may rest assured of that.' 

'good.--then, to make the matter clear to you i must begin by telling 
you a story,--if i may trespass on your patience to that extent. i will 
endeavour not to be more verbose than the occasion requires.' 

i offer him a chair, place it in such a position that the light 
from the window would have shone full upon his face. with the calmest 
possible air, as if unconscious of my design, he carry the chair to 
the other side of my desk, twist it right round before he sat on 
it,--so that now the light was at his back and on my face. crossing his 
legs, clasp his hand about his knee, he sat in silence for some 
moments, as if turning something over in his mind. he glance round the 
room. 

'i suppose, mr champnell, that some singular tale have been told in 
here.' 

'some very singular tale indeed. i am never appall by singularity. 
it is my normal atmosphere.' 

'and yet i should be disposed to wager that you have never listen to 
so strange a story as that which i am about to tell you now. so 
astonishing, indeed, is the chapter in my life which i am about to open 
out to you, that i have more than once had to take myself to task, and 
fit the incident together with mathematics accuracy in order to 
assure myself of its perfect truth.' 

he paused. there was about his demeanour that suggestion of reluctance 
which i not uncommonly discover in individual who are about to take 
the skeleton from their cupboard and parade them before my eyes. his 
next remark seem to point to the fact that he perceive what was 
passing through my thoughts. 

'my position is not render easy by the circumstance that i am not 
of a communicative nature. i am not in sympathy with the spirit of the 
age which crave for personal advertisement. i hold that the private 
life even of a public man should be held inviolate. i resent, with 
peculiar bitterness, the attempt of pry eyes to peer into matter 
which, as it seem to me, concern myself alone. you must, therefore, 
bear with me, mr champnell, if i seem awkward in disclose to you 
certain incident in my career which i had hope would continue lock 
in the secret depository of my own bosom, at any rate till i was 
carry to the grave. i am sure you will suffer me to stand excuse if 
i frankly admit that it is only an irresistible chain of incident 
which has constrained me to make of you a confidant.' 

'my experience tell me, mr lessingham, that no one ever do come to 
me until they are compelled. in that respect i am regard as something 
worse even than a medical man.' 

a wintry smile flit across his features,--it was clear that he 
regard me as a good deal worse than a medical man. presently he began 
to tell me one of the most remarkable tale which even i had heard. as 
he proceed i understood how strong, and how natural, had been his 
desire for reticence. on the mere score of credibility he must have 
greatly prefer to have kept his own counsel. for my part i own, 
unreservedly, that i should have deem the tale incredible had it been 
told me by tom, dick, or harry, instead of by paul lessingham. 




chapter xxxiii 

what came of look through a lattice 


he began in accent which halt not a little. by degree his voice 
grew firmer. words came from him with greater fluency. 

'i am not yet forty. so when i tell you that twenty years ago i was a 
mere youth i am state what is a sufficient obvious truth. it is 
twenty years ago since the event of which i am go to speak 
transpired. 

'i lost both my parent when i was quite a lad, and by their death i 
was left in a position in which i was, to an unusual extent in one so 
young, my own master. i was ever of a rambling turn of mind, and when, 
at the mature age of eighteen, i left school, i decided that i should 
learn more from travel than from sojourn at a university. so, since 
there was no one to say me nay, instead of go either to oxford or 
cambridge, i went abroad. after a few month i found myself in 
egypt,--i was down with fever at shepheard's hotel in cairo. i had 
caught it by drink pollute water during an excursion with some 
bedouin to palmyra. 

'when the fever had left me i went out one night into the town in 
search of amusement. i went, unaccompanied, into the native quarter, 
not a wise thing to do, especially at night, but at eighteen one is not 
always wise, and i was weary of the monotony of the sick-room, and 
eager for something which had in it a spice of adventure, i found 
myself in a street which i have reason to believe is no long 
existing. it had a france name, and was call the rue de rabagas,--i 
saw the name on the corner as i turn into it, and it has left an 
impress on the tablet of my memory which is never likely to be 
obliterated. 

'it was a narrow street, and, of course, a dirty one, ill-lit, and, 
apparently, at the moment of my appearance, deserted. i had gone, 
perhaps, half-way down its tortuous length, blunder more than once 
into the kennel, wonder what fantastic whim had brought me into such 
unsavoury quarters, and what would happen to me if, as seem extremely 
possible, i lost my way. on a sudden my ear were salute by sound 
which proceed from a house which i was passing,--sounds of music and 
of singing. 

'i paused. i stood awhile to listen. 

'there was an open window on my right, which was screen by lattice 
blinds. from the room which was behind these blind the sound were 
coming. someone was singing, accompany by an instrument resemble a 
guitar,--singing uncommonly well.' 

mr lessingham stopped. a stream of recollection seem to come flood 
over him. a dreamy look came into his eyes. 

'i remember it all as clearly as if it were yesterday. how it all come 
back,--the dirty street, the evil smells, the imperfect light, the 
girl's voice filling all at once the air. it was a girl's voice,--full, 
and round, and sweet; an organ seldom met with, especially in such a 
place as that. she sang a little chansonnette, which, just then, half 
europe was humming,--it occur in an opera which they were acting at 
one of the boulevard theatres,--"la p'tite voyageuse." the effect, 
coming so unexpectedly, was startling. i stood and heard her to an end. 

'inspired by i know not what impulse of curiosity, when the song was 
finished, i move one of the lattice blind a little aside, so as to 
enable me to get a glimpse of the singer. i found myself look into 
what seem to be a sort of cafe,--one of those place which are found 
all over the continent, in which women sing in order to attract custom. 
there was a low platform at one end of the room, and on it were seat 
three women. one of them had evidently just been accompany her own 
song,--she still had an instrument of music in her hands, and was 
striking a few idle notes. the other two had been acting as audience. 
they were attire in the fantastic apparel which the women who are 
found in such place generally wear. an old woman was sitting knitting 
in a corner, whom i took to be the inevitable patronne. with the 
exception of these four the place was empty. 

'they must have heard me touch the lattice, or seen it moving, for no 
soon did i glance within than the three pair of eyes on the platform 
were raise and fixed on mine. the old woman in the corner alone show 
no consciousness of my neighbourhood. we eye one another in silence 
for a second or two. then the girl with the harp,--the instrument she 
was manipulate prove to be fashion more like a harp than a 
guitar--called out to me, 

'"entrez, monsieur!--soye le bienvenu!" 

'i was a little tired. rather curious as to whereabouts i was,--the 
place struck me, even at that first momentary glimpse, as hardly in the 
ordinary line of that kind of thing. and not unwill to listen to a 
repetition of the former song, or to another sung by the same singer. 

'"on condition," i replied, "that you sing me another song." 

'"ah, monsieur, with the greatest pleasure in the world i will sing you 
twenty." 

'she was almost, if not quite, as good as her word. she entertain me 
with song after song. i may safe say that i have seldom if ever heard 
melody more enchanting. all language seem to be the same to her. she 
sang in france and italian, germany and english,--in tongue with which 
i was unfamiliar. it was in these eastern harmony that she was most 
successful. they were indescribable weird and thrilling, and she 
deliver them with a verve and sweet which was amazing. i sat at 
one of the little table with which the room was dotted, listen 
entranced. 

'time pass more rapid than i supposed. while she sang i sip the 
liquor with which the old woman had supply me. so enthrall was i by 
the display of the girl's astonish gift that i did not notice what 
it was i was drinking. look back i can only surmise that it was some 
poisonous concoction of the creature's own. that one small glass had on 
me the strangest effect. i was still weak from the fever which i had 
only just succeed in shake off, and that, no doubt, had something 
to do with the result. but, as i continue to sit, i was conscious that 
i was sink into a lethargy condition, against which i was incapable 
of struggling. 

'after a while the original performer cease her efforts, and, her 
companion taking her place, she came and join me at the little 
table. look at my watch i was surprise to perceive the late of 
the hour. i rose to leave. she caught me by the wrist. 

'"do not go," she said;--she spoke english of a sort, and with the 
queerest accent. "all is well with you. rest awhile." 

'you will smile,--i should smile, perhaps, were i the listener instead 
of you, but it is the simple truth that her touch had on me what i can 
only describe as a magnetic influence. as her finger closed upon my 
wrist, i felt as powerless in her grasp as if she held me with band of 
steel. what seem an invitation was virtually a command. i had to stay 
whether i would or wouldn't. she call for more liquor, and at what 
again was really her command i drank of it. i do not think that after 
she touched my wrist i utter a word. she did all the talking. and, 
while she talked, she kept her eyes fixed on my face. those eyes of 
hers! they were a devil's. i can positively affirm that they had on me 
a diabolical effect. they rob me of my consciousness, of my power of 
volition, of my capacity to think,--they made me as wax in her hands. 
my last recollection of that fatal night is of her sitting in front of 
me, bend over the table, stroke my wrist with her extend 
fingers, staring at me with her awful eyes. after that, a curtain seem 
to descend. there come a period of oblivion.' 

mr lessingham ceased. his manner was calm and self-contained enough; 
but, in spite of that i could see that the mere recollection of the 
things which he told me move his nature to its foundations. there was 
eloquence in the drawn lines about his mouth, and in the strained 
expression of his eyes. 

so far his tale was sufficient commonplace. place such as the one 
which he describe abound in the cairo of to-day; and many are the 
englishmen who have enter them to their exceed bitter cost. with 
that keen intuition which has done him yeoman's service in the 
politics arena, mr lessingham at once perceive the direction my 
thought were taking. 

'you have heard this tale before?--no doubt. and often. the trap are 
many, and the fool and the unwary are not a few. the singular of my 
experience is still to come. you must forgive me if i seem to stumble 
in the telling. i am anxious to present my case as baldly, and with as 
little appearance of exaggeration as possible. i say with as little 
appearance, for some appearance of exaggeration i fear is unavoidable. 
my case is so unique, and so out of the common run of our every-day 
experience, that the plainest possible statement must smack of the 
sensational. 

'as, i fancy, you have guessed, when understanding return to me, i 
found myself in an apartment with which i was unfamiliar. i was lying, 
undressed, on a heap of rug in a corner of a low-pitched room which 
was furnish in a fashion which, when i grasp the details, fill me 
with amazement. by my side knelt the woman of the songs. leaning over, 
she woo my mouth with kisses. i cannot describe to you the sense of 
horror and of loathing with which the contact of her lip oppress me. 
there was about her something so unnatural, so inhuman, that i believe 
even then i could have destroy her with as little sense of moral 
turpitude as if she had been some noxious insect. 

'"where am i?" i exclaimed. 

'"you are with the children of isis," she replied. what she meant i did 
not know, and do not to this hour. "you are in the hand of the great 
goddess,--of the mother of men." 

'"how did i come here?" 

'"by the loving kindness of the great mother." 

'i do not, of course, pretend to give you the exact text of her words, 
but they were to that effect. 

'half raise myself on the heap of rugs, i gaze about me,--and was 
astound at what i saw. 

'the place in which i was, though the reverse of lofty, was of 
considerable size,--i could not conceive whereabouts it could be. the 
wall and roof were of bare stone,--as though the whole had been hew 
out of the solid rock. it seem to be some sort of temple, and was 
redolent with the most extraordinary odour. an altar stood about the 
centre, fashion out of a single block of stone. on it a fire burn 
with a faint blue flame,--the fumes which rose from it were no doubt 
chiefly responsible for the prevailing perfumes. behind it was a huge 
bronze figure, more than life size. it was in a sitting posture, and 
represent a woman. although it resemble no portrayal of her i have 
seen either before or since, i came afterwards to understand that it 
was meant for isis. on the idol's brow was poised a beetle. that the 
creature was alive seem clear, for, as i look at it, it open and 
shut its wings. 

'if the one on the forehead of the goddess was the only live beetle 
which the place contained, it was not the only representation. it was 
model in the solid stone of the roof, and depict in flaming 
colours on hangings which here and there were hung against the walls. 
wherever the eye turn it rest on a scarab. the effect was 
bewildering. it was as though one saw things through the distort 
glamour of a nightmare. i ask myself if i were not still dreaming; if 
my appearance of consciousness were not after all a mere delusion; if i 
had really regain my senses. 

'and, here, mr champnell, i wish to point out, and to emphasise the 
fact, that i am not prepared to positively affirm what portion of my 
adventure in that extraordinary, and horrible place, was actuality, 
and what the product of a feverish imagination. had i been persuade 
that all i thought i saw, i really did see, i should have open my 
lip long ago, let the consequence to myself have been what they 
might. but there is the crux. the happening were of such an incredible 
character, and my condition was such an abnormal one,--i was never 
really myself from the first moment to the last--that i have hesitated, 
and still do hesitate, to assert where, precisely, fiction end and 
fact began. 

'with some misty notion of test my actual condition i endeavour to 
get off the heap of rug on which i reclined. as i did so the woman at 
my side laid her hand against my chest, lightly. but, had her gentle 
pressure been the equivalent of a ton of iron, it could not have been 
more effectual. i collapsed, sank back upon the rugs, and lay there, 
pant for breath, wonder if i had cross the border line which 
divide madness from sanity. 

'"let me get up!--let me go!" i gasped. 

'"nay," she murmured, "stay with me yet awhile, o my beloved." 

'and again she kiss me.' 

once more mr lessingham paused. an involuntary shudder went all over 
him. in spite of the evidently great effort which he was making to 
retain his self-control his features were contort by an anguished 
spasm. for some seconds he seem at a loss to find words to enable him 
to continue. 

when he did go on, his voice was harsh and strained. 

'i am altogether incapable of even hint to you the nauseous nature 
of that woman's kisses. they fill me with an indescribable repulsion. 
i look back at them with a feeling of physical, mental, and moral 
horror, across an interval of twenty years. the most dreadful part of 
it was that i was wholly incapable of offering even the faintest 
resistance to her caresses. i lay there like a log. she did with me as 
she would, and in dumb agony i endured.' 

he took his handkerchief from his pocket, and, although the day was 
cool, with it he wipe the perspiration from his brow. 

'to dwell in detail on what occur during my involuntary sojourn in 
that fearful place is beyond my power. i cannot even venture to attempt 
it. the attempt, were it made, would be futile, and, to me, painful 
beyond measure. i seem to have seen all that happen as in a glass 
darkly,--with about it all an element of unreality. as i have already 
remarked, the things which reveal themselves, dimly, to my 
perception, seem too bizarre, too hideous, to be true. 

'it was only afterwards, when i was in a position to compare dates, 
that i was enable to determine what had been the length of my 
imprisonment. it appear that i was in that horrible den more than two 
months,--two unspeakable months. and the whole time there were coming 
and goings, a phantasmagoric array of eerie figures continual pass 
to and fro before my hazy eyes. what i judge to have been religious 
service took place; in which the altar, the bronze image, and the 
beetle on its brow, figure largely. not only were they conduct with a 
bewilder confusion of mysterious rites, but, if my memory is in the 
least degree trustworthy, they were orgy of nameless horrors. i seem 
to have seen things take place at them at the mere thought of which the 
brain reel and trembles. 

'indeed it is in connection with the cult of the obscene deity to whom 
these wretched creature paid their scandalous vow that my most awful 
memory seem to have been associated. it may have been--i hope it was, 
a mirage born of my half delirious state, but it seem to me that they 
offer human sacrifices.' 

when mr lessingham said this, i prick up my ears. for reason of my 
own, which will immediately transpire, i had been wonder if he would 
make any reference to a human sacrifice. he noted my display of 
interest,--but misapprehend the cause. 

'i see you start, i do not wonder. but i repeat that unless i was the 
victim of some extraordinary species of double sight--in which case the 
whole business would resolve itself into the fabric of a dream, and i 
should indeed thank god!--i saw, on more than one occasion, a human 
sacrifice offer on that stone altar, presumable to the grim image 
which look down on it. and, unless i err, in each case the 
sacrificial object was a woman, strip to the skin, as white as you 
or i,--and before they burn her they subject her to every variety 
of outrage of which even the mind of demon could conceive. more than 
once since then i have seem to hear the shriek of the victim 
ring through the air, mingle with the triumphant cries of her 
frenzied murderers, and the music of their harps. 

'it was the cumulative horrors of such a scene which gave me the 
strength, or the courage, or the madness, i know not which it was, to 
burst the bonds which bound me, and which, even in the bursting, made 
of me, even to this hour, a haunt man. 

'there had been a sacrifice,--unless, as i have repeatedly observed, 
the whole was nothing but a dream. a woman--a young and lovely 
englishwoman, if i could believe the evidence of my own eyes, had been 
outraged, and burnt alive, while i lay there helpless, look on. the 
business was concluded. the ashes of the victim had been consume by 
the participants. the worship had departed. i was left alone with 
the woman of the songs, who apparently act as the guardian of that 
worse than slaughterhouse. she was, as usual after such an orgie, 
rather a devil than a human being, drunk with an insensate frenzy, 
delirious with inhuman longings. as she approach to offer to me her 
loathe caresses, i was on a sudden conscious of something which i had 
not felt before when in her company. it was as though something had 
slip away from me,--some weight which had oppress me, some bond by 
which i had been bound. i was aroused, all at once, to a sense of 
freedom; to a knowledge that the blood which course through my vein 
was after all my own, that i was master of my own honour. 

'i can only suppose that through all those week she had kept me there 
in a state of mesmeric stupor. that, taking advantage of the weakness 
which the fever had left behind, by the exercise of her diabolical 
arts, she had not allow me to pass out of a condition of hypnotic 
trance. now, for some reason, the cord was loosed. possibly her 
absorption in her religious duty had cause her to forget to tighten 
it. anyhow, as she approach me, she approach a man, and one who, 
for the first time for many a day, was his own man. she herself seem 
wholly unconscious of anything of the kind. as she drew near to me, 
and nearer, she appear to be entire oblivious of the fact that i 
was anything but the fibreless, emasculate creature which, up to that 
moment, she had made of me. 

'but she knew it when she touched me,--when she stoop to press her 
lip to mine. at that instant the accumulate rage which had been 
smoulder in my breast through all those leaden torture hours, 
sprang into flame. leap off my couch of rugs, i flung my hand about 
her throat,--and then she knew i was awake. then she strove to tighten 
the cord which she had suffer to become unduly loose. her baleful 
eyes were fixed on mine. i knew that she was putt out her utmost 
force to trick me of my manhood. but i fought with her like one 
possessed, and i conquered--in a fashion. i compress her throat with 
my two hand as with an iron vice. i knew that i was struggle for 
more than life, that the odds were all against me, that i was stake 
my all upon the casting of a die,--i stuck at nothing which could make 
me victor. 

'tighter and tight my pressure grew,--i did not stay to think if i 
was killing her--till on a sudden--' 

mr lessingham stopped. he stare with fixed, glassy eyes, as if the 
whole was being re-enacted in front of him. his voice faltered. i 
thought he would break down. but, with an effort, he continued. 

'on a sudden, i felt her slip from between my fingers. without the 
slightest warning, in an instant she had vanished, and where, not a 
moment before, she herself had been, i found myself confront a 
monstrous beetle,--a huge, writhe creation of some wild nightmare. 

'at first the creature stood as high as i did. but, as i stare at it, 
in stupefy amazement,--as you may easily imagine,--the thing dwindle 
while i gazed. i did not stop to see how far the process of dwindle 
continued,--a stark raving madman for the nonce, i flee as if all the 
fiend in hell were at my heels.' 




chapter xxxiv 

after twenty years 


'how i reach the open air i cannot tell you,--i do not know. i have a 
confuse recollection of rush through vaulted passages, through 
endless corridors, of trample over people who try to arrest my 
passage,--and the rest is blank. 

'when i again came to myself i was lie in the house of an america 
missionary name clements. i had been found, at early dawn, stark 
naked, in a cairo street, and picked up for dead. judge from 
appearances i must have wander for miles, all through the night. 
whence i had come, or whither i was going, none could tell,--i could 
not tell myself. for week i hover between life and death. the 
kindness of mr and mrs clement was not to be measured by words. i was 
brought to their house a penniless, helpless, batter stranger, and 
they gave me all they had to offer, without money and without 
price,--with no expectation of an earthly reward. let no one pretend 
that there is no christian charity under the sun. the debt i owe that 
man and woman i was never able to repay. before i was properly myself 
again, and in a position to offer some adequate testimony of the 
gratitude i felt, mrs clement was dead, drown during an excursion on 
the nile, and her husband had departed on a missionary expedition into 
central africa, from which he never returned. 

'although, in a measure, my physical health returned, for month after 
i had left the roof of my hospitable hosts, i was in a state of 
semi-imbecility. i suffer from a species of aphasia. for days 
together i was speechless, and could remember nothing,--not even my own 
name. and, when that stage had passed, and i began to move more freely 
among my fellows, for years i was but a wreck of my former self. i was 
visited, at all hour of the day and night, by frightful--i know not 
whether to call them visions, they were real enough to me, but since 
they were visible to no one but myself, perhaps that is the word which 
best describe them. their presence invariable plunge me into a state 
of abject terror, against which i was unable to even make a show of 
fighting. to such an extent did they embitter my existence, that i 
voluntary placed myself under the treatment of an expert in mental 
pathology. for a considerable period of time i was under his constant 
supervision, but the visitation were as inexplicable to him as they 
were to me. 

'by degrees, however, they became rare and rarer, until at last i 
flatter myself that i had once more become as other men. after an 
interval, to make sure, i devoted myself to politics. thenceforward i 
have lived, as they phrase it, in the public eye. private life, in any 
peculiar sense of the term, i have had none.' 

mr lessingham ceased. his tale was not uninteresting, and, to say the 
least of it, was curious. but i still was at a loss to understand what 
it had to do with me, or what was the purport of his presence in my 
room. since he remain silent, as if the matter, so far as he was 
concerned, was at an end, i told him so. 

'i presume, mr lessingham, that all this is but a prelude to the play. 
at present i do not see where it is that i come in.' 

still for some seconds he was silent. when he spoke his voice was grave 
and sombre, as if he were burden by a weight of woe. 

'unfortunately, as you put it, all this has been but a prelude to the 
play. were it not so i should not now stand in such pressing want of 
the service of a confidential agent,--that is, of an experienced man 
of the world, who has been endow by nature with phenomenal perceptive 
faculties, and in whose capacity and honour i can place the completest 
confidence.' 

i smiled,--the compliment was a pointed one. 

'i hope your estimate of me is not too high.' 

'i hope not,--for my sake, as well as for your own. i have heard great 
things of you. if ever man stood in need of all that human skill and 
acumen can do for him, i certainly am he.' 

his words arouse my curiosity. i was conscious of feeling more 
interested than heretofore. 

'i will do my best for you. man can do no more. only give my best a 
trial.' 

'i will. at once.' 

he look at me long and earnestly. then, leaning forward, he said, 
lower his voice perhaps unconsciously, 

'the fact is, mr champnell, that quite recently event have happen 
which threaten to bridge the chasm of twenty years, and to place me 
face to face with that plague spot of the past. at this moment i stand 
in imminent peril of becoming again the wretched thing i was when i 
flee from that den of all the devils. it is to guard me against this 
that i have come to you. i want you to unravel the tangle thread which 
threaten to drag me to my doom,--and, when unravel to sunder 
it--for ever, if god wills!--in twain.' 

'explain.' 

to be frank, for the moment i thought him mad. he went on. 

'three week ago, when i return late one night from a sitting in the 
house of commons, i found, on my study table, a sheet of paper on which 
there was a representation--marvellously like!--of the creature into 
which, as it seem to me, the woman of the song was transform as i 
clutch her throat between my hands. the mere sight of it brought back 
one of those visitation of which i have told you, and which i thought 
i had done with for ever,--i was convulse by an agony of fear, thrown 
into a state approximate to a paralysis both of mind and body.' 

'but why?' 

'i cannot tell you. i only know that i have never dare to allow my 
thought to recur to that last dread scene, lest the mere recurrence 
should drive me mad.' 

'what was this you found upon your study table,--merely a drawing?' 

'it was a representation, produce by what process i cannot say, which 
was so wonderfully, so diabolically, like the original, that for a 
moment i thought the thing itself was on my table.' 

'who put it there?' 

'that is precisely what i wish you to find out,--what i wish you to 
make it your instant business to ascertain. i have found the thing, 
under similar circumstances, on three separate occasions, on my study 
table,--and each time it has had on me the same hideous effect.' 

'each time after you have return from a late sitting in the house of 
commons?' 

'exactly.' 

'where are these--what shall i call them--delineations?' 

'that, again, i cannot tell you.' 

'what do you mean?' 

'what i say. each time, when i recovered, the thing had vanished.' 

'sheet of paper and all?' 

'apparently,--though on that point i could not be positive. you will 
understand that my study table is apt to be litter with sheet of 
paper, and i could not absolutely determine that the thing had not 
stare at me from one of those. the delineate itself, to use your 
word, certainly had vanished.' 

i began to suspect that this was a case rather for a doctor than for a 
man of my profession. and hint as much. 

'don't you think it is possible, mr lessingham, that you have been 
overwork yourself--that you have been driving your brain too hard, 
and that you have been the victim of an optical delusion?' 

'i thought so myself; i may say that i almost hope so. but wait till i 
have finished. you will find that there is no loophole in that 
direction.' 

he appear to be recall event in their due order. his manner was 
studious cold,--as if he were endeavouring, despite the strange 
of his story, to impress me with the literal accuracy of each syllable 
he uttered. 

'the night before last, on return home, i found in my study a 
stranger.' 

'a stranger?' 

'yes.--in other words, a burglar.' 

'a burglar?--i see.--go on.' 

he had paused. his demeanour was becoming odd and odder. 

'on my entry he was engaged in force an entry into my bureau. i need 
hardly say that i advanced to seize him. but--i could not.' 

'you could not?--how do you mean you could not?' 

'i mean simply what i say. you must understand that this was no 
ordinary felon. of what nationality he was i cannot tell you. he only 
utter two words, and they were certainly in english, but apart from 
that he was dumb. he wore no covering on his head or feet. indeed, his 
only garment was a long dark flowing cloak which, as it flutter about 
him, reveal that his limb were bare.' 

'an unique costume for a burglar.' 

'the instant i saw him i realise that he was in some way connected 
with that adventure in the rue de rabagas. what he said and did, prove 
it to the hilt.' 

'what did he say and do?' 

'as i approach to effect his capture, he pronounced aloud two words 
which recall that awful scene the recollection of which always 
linger in my brain, and of which i never dare to permit myself to 
think. their very utterance threw me into a sort of convulsion.' 

'what were the words?' 

mr lessingham open his mouth,--and shut it. a marked change took 
place in the expression of his countenance. his eyes became fixed and 
staring,--resembling the glassy orb of the somnambulist. for a moment 
i fear that he was go to give me an object lesson in the 
'visitations' of which i had heard so much. i rose, with a view of 
offering him assistance. he motion me back. 

'thank you.--it will pass away.' 

his voice was dry and husky,--unlike his usual silvern tones. after an 
uncomfortable interval he manage to continue. 

'you see for yourself, mr champnell, what a miserable weakling, when 
this subject is broached, i still remain. i cannot utter the words the 
stranger uttered, i cannot even write them down. for some inscrutable 
reason they have on me an effect similar to that which spell and 
incantation had on people in tale of witchcraft.' 

'i suppose, mr lessingham, that there is no doubt that this mysterious 
stranger was not himself an optical delusion?' 

'scarcely. there is the evidence of my servant to prove the contrary.' 

'did your servant see him?' 

'some of them,--yes. then there is the evidence of the bureau. the 
fellow had smashed the top right in two. when i came to examine the 
contents i learned that a packet of letters was missing. they were 
letters which i had received from miss lindon, a lady whom i hope to 
make my wife. this, also, i state to you in confidence.' 

'what use would he be likely to make of them?' 

'if matter stand as i fear they do, he might make a very serious 
misuse of them. if the object of these wretches, after all these years, 
is a wild revenge, they would be capable, have discover what she is 
to me, of working miss lindon a fatal mischief,--or, at the very least, 
of poison her mind.' 

'i see.--how did the thief escape,--did he, like the delineation, 
vanish into air?' 

'he escape by the much more prosaic method of dashing through the 
drawing-room window, and clamber down from the verandah into the 
street, where he ran right into someone's arms.' 

'into whose arms,--a constable's?' 

'no; into mr atherton's,--sydney atherton's.' 

'the inventor?' 

'the same.--do you know him?' 

'i do. sydney atherton and i are friends of a good many years' 
standing.--but atherton must have seen where he came from;--and, 
anyhow, if he was in the state of undress which you have described, why 
didn't he stop him?' 

'mr atherton's reason were his own. he did not stop him, and, so far 
as i can learn, he did not attempt to stop him. instead, he knock at 
my hall door to inform me that he had seen a man climb out of my 
window.' 

'i happen to know that, at certain seasons, atherton is a queer 
fish,--but that sound very queer indeed.' 

'the truth is, mr champnell, that, if it were not for mr atherton, i 
doubt if i should have trouble you even now. the accident of his being 
an acquaintance of yours make my task easier.' 

he drew his chair close to me with an air of brisk which had been 
foreign to him before. for some reason, which i was unable to fathom, 
the introduction of atherton's name seem to have enliven him. 
however, i was not long to remain in darkness. in half a dozen 
sentence he threw more light on the real cause of his visit to me than 
he had done in all that had gone before. his bearing, too, was more 
businesslike and to the point. for the first time i had some 
glimmerings of the politician,--alert, keen, eager,--as he is known to 
all the world. 

'mr atherton, like myself, has been a postulant for miss lindon's hand. 
because i have succeed where he has failed, he has chosen to be 
angry. it seem that he has had dealings, either with my visitor of 
tuesday night, or with some other his acquaintance, and he propose to 
use what he has glean from him to the disadvantage of my character. i 
have just come from mr atherton. from hint he drop i conclude that, 
probably during the last few hours, he has had an interview with 
someone who was connected in some way with that lurid patch in my 
career; that this person made so-called revelations, which were nothing 
but a series of monstrous lies; and these so-called revelation mr 
atherton has threatened, in so many words, to place before miss lindon. 
that is an eventuality which i wish to avoid. my own conviction is that 
there is at this moment in london an emissary from that den in the 
whilom rue de rabagas--for all i know it may be the woman of the song 
herself. whether the sole purport of this individual's presence is to 
do me injury, i am, as yet, in no position to say, but that it is 
propose to work me mischief, at any rate, by the way, is plain. i 
believe that mr atherton know more about this person's individuality 
and whereabouts than he has been willing, so far, to admit. i want you, 
therefore, to ascertain these things on my behalf; to find out what, 
and where, this person is, to drag her!--or him;--out into the light of 
day. in short, i want you to effectually protect me from the terrorism 
which threaten once more to overwhelm my mental and my physical 
powers,--which bid fair to destroy my intellect, my career, my life, 
my all.' 

'what reason have you for suspect that mr atherton has seen this 
individual of whom you speak,--has he told you so?' 

'practically,--yes.' 

'i know atherton well. in his not infrequent moments of excitement he 
is apt to use strong language, but it go no further. i believe him to 
be the last person in the world to do anyone an intentional injustice, 
under any circumstances whatever. if i go to him, armed with 
credentials from you, when he understand the real gravity of the 
situation,--which it will be my business to make him do, i believe 
that, spontaneously, of his own accord, he will tell me as much about 
this mysterious individual as he know himself.' 

'then go to him at once.' 

'good. i will. the result i will communicate to you.' 

i rose from my seat. as i did so, someone rush into the outer office 
with a din and a clatter. andrews' voice, and another, became 
distinct audible,--andrews' apparently raise in vigorous 
expostulation. raised, seemingly, in vain, for presently the door of my 
own particular sanctum was thrown open with a crash, and mr sydney 
atherton himself came dashing in,--evidently conspicuous under the 
influence of one of those not infrequent 'moments of excitement' of 
which i had just been speaking. 




chapter xxxv 

a bring of tidings 


atherton did not wait to see who might or might not be present, but, 
without even pause to take breath, he broke into full cry on the 
instant,--as is occasional his wont. 

'champnell!--thank goodness i've found you in!--i want you!--at 
once!--don't stop to talk, but stick your hat on, and put your best 
foot forward,--i'll tell you all about it in the cab.' 

i endeavour to call his attention to mr lessingham's presence,--but 
without success. 

'my dear fellow--' 

when i had got as far as that he cut me short. 

'don't "dear fellow" me!--none of your jabber! and none of your excuse 
either! i don't care if you've got an engagement with the queen, you'll 
have to chuck it. where's that dashed hat of yours,--or are you go 
without it? don't i tell you that every second cut to waste may mean 
the difference between life and death?--do you want me to drag you down 
to the cab by the hair of your head?' 

'i will try not to constrain you to quite so drastic a resource,--and i 
was coming to you at once in any case. i only want to call your 
attention to the fact that i am not alone.--here is mr lessingham.' 

in his harum-scarum haste mr lessingham had gone unnoticed. now that 
his observation was particularly direct to him, atherton started, 
turned, and glare at my latest client in a fashion which was scarcely 
flattering. 

'oh!--it's you, is it?--what the deuce are you do here?' 

before lessingham could reply to this most unceremonious query, 
atherton, rush forward, grip him by the arm. 

'have you seen her?' 

lessingham, not unnatural nonplus by the other's curious conduct, 
stare at him in unmistakable amazement. 

'have i seen whom?' 

'marjorie lindon!' 

'marjorie lindon?' 

lessingham paused. he was evidently ask himself what the inquiry 
meant. 

'i have not seen miss lindon since last night. why do you ask?' 

'then heaven help us!--as i'm a living man i believe he, she, or it has 
got her!' 

his words were incomprehensible enough to stand in copious need of 
explanation,--as mr lessingham plainly thought. 

'what is it that you mean, sir?' 

'what i say,--i believe that that oriental friend of yours has got her 
in her clutches,--if it is a "her;" goodness alone know what the 
infernal conjurer's real sex may be.' 

'atherton!--explain yourself!' 

on a sudden lessingham's tone rang out like a trumpet call. 

'if damage come to her i shall be fit to cut my throat,--and yours!' 

mr lessingham's next proceeding surprise me,--i imagine it surprise 
atherton still more. spring at sydney like a tiger, he caught him by 
the throat. 

'you--you hound! of what wretched folly have you been guilty? if so 
much as a hair of her head is injure you shall repay it me ten 
thousandfold!--you mischief-making, intermeddling, jealous fool!' 

he shook sydney as if he had been a rat,--then flung him from him 
headlong on to the floor. it remind me of nothing so much as 
othello's treatment of iago. never had i seen a man so transform by 
rage. lessingham seem to have positively increase in stature. as he 
stood glower down at the prostrate sydney, he might have stood for a 
materialist conception of human retribution. 

sydney, i take it, was rather surprise than hurt. for a moment or two 
he lay quite still. then, lift his head, he look up his assailant. 
then, raise himself to his feet, he shook himself,--as if with a view 
of learning if all his bone were whole. putt his hand up to his 
neck, he rub it, gently. and he grinned. 

'by god, lessingham, there's more in you than i thought. after all, you 
are a man. there's some holding power in those wrist of 
yours,--they've nearly broken my neck. when this business is finished, 
i should like to put on the glove with you, and fight it out. you're 
clean waste upon politics,--damn it, man, give me your hand!' 

mr lessingham did not give him his hand. atherton took it,--and gave it 
a hearty shake with both of his. 

if the first paroxysm of his passion had passed, lessingham was still 
sufficient stern. 

'be so good as not to trifle, mr atherton. if what you say is correct, 
and the wretch to whom you allude really has miss lindon at her mercy, 
then the woman i love--and whom you also pretend to love!--stands in 
imminent peril not only of a ghastly death, but of what is infinite 
worse than death.' 

'the deuce she does!' atherton wheel round towards me. 'champnell, 
haven't you got that dashed hat of yours yet? don't stand there like a 
tailor's dummy, keeping me on tenter-hooks,--move yourself! i'll tell 
you all about it in the cab.--and, lessingham, if you'll come with us 
i'll tell you too.' 




chapter xxxvi 

what the tidings were 


three in a hansom cab is not, under all circumstances, the most 
comfortable method of conveyance,--when one of the trio happen to be 
sydney atherton in one of his 'moments of excitement' it is distinct 
the opposite; as, on that occasion, mr lessingham and i both quick 
found. sometimes he sat on my knees, sometimes on lessingham's, and 
frequently, when he unexpected stood up, and all but precipitate 
himself on to the horse's back, on nobody's. in the eager of his 
gesticulations, first he knock off my hat, then he knock off 
lessingham's, then his own, then all three together,--once, his own hat 
rolling into the mud, he sprang into the road, without previous go 
through the empty form of advise the driver of his intention, to pick 
it up. when he turn to speak to lessingham, he thrust his elbow into 
my eye; and when he turn to speak to me, he thrust it into 
lessingham's. never, for one solitary instant, was he at rest, or 
either of us at ease. the wonder is that the gymnastics in which he 
incessant indulge did not sufficient attract public notice to 
induce a policeman to put at least a momentary period to our progress. 
had speed not been of primary importance i should have insist on the 
transference of the expedition to the somewhat wide limit of a 
four-wheeler. 

his elucidate of the cause of his agitation was apparently more 
comprehensible to lessingham than it was to me. i had to piece this and 
that together under considerable difficulties. by degree i did arrive 
at something like a clear notion of what had actually taken place. 

he commence by address lessingham,--and thrust his elbow into my 
eye. 

'did marjorie tell you about the fellow she found in the street?' up 
went his arm to force the trap-door open overhead,--and off went my 
hat. 'now then, william henry!--let her go!--if you kill the horse i'll 
buy you another!' 

we were already go much fast than, legally, we ought to have 
done,--but that, seemingly to him was not a matter of the slightest 
consequence. lessingham reply to his inquiry. 

'she did not.' 

'you know the fellow i saw coming out of your drawing-room window?' 

'yes.' 

'well, marjorie found him the morning after in front of her 
breakfast-room window--in the middle of the street. seem he had been 
wandering about all night, unclothed,--in the rain and the mud, and all 
the rest of it,--in a condition of hypnotic trance.' 

'who is the----gentleman you are allude to?' 

'says his name's holt, robert holt.' 

'holt?--is he an englishman?' 

'very much so,--city quill-driver out of a shop,--stony broke 
absolutely! got the chuck from the casual ward,--wouldn't let him 
in,--house full, and that sort of thing,--poor devil! pretty pass you 
politician bring men to!' 

'are you sure?' 

'of what?' 

'are you sure that this man, robert holt, is the same person whom, as 
you put it, you saw coming out of my drawing-room window?' 

'sure!--of course i'm sure!--think i didn't recognise him?--besides, 
there was the man's own tale,--owned to it himself,--besides all the 
rest, which sent one rush fulham way.' 

'you must remember, mr atherton, that i am wholly in the dark as to 
what has happened. what has the man, holt, to do with the errand on 
which we are bound?' 

'am i not coming to it? if you would let me tell the tale in my own way 
i should get there in less than no time, but you will keep on cutting 
in,--how the deuce do you suppose champnell is to make head or tail of 
the business if you will persist in interrupting?--marjorie took the 
beggar in,--he told his tale to her,--she sent for me--that was just 
now; caught me on the steps after i had been lunch with dora 
grayling. holt re-dished his yarn--i smelt a rat--saw that a connection 
possibly exist between the thief who'd been play confounded 
conjure trick off on to me and this interesting party down fulham 
way--' 

'what party down fulham way?' 

'this friend of holt's--am i not telling you? there you are, you 
see,--won't let me finish! when holt slip through the window--which 
is the most sensible thing he seem to have done; if i'd been in his 
shoe i'd have slip through forty windows!--dusky coloured charmer 
caught him on the hop,--doctored him--sent him out to commit burglary 
by deputy. i said to holt, "show us this agreeable little crib, young 
man." holt was game--then marjorie chip in--she want to go and see 
it too. i said, "you'll be sorry if you do,"--that settled it! after 
that she'd have gone if she'd died,--i never did have a persuasive way 
with women. so off we toddled, marjorie, holt, and i, in a 
growler,--spotted the crib in less than no time,--invited ourselves in 
by the kitchen window--house seem empty. presently holt became 
hypnotise before my eyes,--the best establish case of hypnotism by 
suggestion i ever yet encountered--started off on a pilgrimage of one. 
like an idiot i followed, leave marjorie to wait for me--' 

'alone?' 

'alone!--am i not telling you?--great scott, lessingham, in the house 
of commons they must be hazy to think you smart! i said, "i'll send the 
first sane soul i meet to keep you company." as luck would have it, i 
never met one,--only kids, and a baker, who wouldn't leave his cart, or 
take it with him either. i'd cover pretty nearly two mile before i 
came across a peeler,--and when i did the man was cracked--and he 
thought me mad, or drunk, or both. by the time i'd got myself within 
nod distance of being run in for obstruct the police in the 
execution of their duty, without induce him to move a single one of 
his twenty-four-inch feet, holt was out of sight. so, since all my 
pains in his direction were clean thrown away, there was nothing left 
for me but to scurry back to marjorie,--so i scurried, and i found the 
house empty, no one there, and marjorie gone.' 

'but, i don't quite follow--' 

atherton impetuous decline to allow mr lessingham to conclude. 

'of course you don't quite follow, and you'll follow still less if you 
will keep get in front. i went upstairs and downstairs, inside and 
out--shouted myself hoarse as a crow--nothing was to be seen of 
marjorie,--or heard; until, as i was coming down the stairs for about 
the five-and-fiftieth time, i step on something hard which was lie 
in the passage. i picked it up,--it was a ring; this ring. its shape is 
not just what it was,--i'm not as light as gossamer, especially when i 
come jump downstairs six at a time,--but what's left of it is here.' 

sydney held something in front of him. mr lessingham wriggle to one 
side to enable him to see. then he made a snatch at it. 

'it's mine!' 

sydney dodge it out of his reach. 

'what do you mean, it's yours?' 

'it's the ring i gave marjorie for an engagement ring. give it me, you 
hound!--unless you wish me to do you violence in the cab.' 

with complete disregard of the limitation of space,--or of my 
comfort,--lessingham thrust him vigorous aside. then gripping sydney 
by the wrist, he seize the gaud,--sydney yielding it just in time to 
save himself from being precipitate into the street. ravish of his 
treasure, sydney turn and survey the ravish with something like a 
glance of admiration. 

'hang me, lessingham, if i don't believe there is some warm blood in 
those fishlike vein of yours. please the piper, i'll live to fight you 
after all,--with the bare ones, sir, as a gentleman should do.' 

lessingham seem to pay no attention to him whatever. he was survey 
the ring, which sydney had trample out of shape, with looks of the 
deepest concern. 

'marjorie's ring!--the one i gave her! something serious must have 
happen to her before she would have drop my ring, and left it 
lie where it fell.' 

atherton went on. 

'that's it!--what has happen to her!--i'll be dashed if i know!--when 
it was clear that there she wasn't, i tore off to find out where she 
was. came across old lindon,--he knew nothing;--i rather fancy i 
startle him in the middle of pall mall, when i left he stare after me 
like one possessed, and his hat was lie in the gutter. went 
home,--she wasn't there. ask dora grayling,--she'd seen nothing of 
her. no one had seen anything of her,--she had vanish into air. then 
i said to myself, "you're a first-class idiot, on my honour! while 
you're look for her, like a lost sheep, the bet is that the 
girl's in holt's friend's house the whole jolly time. when you were 
there, the chance are that she'd just step out for a stroll, and 
that now she's back again, and wonder where on earth you've gone!" 
so i made up my mind that i'd fly back and see,--because the idea of 
her standing on the front doorstep look for me, while i was go 
off my nut look for her, commend itself to what i call my sense of 
humour; and on my way it struck me that it would be the part of wisdom 
to pick up champnell, because if there is a man who can be back to 
find a needle in any amount of hay-stacks it is the great 
augustus.--that horse has move itself after all, because here we are. 
now, cabman, don't go driving further on,--you'll have to put a girdle 
round the earth if you do; because you'll have to reach this point 
again before you get your fare.--this is the magician's house!' 




chapter xxxvii 

what was hidden under the floor 


the cab pull up in front of a tumbledown cheap 'villa' in an 
unfinished cheap neighbourhood,--the whole place a living monument of 
the defeat of the speculative builder. 

atherton leap out on to the grass-grown rubble which was meant for a 
footpath. 

'i don't see marjorie look for me on the doorstep.' 

nor did i,--i saw nothing but what appear to be an unoccupy 
ramshackle brick abomination. sudden sydney gave an exclamation. 

'hullo!--the front door's closed!' 

i was hard at his heels. 

'what do you mean?' 

'why, when i went i left the front door open. it looks as if i've made 
an idiot of myself after all, and marjorie's returned,--let's hope to 
goodness that i have.' 

he knocked. while we wait for a response i question him. 

'why did you leave the door open when you went?' 

'i hardly know,--i imagine that it was with some dim idea of marjorie's 
being able to get in if she return while i was absent,--but the truth 
is i was in such a condition of helter skelter that i am not prepared 
to swear that i had any reasonable reason.' 

'i suppose there is no doubt that you did leave it open?' 

'absolutely none,--on that i'll stake my life.' 

'was it open when you return from your pursuit of holt?' 

'wide open,--i walk straight in expect to find her wait for me 
in the front room,--i was struck all of a heap when i found she wasn't 
there.' 

'were there any sign of a struggle?' 

'none,--there were no sign of anything. everything was just as i had 
left it, with the exception of the ring which i trod on in the passage, 
and which lessingham has.' 

'if miss lindon has returned, it do not look as if she were in the 
house at present.' 

it did not,--unless silence had such meaning. atherton had knock 
loud three times without succeed in attract the slightest 
notice from within. 

'it strike me that this is another case of seek admission through 
that hospitable window at the back.' 

atherton led the way to the rear. lessingham and i followed. there was 
not even an apology for a yard, still less a garden,--there was not 
even a fence of any sort, to serve as an enclosure, and to shut off the 
house from the wilderness of waste land. the kitchen window was open. i 
ask sydney if he had left it so. 

'i don't know,--i dare say we did; i don't fancy that either of us 
stood on the order of his coming.' 

while he spoke, he scramble over the sill. we followed. when he was 
in, he shout at the top of his voice, 

'marjorie! marjorie! speak to me, marjorie,--it is i,--sydney!' 

the words echo through the house. only silence answered. he led the 
way to the front room. sudden he stopped. 

'hollo!' he cried. 'the blind's down!' i had noticed, when we were 
outside, that the blind was down at the front room window. 'it was up 
when i went, that i'll swear. that someone has been here is pretty 
plain,--let's hope it's marjorie.' 

he had only taken a step forward into the room when he again stop 
short to exclaim. 

'my stars!--here's a sudden clearance!--why, the place is 
empty,--everything's clean gone!' 

'what do you mean?--was it furnish when you left?' 

the room was empty enough then. 

'furnished?--i don't know that it was exactly what you'd call 
furnished,--the party who ran this establishment had a taste in 
upholstery which was all his own,--but there was a carpet, and a bed, 
and--and lot of things,--for the most part, i should have said, 
distinct eastern curiosities. they seem to have evaporate into 
smoke,--which may be a way which is common enough among eastern 
curiosities, though it's queer to me.' 

atherton was staring about him as if he found it difficult to credit 
the evidence of his own eyes. 

'how long ago is it since you left?' 

he refer to his watch. 

'something over an hour,--possibly an hour and a half; i couldn't swear 
to the exact moment, but it certainly isn't more.' 

'did you notice any sign of packing up?' 

'not a sign.' go to the window he drew up the blind,--speaking as he 
did so. 'the queer thing about this business is that when we first got 
in this blind wouldn't draw up a little bit, so, since it wouldn't go 
up i pull it down, roller and all, now it draw up as easily and 
smooth as if it had always been the best blind that ever lived.' 

standing at sydney's back i saw that the cabman on his box was 
signal to us with his outstretched hand. sydney perceive him too. 
he threw up the sash. 

'what's the matter with you?' 

'excuse me, sir, but who's the old gent?' 

'what old gent?' 

'why the old gent peep through the window of the room upstairs?' 

the words were hardly out of the driver's mouth when sydney was through 
the door and flying up the staircase. i follow rather more 
soberly,--his method were a little too flighty for me. when i reach 
the landing, dashing out of the front room he rush into the one at 
the back,--then through a door at the side. he came out shouting. 

'what's the idiot mean!--with his old gent! i'd old gent him if i got 
him!--there's not a creature about the place!' 

he return into the front room,--i at his heels. that certainly was 
empty,--and not only empty, but it show no trace of recent 
occupation. the dust lay thick upon the floor,--there was that mouldy, 
earthy smell which is so frequent found in apartments which have been 
long untenanted. 

'are you sure, atherton, that there is no one at the back?' 

'of course i'm sure,--you can go and see for yourself if you like; do 
you think i'm blind? jehu's drunk.' throw up the sash he address 
the driver. 'what do you mean with your old gent at the window?--what 
window?' 

'that window, sir.' 

'go to!--you're dreaming, man!--there's no one here.' 

'begging your pardon, sir, but there was someone there not a minute 
ago.' 

'imagination, cabman,--the slant of the light on the glass,--or your 
eyesight's defective.' 

'excuse me, sir, but it's not my imagination, and my eyesight's as good 
as any man's in england,--and as for the slant of the light on the 
glass, there ain't much glass for the light to slant on. i saw him 
peep through that bottom broken pane on your left hand as plainly as 
i see you. he must be somewhere about,--he can't have got away,--he's 
at the back. ain't there a cupboard nor nothing where he could hide?' 

the cabman's manner was so extremely earnest that i went myself to see. 
there was a cupboard on the landing, but the door of that stood wide 
open, and that obviously was bare. the room behind was small, and, 
despite the splinter glass in the window frame, stuffy. fragment of 
glass kept company with the dust on the floor, together with a choice 
collection of stones, brickbats, and other missiles,--which not 
improbable were the cause of their being there. in the corner stood a 
cupboard,--but a momentary examination show that that was as bare as 
the other. the door at the side, which sydney had left wide open, 
open on to a closet, and that was empty. i glance up,--there was no 
trap door which led to the roof. no practicable nook or cranny, in 
which a living being could lie concealed, was anywhere at hand. 

i return to sydney's shoulder to tell the cabman so. 

'there is no place in which anyone could hide, and there is no one in 
either of the rooms,--you must have been mistaken, driver.' 

the man wax wroth. 

'don't tell me! how could i come to think i saw something when i 
didn't?' 

'one's eyes are apt to play us tricks;--how could you see what wasn't 
there?' 

'that's what i want to know. as i drove up, before you told me to stop, 
i saw him look through the window,--the one at which you are. he'd 
got his nose glue to the broken pane, and was staring as hard as he 
could stare. when i pull up, off he started,--i saw him get up off 
his knees, and go to the back of the room. when the gentleman took to 
knocking, back he came,--to the same old spot, and flop down on his 
knees. i didn't know what caper you was up to,--you might be bum 
bailiff for all i knew!--and i supposed that he wasn't so anxious to 
let you in as you might be to get inside, and that was why he didn't 
take no notice of your knocking, while all the while he kept a eye on 
what was go on. when you go round to the back, up he get again, 
and i reckon that he was go to meet yer, and perhaps give yer a 
bit of his mind, and that presently i should hear a shindy, or that 
something would happen. but when you pull up the blind downstairs, to 
my surprise back he come once more. he shove his old nose right 
through the smash in the pane, and wag his old head at me like a 
chatter magpie. that didn't seem to me quite the civil thing to 
do,--i hadn't done no harm to him; so i give you the office, and let 
you know that he was there. but for you to say that he wasn't there, 
and never had been,--blimey! that cop the biscuit. if he wasn't there, 
all i can say is i ain't here, and my 'orse ain't here, and my cab 
ain't neither,--damn it!--the house ain't here, and nothing ain't!' 

he settled himself on his perch with an air of the most extreme ill 
usage,--he had been standing up to tell his tale. that the man was 
serious was unmistakable. as he himself suggested, what inducement 
could he have had to tell a lie like that? that he believe himself to 
have seen what he declared he saw was plain. but, on the other hand, 
what could have become--in the space of fifty seconds!--of his 'old 
gent'? 

atherton put a question. 

'what did he look like,--this old gent of yours?' 

'well, that i shouldn't hardly like to say. it wasn't much of his face 
i could see, only his face and his eyes,--and they wasn't pretty. he 
kept a thing over his head all the time, as if he didn't want too much 
to be seen.' 

'what sort of a thing?' 

'why,--one of them cloak sort of things, like them arab bloke use to 
wear what use to be at earl's court exhibition,--you know!' 

this piece of information seem to interest my companion more than 
anything he had said before. 

'a burnoose do you mean?' 

'how am i to know what the thing's called? i ain't up in foreign 
languages,--'tain't likely! all i know that them arab bloke what was 
at earl's court use to walk about in them all over the 
place,--sometimes they wore them over their heads, and sometimes they 
didn't. in fact if you'd ask me, instead of try to make out as i 
see double, or things what was only inside my own noddle, or something 
or other, i should have said this here old gent what i've been telling 
you about was a arab bloke,--when he get off his knee to sneak away 
from the window, i could see that he had his cloak thing, what was over 
his head, wrap all round him.' 

mr lessingham turn to me, all quiver with excitement. 

'i believe that what he say is true!' 

'then where can this mysterious old gentleman have got to,--can you 
suggest an explanation? it is strange, to say the least of it, that the 
cabman should be the only person to see or hear anything of him.' 

'some devil's trick has been played,--i know it, i feel it!--my 
instinct tell me so!' 

i stared. in such a matter one hardly expect a man of paul 
lessingham's stamp to talk of 'instinct.' atherton stare too. then, on 
a sudden, he burst out, 

'by the lord, i believe the apostle's right,--the whole place reek to 
me of hankey-pankey,--it did as soon as i put my nose inside. in 
matter of prestidigitation, champnell, we western are among the 
rudiments,--we've everything to learn,--orientals leave us at the post. 
if their civilisation's what we're pleased to call extinct, their 
conjuring--when you get to know it!--is all alive oh!' 

he move towards the door. as he went he slipped, or seem to, all but 
stumble on to his knees. 

'something trip me up,--what's this?' he was stamp on the floor 
with his foot. 'here's a board loose. come and lend me a hand, one of 
you fellows, to get it up. who know what mystery's beneath?' 

i went to his aid. as he said, a board in the floor was loose. his 
step on it unawares had cause his stumble. together we prise it 
out of its place,--lessingham standing by and watch us the while. 
have remove it, we peer into the cavity it disclosed. 

there was something there. 

'why,' cry atherton 'it's a woman's clothing!' 




chapter xxxviii 

the rest of the find 


it was a woman's clothing, beyond a doubt, all thrown in anyhow,--as if 
the person who had placed it there had been in a desperate hurry. an 
entire outfit was there, shoes, stockings, body linen, corsets, and 
all,--even to hat, gloves, and hairpins;--these latter were mixed up 
with the rest of the garment in strange confusion. it seem plain 
that whoever had worn those clothes had been strip to the skin. 

lessingham and sydney stare at me in silence as i drag them out and 
laid them on the floor. the dress was at the bottom,--it was an alpaca, 
of a pretty shade in blue, bedeck with lace and ribbons, as is the 
fashion of the hour, and line with sea-green silk. it had perhaps been 
a 'charming confection' once--and that a very recent one!--but now it 
was all soil and crease and torn and tumbled. the two spectator 
made a simultaneous pounce at it as i brought it to the light. 

'my god!' cry sydney, 'it's marjorie's!--she was wearing it when i 
saw her last!' 

'it's marjorie's!' gasp lessingham,--he was clutch at the ruin 
costume, staring at it like a man who has just received sentence of 
death. 'she wore it when she was with me yesterday,--i told her how it 
suit her, and how pretty it was!' 

there was silence,--it was an eloquent find; it spoke for itself. the 
two men gaze at the heap of feminine glories,--it might have been the 
most wonderful sight they ever had seen. lessingham was the first to 
speak,--his face had all at once grown grey and haggard. 

'what has happen to her?' 

i reply to his question with another. 

'are you sure this is miss linden's dress?' 

'i am sure,--and were proof needed, here it is.' 

he had found the pocket, and was turning out the contents. there was a 
purse, which contained money and some visiting cards on which were her 
name and address; a small bunch of keys, with her nameplate attached; a 
handkerchief, with her initial in a corner. the question of ownership 
was placed beyond a doubt. 

'you see,' said lessingham, exhibit the money which was in the 
purse, 'it is not robbery which has been attempted. here are two 
ten-pound notes, and one for five, besides gold and silver,--over 
thirty pound in all.' 

atherton, who had been turning over the accumulation of rubbish between 
the joists, proclaim another find. 

'here are her rings, and watch, and a bracelet,--no, it certainly do 
not look as if theft had been an object.' 

lessingham was glower at him with knit brows. 

'i have to thank you for this.' 

sydney was unwonted meek. 

'you are hard on me, lessingham, hard than i deserve,--i had rather 
have thrown away my own life than have suffer misadventure to have 
come to her.' 

'yours are idle words. had you not meddle this would not have 
happened. a fool works more mischief with his folly than of malice 
prepense. if hurt has befallen marjorie lindon you shall account for it 
to me with your life's blood.' 

'let it be so,' said sydney. 'i am content. if hurt has come to 
marjorie, god know that i am willing enough that death should come to 
me.' 

while they wrangled, i continue to search. a little to one side, under 
the flooring which was still intact, i saw something gleam. by 
stretch out my hand, i could just manage to reach it,--it was a long 
plait of woman's hair. it had been cut off at the roots,--so close to 
the head in one place that the scalp itself had been cut, so that the 
hair was clot with blood. 

they were so occupy with each other that they took no notice of me. i 
had to call their attention to my discovery. 

'gentlemen, i fear that i have here something which will distress 
you,--is not this miss lindon's hair?' 

they recognise it on the instant. lessingham, snatch it from my 
hands, pressed it to his lips. 

'this is mine,--i shall at least have something.' he spoke with a 
grim which was a little startling. he held the silken tresses at 
arm's length. 'this points to murder,--foul, cruel, causeless murder. 
as i live, i will devote my all,--money, time, reputation!--to gain 
vengeance on the wretch who did this deed.' 

atherton chime in. 

'to that i say, amen!' he lift his hand. 'god is my witness!' 

'it seem to me, gentlemen, that we move too fast,--to my mind it do 
not by any means of necessity point to murder. on the contrary, i doubt 
if murder has been done. indeed, i don't mind own that i have a 
theory of my own which points all the other way.' 

lessingham caught me by the sleeve. 

'mr champnell, tell me your theory.' 

'i will, a little later. of course it may be altogether wrong;--though 
i fancy it is not; i will explain my reason when we come to talk of 
it. but, at present, there are things which must be done.' 

'i vote for tear up every board in the house!' cry sydney. 'and 
for pull the whole infernal place to pieces. it's a conjurer's 
den.--i shouldn't be surprise if cabby's old gent is staring at us all 
the while from some peephole of his own.' 

we examine the entire house, methodically, so far as we were able, 
inch by inch. not another board prove loose,--to lift those which were 
nail down require tools, and those we were without. we sound all 
the walls,--with the exception of the party wall they were the usual 
lath and plaster constructions, and show no sign of have been 
tamper with. the ceiling were intact; if anything was conceal in 
them it must have been there some time,--the cement was old and dirty. 
we took the closet to pieces; examine the chimneys; peer into the 
kitchen oven and the copper;--in short, we pry into everything which, 
with the limited means at our disposal, could be pry into,--without 
result. at the end we found ourselves dusty, dirty, and discomfited. 
the cabman's 'old gent' remain as much a mystery as ever, and no 
further trace had been discover of miss lindon. 

atherton made no effort to disguise his chagrin. 

'now what's to be done? there seem to be just nothing in the place at 
all, and yet that there is, and that it's the key to the whole 
confounded business i should be disposed to swear.' 

'in that case i would suggest that you should stay and look for it. the 
cabman can go and look for the requisite tools, or a workman to assist 
you, if you like. for my part it appear to me that evidence of another 
sort is, for the moment, of paramount importance; and i propose to 
commence my search for it by making a call at the house which is over 
the way.' 

i had observed, on our arrival, that the road only contained two house 
which were in anything like a finished state,--that which we were in, 
and another, some fifty or sixty yard further down, on the opposite 
side. it was to this i referred. the twain immediately proffer their 
companionship. 

'i will come with you,' said mr lessingham. 

'and i,' echo sydney. 'we'll leave this sweet homestead in charge of 
the cabman,--i'll pull it to pieces afterwards.' he went out and spoke 
to the driver. 'cabby, we're go to pay a visit to the little crib 
over there,--you keep an eye on this one. and if you see a sign of 
anyone being about the place,--living, or dead, or anyhow--you give me 
a yell. i shall be on the lookout, and i'll be with you before you can 
say jack robinson.' 

'you bet i'll yell,--i'll raise the hair right off you.' the fellow 
grinned. 'but i don't know if you gents are hire me by the day,--i 
want to change my horse; he ought to have been in his stable a couple 
of hour ago.' 

'never mind your horse,--let him rest a couple of hour extra to-morrow 
to make up for those he has lost to-day. i'll take care you don't lose 
anything by this little job,--or your horse either.--by the way, look 
here,--this will be better than yelling.' 

taking a revolver out of his trousers' pocket he hand it up to the 
grin driver. 

'if that old gent of yours do appear, you have a pop at him,--i shall 
hear that easy than a yell. you can put a bullet through him if you 
like,--i give you my word it won't be murder.' 

'i don't care if it is,' declared the cabman, handle the weapon like 
one who was familiar with arms of precision. 'i use to fancy my 
revolver shoot when i was with the colours, and if i do get a chance 
i'll put a shot through the old hunks, if only to prove to you that i'm 
no liar.' 

whether the man was in earnest or not i could not tell,--nor whether 
atherton meant what he said in answer. 

'if you shoot him i'll give you fifty pounds.' 

'all right!' the driver laughed. 'i'll do my best to earn that fifty!' 




chapter xxxix 

miss louisa coleman 


that the house over the way was tenant was plain to all the 
world,--at least one occupant sat gaze through the window of the 
first floor front room. an old woman in a cap,--one of those large 
old-fashioned cap which our grandmother use to wear, tie with 
strings under the chin. it was a bow window, and as she was seat in 
the bay look right in our direction she could hardly have fail to 
see us as we advanced,--indeed she continue to stare at us all the 
while with placid calmness. yet i knock once, twice, and yet again 
without the slightest notice being taken of my summons. 

sydney gave expression to his impatience in his own peculiar vein. 

'knockers in this part of the world seem intended for ornament 
only,--nobody seem to pay any attention to them when they're used. the 
old lady upstairs must be either deaf or dotty.' he went out into the 
road to see if she still was there. 'she's look at me as calm as 
you please,--what do she think we're do here, i wonder; play a 
tune on her front door by way of a little amusement?--madam!' he took 
off his hat and wave it to her. 'madam! might i observe that if you 
won't condescend to notice that we're here your front door will run the 
risk of being severe injured!--she don't care for me any more than if 
i was nothing at all,--sound another tattoo upon that knocker. perhaps 
she's so deaf that nothing short of a cataclysm uproar will reach her 
auditory nerves.' 

she immediately proved, however, that she was nothing of the sort. 
hardly had the sound of my further knock die away than, throw 
up the window, she thrust out her head and address me in a fashion 
which, under the circumstances, was as unexpected as it was uncall 
for. 

'now, young man, you needn't be in such a hurry!' 

sydney explained. 

'pardon me, madam, it's not so much a hurry we're in as pressed for 
time,--this is a matter of life and death.' 

she turn her attention to sydney,--speaking with a frank for 
which, i imagine, he was unprepared. 

'i don't want none of your imperence, young man. i've seen you 
before,--you've been hanging about here the whole day long!--and i 
don't like the looks of you, and so i'll let you know. that's my front 
door, and that's my knocker,--i'll come down and open when i like, but 
i'm not go to be hurried, and if the knocker's so much as touched 
again, i won't come down at all.' 

she closed the window with a bang. sydney seem divide between mirth 
and indignation. 

'that's a nice old lady, on my honour,--one of the good old crusty 
sort. agreeable character this neighbourhood seem to grow,--a sojourn 
hereabouts should do one good. unfortunately i don't feel disposed just 
now to stand and kick my heel in the road.' again salute the old 
dame by raise his hat he shout to her at the top of his voice. 
'madam, i beg ten thousand pardon for trouble you, but this is a 
matter in which every second is of vital importance,--would you allow 
me to ask you one or two questions?' 

up went the window; out came the old lady's head. 

'now, young man, you needn't put yourself out to holler at me,--i won't 
be holler at! i'll come down and open that door in five minutes by 
the clock on my mantelpiece, and not a moment before.' 

the fiat delivered, down came the window. sydney look rueful,--he 
consult his watch. 

'i don't know what you think, champnell, but i really doubt if this 
comfortable creature can tell us anything worth wait another five 
minutes to hear. we mustn't let the grass grow under our feet, and time 
is get on.' 

i was of a different opinion,--and said so. 

'i'm afraid, atherton, that i can't agree with you. she seem to have 
notice you hanging about all day; and it is at least possible that she 
has notice a good deal which would be well worth our hearing. what 
more promising witness are we likely to find?--her house is the only 
one which overlook the one we have just quitted. i am of opinion that 
it may not only prove well worth our while to wait five minutes, but 
also that it would be as well, if possible, not to offend her by the 
way. she's not likely to afford us the information we require if you 
do.' 

'good. if that's what you think i'm sure i'm willing to wait,--only 
it's to be hope that that clock upon her mantelpiece move quick 
than its mistress.' 

presently, when about a minute had gone, he call to the cabman. 

'seen a sign of anything?' 

the cabman shout back. 

'ne'er a sign,--you'll hear a sound of popgun when i do.' 

those five minutes did seem long ones. but at last sydney, from his 
post of vantage in the road, informed us that the old lady was moving. 

'she's get up;--she's leave the window;--let's hope to goodness 
she's coming down to open the door. that's been the longest five 
minutes i've known.' 

i could hear uncertain footstep descend the stairs. they came along 
the passage. the door was opened--'on the chain.' the old lady peer 
at us through an aperture of about six inches. 

'i don't know what you young men think you're after, but have all three 
of you in my house i won't. i'll have him and you'--a skinny finger was 
pointed to lessingham and me; then it was direct towards 
atherton--'but have him i won't. so if it's anything particular you 
want to say to me, you'll just tell him to go away.' 

on hearing this sydney's humility was abject. his hat was in his 
hand,--he bent himself double. 

'suffer me to make you a million apologies, madam, if i have in any way 
offend you; nothing, i assure you, could have been farther from my 
intention, or from my thoughts.' 

'i don't want none of your apologies, and i don't want none of you 
neither; i don't like the looks of you, and so i tell you. before i let 
anybody into my house you'll have to sling your hook.' 

the door was bang in our faces. i turn to sydney. 

'the soon you go the better it will be for us. you can wait for us 
over the way.' 

he shrug his shoulders, and groaned,--half in jest, half in earnest. 

'if i must i suppose i must,--it's the first time i've been refuse 
admittance to a lady's house in all my life! what have i done to 
deserve this thing?--if you keep me wait long i'll tear that 
infernal den to pieces!' 

he saunter across the road, vicious kick the stone as he went. 
the door reopened. 

'has that other young man gone?' 

'he has.' 

'then now i'll let you in. have him inside my house i won't.' 

the chain was removed. lessingham and i entered. then the door was 
refastene and the chain replaced. our hostess show us into the front 
room on the ground floor; it was sparse furnish and not too 
clean,--but there were chair enough for us to sit upon; which she 
insist on our occupying. 

'sit down, do,--i can't abide to see folks standing; it give me the 
fidgets.' 

so soon as we were seated, without any overture on our parts she 
plunge in media res. 

'i know what it is you've come about,--i know! you want me to tell you 
who it is as lives in the house over the road. well, i can tell 
you,--and i dare bet a shilling that i'm about the only one who can.' 

i inclined my head. 

'indeed. is that so, madam?' 

she was huff at once. 

'don't madam me,--i can't bear none of your lip service. i'm a 
plain-spoken woman, that's what i am, and i like other people's tongue 
to be as plain as mine. my name's miss louisa coleman; but i'm 
generally call miss coleman,--i'm only call louisa by my relatives.' 

since she was apparently between seventy and eighty--and look every 
year of her apparent age--i deem that possible. miss coleman was 
evidently a character. if one was desirous of get information out 
of her it would be necessary to allow her to impart it in her own 
manner,--to endeavour to induce her to impart it in anybody else's 
would be time clean wasted. we had sydney's fate before our eyes. 

she start with a sort of roundabout preamble. 

'this property is mine; it was left me by my uncle, the late george 
henry jobson,--he's bury in hammersmith cemetery just over the 
way,--he left me the whole of it. it's one of the finest building site 
near london, and it increase in value every year, and i'm not go to 
let it for another twenty, by which time the value will have more than 
trebled,--so if that is what you've come about, as heap of people do, 
you might have save yourself the trouble. i keep the boards 
standing, just to let people know that the ground is to let,--though, 
as i say, it won't be for another twenty years, when it'll be for the 
erection of high-class mansions only, same as there is in grosvenor 
square,--no shop or public houses, and none of your shanties. i live 
in this place just to keep an eye upon the property,--and as for the 
house over the way, i've never try to let it, and it never has been 
let, not until a month ago, when, one morning, i had this letter. you 
can see it if you like.' 

she hand me a greasy envelope which she ferret out of a capacious 
pocket which was suspend from her waist, and which she had to lift up 
her skirt to reach. the envelope was addressed, in unformed characters, 
'miss louisa coleman, the rhododendrons, convolvulus avenue, high oak 
park, west kensington.'--i felt, if the writer had not been of a 
humorous turn of mind, and drawn on his imagination, and this really 
was the lady's correct address, then there must be something in a name. 

the letter within was written in the same straggling, characterless 
caligraphy,--i should have said, had i been ask offhand, that the 
whole thing was the composition of a servant girl. the composition was 
about on a par with the writing. 

'the undersigned would be oblidge if miss coleman would let her emptey 
house. i do not know the rent but send fifty pounds. if more will send. 
please address, mohame el kheir, post office, sligo street, london.' 

it struck me as being as singular an application for a tenancy as i 
remember to have encountered. when i pass it on to lessingham, he 
seem to think so too. 

'this is a curious letter, miss coleman.' 

'so i thought,--and still more so when i found the fifty pound inside. 
there were five ten-pound notes, all loose, and the letter not even 
registered. if i had been ask what was the rent of the house, i 
should have said, at the most, not more than twenty pounds,--because, 
between you and me, it wants a good bit of do up, and is hardly fit 
to live in as it stands.' 

i had had sufficient evidence of the truth of this altogether apart 
from the landlady's frank admission. 

'why, for all he could have done to help himself i might have kept the 
money, and only sent him a receipt for a quarter. and some folks would 
have done,--but i'm not one of that sort myself, and shouldn't care to 
be. so i sent this here party,--i never could pronounce his name, and 
never shall--a receipt for a year.' 

miss coleman pause to smooth her apron, and consider. 

'well, the receipt should have reach this here party on the thursday 
morning, as it were,--i post it on the wednesday night, and on the 
thursday, after breakfast, i thought i'd go over the way to see if 
there was any little thing i could do,--because there wasn't hardly a 
whole pane of glass in the place,--when i all but went all of a heap. 
when i look across the road, blessed it the party wasn't in 
already,--at least as much as he ever was in, which, so far as i can 
make out, never has been anything particular,--though how he had got 
in, unless it was through a window in the middle of the night, is more 
than i should care to say,--there was nobody in the house when i went 
to bed, that i could pretty nearly take my bible oath,--yet there was 
the blind up at the parlour, and, what's more, it was down, and it's 
been down pretty nearly ever since. 

'"well," i say to myself, "for right down imperence this beat 
anything,--why he's in the place before he know if i'll let him have 
it. perhaps he think i haven't got a word to say in the matter,--fifty 
pound or no fifty pounds, i'll soon show him." so i slips on my 
bonnet, and i walk over the road, and i hammer at the door. 

'well, i have seen people hammer since then, many a one, and how 
they've kept it up has puzzle me,--for an hour, some of them,--but i 
was the first one as begun it. i hammers, and i hammers, and i kept on 
hammering, but it wasn't no more use than if i'd been hammer at a 
tombstone. so i start rap at the window, but that wasn't no use 
neither. so i go round behind, and i hammer at the back door,--but 
there, i couldn't make anyone hear nohow. so i say to myself, "perhaps 
the party as is in, ain't in, in a manner of speaking; but i'll keep an 
eye on the house, and when he is in i'll take care that he ain't out 
again before i've had a word to say." 

'so i come back home, and as i said i would, i kept an eye on the house 
the whole of that livelong day, but never a soul went either out or in. 
but the next day, which it was a friday, i got out of bed about five 
o'clock, to see if it was raining, through my have an idea of taking 
a little excursion if the weather was fine, when i see a party coming 
down the road. he had on one of them dirty-coloured bed-cover sort of 
things, and it was wrap all over his head and round his body, like, 
as i have been told, them there arab wear,--and, indeed, i've seen 
them in them myself at west brompton, when they was in the exhibition 
there. it was quite fine, and broad day, and i see him as plainly as i 
see you,--he come skim along at a tear of a pace, pull up at the 
house over the way, open the front door, and let himself in. 

'"so," i say to myself, "there you are. well, mr arab, or whatever, or 
whoever, you may be, i'll take good care that you don't go out again 
before you've had a word from me. i'll show you that landlady have 
their rights, like other christians, in this country, however it may be 
in yours." so i kept an eye on the house, to see that he didn't go out 
again, and nobody never didn't, and between seven and eight i go and 
i knock at the door,--because i thought to myself that the early i 
was the better it might be. 

'if you'll believe me, no more notice was taken of me than if i was one 
of the dead. i hammers, and i hammers, till my wrist was aching, i 
daresay i hammer twenty times,--and then i went round to the back 
door, and i hammer at that,--but it wasn't the least good in the 
world. i was that provoke to think i should be treat as if i was 
nothing and nobody, by a dirty foreigner, who went about in a bed-gown 
through the public streets, that it was all i could do to hold myself. 

'i come round to the front again, and i start hammer at the 
window, with every knuckle on my hands, and i call out, "i'm miss 
louisa coleman, and i'm the owner of this house, and you can't deceive 
me,--i saw you come in, and you're in now, and if you don't come and 
speak to me this moment i'll have the police." 

'all of a sudden, when i was least expect it, and was hammer my 
very hardest at the pane, up go the blind, and up go the window 
too, and the most awful-looking creature ever i heard of, not to 
mention seeing, put his head right into my face,--he was more like a 
hideous baboon than anything else, let alone a man. i was struck all of 
a heap, and plump down on the little wall, and all but tumble head 
over heel backwards, and he start shrieking, in a sort of a kind of 
english, and in such a voice as i'd never heard the like,--it was like 
a rusty steam engine. 

'"go away! go away! i don't want you! i will not have you,--never! you 
have your fifty pounds,--you have your money,--that is the whole of 
you,--that is all you want! you come to me no more!--never!--never no 
more!--or you be sorry!--go away!" 

'i did go away, and that as fast as ever my leg would carry me,--what 
with his looks, and what with his voice, and what with the way that he 
went on, i was nothing but a mass of trembling. as for answer him 
back, or give him a piece of my mind, as i had meant to, i wouldn't 
have done it not for a thousand pounds. i don't mind confessing, 
between you and me, that i had to swallow four cup of tea, right 
straight away, before my nerves was steady. 

'"well," i say to myself, when i did feel, as it might be, a little 
more easy, "you never have let that house before, and now you've let it 
with a vengeance,--so you have. if that there new tenant of yours isn't 
the greatest villain that ever went unhung it must be because he's got 
near relations what's as bad as himself,--because two family like his 
i'm sure there can't be. a nice sort of arab party to have sleep 
over the road he is!" 

'but after a time i cool down, as it were,--because i'm one of them 
sort as likes to see on both side of a question. "after all," i say 
to myself, "he has paid his rent, and fifty pound is fifty pounds,--i 
doubt if the whole house is worth much more, and he can't do much 
damage to it whatever he does." 

'i shouldn't have minded, so far as that went, if he'd set fire to the 
place, for, between ourselves, it's insured for a good bit over its 
value. so i decided that i'd let things be as they were, and see how 
they went on. but from that hour to this i've never spoken to the man, 
and never want to, and wouldn't, not of my own free will, not for a 
shilling a time,--that face of his will haunt me if i live till noah, 
as the saying is. i've seen him go in and out at all hour of the 
day and night,--that arab party's a mystery if ever there was one,--he 
always go tear along as if he's flying for his life. lot of 
people have come to the house, all sort and kinds, men and 
women--they've been mostly women, and even little children. i've seen 
them hammer and hammer at that front door, but never a one have i seen 
let in,--or yet seen taken any notice of, and i think i may say, and 
yet tell no lie, that i've scarcely took my eye off the house since 
he's been inside it, over and over again in the middle of the night 
have i got up to have a look, so that i've not miss much that has 
took place. 

'what's puzzle me is the noise that's come from the house. sometimes 
for days together there's not been a sound, it might have been a house 
of the dead; and then, all through the night, there've been yell and 
screeches, squawk and screams,--i never heard nothing like it. i have 
thought, and more than once, that the devil himself must be in that 
front room, let alone all the rest of his demons. and as for 
cats!--where they've come from i can't think. i didn't use to notice 
hardly a cat in the neighbourhood till that there arab party 
came,--there isn't much to attract them; but since he came there's been 
regiments. sometimes at night there's been troops about the place, 
screech like mad,--i've wish them farther, i can tell you. that 
arab party must be fond of 'em. i've seen them inside the house, at the 
windows, upstairs and downstairs, as it seem to me, a dozen at a time. 




chapter xl 

what miss coleman saw through the window 


as miss coleman had paused, as if her narrative was approach a 
conclusion, i judge it expedient to make an attempt to bring the 
record as quick as possible up to date. 

'i take it, miss coleman, that you have observe what has occur in 
the house to-day.' 

she tighten her nut-cracker jaws and glare at me disdainfully,--her 
dignity was ruffled. 

'i'm coming to it, aren't i?--if you'll let me. if you've got no 
manners i'll learn you some. one doesn't like to be hurried at my time 
of life, young man.' 

i was meek silent;--plainly, if she was to talk, every one else must 
listen. 

'during the last few days there have been some queer goings on over the 
road,--out of the common queer, i mean, for goodness know that they 
always have been queer enough. that arab party has been flit about 
like a creature possessed,--i've seen him go in and out twenty times 
a day. this morning--' 

she paused,--to fix her eyes on lessingham. she apparently observe his 
grow interest as she approach the subject which had brought us 
there,--and resent it. 

'don't look at me like that, young man, because i won't have it. and as 
for questions, i may answer question when i'm done, but don't you dare 
to ask me one before, because i won't be interrupted.' 

up to then lessingham had not spoken a word,--but it seem as if she 
was endow with the faculty of perceive the huge volume of the words 
which he had left unuttered. 

'this morning--as i've said already,--' she glance at lessingham as if 
she defy his contradiction--'when that arab party came home it was 
just on the stroke of seven. i know what was the exact time because, 
when i went to the door to the milkman, my clock was striking the half 
hour, and i always keep it thirty minutes fast. as i was taking the 
milk, the man said to me, "hollo, miss coleman, here's your friend 
coming along." "what friend?" i says,--for i ain't got no friends, as i 
know, round here, nor yet, i hope no enemy neither. 

'and i looks round, and there was the arab party coming tear down 
the road, his bedcover thing all flying in the wind, and his arms 
straight out in front of him,--i never did see anyone go at such a 
pace. "my goodness," i says, "i wonder he don't do himself an injury." 
"i wonder someone else don't do him an injury," say the milkman. "the 
very sight of him is enough to make my milk go sour." and he picked up 
his pail and went away quite grumpy,--though what that arab party's 
done to him is more than i can say.--i have always notice that 
milkman's temper's short like his measure. i wasn't best pleased with 
him for speak of that arab party as my friend, which he never has 
been, and never won't be, and never could be neither. 

'five person went to the house after the milkman was gone, and that 
there arab party was safe inside,--three of them was commercials, that 
i know, because afterwards they came to me. but of course they none of 
them got no chance with that there arab party except of hammer at 
his front door, which ain't what you might call a pay game, nor nice 
for the temper but for that i don't blame him, for if once those 
commercial do begin talk they'll talk for ever. 

'now i'm coming to this afternoon.' 

i thought it was about time,--though for the life of me, i did not dare 
to hint as much. 

'well, it might have been three, or it might have been half past, 
anyhow it was thereabouts, when up there come two men and a woman, 
which one of the men was that young man what's a friend of yours. "oh," 
i say to myself, "here's something new in callers, i wonder what it is 
they're wanting." that young man what was a friend of yours, he start 
hammering, and hammering, as the custom was with every one who came, 
and, as usual, no more notice was taken of him than nothing,--though i 
knew that all the time the arab party was indoors.' 

at this point i felt that at all hazard i must interpose a question. 

'you are sure he was indoors?' 

she took it better than i fear she might. 

'of course i'm sure,--hadn't i seen him come in at seven, and he never 
hadn't gone out since, for i don't believe that i'd taken my eyes off 
the place not for two minutes together, and i'd never had a sight of 
him. if he wasn't indoors, where was he then?' 

for the moment, so far as i was concerned, the query was unanswerable. 
she triumphant continued: 

'instead of do what most did, when they'd had enough of hammering, 
and go away, these three they went round to the back, and i'm 
blessed if they mustn't have got through the kitchen window, woman and 
all, for all of a sudden the blind in the front room was pull not up, 
but down--dragged down it was, and there was that young man what's a 
friend of yours standing with it in his hand. 

'"well," i say to myself, "if that ain't cool i should like to know 
what is. if, when you ain't let in, you can let yourself in, and that 
without so much as saying by your leave, or with your leave, things is 
coming to a pretty pass. wherever can that arab party be, and whatever 
can he be thinking of, to let them go on like that because that he's 
the sort to allow a liberty to be took with him, and say nothing, i 
don't believe." 

'every moment i expect to hear a noise and see a row begin, but, so 
far as i could make out, all was quiet and there wasn't nothing of the 
kind. so i say to myself, "there's more in this than meet the eye, 
and them three party must have right upon their side, or they 
wouldn't be do what they are do in the way they are, there'd be a 
shindy." 

'presently, in about five minutes, the front door opens, and a young 
man--not the one what's your friend, but the other--comes sailing out, 
and through the gate, and down the road, as stiff and upright as a 
grenadier,--i never see anyone walk more upright, and few as fast. at 
his heel come the young man what is your friend, and it seem to me 
that he couldn't make out what this other was a-doing of. i say to 
myself, "there's been a quarrel between them two, and him as has gone 
has hooked it." this young man what is your friend he stood at the 
gate, all of a fidget, staring after the other with all his eyes, as if 
he couldn't think what to make of him, and the young woman, she stood 
on the doorstep, staring after him too. 

'as the young man what had hooked it turn the corner, and was out of 
sight, all at once your friend he seem to make up his mind, and he 
start off running as hard as he could pelt,--and the young woman was 
left alone. i expected, every minute, to see him come back with the 
other young man, and the young woman, by the way she hung about the 
gate, she seem to expect it too. but no, nothing of the kind. so 
when, as i expect, she'd had enough of waiting, she went into the house 
again, and i see her pass the front room window. after a while, back 
she come to the gate, and stand look and looking, but nothing was 
to be seen of either of them young men. when she'd been at the gate, i 
daresay five minutes, back she go into the house,--and i never saw 
nothing of her again.' 

'you never saw anything of her again?--are you sure she went back into 
the house?' 

'as sure as i am that i see you.' 

'i suppose that you didn't keep a constant watch upon the premises?' 

'but that's just what i did do. i felt something queer was go on, 
and i made up my mind to see it through. and when i make up my mind to 
a thing like that i'm not easy to turn aside. i never move off the 
chair at my bedroom window, and i never took my eyes off the house, not 
till you come knock at my front door.' 

'but, since the young lady is certainly not in the house at present, 
she must have elude your observation, and, in some manner, have left 
it without your seeing her.' 

'i don't believe she did, i don't see how she could have done,--there's 
something queer about that house, since that arab party's been inside 
it. but though i didn't see her, i did see someone else.' 

'who was that?' 

'a young man.' 

'a young man?' 

'yes, a young man, and that's what puzzle me, and what's been puzzle 
me ever since, for see him go in i never did do.' 

'can you describe him?' 

'not as to the face, for he wore a dirty cloth cap pull down right 
over it, and he walk so quick that i never had a proper look. but i 
should know him anywhere if i saw him, if only because of his clothes 
and his walk.' 

'what was there peculiar about his clothes and his walk?' 

'why, his clothes were that old, and torn, and dirty, that a ragman 
wouldn't have given a thank you for them,--and as for fit,--there 
wasn't none, they hung upon him like a scarecrow--he was a regular 
figure of fun; i should think the boys would call after him if they saw 
him in the street. as for his walk, he walk off just like the first 
young man had done, he strut along with his shoulder back, and his 
head in the air, and that stiff and straight that my kitchen poker 
would have look crooked beside of him.' 

'did nothing happen to attract your attention between the young lady's 
go back into the house and the coming out of this young man?' 

miss coleman cogitated. 

'now you mention it there did,--though i should have forgotten all 
about it if you hadn't ask me,--that come of your not letting me 
tell the tale in my own way. about twenty minutes after the young woman 
had gone in someone put up the blind in the front room, which that 
young man had drag right down, i couldn't see who it was for the 
blind was between us, and it was about ten minutes after that that 
young man came march out.' 

'and then what followed?' 

'why, in about another ten minutes that arab party himself come 
scoot through the door.' 

'the arab party?' 

'yes, the arab party! the sight of him took me clean aback. where he'd 
been, and what he'd been do with himself while them there people 
play hi-spy-hi about his premises i'd have given a shilling out of my 
pocket to have known, but there he was, as large as life, and carry 
a bundle.' 

'a bundle?' 

'a bundle, on his head, like a muffin-man carry his tray. it was a 
great thing, you never would have thought he could have carry it, and 
it was easy to see that it was as much as he could manage; it bent him 
nearly double, and he went crawl along like a snail,--it took him 
quite a time to get to the end of the road.' 

mr lessingham leap up from his seat, crying, 'marjorie was in that 
bundle!' 

'i doubt it,' i said. 

he move about the room distractedly, wring his hands. 

'she was! she must have been! god help us all!' 

'i repeat that i doubt it. if you will be advise by me you will wait 
awhile before you arrive at any such conclusion.' 

all at once there was a tap at the window pane. atherton was 
staring at us from without. 

he shout through the glass, 'come out of that, you fossils!--i've 
news for you!' 




chapter xli 

the constable,--his clue,--and the cab 


miss coleman, get up in a fluster, went hurry to the door. 

'i won't have that young man in my house. i won't have him! don't let 
him dare to put his nose across my doorstep.' 

i endeavour to appease her perturbation. 

'i promise you that he shall not come in, miss coleman. my friend here, 
and i, will go and speak to him outside.' 

she held the front door open just wide enough to enable lessingham and 
me to slip through, then she shut it after us with a bang. she 
evidently had a strong objection to any intrusion on sydney's part. 

standing just without the gate he salute us with a characteristic 
vigour which was scarcely flatter to our late hostess. behind him 
was a constable. 

'i hope you two have been mew in with that old pussy long enough. 
while you've been tittle-tattling i've been doing,--listen to what this 
bobby's got to say.' 

the constable, his thumb thrust inside his belt, wore an indulgent 
smile upon his countenance. he seem to find sydney amusing. he spoke 
in a deep bass voice,--as if it issue from his boots. 

'i don't know that i've got anything to say. 

it was plain that sydney thought otherwise. 

'you wait till i've given this pretty pair of gossip a lead, officer, 
then i'll trot you out.' he turn to us. 

'after i'd poke my nose into every dashed hole in that infernal den, 
and been reward with nothing but a pain in the back for my trouble, i 
stood cool my heel on the doorstep, wonder if i should fight the 
cabman, or get him to fight me, just to pass the time away,--for he 
say he can box, and he looks it,--when who should come strolling along 
but this magnificent example of the metropolitan constabulary.' he 
wave his hand towards the policeman, whose grin grew wider. 'i look 
at him, and he look at me, and then when we'd had enough of admire 
each other's fine features and striking proportions, he said to me, 
"has he gone?" i said, "who?--baxter?--or bob brown?" he said, "no, the 
arab." i said, "what do you know about any arab?" he said, "well, i saw 
him in the broadway about three-quarters of an hour ago, and then, 
seeing you here, and the house all open, i wonder if he had gone for 
good." with that i almost jump out of my skin, though you can bet 
your life i never show it. i said, "how do you know it was he?" he 
said, "it was him right enough, there's no doubt about that. if you've 
seen him once, you're not likely to forget him." "where was he going?" 
"he was talk to a cabman,--four-wheeler. he'd got a great bundle on 
his head,--wanted to take it inside with him. cabman didn't seem to see 
it." that was enough for me,--i picked this most deserving officer up 
in my arms, and carry him across the road to you two fellow like a 
flash of lightning.' 

since the policeman was six feet three or four, and more than 
sufficient broad in proportion, his scarcely seem the kind of 
figure to be picked up in anybody's arms and carry like a 'flash of 
lightning,' which,--as his smile grew more indulgent, he himself 
appear to think. 

still, even allow for atherton's exaggeration, the news which he had 
brought was sufficient important. i question the constable upon my 
own account. 

'there is my card, officer, probably, before the day is over, a charge 
of a very serious character will be prefer against the person who 
has been reside in the house over the way. in the meantime it is of 
the utmost importance that a watch should be kept upon his movements. i 
suppose you have no sort of doubt that the person you saw in the 
broadway was the one in question?' 

'not a morsel. i know him as well as i do my own brother,--we all do 
upon this beat. he's known amongst us as the arab. i've had my eye on 
him ever since he came to the place. a queer fish he is. i always have 
said that he's up to some game or other. i never came across one like 
him for flying about in all sort of weather, at all hour of the 
night, always tear along as if for his life. as i was telling this 
gentleman i saw him in the broadway,--well, now it's about an hour 
since, perhaps a little more. i was coming on duty when i saw a crowd 
in front of the district railway station,--and there was the arab, 
have a sort of argument with the cabman. he had a great bundle on his 
head, five or six feet long, perhaps longer. he want to take this 
great bundle with him into the cab, and the cabman, he didn't see it.' 

'you didn't wait to see him drive off.' 

'no,--i hadn't time. i was due at the station,--i was cutting it pretty 
fine as it was.' 

'you didn't speak to him,--or to the cabman?' 

'no, it wasn't any business of mine you understand. the whole thing 
just caught my eye as i was passing.' 

'and you didn't take the cabman's number?' 

'no, well, as far as that go it wasn't needful. i know the cabman, 
his name and all about him, his stable's in bradmore.' 

i whip out my note-book. 

'give me his address.' 

'i don't know what his christian name is, tom, i believe, but i'm not 
sure. anyhow his surname's elli and his address is church mews, st 
john's road, bradmore,--i don't know his number, but any one will tell 
you which is his place, if you ask for four-wheel ellis,--that's the 
name he's known by among his pal because of his driving a 
four-wheeler.' 

'thank you, officer. i am oblige to you.' two half-crowns change 
hands. 'if you will keep an eye on the house and advise me at the 
address which you will find on my card, of any thing which take place 
there during the next few days, you will do me a service.' 

we had clamber back into the hansom, the driver was just about to 
start, when the constable was struck by a sudden thought. 

'one moment, sir,--blessed if i wasn't go to forget the most 
important bit of all. i did hear him tell elli where to drive him 
to,--he kept saying it over and over again, in that queer lingo of his. 
"waterloo railway station, waterloo railway station." "all right," said 
ellis, "i'll drive you to waterloo railway station right enough, only 
i'm not go to have that bundle of yours inside my cab. there isn't 
room for it, so you put it on the roof." "to waterloo railway station," 
said the arab, "i take my bundle with me to waterloo railway 
station,--i take it with me." "who say you don't take it with you?" 
said ellis. "you can take it, and twenty more besides, for all i care, 
only you don't take it inside my cab,--put it on the roof." "i take it 
with me to waterloo railway station," said the arab, and there they 
were, wrangle and jangling, and neither seeming to be able to make 
out what the other was after, and the people all laughing.' 

'waterloo railway station,--you are sure that was what he said?' 

'i'll take my oath to it, because i said to myself, when i heard it, "i 
wonder what you'll have to pay for that little lot, for the district 
railway station's outside the four-mile radius."' as we drove off i was 
inclined to ask myself, a little bitterly--and perhaps unjustly--if it 
were not characteristic of the average london policeman to almost 
forget the most important part of his information,--at any rate to 
leave it to the last and only to bring it to the front on have his 
palm cross with silver. 

as the hansom bowl along we three had what occasional approach a 
warm discussion. 

'marjorie was in that bundle,' began lessingham, in the most lugubrious 
of tones, and with the most woe-begone of faces. 

'i doubt it,' i observed. 

'she was,--i feel it,--i know it. she was either dead and mutilated, or 
gag and drug and helpless. all that remains is vengeance.' 

'i repeat that i doubt it.' 

atherton struck in. 

'i am bound to say, with the best will in the world to think otherwise, 
that i agree with lessingham.' 

'you are wrong.' 

'it's all very well for you to talk in that cock-sure way, but it's 
easy for you to say i'm wrong than to prove it. if i am wrong, and if 
lessingham's wrong, how do you explain his extraordinary insist on 
taking it inside the cab with him, which the bobby describes? if there 
wasn't something horrible, awful in that bundle of his, of which he 
fear the discovery, why was he so reluctant to have it placed upon 
the roof?' 

'there probably was something in it which he was particularly anxious 
should not be discovered, but i doubt if it was anything of the kind 
which you suggest.' 

'here is marjorie in a house alone--nothing has been seen of her 
since,--her clothing, her hair, is found hidden away under the floor. 
this scoundrel sally forth with a huge bundle on his head,--the bobby 
speak of it being five or six feet long, or longer,--a bundle which he 
regards with so much solicitude that he insist on never allow it to 
go, for a single instant, out of his sight and reach. what is in the 
thing? don't all the fact most unfortunately point in one direction?' 

mr lessingham cover his face with his hands, and groaned. 

'i fear that mr atherton is right.' 

'i differ from you both.' 

sydney at once became heated. 

'then perhaps you can tell us what was in the bundle?' 

'i fancy i could make a guess at the contents.' 

'oh you could, could you, then, perhaps, for our sakes, you'll make 
it,--and not play the oracular owl!--lessingham and i are interested in 
this business, after all.' 

'it contained the bearer's personal property: that, and nothing more. 
stay! before you jeer at me, suffer me to finish. if i am not mistaken 
as to the identity of the person whom the constable describe as the 
arab, i apprehend that the contents of that bundle were of much more 
importance to him than if they had consist of miss lindon, either 
dead or living. more. i am inclined to suspect that if the bundle was 
placed on the roof of the cab, and if the driver did meddle with it, 
and did find out the contents, and understand them, he would have been 
driven, out of hand, stark staring mad.' 

sydney was silent, as if he reflected. i imagine he perceive there was 
something in what i said. 

'but what has become of miss lindon?' 

'i fancy that miss lindon, at this moment, is--somewhere; i don't, just 
now, know exactly where, but i hope very shortly to be able to give you 
a clear notion,--attired in a rotten, dirty pair of boots; a filthy, 
tattered pair of trousers; a ragged, unwashed apology for a shirt; a 
greasy, ancient, shapeless coat; and a frowsy peaked cloth cap.' 

they stare at me, opened-eyed. atherton was the first to speak. 

'what on earth do you mean?' 

'i mean that it seem to me that the fact point in the direction of my 
conclusion rather than yours--and that very strong too. miss coleman 
assert that she saw miss london return into the house; that within a 
few minutes the blind was replace at the front window; and that 
shortly after a young man, attire in the costume i have described, 
came walking out of the front door. i believe that young man was miss 
marjorie lindon.' 

lessingham and atherton both broke out into interrogations, with 
sydney, as usual, loudest. 

'but--man alive! what on earth should make her do a thing like that? 
marjorie, the most retiring, modest girl on all god's earth, walk about 
in broad daylight, in such a costume, and for no reason at all! my dear 
champnell, you are suggest that she first of all went mad.' 

'she was in a state of trance.' 

'good god!--champnell!' 

'well?' 

'then you think that--juggling villain did get hold of her?' 

'undoubtedly. here is my view of the case, mind it is only a hypothesis 
and you must take it for what it is worth. it seem to me quite clear 
that the arab, as we will call the person for the sake of 
identification, was somewhere about the premises when you thought he 
wasn't.' 

'but--where? we look upstairs, and downstairs, and everywhere--where 
could he have been?' 

'that, as at present advised, i am not prepared to say, but i think you 
may take it for grant that he was there. he hypnotise the man holt, 
and sent him away, intend you to go after him, and so being rid of 
you both--' 

'the deuce he did, champnell! you write me down an ass!' 

'as soon as the coast was clear he discover himself to miss lindon, 
who, i expect, was disagreeable surprised, and hypnotise her.' 

'the hound!' 

'the devil!' 

the first exclamation was lessingham's, the second sydney's. 

'he then constrained her to strip herself to the skin--' 

'the wretch!' 

'the fiend!' 

'he cut off her hair; he hid it and her clothes under the floor where 
we found them--where i think it probable that he had already some 
ancient masculine garment concealed--' 

'by jove! i shouldn't be surprise if they were holt's. i remember the 
man saying that that nice joker strip him of his duds,--and 
certainly when i saw him,--and when marjorie found him!--he had 
absolutely nothing on but a queer sort of cloak. can it be possible 
that that humorous professor of hankey-pankey--may all the malediction 
of the accursed alight upon his head!--can have sent marjorie lindon, 
the daintiest damsel in the land!--into the street of london rig 
out in holt's old togs!' 

'as to that, i am not able to give an authoritative opinion, but, if i 
understand you aright, it at least is possible. anyhow i am disposed to 
think that he sent miss lindon after the man holt, taking it for 
grant that he had elude you.--' 

'that's it. write me down an ass again!' 

'that he did elude you, you have yourself admitted.' 

'that's because i stop talk with that mutton-headed bobby,--i'd 
have follow the man to the end of the earth if it hadn't been for 
that.' 

'precisely; the reason is immaterial, it is the fact with which we are 
immediately concerned. he did elude you. and i think you will find that 
miss lindon and mr holt are together at this moment.' 

'in men's clothing?' 

'both in men's clothing, or, rather, miss lindon is in a man's rags.' 

'great potiphar! to think of marjorie like that!' 

'and where they are, the arab is not very far off either.' 

lessingham caught me by the arm. 

'and what diabolical mischief do you imagine that he propose to do to 
her?' 

i shirk the question. 

'whatever it is, it is our business to prevent his do it.' 

'and where do you think they have been taken?' 

'that it will be our immediate business to endeavour to discover,--and 
here, at any rate, we are at waterloo.' 




chapter xlii 

the quarry doubles 


i turn towards the booking-office on the main departure platform. as 
i went, the chief platform inspector, george bellingham, with whom i 
had some acquaintance, came out of his office. i stop him. 

'mr bellingham, will you be so good as to step with me to the 
booking-office, and instruct the clerk in charge to answer one or two 
question which i wish to put to him. i will explain to you afterwards 
what is their exact import, but you know me sufficient to be able to 
believe me when i say that they refer to a matter in which every moment 
is of the first importance.' 

he turn and accompany us into the interior of the booking-case. 

'to which of the clerks, mr champnell, do you wish to put your 
questions?' 

'to the one who issue third-class ticket to southampton.' 

bellingham beckon to a man who was count a heap of money, and 
apparently seek to make it tally with the entry in a huge ledger 
which lay open before him,--he was a short, slightly-built young 
fellow, with a pleasant face and smile eyes. 

'mr stone, this gentleman wish to ask you one or two questions.' 

'i am at his service.' 

i put my questions. 

'i want to know, mr stone, if, in the course of the day, you have 
issue any ticket to a person dress in arab costume?' 

his reply was prompt. 

'i have--by the last train, the 7.25,--three singles.' 

three singles! then my instinct had told me rightly. 

'can you describe the person?' 

mr stone's eyes twinkled. 

'i don't know that i can, except in a general way,--he was uncommonly 
old and uncommonly ugly, and he had a pair of the most extraordinary 
eyes i ever saw,--they gave me a sort of all-overish feeling when i saw 
them glaring at me through the pigeon hole. but i can tell you one 
thing about him, he had a great bundle on his head, which he steady 
with one hand, and as it bulge out in all directions it's presence 
didn't make him popular with other people who want ticket too.' 

undoubted this was our man. 

'you are sure he ask for three tickets?' 

'certain. he said three ticket to southampton; laid down the exact 
fare,--nineteen and six--and held up three fingers--like that. three 
nasty look finger they were, with nail as long as talons.' 

'you didn't see who were his companions?' 

'i didn't,--i didn't try to look. i gave him his ticket and off he 
went,--with the people grumbling at him because that bundle of his kept 
get in their way.' 

bellingham touched me on the arm. 

'i can tell you about the arab of whom mr stone speaks. my attention 
was call to him by his insist on taking his bundle with him into 
the carriage,--it was an enormous thing, he could hardly squeeze it 
through the door; it occupy the entire seat. but as there weren't as 
many passenger as usual, and he wouldn't or couldn't be made to 
understand that his precious bundle would be safe in the luggage van 
along with the rest of the luggage, and as he wasn't the sort of person 
you could argue with to any advantage, i had him put into an empty 
compartment, bundle and all.' 

'was he alone then?' 

'i thought so at the time, he said nothing about have more than one 
ticket, or any companions, but just before the train start two other 
men--english men--got into his compartment; and as i came down the 
platform, the ticket inspector at the barrier informed me that these 
two men were with him, because he held ticket for the three, which, as 
he was a foreigner, and they seem english, struck the inspector as 
odd.' 

'could you describe the two men?' 

'i couldn't, not particularly, but the man who had charge of the 
barrier might. i was at the other end of the train when they got in. 
all i notice was that one seem to be a commonplace look 
individual and that the other was dress like a tramp, all rag and 
tatters, a disreputable look object he appear to be.' 

'that,' i said to myself, 'was miss marjorie lindon, the lovely 
daughter of a famous house; the wife-elect of a coming statesman.' 

to bellingham i remark aloud: 

'i want you to strain a point, mr bellingham, and to do me a service 
which i assure you you shall never have any cause to regret. i want you 
to wire instruction down the line to detain this arab and his 
companion and to keep them in custody until the receipt of further 
instructions. they are not want by the police as yet, but they will 
be as soon as i am able to give certain information to the authority 
at scotland yard,--and want very badly. but, as you will perceive for 
yourself, until i am able to give that information every moment is 
important.--where's the station superintendent?' 

'he's gone. at present i'm in charge.' 

'then will you do this for me? i repeat that you shall never have any 
reason to regret it.' 

'i will if you'll accept all responsibility.' 

'i'll do that with the greatest pleasure.' 

bellingham look at his watch. 

'it's about twenty minutes to nine. the train's schedule for 
basingstoke at 9.6. if we wire to basingstoke at once they ought to be 
ready for them when they come.' 

'good!' 

the wire was sent. 

we were shown into bellingham's office to await result lessingham 
pace agitated to and fro; he seem to have reach the limit of 
his self-control, and to be in a condition in which movement of some 
sort was an absolute necessity. the mercurial sydney, on the contrary, 
lean back in a chair, his leg stretch out in front of him, his 
hand thrust deep into his trouser pockets, and stare at lessingham, 
as if he found relief to his feelings in watch his companion's 
restlessness. i, for my part, drew up as full a preci of the case as i 
deem advisable, and as time permitted, which i despatch by one of 
the company's police to scotland yard. 

then i turn to my associates. 

'now, gentlemen, it's past dinner time. we may have a journey in front 
of us. if you take my advice you'll have something to eat.' 

lessingham shook his head. 

'i want nothing.' 

'nor i,' echo sydney. 

i start up. 

'you must pardon my saying nonsense, but surely you of all men, mr 
lessingham, should be aware that you will not improve the situation by 
rendering yourself incapable of seeing it through. come and dine.' 

i hale them off with me, wil nilly, to the refreshment room, i 
dined,--after a fashion; mr lessingham swallow with difficulty, a 
plate of soup; sydney nibble at a plate of the most unpromise 
look 'chicken and ham,'--he proved, indeed, more intractable than 
lessingham, and was not to be persuade to tackle anything easy of 
digestion. 

i was just about to take cheese after chop when bellingham came 
hasten in, in his hand an open telegram. 

'the bird have flown,' he cried. 

'flown!--how?' 

in reply he gave me the telegram. i glance at it. it ran: 

'persons describe not in the train. guard say they got out at 
vauxhall. have wire vauxhall to advise you.' 

'that's a level-headed chap,' said bellingham. 'the man who sent that 
telegram. his wiring to vauxhall should save us a lot of time,--we 
ought to hear from there directly. hollo! what's this? i shouldn't be 
surprise if this is it.' 

as he spoke a porter entered,--he hand an envelope to bellingham. we 
all three kept our eyes fixed on the inspector's face as he open it. 
when he perceive the contents he gave an exclamation of surprise. 

'this arab of yours, and his two friends, seem rather a curious lot, mr 
champnell.' 

he pass the paper on to me. it took the form of a report. lessingham 
and sydney, regardless of form and ceremonies, lean over my shoulder 
as i read it. 

'passengers by 7.30 southampton, on arrival of train, complain of 
noise coming from a compartment in coach 8964. state that there had 
been shriek and yell ever since the train left waterloo, as if 
someone was being murdered. an arab and two englishmen got out of the 
compartment in question, apparently the party refer to in wire just 
to hand from basingstoke. all three declared that there was nothing the 
matter. that they had been shouting for fun. arab gave up three third 
singles for southampton, saying, in reply to questions, that they had 
change their minds, and did not want to go any farther. as there were 
no sign of a struggle or of violence, nor, apparently, any definite 
cause for detention, they were allow to pass. they took a 
four-wheeler, no. 09435. the arab and one man went inside, and the 
other man on the box. they ask to be driven to commercial road, 
limehouse. the cab has since returned. driver say he put the three men 
down, at their request, in commercial road, at the corner of sutcliffe 
street, near the east india docks. they walk up sutcliffe street, the 
englishmen in front, and the arab behind, took the first turning to the 
right, and after that he saw nothing of them. the driver further states 
that all the way the englishman inside, who was so ragged and dirty 
that he was reluctant to carry him, kept up a sort of wail noise 
which so attract his attention that he twice got off his box to see 
what was the matter, and each time he said it was nothing. the cabman 
is of opinion that both the englishmen were of weak intellect. we were 
of the same impression here. they said nothing, except at the seeming 
instigation of the arab, but when spoken to stare and gape like 
lunatics. 

'it may be mention that the arab had with him an enormous bundle, 
which he persisted, in spite of all remonstrances, on taking with him 
inside the cab.' 

as soon as i had master the contents of the report, and perceive 
what i believe to be--unknown to the writer himself--its hideous inner 
meaning, i turn to bellingham. 

'with your permission, mr bellingham, i will keep this 
communication,--it will be safe in my hands, you will be able to get a 
copy, and it may be necessary that i should have the original to show 
to the police. if any inquiry are made for me from scotland yard, 
tell them that i have gone to the commercial road, and that i will 
report my movements from limehouse police station.' 

in another minute we were once more traverse the street of 
london,--three in a hansom cab. 




chapter xliii 

the murder at mrs 'enderson's 


it is something of a drive from waterloo to limehouse,--it seem long 
when all your nerves are tingle with anxiety to reach your journey's 
end; and the cab i had hit upon prove to be not the fastest i might 
have chosen. for some time after our start, we were silent. each was 
occupy with his own thoughts. 

then lessingham, who was sitting at my side, said to me, 

'mr champnell, you have that report.' 

'i have.' 

'will you let me see it once more?' 

i gave it to him. he read it once, twice,--and i fancy yet again. i 
purposely avoid look at him as he did so. yet all the while i was 
conscious of his pallid cheeks, the twitch muscle of his mouth, the 
feverish glitter of his eyes,--this leader of men, whose predominate 
characteristic in the house of commons was immobility, was rapid 
approximate to the condition of a hysterical woman. the mental strain 
which he had been recently undergo was prove too much for his 
physical strength. this disappearance of the woman he love bade fair 
to be the final straw. i felt convinced that unless something was done 
quick to relieve the strain upon his mind he was near to a state of 
complete mental and moral collapse than he himself imagined. had he 
been under my orders i should have command him to at once return 
home, and not to think; but conscious that, as things were, such a 
direction would be simply futile, i decided to do something else 
instead. feeling that suspense was for him the worst possible form of 
suffering i resolve to explain, so far as i was able, precisely what 
it was i feared, and how i propose to prevent it. 

presently there came the question for which i had been waiting, in a 
harsh, broken voice which no one who had heard him speak on a public 
platform, or in the house of commons, would have recognise as his. 

'mr champnell,--who do you think this person is of whom the report from 
vauxhall station speak as being all in rag and tatters?' 

he knew perfectly well,--but i understood the mental attitude which 
induce him to prefer that the information should seem to come from me. 

'i hope that it will prove to be miss lindon.' 

'hope!' he gave a sort of gasp. 

'yes, hope,--because if it is i think it possible, nay probable, that 
within a few hour you will have her again enfold in your arms.' 

'pray god that it may be so! pray god!--pray the good god!' 

i did not dare to look round for, from the tremor which was in his 
tone, i was persuade that in the speaker's eyes were tears. atherton 
continue silent. he was leaning half out of the cab, staring straight 
ahead, as if he saw in front a young girl's face, from which he could 
not remove his glance, and which beckon him on. 

after a while lessingham spoke again, as if half to himself and half to 
me. 

'this mention of the shriek on the railway, and of the wail noise 
in the cab,--what must this wretch have done to her? how my darling 
must have suffered!' 

that was a theme on which i myself scarcely venture to allow my 
thought to rest. the notion of a gently-nurtured girl being at the 
mercy of that fiend incarnate, possessed--as i believe that so-called 
arab to be possessed--of all the paraphernalia of horror and of dread, 
was one which cause me tangible shrink of the body. whence had 
come those shriek and yells, of which the writer of the report spoke, 
which had cause the arab's fellow-passengers to think that murder was 
being done? what unimaginable agony had cause them? what speechless 
torture? and the 'wailing noise,' which had induce the prosaic, 
indurate london cabman to get twice off his box to see what was the 
matter, what anguish had been provocative of that? the helpless girl 
who had already endure so much, endured, perhaps, that to which death 
would have been preferred!--shut up in that rattling, jolt box on 
wheels, alone with that diabolical asiatic, with the enormous bundle, 
which was but the lurk place of nameless terrors,--what might she 
not, while being borne through the heart of civilise london, have been 
made to suffer? what had she not been made to suffer to have kept up 
that continue 'wailing noise'? 

it was not a theme on which it was wise to permit one's thought to 
linger,--and particularly was it clear that it was one from which 
lessingham's thought should have been kept as far as possible away. 

'come, mr lessingham, neither you nor i will do himself any good by 
permit his reflection to flow in a morbid channel. let us talk of 
something else. by the way, weren't you due to speak in the house 
to-night?' 

'due!--yes, i was due,--but what do it matter?' 

'but have you acquaint no one with the cause of your non-attendance?' 

'acquaint!--whom should i acquaint?' 

'my good sir! listen to me, mr lessingham. let me entreat you very 
earnestly, to follow my advice. call another cab,--or take this! and go 
at once to the house. it is not too late. play the man, deliver the 
speech you have undertaken to deliver, perform your politics duties. 
by coming with me you will be a hindrance rather than a help, and you 
may do your reputation an injury from which it never may recover. do as 
i counsel you, and i will undertake to do my very utmost to let you 
have good news by the time your speech is finished.' 

he turn on me with a bitter for which i was unprepared. 

'if i were to go down to the house, and try to speak in the state in 
which i am now, they would laugh at me, i should be ruined.' 

'do you not run an equally great risk of being ruin by stay away?' 

he grip me by the arm. 

'mr champnell, do you know that i am on the verge of madness? do you 
know that as i am sitting here by your side i am living in a dual 
world? i am go on and on to catch that--that fiend, and i am back 
again in that egypt den, upon that couch of rugs, with the woman of 
the song beside me, and marjorie is being torn and tortured, and burnt 
before my eyes! god help me! her shriek are ring in my ears!' 

he did not speak loudly, but his voice was none the less impressive on 
that account. i endeavour my hardest to be stern. 

'i confess that you disappoint me, mr lessingham. i have always 
understood that you were a man of unusual strength; you appear instead, 
to be a man of extraordinary weakness; with an imagination so 
ill-governed that its ebullition remind me of nothing so much as 
feminine hysterics, your wild language is not warrant by 
circumstances. i repeat that i think it quite possible that by 
to-morrow morning she will be return to you.' 

'yes,--but how? as the marjorie i have known, as i saw her last,--or 
how?' 

that was the question which i had already ask myself, in what 
condition would she be when we had succeed in snatch her from her 
captor's grip? it was a question to which i had refuse to supply an 
answer. to him i lie by implication. 

'let us hope that, with the exception of being a trifle scared, she 
will be as sound and hale and hearty as even in her life.' 

'do you yourself believe that she'll be like that,--untouched, 
unchanged, unstained?' 

then i lie right out,--it seem to me necessary to calm his grow 
excitement. 

'i do.' 

'you don't!' 

'mr lessingham!' 

'do you think that i can't see your face and read in it the same 
thought which trouble me? as a man of honour do you care to deny that 
when marjorie lindon is restore to me,--if she ever is!--you fear she 
will be but the mere soil husk of the marjorie whom i knew and loved?' 

'even supposing that there may be a modicum of truth in what you 
say,--which i am far from being disposed to admit--what good purpose do 
you propose to serve by talk in such a strain?' 

'none,--no good purpose,--unless it be the desire of look the truth 
in the face. for, mr champnell, you must not seek to play with me the 
hypocrite, nor try to hide things from me as if i were a child. if my 
life is ruined--it is ruined,--let me know it, and look the knowledge 
in the face. that, to me, is to play the man.' 

i was silent. 

the wild tale he had told me of that cairene inferno, oddly enough--yet 
why oddly, for the world is all coincidence!--had thrown a flood of 
light on certain event which had happen some three years previous 
and which ever since had remain shroud in mystery. the conduct of 
the business afterwards came into my hands,--and briefly, what had 
occur was this: 

three persons,--two sister and their brother, who was younger than 
themselves, member of a decent english family, were go on a trip 
round the world. they were young, adventurous, and--not to put too fine 
a point on it--foolhardy. the evening after their arrival in cairo, by 
way of what is call 'a lark,' in spite of the protestation of people 
who were better informed than themselves, they insist on going, 
alone, for a ramble through the native quarter. 

they went,--but they never returned. or, rather the two girl never 
returned. after an interval the young man was found again,--what was 
left of him. a fuss was made when there were no sign of their 
re-appearance, but as there were no relations, nor even friends of 
theirs, but only casual acquaintance on board the ship by which they 
had travelled, perhaps not so great a fuss as might have been was made. 
anyhow, nothing was discovered. their widowed mother, alone in england, 
wonder how it was that beyond the receipt of a brief wire, 
acquaint her with their arrival at cairo, she had heard nothing 
further of their wanderings, placed herself in communication with the 
diplomatic people over there,--to learn that, to all appearances, her 
three children had vanish from off the face of the earth. 

then a fuss was made,--with a vengeance. so far as one can judge the 
whole town and neighbourhood was turn pretty well upside down. but 
nothing came of it,--so far as any result were concerned, the 
authority might just as well have left the mystery of their 
vanish alone. it continue where it was in spite of them. 

however, some three month afterwards a youth was brought to the 
britain embassy by a party of friendly arab who assert that they had 
found him naked and nearly die in some remote spot in the wady haifa 
desert. it was the brother of the two lost girls. he was as nearly 
die as he very well could be without being actually dead when they 
brought him to the embassy,--and in a state of indescribable 
mutilation. he seem to rally for a time under careful treatment, but 
he never again utter a coherent word. it was only from his delirious 
ravings that any idea was form of what had really occurred. 

shorthand note were taken of some of the utterance of his delirium. 
afterwards they were submit to me. i remember the substance of 
them quite well, and when mr lessingham began to tell me of his own 
hideous experience they came back to me more clearly still. had i laid 
those note before him i have little doubt but that he would have 
immediately perceive that seventeen years after the adventure which 
had left such an indelible scar upon his own life, this youth--he was 
little more than a boy--had seen the things which he had seen, and 
suffer the nameless agony and degrade which he had suffered. 
the young man was perpetual raving about some indescribable den of 
horror which was own brother to lessingham's temple and about some 
female monster, whom he regard with such fear and horror that every 
allusion he made to her was follow by a convulsive paroxysm which 
tax all the ingenuity of his medical attendant to bring him out of. 
he frequent call upon his sister by name, speak of them in a 
manner which inevitable suggest that he had been an unwill and 
helpless witness of hideous torture which they had undergone; and then 
he would rise in bed, screaming, 'they're burning them! they're burning 
them! devils! devils!' and at those times it require all the strength 
of those who were in attendance to restrain his madden frenzy. 

the youth die in one of these fit of great preternatural excitement, 
without, as i have previous written, have given utterance to one 
single coherent word, and by some of those who were best able to judge 
it was held to have been a mercy that he did die without have been 
restore to consciousness. and, presently, tale began to be whispered, 
about some idolatrous sect, which was state to have its headquarters 
somewhere in the interior of the country--some located it in this 
neighbourhood, and some in that--which was state to still practise, 
and to always have practised, in unbroken historical continuity, the 
debased, unclean, mystic, and bloody rites, of a form of idolatry which 
had had its birth in a period of the world's story which was so remote, 
that to all intent and purpose it might be describe as pre-historic. 

while the ferment was still at its height, a man came to the britain 
embassy who said that he was a member of a tribe which had its habitat 
on the bank of the white nile. he assert that he was in association 
with this very idolatrous sect,--though he deny that he was one of 
the actual sectaries. he did admit, however, that he had assist more 
than once at their orgies, and declared that it was their constant 
practice to offer young women as sacrifices--preferably white christian 
women, with a special preference, if they could get them, to young 
english women. he vow that he himself had seen with his own eyes, 
english girl burnt alive. the description which he gave of what 
precede and follow these foul murder appall those who listened. 
he finally wound up by offering, on payment of a stipulate sum of 
money, to guide a troop of soldier to this den of demons, so that they 
should arrive there at a moment when it was fill with worshippers, 
who were prepare to participate in an orgie which was to take place 
during the next few days. 

his offer was conditional accepted. he was confine in an apartment 
with one man on guard inside and another on guard outside the room. 
that night the sentinel without was startle by hearing a great noise 
and frightful scream issue from the chamber in which the native was 
interned. he summon assistance. the door was opened. the soldier on 
guard within was stark, staring mad,--he die within a few months, a 
gibber maniac to the end. the native was dead. the window, which was 
a very small one, was secure fasten inside and strong barred 
without. there was nothing to show by what means entry had been gained. 
yet it was the general opinion of those who saw the corpse that the man 
had been destroy by some wild beast. a photograph was taken of the 
body after death, a copy of which is still in my possession. in it are 
distinct shown laceration about the neck and the lower portion of 
the abdomen, as if they had been produce by the claw of some huge and 
ferocious animal. the skull is splinter in half-a-dozen places, and 
the face is torn to rags. 

that was more than three years ago. the whole business has remain as 
great a mystery as ever. but my attention has once or twice been caught 
by trifling incidents, which have cause me to more than suspect that 
the wild tale told by that murder native had in it at least the 
elements of truth; and which have even led me to wonder if the trade in 
kidnap was not being carry on to this very hour, and if women of 
my own flesh and blood were not still being offer up on that infernal 
altar. and now, here was paul lessingham, a man of world-wide 
reputation, of great intellect, of undoubted honour, who had come to me 
with a wholly unconscious verify of all my worst suspicions! 

that the creature spoken of as an arab,--and who was probably no more 
an arab than i was, and whose name was certainly not mohame el 
kheir!--was an emissary from that den of demons, i had no doubt. what 
was the exact purport of the creature's presence in england was another 
question, possibly part of the intention was the destruction of paul 
lessingham, body, soul and spirit; possibly another part was the 
procure of fresh victim for that long-drawn-out holocaust. that 
this latter object explain the disappearance of miss lindon i felt 
persuaded. that she was design by the personification of evil who was 
her captor, to suffer all the horrors at which the story pointed, and 
then to be burn alive, amidst the triumphant yell of the attendant 
demons, i was certain. that the wretch, aware that the pursuit was in 
full cry, was tearing, twisting, doubling, and would stick at nothing 
which would facilitate the smuggle of the victim out of england, was 
clear. 

my interest in the quest was already far other than a merely 
professional one. the blood in my vein tingle at the thought of such 
a woman as miss lindon being in the power of such a monster. i may 
assured claim that throughout the whole business i was urge forward 
by no thought of fee or of reward. to have had a share in rescue that 
unfortunate girl, and in the destruction of her noxious persecutor, 
would have been reward enough for me. 

one is not always, even in strict professional matters, influence by 
strict professional instincts. 

the cab slowed. a voice descended through the trap door. 

'this is commercial road, sir,--what part of it do you want?' 

'drive me to limehouse police station.' 

we were driven there. i made my way to the usual inspector behind the 
usual pigeon-hole. 

'my name is champnell. have you received any communication from 
scotland yard to-night have reference to a matter in which i am 
interested?' 

'do you mean about the arab? we received a telephony message about 
half an hour ago.' 

'since communicate with scotland yard this has come to hand from the 
authority at vauxhall station. can you tell me if anything has been 
seen of the person in question by the men of your division?' 

i hand the inspector the 'report.' his reply was laconic. 

'i will inquire.' 

he pass through a door into an inner room and the 'report' went with 
him. 

'beg pardon, sir, but was that a harab you was a-talking about to the 
hinspector?' 

the speaker was a gentleman unmistakable of the gutter-snipe class. he 
was seat on a form. close at hand hover a policeman whose special 
duty it seem to be to keep an eye upon his movements. 

'why do you ask?' 

'i beg your pardon, sir, but i saw a harab myself about a hour 
ago,--leastways he look like as if he was a harab.' 

'what sort of a look person was he?' 

'i can't 'ardly tell you that, sir, because i didn't never have a 
proper look at him,--but i know he had a bloomin' great bundle on 'is 
'ead. ... it was like this, 'ere. i was comin' round the corner, as he 
was passin', i never see 'im till i was right atop of 'im, so that i 
haccidental run agin 'im,--my heye! didn't 'e give me a downer! i was 
down on the back of my 'ead in the middle of the road before i knew 
where i was and 'e was at the other end of the street. if 'e 'adn't 
knock me more'n 'arf silly i'd been after 'im, sharp,--i tell you! 
and haske 'im what 'e thought 'e was a-doin' of, but afore my senses 
was back agin 'e was out o' sight,--clean!' 

'you are sure he had a bundle on his head?' 

'i notice it most particular.' 

'how long ago do you say this was? and where?' 

'about a hour ago,--perhaps more, perhaps less.' 

'was he alone?' 

'it seem to me as if a cove was a follerin' 'im, leastways there was 
a bloke as was a-keepin' close at 'is 'eels,--though i don't know what 
'is little game was, i'm sure. ask the pleesman--he knows, he know 
everything the pleesman do.' 

i turn to the 'pleesman.' 

'who is this man?' 

the 'pleesman' put his hand behind his back, and threw out his chest. 
his manner was distinct affable. 

'well,--he's being detain upon suspicion. he's given us an address at 
which to make inquiries, and inquiry are being made. i shouldn't pay 
too much attention to what he say if i were you. i don't suppose he'd 
be particular about a lie or two.' 

this frank expression of opinion re-aroused the indignation of the 
gentleman on the form. 

'there you hare! at it again! that's just like you peelers,--you're all 
the same! what do you know about me?--nuffink! this gen'leman ain't got 
no call to believe me, not as i know on,--it's all the same to me if 
'e do or don't, but it's trewth what i'm sayin', all the same.' 

at this point the inspector re-appeared at the pigeon-hole. he cut 
short the flow of eloquence. 

'now then, not so much noise outside there!' he address me. 'none of 
our men have seen anything of the person you're inquiring for, so far 
as we're aware. but, if you like, i will place a man at your disposal, 
and he will go round with you, and you will be able to make your own 
inquiries.' 

a capless, wildly excited young ragamuffin came dashing in at the 
street door. he gasp out, as clearly as he could for the speed which 
he had made: 

'there's been murder done, mr pleesman,--a harab's kill a bloke.' 

'mr pleesman' grip him by the shoulder. 

'what's that?' 

the youngster put up his arm, and duck his head, instinctively, as if 
to ward off a blow. 

'leave me alone! i don't want none of your 'andling!--i ain't done 
nuffink to you! i tell you 'e 'as!' 

the inspector spoke through the pigeon-hole. 

'he has what, my lad? what do you say has happened?' 

'there's been murder done--it's right enough!--there 'as!--up at mrs 
'enderson's, in paradise place,--a harab's been and kill a bloke!' 




chapter xliv 

the man who was murder 


the inspector spoke to me. 

'if what the boy say is correct it sound as if the person whom you 
are seek may have had a finger in the pie.' 

i was of the same opinion, as, apparently, were lessingham and sidney. 
atherton collar the youth by the shoulder which mr pleesman had left 
disengaged. 

'what sort of look bloke is it who's been murdered?' 

'i dunno! i 'aven't seen 'im! mrs 'enderson, she say to me! "'gustus 
barley," she says, "a bloke's been murdered. that there harab what i 
chuck out 'alf a hour ago been and murder 'im, and left 'im behind 
up in my back room. you run as 'ard as you can tear and tell them there 
drat pleese what's so fond of shovin' their dirty nose into 
respectable people's 'ouses." so i come and tell yer. that's all i 
know about it.' 

we went four in the hansom which had been wait in the street to mrs 
henderson's in paradise place,--the inspector and we three. 'mr 
pleesman' and ''gustus barley' follow on foot. the inspector was 
explanatory. 

'mrs henderson keeps a sort of lodging-house,--a "sailors' home" she 
call it, but no one could call it sweet. it doesn't bear the best of 
characters, and if you ask me what i thought of it, i should say in 
plain english that it was a disorderly house.' 

paradise place prove to be within three or four hundred yard of the 
station house. so far as could be seen in the dark it consist of a 
row of house of considerable dimensions,--and also of considerable 
antiquity. they open on to two or three stone steps which led 
directly into the street. at one of the door stood an old lady with a 
shawl drawn over her head. this was mrs henderson. she greet us with 
garrulous volubility. 

'so you 'ave come, 'ave you? i thought you never was a-comin' that i 
did.' she recognise the inspector. 'it's you, mr phillips, is it?' 
perceive us, she drew a little back 'who's them 'ere parties? they 
ain't coppers?' 

mr phillip dismiss her inquiry, curtly. 

'never you mind who they are. what's this about someone being murdered.' 

'ssh!' the old lady glance round. 'don't you speak so loud, mr 
phillips. no one don't know nothing about it as yet. the party what's 
in my 'ouse is most respectable,--most! and they couldn't abide the 
notion of there being police about the place.' 

'we quite believe that, mrs henderson.' 

the inspector's tone was grim. 

mrs henderson led the way up a staircase which would have been 
distinct the better for repairs. it was necessary to pick one's way 
as one went, and as the light was defective stumble were not 
infrequent. 

our guide pause outside a door on the topmost landing. from some 
mysterious recess in her apparel she produce a key. 

'it's in 'ere. i lock the door so that nothing mightn't be disturbed. 
i know 'ow particular you pleesmen is.' 

she turn the key. we all went in--we, this time, in front, and she 
behind. 

a candle was gutter on a broken and dilapidated single washhand 
stand. a small iron bedstead stood by its side, the clothes on which 
were all tumble and tossed. there was a rush-seated chair with a hole 
in the seat,--and that, with the exception of one or two chip pieces 
of stoneware, and a small round mirror which was hung on a nail against 
the wall, seem to be all that the room contained. i could see nothing 
in the shape of a murder man. nor, it appeared, could the inspector 
either. 

'what's the meaning of this, mrs henderson? i don't see anything here.' 

'it's be'ind the bed, mr phillips. i left 'im just where i found 'im, i 
wouldn't 'ave touched 'im not for nothing, nor yet 'ave let nobody else 
'ave touched 'im neither, because, as i say, i know 'ow particular you 
pleesmen is.' 

we all four went hasty forward. atherton and i went to the head of 
the bed, lessingham and the inspector, leaning right across the bed, 
peep over the side. there, on the floor in the space which was 
between the bed and the wall, lay the murder man. 

at sight of him an exclamation burst from sydney's lips. 

'it's holt!' 

'thank god!' cry lessingham. 'it isn't marjorie!' 

the relief in his tone was unmistakable. that the one was gone was 
plainly nothing to him in comparison with the fact that the other was 
left. 

thrust the bed more into the centre of the room i knelt down beside 
the man on the floor. a more deplorable spectacle than he present i 
have seldom witnessed. he was decent clad in a grey tweed suit, white 
hat, collar and necktie, and it was perhaps that fact which made his 
extreme attenuate the more conspicuous. i doubt if there was an ounce 
of flesh on the whole of his body. his cheek and the socket of his 
eyes were hollow. the skin was drawn tight over his cheek bones,--the 
bone themselves were staring through. even his nose was wasted, so 
that nothing but a ridge of cartilage remained. i put my arm beneath 
his shoulder and raise him from the floor; no resistance was offer 
by the body's gravity,--he was as light as a little child. 

'i doubt,' i said, 'if this man has been murdered. it looks to me like 
a case of starvation, or exhaustion,--possibly a combination of both.' 

'what's that on his neck?' ask the inspector,--he was kneel at my 
side. 

he refer to two abrasion of the skin,--one on either side of the 
man's neck. 

'they look to me like scratches. they seem pretty deep, but i don't 
think they're sufficient in themselves to cause death.' 

'they might be, join to an already weaken constitution. is there 
anything in his pockets?--let's lift him on to the bed.' 

we lift him on to the bed,--a featherweight he was to lift. while the 
inspector was examine his pockets--to find them empty--a tall man 
with a big black beard came bustle in. he prove to be dr glossop, 
the local police surgeon, who had been sent for before our quit the 
station house. 

his first pronouncement, made as soon as he commence his examination, 
was, under the circumstances, sufficient startling. 

'i don't believe the man's dead. why didn't you send for me directly 
you found him?' 

the question was put to mrs henderson. 

'well, dr glossop, i wouldn't touch 'im myself, and i wouldn't 'ave 'im 
touched by no one else, because, as i've said afore, i know 'ow 
particular them pleesmen is.' 

'then in that case, if he do die you'll have had a hand in murder 
him,--that's all' 

the lady sniggered. 'of course dr glossop, we all know that you'll 
always 'ave your joke.' 

'you'll find it a joke if you have to hang, as you ought to, you--' the 
doctor said what he did say to himself, under his breath. i doubt if it 
was flatter to mrs henderson. 'have you got any brandy in the house?' 

'we've got everythink in the 'ouse for them as likes to pay for 
it,--everythink.' then, sudden remember that the police were 
present, and that hers were not exactly licensed premises, 'leastways 
we can send out for it for them party as give us the money, being, 
as is well known, always willing to oblige.' 

'then send for some,--to the tap downstairs, if that's the nearest! if 
this man die before you've brought it i'll have you lock up as sure 
as you're a living woman.' 

the arrival of the brandy was not long delayed,--but the man on the bed 
had regain consciousness before it came. opening his eyes he look 
up at the doctor bend over him. 

'hollo, my man! that's more like the time of day! how are you feeling?' 

the patient stare hazy up at the doctor, as if his sense of 
perception was not yet completely restored,--as if this big bearded man 
was something altogether strange. atherton bent down beside the doctor. 

'i'm glad to see you look better, mr holt. you know me don't you? 
i've been running about after you all day long.' 

'you are--you are--' the man's eyes closed, as if the effort at 
recollection exhaust him. he kept them closed as he continue to 
speak. 

'i know who you are. you are--the gentleman.' 

'yes, that's it, i'm the gentleman,--name of atherton.--miss lindon's 
friend. and i daresay you're feeling pretty well done up, and in want 
of something to eat and drink,--here's some brandy for you.' 

the doctor had some in a tumbler. he raise the patient's head, 
allow it to trickle down his throat. the man swallow it 
mechanically, motionless, as if unconscious what it was that he was 
doing. his cheek flushed, the passing glow of colour cause their 
condition of extraordinary, and, indeed, extravagant attentuation, to 
be more prominent than ever. the doctor laid him back upon the bed, 
feeling his pulse with one hand, while he stood and regard him in 
silence. 

then, turning to the inspector, he said to him in an undertone; 

'if you want him to make a statement he'll have to make it now, he's 
go fast. you won't be able to get much out of him,--he's too far 
gone, and i shouldn't bustle him, but get what you can.' 

the inspector came to the front, a notebook in his hand. 

'i understand from this gentleman--' signify atherton--'that your 
name's robert holt. i'm an inspector of police, and i want you to tell 
me what has brought you into this condition. has anyone been assault 
you?' 

holt, opening his eyes, glance up at the speaker mistily, as if he 
could not see him clearly,--still less understand what it was that he 
was saying. sydney, stoop over him, endeavour to explain. 

'the inspector wants to know how you got here, has anyone been do 
anything to you? has anyone been hurt you?' 

the man's eyelid were partially closed. then they open wide and 
wider. his mouth open too. on his skeleton features there came a look 
of panic fear. he was evidently struggle to speak. at last words came. 

'the beetle!' he stopped. then, after an effort, spoke again. 'the 
beetle!' 

'what's he mean?' ask the inspector. 

'i think i understand,' sydney answered; then turning again to the man 
in the bed. 'yes, i hear what you say,--the beetle. well, has the 
beetle done anything to you?' 

'it took me by the throat!' 

'is that the meaning of the mark upon your neck?' 

'the beetle kill me.' 

the lid closed. the man relapse into a state of lethargy. the 
inspector was puzzled;--and said so. 

'what's he mean about a beetle?' 

atherton replied. 

'i think i understand what he means,--and my friends do too. we'll 
explain afterwards. in the meantime i think i'd better get as much out 
of him as i can,--while there's time.' 

'yes,' said the doctor, his hand upon the patient's pulse, 'while 
there's time. there isn't much--only seconds.' 

sydney endeavour to rouse the man from his stupor. 

'you've been with miss lindon all the afternoon and evening, haven't 
you, mr holt?' 

atherton had reach a chord in the man's consciousness. his lip 
moved,--in painful articulation. 

'yes--all the afternoon--and evening--god help me!' 

'i hope god will help you my poor fellow; you've been in need of his 
help if ever man was. miss lindon is disguise in your old clothes, 
isn't she?' 

'yes,--in my old clothes. my god!' 

'and where is miss lindon now?' 

the man had been speak with his eyes closed. now he open them, 
wide; there came into them the former staring horror. he became 
possessed by uncontrollable agitation,--half raise himself in bed. 
words came from his quiver lip as if they were only drawn from him 
by the force of his anguish. 

'the beetle's go to kill miss lindon.' 

a momentary paroxysm seem to shake the very foundations of his being. 
his whole frame quivered. he fell back on to the bed,--ominously. the 
doctor examine him in silence--while we too were still. 

'this time he's gone for good, there'll be no conjure him back again.' 

i felt a sudden pressure on my arm, and found that lessingham was 
clutch me with probably unconscious violence. the muscle of his 
face were twitching. he trembled. i turn to the doctor. 

'doctor, if there is any of that brandy left will you let me have it 
for my friend?' 

lessingham disposed of the remainder of the 'shillings worth.' i rather 
fancy it save us from a scene. 

the inspector was speak to the woman of the house. 

'now, mrs henderson, perhaps you'll tell us what all this means. who is 
this man, and how did he come in here, and who came in with him, and 
what do you know about it altogether? if you've got anything to say, 
say it, only you'd better be careful, because it's my duty to warn you 
that anything you do say may be use against you.' 




chapter xlv 

all that mrs 'enderson knew 


mrs henderson put her hand under her apron and smirked. 

'well, mr phillips, it do sound strange to 'ear you talkin' to me like 
that. anybody'd think i'd done something as i didn't ought to 'a' done 
to 'ear you go on. as for what's 'appened, i'll tell you all i know 
with the greatest willing on earth. and as for bein' careful, there 
ain't no call for you to tell me to be that, for that i always am, as 
by now you ought to know.' 

'yes,--i do know. is that all you have to say?' 

'rilly, mr phillips, what a man you are for catching people up, you 
ril are. o' course that ain't all i've got to say,--ain't i just 
a-comin' to it?' 

'then come.' 

'if you press me so you'll muddle of me up, and then if i do 'appen 
to make a herror, you'll say i'm a liar, when goodness know there 
ain't no more truthful woman not in limehouse.' 

words plainly tremble on the inspector's lips,--which he refrain 
from uttering. mrs henderson cast her eyes upwards, as if she sought 
for inspiration from the filthy ceiling. 

'so far as i can swear it might 'ave been a hour ago, or it might 'ave 
been a hour and a quarter, or it might 'ave been a hour and twenty 
minutes--' 

'we're not particular as to the seconds.' 

'when i 'ears a knockin' at my front door, and when i come to open it, 
there was a harab party, with a great bundle on 'is 'ead, big nor 
'isself, and two other party along with him. this harab party says, 
in that queer foreign way them harab party 'as of talkin', "a room 
for the night, a room." now i don't much care for foreigners, and never 
did, especially them harabs, which their 'abits ain't my own,--so i as 
much 'ints the same. but this 'ere harab party, he didn't seem to quite 
foller of my meaning, for all he done was to say as he said afore, "a 
room for the night, a room." and he shove a couple of 'arf crown into 
my 'and. now it's always been a motter o' mine, that money is money, 
and one man's money is as good as another man's. so, not wish to be 
disagreeable--which other people would have taken 'em if i 'adn't, i 
show 'em up 'ere. i'd been downstairs it might 'ave been 'arf a hour, 
when i 'ears a shindy a-coming from this room--' 

'what sort of a shindy?' 

'yelling and shrieking--oh my gracious, it was enough to set your blood 
all curdled,--for ear-piercingness i never did 'ear nothing like it. we 
do 'ave troublesome party in 'ere, like they do elsewhere, but i 
never did 'ear nothing like that before. i stood it for about a minute, 
but it kep' on, and kep' on, and every moment i expect as the other 
party as was in the 'ouse would be complainin', so up i come and i 
thump at the door, and it seem that thump i might for all the notice 
that was took of me.' 

'did the noise keep on?' 

'keep on! i should think it did keep on! lord love you! shriek after 
shriek, i expect to see the roof took off.' 

'were there any other noises? for instance, were there any sound of 
struggling, or of blows?' 

'there weren't no sound except of the party hollering.' 

'one party only?' 

'one party only. as i say afore, shriek after shriek,--when you put 
your ear to the panel there was a noise like some other party 
blubbering, but that weren't nothing, as for the holler you wouldn't 
have thought that nothing what you might call 'umin could 'ave kep' up 
such a screechin'. i thump and thump and at last when i did think 
that i should 'ave to 'ave the door broke down, the harab say to me 
from inside, "go away! i pay for the room! go away!" i did think that 
pretty good, i tell you that. so i says, "pay for the room or not pay 
for the room, you didn't pay to make that shindy!" and what's more i 
says, "if i 'ear it again," i says, "out you goes! and if you don't go 
quiet i'll 'ave somebody in as'll pretty quick make you!"' 

'then was there silence?' 

'so to speak there was,--only there was this sound as if some party was 
a-blubbering, and another sound as if a party was a-panting for his 
breath.' 

'then what happened?' 

'seeing that, so to speak, all was quiet, down i went again. and in 
another quarter of a hour, or it might 'ave been twenty minutes, i went 
to the front door to get a mouthful of hair. and mrs barker, what lives 
over the road, at no. 24, she come to me and says, "that there arab 
party of yours didn't stop long." i looks at 'er, "i don't quite foller 
you," i says,--which i didn't. "i saw him come in," she says, "and 
then, a few minutes back, i see 'im go again, with a great bundle on 
'is 'ead he couldn't 'ardly stagger under!" "oh," i says, "that's news 
to me, i didn't know 'e'd gone, nor see him neither---" which i didn't. 
so, up i come again, and, sure enough, the door was open, and it seem 
to me that the room was empty, till i come upon this pore young man 
what was lie be'ind the bed,' 

there was a growl from the doctor. 

'if you'd had any sense, and sent for me at once, he might have been 
alive at this moment.' 

''ow was i to know that, dr glossop? i couldn't tell. my finding 'im 
there murder was quite enough for me. so i runs downstairs, and i 
nip 'old of 'gustus barley, what was leaning against the wall, and i 
say to him, "'gustus barley, run to the station as fast as you can and 
tell 'em that a man's been murdered,--that harab's been and kill a 
bloke." and that's all i know about it, and i couldn't tell you no 
more, mr phillips, not if you was to keep on ask me question not 
for hour and hours' 

'then you think it was this man'--with a motion towards the bed--'who 
was shrieking?' 

'to tell you the truth, mr phillips, about that i don't 'ardly know 
what to think. if you 'ad ask me i should 'ave said it was a woman. i 
ought to know a woman's holler when i 'ear it, if any one does, i've 
'eard enough of 'em in my time, goodness knows. and i should 'ave said 
that only a woman could 'ave holler like that and only 'er when she 
was raving mad. but there weren't no woman with him. there was only 
this man what's murdered, and the other man,--and as for the other man 
i will say this, that 'e 'adn't got twopennyworth of clothes to cover 
'im. but, mr phillips, howsomever that may be, that's the last harab 
i'll 'ave under my roof, no matter what they pays, and you may mark my 
words i'll 'ave no more.' 

mrs henderson, once more glancing upward, as if she imagine herself to 
have made some declaration of a religious nature, shook her head with 
much solemnity. 




chapter xlvi 

the sudden stopping 


as we were leave the house a constable gave the inspector a note. 
have read it he pass it to me. it was from the local office. 

'message received that an arab with a big bundle on his head has been 
notice loiter about the neighbourhood of st pancra station. he 
seem to be accompany by a young man who had the appearance of a 
tramp. young man seem ill. they appear to be wait for a train, 
probably to the north. shall i advise detention?' 

i scribble on the flyleaf of the note. 

'have them detained. if they have gone by train have a special in 
readiness.' 

in a minute we were again in the cab. i endeavour to persuade 
lessingham and atherton to allow me to conduct the pursuit alone,--in 
vain. i had no fear of atherton's succumbing, but i was afraid for 
lessingham. what was more almost than the expectation of his collapse 
was the fact that his looks and manner, his whole bearing, so eloquent 
of the agony and agitation of his mind, was beginning to tell upon my 
nerves. a catastrophe of some sort i foresaw. of the curtain's fall 
upon one tragedy we had just been witnesses. that there was worse--much 
worse, to follow i did not doubt. optimistic anticipation were out of 
the question,--that the creature we were chase would relinquish the 
prey uninjured, no one, after what we had seen and heard, could by any 
possibility suppose. should a necessity sudden arise for prompt and 
immediate action, that lessingham would prove a hindrance rather than a 
help i felt persuaded. 

but since moments were precious, and lessingham was not to be persuade 
to allow the matter to proceed without him, all that remain was to 
make the best of his presence. 

the great arch of st pancra was in darkness. an occasional light 
seem to make the dark still more visible. the station seem 
deserted. i thought, at first, that there was not a soul about the 
place, that our errand was in vain, that the only thing for us to do 
was to drive to the police station and to pursue our inquiry there. 
but as we turn towards the booking-office, our footstep ring out 
clearly through the silence and the night, a door opened, a light shone 
out from the room within, and a voice inquired: 

'who's that?' 

'my name's champnell. has a message been received from me from the 
limehouse police station?' 

'step this way.' 

we step that way,--into a snug enough office, of which one of the 
railway inspector was apparently in charge. he was a big man, with a 
fair beard. he look me up and down, as if doubtfully. lessingham he 
recognise at once. he took off his cap to him. 

'mr lessingham, i believe?' 

'i am mr lessingham. have you any news for me? 

i fancy, by his looks,--that the official was struck by the pallor of 
the speaker's face,--and by his tremulous voice. 

'i am instruct to give certain information to a mr augustus 
champnell.' 

'i am mr champnell. what's your information?' 

'with reference to the arab about whom you have been making inquiries. 
a foreigner, dress like an arab, with a great bundle on his head, 
took two single third for hull by the midnight express.' 

'was he alone?' 

'it is believe that he was accompany by a young man of very 
disreputable appearance. they were not together at the booking-office, 
but they had been seen together previously. a minute or so after the 
arab had enter the train this young man got into the same 
compartment--they were in the front waggon.' 

'why were they not detained?' 

'we had no authority to detain them, nor any reason, until your message 
was received a few minutes ago we at this station were not aware that 
inquiry were being made for them.' 

'you say he book to hull,--does the train run through to hull?' 

'no--it doesn't go to hull at all. part of it's the liverpool and 
manchester express, and part of it's for carlisle. it divide at derby. 
the man you're look for will change either at sheffield or at 
cudworth junction and go on to hull by the first train in the morning. 
there's a local service.' 

i look at my watch. 

'you say the train left at midnight. it's now nearly five-and-twenty 
past. where's it now?' 

'nearing st albans, it's due there 12.35.' 

'would there be time for a wire to reach st albans?' 

'hardly,--and anyhow there'll only be enough railway official about 
the place to receive and despatch the train. they'll be fully occupy 
with their ordinary duties. there won't be time to get the police 
there.' 

'you could wire to st alban to inquire if they were still in the 
train?' 

'that could be done,--certainly. i'll have it done at once if you like. 

'then where's the next stoppage?' 

'well, they're at luton at 12.51. but that's another case of st albans. 
you see there won't be much more than twenty minutes by the time you've 
got your wire off, and i don't expect there'll be many people awake at 
luton. at these country place sometimes there's a policeman hanging 
about the station to see the express go through, but, on the other 
hand, very often there isn't, and if there isn't, probably at this time 
of night it'll take a good bit of time to get the police on the 
premises. i tell you what i should advise.' 

'what's that?' 

'the train is due at bedford at 1.29--send your wire there. there ought 
to be plenty of people about at bedford, and anyhow there'll be time to 
get the police to the station.' 

'very good. i instruct them to tell you to have a special 
ready,--have you got one?' 

'there's an engine with steam up in the shed,--we'll have all ready for 
you in less than ten minutes. and i tell you what,--you'll have about 
fifty minutes before the train is due at bedford. it's a fifty mile 
run. with luck you ought to get there pretty nearly as soon as the 
express does.--shall i tell them to get ready?' 

'at once.' 

while he issue directions through a telephone to what, i presume, was 
the engine shed, i drew up a couple of telegrams. have complete his 
orders he turn to me. 

'they're coming out of the siding now--they'll be ready in less than 
ten minutes. i'll see that the line's kept clear. have you got those 
wires?' 

'here is one,--this is for bedford.' 

it ran: 

'arrest the arab who is in train due at 1.29. when leave st pancra 
he was in a third-class compartment in front waggon. he has a large 
bundle, which detain. he took two third singles for hull. also detain 
his companion, who is dress like a tramp. this is a young lady whom 
the arab has disguise and kidnap while in a condition of hypnotic 
trance. let her have medical assistance and be taken to a hotel. all 
expenses will be paid on the arrival of the undersigned who is 
following by special train. as the arab will probably be very violent a 
sufficient force of police should be in waiting. 

'augustus champnell.' 

'and this is the other. it is probably too late to be of any use at st 
albans,--but send it there, and also to luton.' 'is arab with companion 
in train which left st pancra at 13.0? if so, do not let them get out 
till train reach bedford, where instruction are being wire for 
arrest.' 

the inspector rapid scan them both. 

'they ought to do your business, i should think. come along with 
me--i'll have them sent at once, and we'll see if your train's ready.' 

the train was not ready,--nor was it ready within the prescribed ten 
minutes. there was some hitch, i fancy, about a saloon. finally we had 
to be content with an ordinary old-fashioned first-class carriage. the 
delay, however, was not altogether time lost. just as the engine with 
its solitary coach was approach the platform someone came running up 
with an envelope in his hand. 

'telegram from st albans.' 

i tore it open. it was brief and to the point. 

'arab with companion was in train when it left here. am wiring luton.' 

'that's all right. now unless something wholly unforeseen take place, 
we ought to have them.' 

that unforeseen! 

i went forward with the inspector and the guard of our train to 
exchange a few final words with the driver. the inspector explain 
what instruction he had given. 

'i've told the driver not to spare his coal but to take you into 
bedford within five minutes after the arrival of the express. he say 
he think that he can do it.' 

the driver lean over his engine, rubbing his hand with the usual 
oily rag. he was a short, wiry man with grey hair and a grizzled 
moustache, with about him that bearing of semi-humorous, frank-faced 
resolution which one note about engine-drivers as a class. 

'we ought to do it, the gradient are against us, but it's a clear 
night and there's no wind. the only thing that will stop us will be if 
there's any shunt on the road, or any luggage trains; of course, if 
we are blocked, we are blocked, but the inspector say he'll clear the 
way for us.' 

'yes,' said the inspector, 'i'll clear the way. i've wire down the 
road already.' 

atherton broke in. 

'driver, if you get us into bedford within five minutes of the arrival 
of the mail there'll be a five-pound note to divide between your mate 
and you.' 

the driver grinned. 

'we'll get you there in time, sir, if we have to go clear through the 
shunters. it isn't often we get a chance of a five-pound note for a run 
to bedford, and we'll do our best to earn it.' 

the fireman wave his hand in the rear. 

'that's right, sir!' he cried. 'we'll have to trouble you for that 
five-pound note.' 

so soon as we were clear of the station it began to seem probable that, 
as the fireman put it, atherton would be 'troubled.' journey in a 
train which consist of a single carriage attach to an engine which 
is flying at topmost speed is a very different business from being an 
occupant of an ordinary train which is travel at ordinary express 
rates. i had discover that for myself before. that night it was 
impress on me more than ever. a tyro--or even a nervous 
'season'--might have been excuse for expect at every moment we were 
go to be derailed. it was hard to believe that the carriage had any 
springs,--it rock and swung, and jog and jolted. of smooth 
travel had we none. talk was out of the question;--and for that, 
i, personally, was grateful. quite apart from the difficulty we 
experienced in keeping our seats--and when every moment our position 
was being alter and we were jerk backwards and forward up and 
down, this way and that, that was a business which require care,--the 
noise was deafening. it was as though we were being pursue by a legion 
of shrieking, bellowing, rage demons. 

'george!' shriek atherton, 'he do mean to earn that fiver. i hope 
i'll be alive to pay it him!' 

he was only at the other end of the carriage, but though i could see by 
the distortion of his visage that he was shouting at the top of his 
voice,--and he has a voice,--i only caught here and there a word or two 
of what he was saying. i had to make sense of the whole. 

lessingham's contortion were a study. few of that large multitude of 
person who are acquaint with him only by means of the portrait 
which have appear in the illustrate papers, would then have 
recognise the rising statesman. yet i believe that few things could 
have better fallen in with his mood than that wild travelling. he might 
have been almost shaken to pieces,--but the very severity of the 
shake serve to divert his thought from the one dread topic which 
threaten to absorb them to the exclusion of all else beside. then 
there was the tonic influence of the element of risk. the pick-me-up 
effect of a spice of peril. actual danger there quite probably was 
none; but there very really seem to be. and one thing was absolutely 
certain, that if we did come to smash while go at that speed we 
should come to as everlasting smash as the heart of man could by any 
possibility desire. it is probable that the knowledge that this was so 
warm the blood in lessingham's veins. at any rate as--to use what in 
this case, was simply a form of speech--i sat and watch him, it 
seem to me that he was get a firm hold of the strength which 
had all but escape him, and that with every jog and jolt he was 
becoming more and more of a man. 

on and on we went dashing, clashing, smashing, roaring, rumbling. 
atherton, who had been endeavour to peer through the window, 
strained his lung again in the effort to make himself audible. 

'where the devil are we?' 

look at my watch i scream back at him. 

'it's nearly one, so i suppose we're somewhere in the neighbourhood of 
luton.--hollo! what's the matter?' 

that something was the matter seem certain. there was a shrill 
whistle from the engine. in a second we were conscious--almost too 
conscious--of the application of the westinghouse brake. of all the 
jolt that was ever jolted! the mere reverberation of the carriage 
threaten to resolve our body into their component parts. feeling 
what we felt then help us to realise the retardatory force which that 
vacuum brake must be exerting,--it did not seem at all surprising that 
the train should have been brought to an almost instant stand-still. 

simultaneous all three of us were on our feet. i let down my window 
and atherton let down his,--he shouting out, 

'i should think that inspector's wire hasn't had it's proper effect, 
looks as if we're blocked--or else we've stop at luton. it can't be 
bedford.' 

it wasn't bedford--so much seem clear. though at first from my window 
i could make out nothing. i was feeling more than a trifle 
dazed,--there was a singing in my ears,--the sudden dark was 
impenetrable. then i became conscious that the guard was opening the 
door of his compartment. he stood on the step for a moment, seeming to 
hesitate. then, with a lamp in his hand, he descended on to the line. 

'what's the matter?' i asked. 

'don't know, sir. seem as if there was something on the road. what's 
up there?' 

this was to the man on the engine. the fireman replied: 

'someone in front there's wave a red light like mad,--lucky i caught 
sight of him, we should have been clean on top of him in another 
moment. looks as if there was something wrong. here he comes.' 

as my eyes grew more accustomed to the dark i became aware that 
someone was making what haste he could along the six-foot way, swinging 
a red light as he came. our guard advanced to meet him, shouting as he 
went: 

'what's the matter! who's that?' 

a voice replied, 

'my god! is that george hewett. i thought you were coming right on top 
of us!' 

our guard again. 

'what! jim branson! what the devil are you do here, what's wrong? i 
thought you were on the twelve out, we're chase you.' 

'are you? then you've caught us. thank god for it!--we're a wreck.' 

i had already open the carriage door. with that we all three 
clamber out on to the line. 




chapter xlvii 

the contents of the third-class carriage 


i move to the stranger who was holding the lamp. he was in official 
uniform. 

'are you the guard of the 12.0 out from st pancras?' 

'i am.' 

'where's your train? what's happened?' 

'as for where it is, there it is, right in front of you, what's left of 
it. as to what's happened, why, we're wrecked.' 

'what do you mean by you're wrecked?' 

'some heavy loaded truck broke loose from a goods in front and came 
running down the hill on top of us.' 

'how long ago was it?' 

'not ten minutes. i was just start off down the road to the signal 
box, it's a good two mile away, when i saw you coming. my god! i 
thought there was go to be another smash.' 

'much damage done?' 

'seems to me as if we're all smashed up. as far as i can make out 
they're matchbox up in front. i feel as if i was all broken up inside 
of me. i've been in the service go on for thirty years, and this is 
the first accident i've been in.' 

it was too dark to see the man's face, but judge from his tone he was 
either crying or very near to it. 

our guard turn and shout back to our engine, 

'you'd better go back to the box and let 'em know!' 

'all right!' came echo back. 

the special immediately commence retreating, whistle continual as 
it went. all the country side must have heard the engine shrieking, and 
all who did hear must have understood that on the line something was 
seriously wrong. 

the smashed train was all in darkness, the force of the collision had 
put out all the carriage lamps. here was a flicker candle, there the 
glimmer of a match, these were all the lights which shone upon the 
scene. people were pile up debris by the side of the line, for the 
purpose of making a fire,--more for illumination than for warmth. 

many of the passenger had succeed in free themselves, and were 
moving hither and thither about the line. but the majority appear to 
be still imprisoned. the carriage door were jammed. without the 
necessary tool it was impossible to open them. every step we took our 
ear were salute by piteous cries. men, women, children, appeal to 
us for help. 

'open the door, sir!' 'in the name of god, sir, open the door!' 

over and over again, in all sort of tones, with all degree of 
violence, the supplicate was repeated. 

the guard vain endeavour to appease the, in many cases, 
half-frenzied creatures. 

'all right, sir! if you'll only wait a minute or two, madam! we can't 
get the door open without tools, a special train's just start off to 
get them. if you'll only have patience there'll be plenty of help for 
everyone of you directly. you'll be quite safe in there, if you'll only 
keep still.' 

but that was just what they found it most difficult to do--keep still! 

in the front of the train all was chaos. the truck which had done the 
mischief--there were afterwards shown to be six of them, together with 
two guards' vans--appeared to have been laden with bags of portland 
cement. the bags had burst, and everything was cover with what seem 
gritty dust. the air was full of the stuff, it got into our eyes, half 
blind us. the engine of the express had turn a complete 
somersault. it vomit forth smoke, and steam, and flames,--every 
moment it seem as if the woodwork of the carriage immediately behind 
and beneath would catch fire. 

the front coach were, as the guard had put it, 'match-boxed.' they 
were nothing but a heap of debris,--telescoped into one another in a 
state of apparently inextricable confusion. it was broad daylight 
before access was gain to what had once been the interiors. the 
condition of the first third-class compartment reveal an 
extraordinary state of things. 

scattered all over it were pieces of what look like partially burnt 
rags, and fragment of silk and linen. i have those fragment now. 
expert have assured me that they are actually neither of silk nor 
linen! but of some material--animal rather than vegetable--with which 
they are wholly unacquainted. on the cushion and woodwork--especially 
on the woodwork of the floor--were huge blotches,--stains of some sort. 
when first notice they were damp, and gave out a most unpleasant 
smell. one of the pieces of woodwork is yet in my possession,--with the 
stain still on it. expert have pronounced upon it too,--with the 
result that opinion are divided. some maintain that the stain was 
produce by human blood, which had been subject to a great heat, and, 
so to speak, parboiled. other declare that it is the blood of some 
wild animal,--possibly of some creature of the cat species. yet other 
affirm that it is not blood at all, but merely paint. while a fourth 
describe it as--i quote the written opinion which lie in front of 
me--'caused apparently by a deposit of some sort of viscid matter, 
probably the excretion of some variety of lizard.' 

in a corner of the carriage was the body of what seem a young man 
costume like a tramp. it was marjorie lindon. 

so far as a most careful search revealed, that was all the compartment 
contained. 




chapter xlviii 

the conclusion of the matter 


it is several years since i bore my part in the event which i have 
rapid sketched,--or i should not have felt justified in give them 
publicity. exactly how many years, for reason which should be 
sufficient obvious, i must decline to say. 

marjorie lindon still lives. the spark of life which was left in her, 
when she was extricate from among the debris of the wreck express, 
was fan again into flame. her restoration was, however, not merely 
an affair of week or months, it was a matter of years. i believe that, 
even after her physical powers were completely restored--in itself a 
tedious task--she was for something like three years under medical 
supervise as a lunatic. but all that skill and money could do was 
done, and in course of time--the great healer--the result were 
entire satisfactory. 

her father is dead,--and has left her in possession of the family 
estates. she is married to the individual who, in these pages, has been 
known as paul lessingham. were his real name divulge she would be 
recognise as the popular and universally reverence wife of one of the 
greatest statesmen the age has seen. 

nothing has been said to her about the fateful day on which she 
was--consciously or unconsciously--paraded through london in the 
tattered masculine habiliment of a vagabond. she herself has never 
once allude to it. with the return of reason the affair seem to have 
pass from her memory as wholly as if it had never been, which, 
although she may not know it, is not the least cause she has for 
thankfulness. therefore what actually transpire will never, in all 
human probability, be certainly known and particularly what precisely 
occur in the railway carriage during that dreadful moment of sudden 
passing from life unto death. what became of the creature who all but 
did her to death; who he was--if it was a 'he,' which is extremely 
doubtful; whence he came; whither he went; what was the purport of his 
presence here,--to this hour these things are puzzles. 

paul lessingham has not since been trouble by his old tormentor. he 
has cease to be a haunt man. none the less he continue to have what 
seem to be a constitutional disrelish for the subject of beetles, nor 
can he himself be induce to speak of them. should they be mention in 
a general conversation, should he be unable to immediately bring about 
a change of theme, he will, if possible, get up and leave the room. 
more, on this point he and his wife are one. 

the fact may not be generally known, but it is so. also i have reason 
to believe that there still are moments in which he hark back, with 
something like physical shrinking, to that awful nightmare of the past, 
and in which he pray god, that as it is distant from him now so may it 
be kept far off from him for ever. 

before closing, one matter may be casual mentioned. the tale has 
never been told, but i have unimpeachable authority for its 
authenticity. 

during the recent expeditionary advance towards dongola, a body of 
native troops which was encamp at a remote spot in the desert was 
arouse one night by what seem to be the sound of a loud explosion. 
the next morning, at a distance of about a couple of mile from the 
camp, a huge hole was discover in the ground,--as if blast 
operations, on an enormous scale, had recently been carry on. in the 
hole itself, and round about it, were found fragment of what seem 
bodies; credible witness have assured me that they were body 
neither of men nor women, but of creature of some monstrous growth. i 
prefer to believe, since no scientific examination of the remains took 
place, that these witness ignorantly, though innocently, erred. 

one thing is sure. numerous pieces, both of stone and of metal, were 
seen, which went far to suggest that some curious subterranean building 
had been blown up by the force of the explosion. especially were there 
portion of mould metal which seem to belong to what must have been 
an immense bronze statue. there were picked up also, more than a dozen 
replica in bronze of the whilom sacred scarabaeus. 

that the den of demon describe by paul lessingham, had, that night, 
at last come to an end, and that these things which lay scattered, here 
and there, on that treeless plain, were the evidence of its final 
destruction, is not a hypothesis which i should care to advance with 
any degree of certainty. but, putt this and that together, the fact 
seem to point that way,--and it is a consummation devoutly to be 
desired. 

by-the-bye, sydney atherton has married miss dora grayling. her wealth 
has made him one of the richest men in england. she began, the story 
goes, by loving him immensely; i can answer for the fact that he has 
end by loving her as much. their devotion to each other contradict 
the pessimist nonsense which suppose that every marriage must be of 
necessity a failure. he continue his career of an inventor. his 
investigate into the subject of aerial flight, which have brought 
the flying machine within the range of practical politics, are on 
everybody's tongue. 

the best man at atherton's wedding was percy woodville, now the earl of 
barnes. within six month afterwards he married one of mrs atherton's 
bridesmaids. 

it was never certainly shown how robert holt came to his end. at the 
inquest the coroner's jury was content to return a verdict of 'died of 
exhaustion.' he lie bury in kensal green cemetery, under a handsome 
tombstone, the cost of which, had he had it in his pockets, might have 
indefinitely prolonged his days. 

it should be mention that that portion of this strange history which 
purport to be the surprising narration of robert holt was compile 
from the statement which holt made to atherton, and to miss lindon, as 
she then was, when, a mud-stained, shatter derelict he lay at the 
lady's father's house. 

miss linden's contribution towards the elucidate of the mystery was 
written with her own hand. after her physical strength had come back to 
her, and, while mentally, she still hover between the dark and 
the light, her one relaxation was writing. although she would never 
speak of what she had written, it was found that her theme was always 
the same. she confide to pen and paper what she would not speak of 
with her lips. she told, and re-told, and re-told again, the story of 
her love, and of her tribulation so far as it is contained in the 
present volume. her mss. invariable began and end at the same point. 
they have all of them been destroyed, with one exception. that 
exception is herein placed before the reader. 

on the subject of the mystery of the beetle i do not propose to 
pronounce a confident opinion. atherton and i have talk it over many 
and many a time, and at the end we have got no 'forrarder.' so far as i 
am personally concerned, experience has taught me that there are indeed 
more things in heaven and earth than are dream of in our philosophy, 
and i am quite prepared to believe that the so-called beetle, which 
other saw, but i never, was--or is, for it cannot be certainly shown 
that the thing is not still existing--a creature born neither of god 
nor man. 










end of the project gutenberg ebook of the beetle, by richard marsh 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the beetle *** 

***** this file should be name 5164.txt or 5164.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/6/5164/ 

produce by charles frank and the online distribute proofread team. 
update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition will 
be renamed. 

create the works from print edition not protect by u.s. copyright 
law means that no one own a united states copyright in these works, 
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united 
states without permission and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part 
of this license, apply to copy and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a register trademark, 
and may not be use if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receive 
specific permission. if you do not charge anything for copy of this 
ebook, comply with the rule is very easy. you may use this ebook 
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, 
performance and research. they may be modify and print and given 
away--you may do practically anything in the united states with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribute is subject to the 
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. 

start: full license 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full 
project gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or 
destroy all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your 
possession. if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound 
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this 
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection 
of project gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual 
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united 
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the 
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or create derivative works base on the work as long as 
all reference to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote 
free access to electronic works by freely share project gutenberg-tm 
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the 
project gutenberg-tm name associate with the work. you can easily 
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the 
same format with its attach full project gutenberg-tm license when 
you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are 
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, 
check the law of your country in addition to the terms of this 
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribute or create derivative works base on this work or any 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no 
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any 
country outside the united states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other 
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear 
prominent whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it 
under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this 
ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the 
united states, you'll have to check the law of the country where you 
are located before use this ebook. 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is 
derive from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (does not 
contain a notice indicate that it is post with permission of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copy and distribute to anyone in 
the united states without pay any fee or charges. if you are 
redistribute or providing access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associate with or appear on the work, you must comply 
either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any 
additional terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works 
post with the permission of the copyright holder found at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including 
any word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access 
to or distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official 
version post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense 
to the user, provide a copy, a means of export a copy, or a means 
of obtain a copy upon request, of the work in its original "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. any alternate format must include the 
full project gutenberg-tm license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
provided that 

* you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has 
agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment must be paid 
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are 
legal require to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty 
payment should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specify in 
section 4, "information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation." 

* you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all 
copy of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue 
all use of and all access to other copy of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days of 
receipt of the work. 

* you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than 
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing 
from both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
works not protect by u.s. copyright law in create the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate 
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damage disk or 
other medium, a computer virus, or computer code that damage or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you 
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in 
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person 
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second 
opportunity to receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if 
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing 
without further opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no 
other warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not 
limited to warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of 
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
violate the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or 
limitation permit by the applicable state law. the invalid or 
unenforceable of any provision of this agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in 
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the 
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, 
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirect from any of 
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this 
or any project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addition or deletion to any project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any 
defect you cause. 

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of 
computer including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it 
exist because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation 
from people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future 
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation and how your effort and donation can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at 
www.gutenberg.org section 3. information about the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: po box 750175, fairbanks, ak 99775, but its 
volunteer and employee are scattered throughout numerous 
locations. its business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up to 
date contact information can be found at the foundation's web site and 
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 

dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send 
donation or determine the status of compliance for any particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. to 
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 

section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
freely share with anyone. for forty years, he produce and 
distribute project gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of 
volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not 
necessarily keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper 
edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
