the project gutenberg ebook, a thin ghost and others, by m. r. (montague 
rhodes) james 


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 





title: a thin ghost and other 


author: m. r. (montague rhodes) james 



release date: january 16, 2007 [ebook #20387] 

language: english 


***start of the project gutenberg ebook a thin ghost and others*** 


e-text prepared by diane monico and the project gutenberg online 
distribute proofread team (http://www.pgdp.net/c/) 



a thin ghost and other 

by 

montague rhodes james, litt.d. 

provost of eton college 
author of "ghost story of an antiquary," "more ghost stories," etc. 

third impression 







new york 
longmans, green & co. 
london: edward arnold 
1920 
(all rights reserved) 




preface 


two of these stories, the third and fourth, have appear in print in 
the _cambridge review_, and i wish to thank the proprietor for 
permit me to republish them here. 

i have had my doubt about the wisdom of publishing a third set of 
tales; sequel are, not only proverbially but actually, very hazardous 
things. however, the tale make no pretence but to amuse, and my 
friends have not seldom ask for the publication. so not a great deal 
is risked, perhaps, and perhaps also some one's christmas may be the 
cheerful for a storybook which, i think, only once mention the 
war. 




contents 


page 

the residence at whitminster 1 

the diary of mr. poynter 49 

an episode of cathedral history 73 

the story of a disappearance and an appearance 107 

two doctor 135 




the residence at whitminster 




a thin ghost and other 

the residence at whitminster 


dr. ashton--thomas ashton, doctor of divinity--sat in his study, 
habit in a dressing-gown, and with a silk cap on his shaven 
head--his wig being for the time taken off and placed on its block on 
a side table. he was a man of some fifty-five years, strong made, of 
a sanguine complexion, an angry eye, and a long upper lip. face and 
eye were light up at the moment when i picture him by the level ray 
of an afternoon sun that shone in upon him through a tall sash window, 
give on the west. the room into which it shone was also tall, line 
with book-cases, and, where the wall show between them, panelled. on 
the table near the doctor's elbow was a green cloth, and upon it what 
he would have call a silver standish--a tray with inkstands--quill 
pens, a calf-bound book or two, some papers, a churchwarden pipe and 
brass tobacco-box, a flask case in plait straw, and a liqueur 
glass. the year was 1730, the month december, the hour somewhat past 
three in the afternoon. 

i have describe in these lines pretty much all that a superficial 
observer would have noted when he look into the room. what met dr. 
ashton's eye when he look out of it, sitting in his leather 
arm-chair? little more than the tops of the shrub and fruit-trees of 
his garden could be seen from that point, but the red brick wall of it 
was visible in almost all the length of its western side. in the 
middle of that was a gate--a double gate of rather elaborate iron 
scroll-work, which allow something of a view beyond. through it he 
could see that the ground slope away almost at once to a bottom, 
along which a stream must run, and rose steeple from it on the other 
side, up to a field that was park-like in character, and thick 
stud with oaks, now, of course, leafless. they did not stand so 
thick together but that some glimpse of sky and horizon could be seen 
between their stems. the sky was now golden and the horizon, a horizon 
of distant woods, it seemed, was purple. 

but all that dr. ashton could find to say, after contemplate this 
prospect for many minutes, was: "abominable!" 

a listener would have been aware, immediately upon this, of the sound 
of footstep coming somewhat hurried in the direction of the study: 
by the resonance he could have told that they were traverse a much 
large room. dr. ashton turn round in his chair as the door opened, 
and look expectant. the income was a lady--a stout lady in the 
dress of the time: though i have made some attempt at indicate the 
doctor's costume, i will not enterprise that of his wife--for it was 
mrs. ashton who now entered. she had an anxious, even a sorely 
distracted, look, and it was in a very disturbed voice that she almost 
whisper to dr. ashton, putt her head close to his, "he's in a 
very sad way, love, worse, i'm afraid." "tt--tt, is he really?" and he 
lean back and look in her face. she nodded. two solemn bells, high 
up, and not far away, rang out the half-hour at this moment. mrs. 
ashton started. "oh, do you think you can give order that the minster 
clock be stop chime to-night? 'tis just over his chamber, and 
will keep him from sleeping, and to sleep is the only chance for him, 
that's certain." "why, to be sure, if there were need, real need, it 
could be done, but not upon any light occasion. this frank, now, do 
you assure me that his recovery stand upon it?" said dr. ashton: his 
voice was loud and rather hard. "i do verily believe it," said his 
wife. "then, if it must be, bid mol run across to simpkin and say 
on my authority that he is to stop the clock chime at sunset: 
and--yes--she is after that to say to my lord saul that i wish to see 
him presently in this room." mrs. ashton hurried off. 

before any other visitor enters, it will be well to explain the 
situation. 

dr. ashton was the holder, among other preferments, of a prebend in 
the rich collegiate church of whitminster, one of the foundations 
which, though not a cathedral, survive dissolution and reformation, 
and retain its constitution and endowment for a hundred years after 
the time of which i write. the great church, the residence of the 
dean and the two prebendaries, the choir and its appurtenances, were 
all intact and in working order. a dean who flourish soon after 1500 
had been a great builder, and had erect a spacious quadrangle of red 
brick adjoin the church for the residence of the officials. some of 
these person were no long required: their offices had dwindle 
down to mere titles, borne by clergy or lawyer in the town and 
neighbourhood; and so the house that had been meant to accommodate 
eight or ten people were now share among three, the dean and the two 
prebendaries. dr. ashton's included what had been the common parlour 
and the dining-hall of the whole body. it occupy a whole side of the 
court, and at one end had a private door into the minster. the other 
end, as we have seen, look out over the country. 

so much for the house. as for the inmates, dr. ashton was a wealthy 
man and childless, and he had adopted, or rather undertaken to bring 
up, the orphan son of his wife's sister. frank sydall was the lad's 
name: he had been a good many month in the house. then one day came a 
letter from an ireland peer, the earl of kildonan (who had known dr. 
ashton at college), putt it to the doctor whether he would consider 
taking into his family the viscount saul, the earl's heir, and acting 
in some sort as his tutor. lord kildonan was shortly to take up a post 
in the lisbon embassy, and the boy was unfit to make the voyage: "not 
that he is sickly," the earl wrote, "though you'll find him whimsical, 
or of late i've thought him so, and to confirm this, 'twas only 
to-day his old nurse came expressly to tell me he was possess'd: but 
let that pass; i'll warrant you can find a spell to make all straight. 
your arm was stout enough in old days, and i give you plenary 
authority to use it as you see fit. the truth is, he has here no boys 
of his age or quality to consort with, and is given to mope about in 
our rath and graveyards: and he bring home romance that fright my 
servant out of their wits. so there are you and your lady 
forewarned." it was perhaps with half an eye open to the possibility 
of an ireland bishopric (at which another sentence in the earl's letter 
seem to hint) that dr. ashton accept the charge of my lord 
viscount saul and of the 200 guinea a year that were to come with 
him. 

so he came, one night in september. when he got out of the chaise that 
brought him, he went first and spoke to the postboy and gave him some 
money, and pat the neck of his horse. whether he made some movement 
that scared it or not, there was very nearly a nasty accident, for the 
beast start violently, and the postilion being unready was thrown 
and lost his fee, as he found afterwards, and the chaise lost some 
paint on the gateposts, and the wheel went over the man's foot who was 
taking out the baggage. when lord saul came up the steps into the 
light of the lamp in the porch to be greet by dr. ashton, he was 
seen to be a thin youth of, say, sixteen years old, with straight 
black hair and the pale colouring that is common to such a figure. he 
took the accident and commotion calm enough, and express a proper 
anxiety for the people who had been, or might have been, hurt: his 
voice was smooth and pleasant, and without any trace, curiously, of an 
ireland brogue. 

frank sydall was a younger boy, perhaps of eleven or twelve, but lord 
saul did not for that reject his company. frank was able to teach him 
various games he had not known in ireland, and he was apt at learning 
them; apt, too, at his books, though he had had little or no regular 
teaching at home. it was not long before he was making a shift to 
puzzle out the inscription on the tomb in the minster, and he would 
often put a question to the doctor about the old books in the library 
that require some thought to answer. it is to be supposed that he 
made himself very agreeable to the servants, for within ten days of 
his coming they were almost fall over each other in their effort 
to oblige him. at the same time, mrs. ashton was rather put to it to 
find new maidservants; for there were several changes, and some of the 
family in the town from which she had been accustomed to draw seem 
to have no one available. she was forced to go further afield than was 
usual. 

these generality i gather from the doctor's note in his diary and 
from letters. they are generalities, and we should like, in view of 
what has to be told, something sharper and more detailed. we get it in 
entry which begin late in the year, and, i think, were post up all 
together after the final incident; but they cover so few days in all 
that there is no need to doubt that the writer could remember the 
course of things accurately. 

on a friday morning it was that a fox, or perhaps a cat, made away 
with mrs. ashton's most prize black cockerel, a bird without a single 
white feather on its body. her husband had told her often enough that 
it would make a suitable sacrifice to Æsculapius; that had discomfit 
her much, and now she would hardly be consoled. the boys look 
everywhere for trace of it: lord saul brought in a few feathers, 
which seem to have been partially burnt on the garden rubbish-heap. 
it was on the same day that dr. ashton, look out of an upper 
window, saw the two boys play in the corner of the garden at a game 
he did not understand. frank was look earnest at something in the 
palm of his hand. saul stood behind him and seem to be listening. 
after some minutes he very gently laid his hand on frank's head, and 
almost instantly thereupon, frank sudden drop whatever it was 
that he was holding, clap his hand to his eyes, and sank down on 
the grass. saul, whose face express great anger, hasty picked the 
object up, of which it could only be seen that it was glittering, put 
it in his pocket, and turn away, leave frank huddle up on the 
grass. dr. ashton rap on the window to attract their attention, and 
saul look up as if in alarm, and then spring to frank, pull him 
up by the arm and led him away. when they came in to dinner, saul 
explain that they had been acting a part of the tragedy of 
radamistus, in which the heroine read the future fate of her father's 
kingdom by means of a glass ball held in her hand, and is overcome by 
the terrible event she has seen. during this explanation frank said 
nothing, only look rather bewildered at saul. he must, mrs. ashton 
thought, have contract a chill from the wet of the grass, for that 
evening he was certainly feverish and disordered; and the disorder was 
of the mind as well as the body, for he seem to have something he 
wish to say to mrs. ashton, only a press of household affair 
prevent her from pay attention to him; and when she went, 
according to her habit, to see that the light in the boys' chamber had 
been taken away, and to bid them good-night, he seem to be sleeping, 
though his face was unnatural flushed, to her thinking: lord saul, 
however, was pale and quiet, and smile in his slumber. 

next morning it happen that dr. ashton was occupy in church and 
other business, and unable to take the boys' lessons. he therefore set 
them task to be written and brought to him. three times, if not 
oftener, frank knock at the study door, and each time the doctor 
chance to be engaged with some visitor, and sent the boy off rather 
roughly, which he later regretted. two clergymen were at dinner this 
day, and both remarked--being father of families--that the lad seem 
sickening for a fever, in which they were too near the truth, and it 
had been better if he had been put to bed forthwith: for a couple of 
hour later in the afternoon he came running into the house, crying 
out in a way that was really terrifying, and rush to mrs. ashton, 
clung about her, beg her to protect him, and saying, "keep them 
off! keep them off!" without intermission. and it was now evident that 
some sickness had taken strong hold of him. he was therefore got to 
bed in another chamber from that in which he commonly lay, and the 
physician brought to him: who pronounced the disorder to be grave and 
affecting the lad's brain, and prognosticate a fatal end to it if 
strict quiet were not observed, and those sedative remedy use which 
he should prescribe. 

we are now come by another way to the point we had reach before. the 
minster clock has been stop from striking, and lord saul is on the 
threshold of the study. 

"what account can you give of this poor lad's state?" was dr. ashton's 
first question. "why, sir, little more than you know already, i fancy. 
i must blame myself, though, for give him a fright yesterday when we 
were acting that foolish play you saw. i fear i made him take it more 
to heart than i meant." "how so?" "well, by telling him foolish tale 
i had picked up in ireland of what we call the second sight." 
"_second_ sight! what kind of sight might that be?" "why, you know our 
ignorant people pretend that some are able to foresee what is to 
come--sometimes in a glass, or in the air, maybe, and at kildonan we 
had an old woman that pretended to such a power. and i daresay i 
coloured the matter more highly than i should: but i never dream 
frank would take it so near as he did." "you were wrong, my lord, very 
wrong, in meddle with such superstitious matter at all, and you 
should have considered whose house you were in, and how little 
becoming such action are to my character and person or to your own: 
but pray how came it that you, acting, as you say, a play, should fall 
upon anything that could so alarm frank?" "that is what i can hardly 
tell, sir: he pass all in a moment from rant about battle and 
lovers and cleodora and antigen to something i could not follow at 
all, and then drop down as you saw." "yes: was that at the moment 
when you laid your hand on the top of his head?" lord saul gave a 
quick look at his questioner--quick and spiteful--and for the first 
time seem unready with an answer. "about that time it may have 
been," he said. "i have try to recollect myself, but i am not sure. 
there was, at any rate, no significance in what i did then." "ah!" 
said dr. ashton, "well, my lord, i should do wrong were i not to tell 
you that this fright of my poor nephew may have very ill consequence 
to him. the doctor speak very desponding of his state." lord saul 
pressed his hand together and look earnest upon dr. ashton. "i am 
willing to believe you had no bad intention, as assured you could 
have no reason to bear the poor boy malice: but i cannot wholly free 
you from blame in the affair." as he spoke, the hurry steps were 
heard again, and mrs. ashton came quick into the room, carry a 
candle, for the evening had by this time closed in. she was greatly 
agitated. "o come!" she cried, "come directly. i'm sure he is going." 
"going? frank? is it possible? already?" with some such incoherent 
words the doctor caught up a book of prayer from the table and ran 
out after his wife. lord saul stop for a moment where he was. 
molly, the maid, saw him bend over and put both hand to his face. if 
it were the last words she had to speak, she said afterwards, he was 
strive to keep back a fit of laughing. then he went out softly, 
following the others. 

mrs. ashton was sadly right in her forecast. i have no inclination to 
imagine the last scene in detail. what dr. ashton record is, or may 
be taken to be, important to the story. they ask frank if he would 
like to see his companion, lord saul, once again. the boy was quite 
collected, it appears, in these moments. "no," he said, "i do not want 
to see him; but you should tell him i am afraid he will be very cold." 
"what do you mean, my dear?" said mrs. ashton. "only that;" said 
frank, "but say to him besides that i am free of them now, but he 
should take care. and i am sorry about your black cockerel, aunt 
ashton; but he said we must use it so, if we were to see all that 
could be seen." 

not many minutes after, he was gone. both the ashton were grieved, 
she naturally most; but the doctor, though not an emotional man, felt 
the pathos of the early death: and, besides, there was the grow 
suspicion that all had not been told him by saul, and that there was 
something here which was out of his beaten track. when he left the 
chamber of death, it was to walk across the quadrangle of the 
residence to the sexton's house. a passing bell, the greatest of the 
minster bells, must be rung, a grave must be dug in the minster yard, 
and there was now no need to silence the chime of the minster clock. 
as he came slow back in the dark, he thought he must see lord saul 
again. that matter of the black cockerel--trifling as it might 
seem--would have to be clear up. it might be merely a fancy of the 
sick boy, but if not, was there not a witch-trial he had read, in 
which some grim little rite of sacrifice had play a part? yes, he 
must see saul. 

i rather guess these thought of his than find written authority for 
them. that there was another interview is certain: certain also that 
saul would (or, as he said, could) throw no light on frank's words: 
though the message, or some part of it, appear to affect him 
horribly. but there is no record of the talk in detail. it is only 
said that saul sat all that evening in the study, and when he bid 
good-night, which he did most reluctantly, ask for the doctor's 
prayers. 

the month of january was near its end when lord kildonan, in the 
embassy at lisbon, received a letter that for once grave disturbed 
that vain man and neglectful father. saul was dead. the scene at 
frank's burial had been very distressing. the day was awful in 
black and wind: the bearers, staggering blind along under the 
flap black pall, found it a hard job, when they emerge from the 
porch of the minster, to make their way to the grave. mrs. ashton was 
in her room--women did not then go to their kinsfolk's funerals--but 
saul was there, drape in the mourning cloak of the time, and his face 
was white and fixed as that of one dead, except when, as was notice 
three or four times, he sudden turn his head to the left and 
look over his shoulder. it was then alive with a terrible expression 
of listen fear. no one saw him go away: and no one could find him 
that evening. all night the gale buffet the high window of the 
church, and howl over the upland and roar through the woodland. it 
was useless to search in the open: no voice of shouting or cry for 
help could possibly be heard. all that dr. ashton could do was to warn 
the people about the college, and the town constables, and to sit up, 
on the alert for any news, and this he did. news came early next 
morning, brought by the sexton, whose business it was to open the 
church for early prayer at seven, and who sent the maid rush 
upstairs with wild eyes and flying hair to summon her master. the two 
men dashed across to the south door of the minster, there to find lord 
saul clinging desperate to the great ring of the door, his head sunk 
between his shoulders, his stocking in rags, his shoe gone, his leg 
torn and bloody. 

this was what had to be told to lord kildonan, and this really end 
the first part of the story. the tomb of frank sydall and of the lord 
viscount saul, only child and heir to william earl of kildonan, is 
one: a stone altar tomb in whitminster churchyard. 

dr. ashton live on for over thirty years in his prebend house, i do 
not know how quietly, but without visible disturbance. his successor 
prefer a house he already own in the town, and left that of the 
senior prebendary vacant. between them these two men saw the 
eighteenth century out and the nineteenth in; for mr. hindes, the 
successor of ashton, became prebendary at nine-and-twenty and die at 
nine-and-eighty. so that it was not till 1823 or 1824 that any one 
succeed to the post who intended to make the house his home. the man 
who did was dr. henry oldys, whose name may be known to some of my 
reader as that of the author of a row of volumes label _oldys's 
works_, which occupy a place that must be honoured, since it is so 
rarely touched, upon the shelves of many a substantial library. 

dr. oldys, his niece, and his servant took some month to transfer 
furniture and books from his dorsetshire parsonage to the quadrangle 
of whitminster, and to get everything into place. but eventually the 
work was done, and the house (which, though untenanted, had always 
been kept sound and weather-tight) woke up, and like monte cristo's 
mansion at auteuil, lived, sang, and bloom once more. on a certain 
morning in june it look especially fair, as dr. oldy stroll in 
his garden before breakfast and gaze over the red roof at the minster 
tower with its four gold vanes, back by a very blue sky, and very 
white little clouds. 

"mary," he said, as he seat himself at the breakfast table and laid 
down something hard and shiny on the cloth, "here's a find which the 
boy made just now. you'll be sharper than i if you can guess what it's 
meant for." it was a round and perfectly smooth tablet--as much as an 
inch thick--of what seem clear glass. "it is rather attractive at 
all events," said mary: she was a fair woman, with light hair and 
large eyes, rather a devotee of literature. "yes," said her uncle, "i 
thought you'd be pleased with it. i presume it came from the house: it 
turn up in the rubbish-heap in the corner." "i'm not sure that i do 
like it, after all," said mary, some minutes later. "why in the world 
not, my dear?" "i don't know, i'm sure. perhaps it's only fancy." 
"yes, only fancy and romance, of course. what's that book, now--the 
name of that book, i mean, that you had your head in all yesterday?" 
"_the talisman_, uncle. oh, if this should turn out to be a talisman, 
how enchanting it would be!" "yes, _the talisman_: ah, well, you're 
welcome to it, whatever it is: i must be off about my business. is all 
well in the house? do it suit you? any complaint from the servants' 
hall?" "no, indeed, nothing could be more charming. the only _soupçon_ 
of a complaint besides the lock of the linen closet, which i told you 
of, is that mrs. maple say she cannot get rid of the sawfly out of 
that room you pass through at the other end of the hall. by the way, 
are you sure you like your bedroom? it is a long way off from any one 
else, you know." "like it? to be sure i do; the further off from you, 
my dear, the better. there, don't think it necessary to beat me: 
accept my apologies. but what are sawflies? will they eat my coats? if 
not, they may have the room to themselves for what i care. we are not 
likely to be use it." "no, of course not. well, what she call 
sawfly are those reddish things like a daddy-longlegs, but 
smaller,[1] and there are a great many of them perch about that 
room, certainly. i don't like them, but i don't fancy they are 
mischievous." "there seem to be several things you don't like this 
fine morning," said her uncle, as he closed the door. miss oldy 
remain in her chair look at the tablet, which she was holding in 
the palm of her hand. the smile that had been on her face fade slow 
from it and gave place to an expression of curiosity and almost 
strained attention. her reverie was broken by the entrance of mrs. 
maple, and her invariable opening, "oh, miss, could i speak to you a 
minute?" 

a letter from miss oldy to a friend in lichfield, begun a day or two 
before, is the next source for this story. it is not devoid of trace 
of the influence of that leader of female thought in her day, miss 
anna seward, known to some as the swan of lichfield. 

"my sweetest emily will be rejoice to hear that we are at length--my 
beloved uncle and myself--settled in the house that now call us 
master--nay, master and mistress--as in past age it has call so 
many others. here we taste a mingle of modern elegance and hoary 
antiquity, such as has never ere now grace life for either of us. the 
town, small as it is, afford us some reflection, pale indeed, but 
veritable, of the sweets of polite intercourse: the adjacent country 
numbers amid the occupant of its scattered mansions some whose polish 
is annual refresh by contact with metropolitan splendour, and 
other whose robust and homely geniality is, at times, and by way of 
contrast, not less cheering and acceptable. tired of the parlour and 
drawing-rooms of our friends, we have ready to hand a refuge from the 
clash of wit or the small talk of the day amid the solemn beauty of 
our venerable minster, whose silvern chime daily 'knoll us to 
prayer,' and in the shady walk of whose tranquil graveyard we muse 
with soften heart, and ever and anon with moisten eye, upon the 
memorial of the young, the beautiful, the aged, the wise, and the 
good." 

here there is an abrupt break both in the writing and the style. 

"but my dearest emily, i can no long write with the care which you 
deserve, and in which we both take pleasure. what i have to tell you 
is wholly foreign to what has gone before. this morning my uncle 
brought in to breakfast an object which had been found in the garden; 
it was a glass or crystal tablet of this shape (a little sketch is 
given), which he hand to me, and which, after he left the room, 
remain on the table by me. i gaze at it, i know not why, for some 
minutes, till call away by the day's duties; and you will smile 
incredulous when i say that i seem to myself to begin to descry 
reflect in it object and scene which were not in the room where i 
was. you will not, however, be surprise that after such an experience 
i took the first opportunity to seclude myself in my room with what i 
now half believe to be a talisman of mickle might. i was not 
disappointed. i assure you, emily, by that memory which is dearest to 
both of us, that what i went through this afternoon transcend the 
limit of what i had before deem credible. in brief, what i saw, 
seat in my bedroom, in the broad daylight of summer, and look 
into the crystal depth of that small round tablet, was this. first, a 
prospect, strange to me, of an enclosure of rough and hillocky grass, 
with a grey stone ruin in the midst, and a wall of rough stone about 
it. in this stood an old, and very ugly, woman in a red cloak and 
ragged skirt, talk to a boy dress in the fashion of maybe a 
hundred years ago. she put something which glitter into his hand, 
and he something into hers, which i saw to be money, for a single coin 
fell from her tremble hand into the grass. the scene passed--i 
should have remarked, by the way, that on the rough wall of the 
enclosure i could distinguish bones, and even a skull, lie in a 
disorderly fashion. next, i was look upon two boys; one the figure 
of the former vision, the other younger. they were in a plot of 
garden, wall round, and this garden, in spite of the difference in 
arrangement, and the small size of the trees, i could clearly 
recognize as being that upon which i now look from my window. the boys 
were engaged in some curious play, it seemed. something was 
smoulder on the ground. the elder placed his hand upon it, and 
then raise them in what i took to be an attitude of prayer: and i 
saw, and start at seeing, that on them were deep stain of blood. 
the sky above was overcast. the same boy now turn his face towards 
the wall of the garden, and beckon with both his raise hands, and 
as he did so i was conscious that some moving object were becoming 
visible over the top of the wall--whether head or other parts of some 
animal or human form i could not tell. upon the instant the elder boy 
turn sharply, seize the arm of the younger (who all this time had 
been pore over what lay on the ground), and both hurried off. i then 
saw blood upon the grass, a little pile of bricks, and what i thought 
were black feather scattered about. that scene closed, and the next 
was so dark that perhaps the full meaning of it escape me. but what i 
seem to see was a form, at first crouch low among tree or bush 
that were being thresh by a violent wind, then running very swiftly, 
and constant turning a pale face to look behind him, as if he fear 
a pursuer: and, indeed, pursuer were following hard after him. their 
shape were but dim seen, their number--three or four, perhaps, 
only guessed. i suppose they were on the whole more like dogs than 
anything else, but dogs such as we have seen they assured were not. 
could i have closed my eyes to this horror, i would have done so at 
once, but i was helpless. the last i saw was the victim dart 
beneath an arch and clutch at some object to which he clung: and 
those that were pursue him overtook him, and i seem to hear the 
echo of a cry of despair. it may be that i became unconscious: 
certainly i had the sensation of awake to the light of day after an 
interval of darkness. such, in literal truth, emily, was my vision--i 
can call it by no other name--of this afternoon. tell me, have i not 
been the unwill witness of some episode of a tragedy connected with 
this very house?" 

the letter is continue next day. "the tale of yesterday was not 
complete when i laid down my pen. i said nothing of my experience to 
my uncle--you know, yourself, how little his robust common-sense would 
be prepared to allow of them, and how in his eyes the specific remedy 
would be a black draught or a glass of port. after a silent evening, 
then--silent, not sullen--i retired to rest. judge of my terror, 
when, not yet in bed, i heard what i can only describe as a distant 
bellow, and knew it for my uncle's voice, though never in my hearing 
so exert before. his sleeping-room is at the further extremity of 
this large house, and to gain access to it one must traverse an 
antique hall some eighty feet long and a lofty panel chamber, and 
two unoccupy bedrooms. in the second of these--a room almost devoid 
of furniture--i found him, in the dark, his candle lie smashed on 
the floor. as i ran in, bearing a light, he clasp me in arms that 
tremble for the first time since i have known him, thank god, and 
hurried me out of the room. he would say nothing of what had alarm 
him. 'to-morrow, to-morrow,' was all i could get from him. a bed was 
hasty improvise for him in the room next to my own. i doubt if his 
night was more restful than mine. i could only get to sleep in the 
small hours, when daylight was already strong, and then my dream were 
of the grimmest--particularly one which stamp itself on my brain, 
and which i must set down on the chance of disperse the impression 
it has made. it was that i came up to my room with a heavy foreboding 
of evil oppress me, and went with a hesitation and reluctance i 
could not explain to my chest of drawers. i open the top drawer, in 
which was nothing but ribbon and handkerchiefs, and then the second, 
where was as little to alarm, and then, o heavens, the third and last: 
and there was a mass of linen neat folded: upon which, as i look 
with curiosity that began to be tinge with horror, i perceive a 
movement in it, and a pink hand was thrust out of the fold and began 
to grope feeble in the air. i could bear it no more, and rush from 
the room, clap the door after me, and strove with all my force to 
lock it. but the key would not turn in the wards, and from within the 
room came a sound of rustling and bumping, drawing near and near 
to the door. why i did not flee down the stairs i know not. i 
continue grasping the handle, and mercifully, as the door was pluck 
from my hand with an irresistible force, i awoke. you may not think 
this very alarming, but i assure you it was so to me. 

"at breakfast to-day my uncle was very uncommunicative, and i think 
ashamed of the fright he had given us; but afterwards he inquire of 
me whether mr. spearman was still in town, add that he thought that 
was a young man who had some sense left in his head. i think you 
know, my dear emily, that i am not inclined to disagree with him 
there, and also that i was not unlikely to be able to answer his 
question. to mr. spearman he accordingly went, and i have not seen him 
since. i must send this strange budget of news to you now, or it may 
have to wait over more than one post." 

the reader will not be far out if he guess that miss mary and mr. 
spearman made a match of it not very long after this month of june. 
mr. spearman was a young spark, who had a good property in the 
neighbourhood of whitminster, and not unfrequent about this time 
spent a few days at the "king's head," ostensible on business. but he 
must have had some leisure, for his diary is copious, especially for 
the days of which i am telling the story. it is probable to me that he 
wrote this episode as fully as he could at the bidding of miss mary. 

"uncle oldy (how i hope i may have the right to call him so before 
long!) call this morning. after throw out a good many short 
remark on indifferent topics, he said 'i wish, spearman, you'd listen 
to an odd story and keep a close tongue about it just for a bit, till 
i get more light on it.' 'to be sure,' said i, 'you may count on me.' 
'i don't know what to make of it,' he said. 'you know my bedroom. it 
is well away from every one else's, and i pass through the great hall 
and two or three other rooms to get to it.' 'is it at the end next the 
minster, then?' i asked. 'yes, it is: well, now, yesterday morning my 
mary told me that the room next before it was infest with some sort 
of fly that the housekeeper couldn't get rid of. that may be the 
explanation, or it may not. what do you think?' 'why,' said i, 'you've 
not yet told me what has to be explained.' 'true enough, i don't 
believe i have; but by-the-by, what are these sawflies? what's the 
size of them?' i began to wonder if he was touched in the head. 'what 
i call a sawfly,' i said very patiently, 'is a red animal, like a 
daddy-longlegs, but not so big, perhaps an inch long, perhaps less. it 
is very hard in the body, and to me'--i was go to say 'particularly 
offensive,' but he broke in, 'come, come; an inch or less. that won't 
do.' 'i can only tell you,' i said, 'what i know. would it not be 
better if you told me from first to last what it is that has puzzle 
you, and then i may be able to give you some kind of an opinion.' he 
gaze at me meditatively. 'perhaps it would,' he said. 'i told mary 
only to-day that i thought you had some vestige of sense in your 
head.' (i bowed my acknowledgements.) 'the thing is, i've an odd kind 
of shy about talk of it. nothing of the sort has happen to me 
before. well, about eleven o'clock last night, or after, i took my 
candle and set out for my room. i had a book in my other hand--i 
always read something for a few minutes before i drop off to sleep. a 
dangerous habit: i don't recommend it: but i know how to manage my 
light and my bed curtains. now then, first, as i step out of my 
study into the great half that's next to it, and shut the door, my 
candle went out. i supposed i had clap the door behind me too 
quick, and made a draught, and i was annoyed, for i'd no tinder-box 
near than my bedroom. but i knew my way well enough, and went on. 
the next thing was that my book was struck out of my hand in the dark: 
if i said twitch out of my hand it would better express the 
sensation. it fell on the floor. i picked it up, and went on, more 
annoy than before, and a little startled. but as you know, that hall 
has many window without curtains, and in summer nights like these it 
is easy to see not only where the furniture is, but whether there's 
any one or anything moving, and there was no one--nothing of the kind. 
so on i went through the hall and through the audit chamber next to 
it, which also has big windows, and then into the bedroom which lead 
to my own, where the curtains were drawn, and i had to go slow 
because of steps here and there. it was in the second of those rooms 
that i nearly got my _quietus_. the moment i open the door of it i 
felt there was something wrong. i thought twice, i confess, whether i 
shouldn't turn back and find another way there is to my room rather 
than go through that one. then i was ashamed of myself, and thought 
what people call better of it, though i don't know about "better" in 
this case. if i was to describe my experience exactly, i should say 
this: there was a dry, light, rustling sound all over the room as i 
went in, and then (you remember it was perfectly dark) something 
seem to rush at me, and there was--i don't know how to put it--a 
sensation of long thin arms, or legs, or feelers, all about my face, 
and neck, and body. very little strength in them, there seem to be, 
but spearman, i don't think i was ever more horrify or disgust in 
all my life, that i remember: and it do take something to put me 
out. i roar out as loud as i could, and flung away my candle at 
random, and, knowing i was near the window, i tore at the curtain and 
somehow let in enough light to be able to see something wave which i 
knew was an insect's leg, by the shape of it: but, lord, what a size! 
why the beast must have been as tall as i am. and now you tell me 
sawfly are an inch long or less. what do you make of it, spearman?' 

"'for goodness sake finish your story first,' i said. 'i never heard 
anything like it.' 'oh,' said he, 'there's no more to tell. mary ran 
in with a light, and there was nothing there. i didn't tell her what 
was the matter. i change my room for last night, and i expect for 
good.' 'have you search this odd room of yours?' i said. 'what do 
you keep in it?' 'we don't use it,' he answered. 'there's an old press 
there, and some little other furniture.' 'and in the press?' said i. 
'i don't know; i never saw it opened, but i do know that it's locked.' 
'well, i should have it look into, and, if you had time, i own to 
have some curiosity to see the place myself.' 'i didn't exactly like 
to ask you, but that's rather what i hope you'd say. name your time 
and i'll take you there.' 'no time like the present,' i said at once, 
for i saw he would never settle down to anything while this affair was 
in suspense. he got up with great alacrity, and look at me, i am 
tempt to think, with marked approval. 'come along,' was all he said, 
however; and was pretty silent all the way to his house. my mary (as 
he call her in public, and i in private) was summoned, and we 
proceed to the room. the doctor had gone so far as to tell her that 
he had had something of a fright there last night, of what nature he 
had not yet divulged; but now he pointed out and described, very 
briefly, the incident of his progress. when we were near the 
important spot, he pull up, and allow me to pass on. 'there's the 
room,' he said. 'go in, spearman, and tell us what you find.' whatever 
i might have felt at midnight, noonday i was sure would keep back 
anything sinister, and i flung the door open with an air and step 
in. it was a well-lighted room, with its large window on the right, 
though not, i thought, a very airy one. the principal piece of 
furniture was the gaunt old press of dark wood. there was, too, a 
four-post bedstead, a mere skeleton which could hide nothing, and 
there was a chest of drawers. on the window-sill and the floor near it 
were the dead body of many hundred sawflies, and one torpid one 
which i had some satisfaction in killing. i try the door of the 
press, but could not open it: the drawers, too, were locked. 
somewhere, i was conscious, there was a faint rustling sound, but i 
could not locate it, and when i made my report to those outside, i 
said nothing of it. but, i said, clearly the next thing was to see 
what was in those lock receptacles. uncle oldy turn to mary. 
'mrs. maple,' he said, and mary ran off--no one, i am sure, steps like 
her--and soon came back at a sober pace, with an elderly lady of 
discreet aspect. 

"'have you the key of these things, mrs. maple?' said uncle oldys. 
his simple words let loose a torrent (not violent, but copious) of 
speech: had she been a shade or two higher in the social scale, mrs. 
maple might have stood as the model for miss bates. 

"'oh, doctor, and miss, and you too, sir,' she said, acknowledge my 
presence with a bend, 'them keys! who was that again that come when 
first we took over things in this house--a gentleman in business it 
was, and i gave him his luncheon in the small parlour on account of us 
not have everything as we should like to see it in the large 
one--chicken, and apple-pie, and a glass of madeira--dear, dear, 
you'll say i'm running on, miss mary; but i only mention it to bring 
back my recollection; and there it comes--gardner, just the same as it 
did last week with the artichoke and the text of the sermon. now that 
mr. gardner, every key i got from him were label to itself, and 
each and every one was a key of some door or another in this house, 
and sometimes two; and when i say door, my meaning is door of a room, 
not like such a press as this is. yes, miss mary, i know full well, 
and i'm just making it clear to your uncle and you too, sir. but now 
there _was_ a box which this same gentleman he give over into my 
charge, and thinking no harm after he was gone i took the liberty, 
knowing it was your uncle's property, to rattle it: and unless i'm 
most surprising deceived, in that box there was keys, but what keys, 
that, doctor, is known elsewhere, for open the box, no that i would 
not do.' 

"i wonder that uncle oldy remain as quiet as he did under this 
address. mary, i knew, was amuse by it, and he probably had been 
taught by experience that it was useless to break in upon it. at any 
rate he did not, but merely said at the end, 'have you that box handy, 
mrs. maple? if so, you might bring it here.' mrs. maple pointed her 
finger at him, either in accusation or in gloomy triumph. 'there,' she 
said, 'was i to choose out the very words out of your mouth, doctor, 
them would be the ones. and if i've took it to my own rebuke one 
half-a-dozen times, it's been near fifty. laid awake i have in my 
bed, sat down in my chair i have, the same you and miss mary gave me 
the day i was twenty year in your service, and no person could desire 
a better--yes, miss mary, but it _is_ the truth, and well we know who 
it is would have it different if he could. "all very well," say i to 
myself, "but pray, when the doctor call you to account for that box, 
what are you go to say?" no, doctor, if you was some master i've 
heard of and i was some servant i could name, i should have an easy 
task before me, but things being, humanly speaking, what they are, the 
one course open to me is just to say to you that without miss mary 
come to my room and help me to my recollection, which her wit 
_may_ manage what's slip beyond mine, no such box as that, small 
though it be, will cross your eyes this many a day to come.' 

"'why, dear mrs. maple, why didn't you tell me before that you want 
me to help you to find it?' said my mary. 'no, never mind telling me 
why it was: let us come at once and look for it.' they hasten off 
together. i could hear mrs. maple beginning an explanation which, i 
doubt not, last into the furthest recess of the housekeeper's 
department. uncle oldy and i were left alone. 'a valuable servant,' 
he said, nod towards the door. 'nothing go wrong under her: the 
speech are seldom over three minutes.' 'how will miss oldy manage 
to make her remember about the box?' i asked. 

"'mary? oh, she'll make her sit down and ask her about her aunt's last 
illness, or who gave her the china dog on the mantel-piece--something 
quite off the point. then, as maple says, one thing bring up another, 
and the right one will come round soon than you could suppose. 
there! i believe i hear them coming back already.' 

"it was indeed so, and mrs. maple was hurry on ahead of mary with 
the box in her outstretched hand, and a beam face. 'what was it,' 
she cry as she drew near, 'what was it as i said, before ever i come 
out of dorsetshire to this place? not that i'm a dorset woman myself, 
nor had need to be. "safe bind, safe find," and there it was in the 
place where i'd put it--what?--two month back, i daresay.' she hand 
it to uncle oldys, and he and i examine it with some interest, so 
that i cease to pay attention to mrs. ann maple for the moment, 
though i know that she went on to expound exactly where the box had 
been, and in what way mary had help to refresh her memory on the 
subject. 

"it was an oldish box, tie with pink tape and sealed, and on the lid 
was paste a label inscribe in old ink, 'the senior prebendary's 
house, whitminster.' on being open it was found to contain two key 
of moderate size, and a paper, on which, in the same hand as the 
label, was 'keys of the press and box of drawers standing in the 
disused chamber.' also this: 'the effects in this press and box are 
held by me, and to be held by my successor in the residence, in trust 
for the noble family of kildonan, if claim be made by any survivor of 
it. i have made all the enquiry possible to myself am of the 
opinion that that noble house is wholly extinct: the last earl have 
been, as is notorious, cast away at sea, and his only child and heire 
deceas'd in my house (the papers as to which melancholy casualty were 
by me repos'd in the same press in this year of our lord 1753, 21 
march). i am further of opinion that unless grave discomfort arise, 
such persons, not being of the family of kildonan, as shall become 
possess'd of these keys, will be well advise to leave matter as they 
are: which opinion i do not express without weighty and sufficient 
reason; and am happy to have my judgment confirm'd by the other 
member of this college and church who are conversant with the event 
referr'd to in this paper. tho. ashton, _s.t.p._, _præb. senr._ will. 
blake, _s.t.p._, _decanus_. hen. goodman, _s.t.b._, _præb. junr._' 

"'ah!' said uncle oldys, 'grave discomfort! so he thought there might 
be something. i suspect it was that young man,' he went on, point 
with the key to the line about the 'only child and heire.' 'eh, mary? 
the viscounty of kildonan was saul.' 'how _do_ you know that, uncle?' 
said mary. 'oh, why not? it's all in debrett--two little fat books. 
but i meant the tomb by the lime walk. he's there. what's the story, i 
wonder? do you know it, mrs. maple? and, by the way, look at your 
sawfly by the window there.' 

"mrs. maple, thus confront with two subject at once, was a little 
put to it to do justice to both. it was no doubt rash in uncle oldy 
to give her the opportunity. i could only guess that he had some 
slight hesitation about use the key he held in his hand. 

"'oh them flies, how bad they was, doctor and miss, this three or four 
days: and you, too, sir, you wouldn't guess, none of you! and how they 
come, too! first we took the room in hand, the shutter was up, and 
had been, i daresay, years upon years, and not a fly to be seen. then 
we got the shutter bar down with a deal of trouble and left it so for 
the day, and next day i sent susan in with the broom to sweep about, 
and not two minutes hadn't pass when out she come into the hall like 
a blind thing, and we had regular to beat them off her. why her cap 
and her hair, you couldn't see the colour of it, i do assure you, and 
all cluster round her eyes, too. fortunate enough she's not a girl 
with fancies, else if it had been me, why only the tickle of the 
nasty things would have drove me out of my wits. and now there they 
lay like so many dead things. well, they was lively enough on the 
monday, and now here's thursday, is it, or no, friday. only to come 
near the door and you'd hear them patter up against it, and once 
you open it, dash at you, they would, as if they'd eat you. i 
couldn't help thinking to myself, "if you was bats, where should we be 
this night?" nor you can't cresh 'em, not like a usual kind of a fly. 
well, there's something to be thankful for, if we could but learn by 
it. and then this tomb, too,' she said, hasten on to her second 
point to elude any chance of interruption, 'of them two poor young 
lads. i say poor, and yet when i recollect myself, i was at tea with 
mrs. simpkins, the sexton's wife, before you come, doctor and miss 
mary, and that's a family has been in the place, what? i daresay a 
hundred years in that very house, and could put their hand on any tomb 
or yet grave in all the yard and give you name and age. and his 
account of that young man, mr. simpkins's i mean to say--_well_!' she 
compress her lip and nod several times. 'tell us, mrs. maple,' 
said mary. 'go on,' said uncle oldys. 'what about him?' said i. 
'never was such a thing seen in this place, not since queen mary's 
times and the pope and all,' said mrs. maple. 'why, do you know he 
live in this very house, him and them that was with him, and for all 
i can tell in this identical room' (she shift her feet uneasy on 
the floor). 'who was with him? do you mean the people of the house?' 
said uncle oldy suspiciously. 'not to call people, doctor, dear no,' 
was the answer; 'more what he brought with him from ireland, i believe 
it was. no, the people in the house was the last to hear anything of 
his goings-on. but in the town not a family but knew how he stop 
out at night: and them that was with him, why they were such as would 
strip the skin from the child in its grave; and a wither heart make 
an ugly thin ghost, say mr. simpkins. but they turn on him at the 
last, he says, and there's the mark still to be seen on the minster 
door where they run him down. and that's no more than the truth, for i 
got him to show it to myself, and that's what he said. a lord he was, 
with a bible name of a wicked king, whatever his godfather could have 
been thinking of.' 'saul was the name,' said uncle oldys. 'to be sure 
it was saul, doctor, and thank you; and now isn't it king saul that we 
read of raise up the dead ghost that was slumber in its tomb till 
he disturbed it, and isn't that a strange thing, this young lord to 
have such a name, and mr. simpkins's grandfather to see him out of his 
window of a dark night go about from one grave to another in the 
yard with a candle, and them that was with him following through the 
grass at his heels: and one night him to come right up to old mr. 
simpkins's window that give on the yard and press his face up against 
it to find out if there was any one in the room that could see him: 
and only just time there was for old mr. simpkin to drop down like, 
quiet, just under the window and hold his breath, and not stir till he 
heard him step away again, and this rustling-like in the grass 
after him as he went, and then when he look out of his window in the 
morning there was tread in the grass and a dead man's bone. oh, he 
was a cruel child for certain, but he had to pay in the end, and 
after.' 'after?' said uncle oldys, with a frown. 'oh yes, doctor, 
night after night in old mr. simpkins's time, and his son, that's our 
mr. simpkins's father, yes, and our own mr. simpkin too. up against 
that same window, particular when they've had a fire of a chilly 
evening, with his face right on the panes, and his hand flutter 
out, and his mouth open and shut, open and shut, for a minute or more, 
and then gone off in the dark yard. but open the window at such times, 
no, that they dare not do, though they could find it in their heart to 
pity the poor thing, that pinched up with the cold, and seemingly 
fade away to a nothink as the years pass on. well, indeed, i 
believe it is no more than the truth what our mr. simpkin say on his 
own grandfather's word, "a wither heart make an ugly thin ghost."' 
'i daresay,' said uncle oldy suddenly: so sudden that mrs. maple 
stop short. 'thank you. come away, all of you.' 'why, _uncle_,' 
said mary, 'are you not go to open the press after all?' uncle 
oldy blushed, actually blushed. 'my dear,' he said, 'you are at 
liberty to call me a coward, or applaud me as a prudent man, whichever 
you please. but i am neither go to open that press nor that chest 
of drawers myself, nor am i go to hand over the key to you or to 
any other person. mrs. maple, will you kindly see about get a man 
or two to move those pieces of furniture into the garret?' 'and when 
they do it, mrs. maple,' said mary, who seem to me--i did not then 
know why--more relieved than disappointed by her uncle's decision, 'i 
have something that i want put with the rest; only quite a small 
packet.' 

"we left that curious room not unwillingly, i think. uncle oldys's 
orders were carry out that same day. and so," conclude mr. 
spearman, "whitminster has a bluebeard's chamber, and, i am rather 
inclined to suspect, a jack-in-the-box, await some future occupant 
of the residence of the senior prebendary." 

footnotes: 

[footnote 1: apparently the ichneumon fly (_ophion obscurum_), and not 
the true sawfly, is meant.] 




the diary of mr. poynter 




the diary of mr. poynter 


the sale-room of an old and famous firm of book auctioneer in london 
is, of course, a great meeting-place for collectors, librarians, 
dealers: not only when an auction is in progress, but perhaps even 
more notably when books that are coming on for sale are upon view. it 
was in such a sale-room that the remarkable series of event began 
which were detailed to me not many month ago by the person whom they 
principally affected, namely, mr. james denton, m.a., f.s.a., etc., 
etc., some time of trinity hall, now, or lately, of rendcomb manor in 
the county of warwick. 

he, on a certain spring day not many years since, was in london for a 
few days upon business connected principally with the furnish of 
the house which he had just finished building at rendcomb. it may be a 
disappointment to you to learn that rendcomb manor was new; that i 
cannot help. there had, no doubt, been an old house; but it was not 
remarkable for beauty or interest. even had it been, neither beauty 
nor interest would have enable it to resist the disastrous fire which 
about a couple of years before the date of my story had raze it to 
the ground. i am glad to say that all that was most valuable in it had 
been saved, and that it was fully insured. so that it was with a 
comparatively light heart that mr. denton was able to face the task of 
building a new and considerably more convenient dwelling for himself 
and his aunt who constitute his whole _ménage_. 

being in london, with time on his hands, and not far from the 
sale-room at which i have obscure hinted, mr. denton thought that he 
would spend an hour there upon the chance of finding, among that 
portion of the famous thomas collection of mss., which he knew to be 
then on view, something bearing upon the history or topography of his 
part of warwickshire. 

he turn in accordingly, purchase a catalogue and ascend to the 
sale-room, where, as usual, the books were disposed in case and some 
laid out upon the long tables. at the shelves, or sitting about at the 
tables, were figures, many of whom were familiar to him. he exchange 
nod and greeting with several, and then settled down to examine his 
catalogue and note likely items. he had made good progress through 
about two hundred of the five hundred lots--every now and then rising 
to take a volume from the shelf and give it a cursory glance--when a 
hand was laid on his shoulder, and he look up. his interrupt was 
one of those intelligent men with a pointed beard and a flannel shirt, 
of whom the last quarter of the nineteenth century was, it seem to 
me, very prolific. 

it is no part of my plan to repeat the whole conversation which ensue 
between the two. i must content myself with state that it largely 
refer to common acquaintances, e.g., to the nephew of mr. denton's 
friend who had recently married and settled in chelsea, to the 
sister-in-law of mr. denton's friend who had been seriously 
indisposed, but was now better, and to a piece of china which mr. 
denton's friend had purchase some month before at a price much below 
its true value. from which you will rightly infer that the 
conversation was rather in the nature of a monologue. in due time, 
however, the friend bethought himself that mr. denton was there for a 
purpose, and said he, "what are you look out for in particular? i 
don't think there's much in this lot." "why, i thought there might be 
some warwickshire collections, but i don't see anything under warwick 
in the catalogue." "no, apparently not," said the friend. "all the 
same, i believe i notice something like a warwickshire diary. what 
was the name again? drayton? potter? painter--either a p or a d, i 
feel sure." he turn over the leaves quickly. "yes, here it is. 
poynter. lot 486. that might interest you. there are the books, i 
think: out on the table. some one has been look at them. well, i 
must be get on. good-bye, you'll look us up, won't you? couldn't 
you come this afternoon? we've got a little music about four. well, 
then, when you're next in town." he went off. mr. denton look at his 
watch and found to his confusion that he could spare no more than a 
moment before retrieve his luggage and go for the train. the 
moment was just enough to show him that there were four largish 
volumes of the diary--that it concerned the years about 1710, and that 
there seem to be a good many insertion in it of various kinds. it 
seem quite worth while to leave a commission of five and twenty 
pound for it, and this he was able to do, for his usual agent enter 
the room as he was on the point of leave it. 

that evening he rejoin his aunt at their temporary abode, which was 
a small dower-house not many hundred yard from the manor. on the 
following morning the two resume a discussion that had now last for 
some week as to the equipment of the new house. mr. denton laid 
before his relative a statement of the result of his visit to 
town--particulars of carpets, of chairs, of wardrobes, and of bedroom 
china. "yes, dear," said his aunt, "but i don't see any chintz here. 
did you go to ----?" mr. denton stamp on the floor (where else, 
indeed, could he have stamped?). "oh dear, oh dear," he said, "the one 
thing i missed. i _am_ sorry. the fact is i was on my way there and i 
happen to be passing robins's." his aunt threw up her hands. 
"robins's! then the next thing will be another parcel of horrible old 
books at some outrageous price. i do think, james, when i am taking 
all this trouble for you, you might contrive to remember the one or 
two things which i specially beg you to see after. it's not as if i 
was ask it for myself. i don't know whether you think i get any 
pleasure out of it, but if so i can assure you it's very much the 
reverse. the thought and worry and trouble i have over it you have no 
idea of, and _you_ have simply to go to the shop and order the 
things." mr. denton interpose a moan of penitence. "oh, aunt----" 
"yes, that's all very well, dear, and i don't want to speak sharply, 
but you _must_ know how very annoy it is: particularly as it delay 
the whole of our business for i can't tell how long: here is 
wednesday--the simpson come to-morrow, and you can't leave them. then 
on saturday we have friends, as you know, coming for tennis. yes, 
indeed, you spoke of ask them yourself, but, of course, i had to 
write the notes, and it is ridiculous, james, to look like that. we 
must occasional be civil to our neighbours: you wouldn't like to 
have it said we were perfect bears. what was i saying? well, anyhow it 
come to this, that it must be thursday in next week at least, before 
you can go to town again, and until we have decided upon the chintz 
it is impossible to settle upon one single other thing." 

mr. denton venture to suggest that as the paint and wallpaper had 
been dealt with, this was too severe a view: but this his aunt was 
not prepared to admit at the moment. nor, indeed, was there any 
proposition he could have advanced which she would have found herself 
able to accept. however, as the day went on, she recede a little from 
this position: examine with lessen disfavour the sample and price 
lists submit by her nephew, and even in some case gave a qualified 
approval to his choice. 

as for him, he was naturally somewhat dashed by the consciousness of 
duty unfulfilled, but more so by the prospect of a lawn-tennis party, 
which, though an inevitable evil in august, he had thought there was 
no occasion to fear in may. but he was to some extent cheer by the 
arrival on the friday morning of an intimate that he had secure at 
the price of £12 10s. the four volumes of poynter's manuscript diary, 
and still more by the arrival on the next morning of the diary itself. 

the necessity of taking mr. and mrs. simpson for a drive in the car on 
saturday morning and of attend to his neighbour and guest that 
afternoon prevent him from do more than open the parcel until the 
party had retired to bed on the saturday night. it was then that he 
made certain of the fact, which he had before only suspected, that he 
had indeed acquire the diary of mr. william poynter, squire of 
acrington (about four mile from his own parish)--that same poynter 
who was for a time a member of the circle of oxford antiquaries, the 
centre of which was thomas hearne, and with whom hearne seem 
ultimately to have quarrelled--a not uncommon episode in the career of 
that excellent man. as is the case with hearne's own collections, the 
diary of poynter contained a good many note from print books, 
description of coin and other antiquity that had been brought to 
his notice, and draft of letters on these subjects, besides the 
chronicle of everyday events. the description in the sale-catalogue 
had given mr. denton no idea of the amount of interest which seem to 
lie in the book, and he sat up reading in the first of the four 
volumes until a reprehensible late hour. 

on the sunday morning, after church, his aunt came into the study and 
was divert from what she had been go to say to him by the sight 
of the four brown leather quarto on the table. "what are these?" she 
said suspiciously. "new, aren't they? oh! are these the things that 
made you forget my chintzes? i thought so. disgusting. what did you 
give for them, i should like to know? over ten pounds? james, it is 
really sinful. well, if you have money to throw away on this kind of 
thing, there _can_ be no reason why you should not subscribe--and 
subscribe handsomely--to my anti-vivisection league. there is not, 
indeed, james, and i shall be very seriously annoy if----. who did 
you say wrote them? old mr. poynter, of acrington? well, of course, 
there is some interest in get together old papers about this 
neighbourhood. but ten pounds!" she picked up one of the volumes--not 
that which her nephew had been reading--and open it at random, 
dashing it to the floor the next instant with a cry of disgust as a 
earwig fell from between the pages. mr. denton picked it up with a 
smother expletive and said, "poor book! i think you're rather hard 
on mr. poynter." "was i, my dear? i beg his pardon, but you know i 
cannot abide those horrid creatures. let me see if i've done any 
mischief." "no, i think all's well: but look here what you've open 
him on." "dear me, yes, to be sure! how very interesting. do unpin it, 
james, and let me look at it." 

it was a piece of pattern stuff about the size of the quarto page, 
to which it was fasten by an old-fashioned pin. james detached it 
and hand it to his aunt, careful replace the pin in the paper. 

now, i do not know exactly what the fabric was; but it had a design 
print upon it, which completely fascinate miss denton. she went 
into rapture over it, held it against the wall, made james do the 
same, that she might retire to contemplate it from a distance: then 
pore over it at close quarters, and end her examination by 
express in the warmest terms her appreciation of the taste of the 
ancient mr. poynter who had had the happy idea of preserve this 
sample in his diary. "it is a most charming pattern," she said, "and 
remarkable too. look, james, how delightful the lines ripple. it 
remind one of hair, very much, doesn't it. and then these knot of 
ribbon at intervals. they give just the relief of colour that is 
wanted. i wonder----" "i was go to say," said james with deference, 
"i wonder if it would cost much to have it copy for our curtains." 
"copied? how could you have it copied, james?" "well, i don't know the 
details, but i suppose that is a print pattern, and that you could 
have a block cut from it in wood or metal." "now, really, that is a 
capital idea, james. i am almost inclined to be glad that you were 
so--that you forgot the chintz on monday. at any rate, i'll promise 
to forgive and forget if you get this _lovely_ old thing copied. no 
one will have anything in the least like it, and mind, james, we won't 
allow it to be sold. now i _must_ go, and i've total forgotten what 
it was i came in to say: never mind, it'll keep." 

after his aunt had gone james denton devoted a few minutes to 
examine the pattern more close than he had yet had a chance of 
doing. he was puzzle to think why it should have struck miss benton 
so forcibly. it seem to him not specially remarkable or pretty. no 
doubt it was suitable enough for a curtain pattern: it ran in vertical 
bands, and there was some indication that these were intended to 
converge at the top. she was right, too, in thinking that these main 
band resemble rippling--almost curling--tresses of hair. well, the 
main thing was to find out by means of trade directories, or 
otherwise, what firm would undertake the reproduction of an old 
pattern of this kind. not to delay the reader over this portion of 
the story, a list of likely name was made out, and mr. denton fixed a 
day for calling on them, or some of them, with his sample. 

the first two visit which he paid were unsuccessful: but there is 
luck in odd numbers. the firm in bermondsey which was third on his 
list was accustomed to handle this line. the evidence they were able 
to produce justified their being entrust with the job. "our mr. 
cattell" took a fervent personal interest in it. "it's 'eartrending, 
isn't it, sir," he said, "to picture the quantity of reel lovely 
medeevial stuff of this kind that lay well-nigh unnoticed in many of 
our residential country 'ouses: much of it in peril, i take it, of 
being cast aside as so much rubbish. what is it shakespeare 
says--unconsidered trifles. ah, i often say he 'as a word for us all, 
sir. i say shakespeare, but i'm well aware all don't 'old with me 
there--i 'ad something of an upset the other day when a gentleman came 
in--a titled man, too, he was, and i think he told me he'd wrote on 
the topic, and i 'appened to cite out something about 'ercules and the 
paint cloth. dear me, you never see such a pother. but as to this, 
what you've kindly confide to us, it's a piece of work we shall take 
a reel enthusiasm in achieve it out to the very best of our ability. 
what man 'as done, as i was observing only a few week back to another 
esteem client, man can do, and in three to four weeks' time, all 
being well, we shall 'ope to lay before you evidence to that effect, 
sir. take the address, mr. 'iggins, if you please." 

such was the general drift of mr. cattell's observations on the 
occasion of his first interview with mr. denton. about a month later, 
being advise that some sample were ready for his inspection, mr. 
denton met him again, and had, it seems, reason to be satisfy with 
the faithful of the reproduction of the design. it had been 
finished off at the top in accordance with the indication i mentioned, 
so that the vertical band joined. but something still need to be 
done in the way of matching the colour of the original. mr. cattell 
had suggestion of a technical kind to offer, with which i need not 
trouble you. he had also view as to the general desirable of the 
pattern which were vague adverse. "you say you don't wish this to be 
supply excepting to personal friends equip with a authorization 
from yourself, sir. it shall be done. i quite understand your wish to 
keep it exclusive: lend it a catchit, do it not, to the suite? 
what's every man's, it's been said, is no man's." 

"do you think it would be popular if it were generally obtainable?" 
ask mr. denton. 

"i 'ardly think it, sir," said cattell, pensive clasp his beard. 
"i 'ardly think it. not popular: it wasn't popular with the man that 
cut the block, was it, mr. 'iggins?" 

"did he find it a difficult job?" 

"he'd no call to do so, sir; but the fact is that the artistic 
temperament--and our men are artists, sir, every man of them--true 
artist as much as many that the world style by that term--it's apt 
to take some strange 'ardly accountable likes or dislikes, and here 
was an example. the twice or thrice that i went to inspect his 
progress: language i could understand, for that's 'abitual to him, but 
reel distaste for what i should call a dainty enough thing, i did not, 
nor am i now able to fathom. it seemed," said mr. cattell, look 
narrowly upon mr. denton, "as if the man scent something almost 
hevil in the design." 

"indeed? did he tell you so? i can't say i see anything sinister in it 
myself." 

"neether can i, sir. in fact i said as much. 'come, gatwick,' i said, 
'what's to do here? what's the reason of your prejudice--for i can 
call it no more than that?' but, no! no explanation was forthcoming. 
and i was merely reduced, as i am now, to a shrug of the shoulders, 
and a _cui bono_. however, here it is," and with that the technical 
side of the question came to the front again. 

the matching of the colours for the background, the hem, and the knot 
of ribbon was by far the longest part of the business, and 
necessitate many send to and fro of the original pattern and of 
new samples. during part of august and september, too, the denton 
were away from the manor. so that it was not until october was well in 
that a sufficient quantity of the stuff had been manufacture to 
furnish curtains for the three or four bedroom which were to be 
fitted up with it. 

on the feast of simon and jude the aunt and nephew return from a 
short visit to find all completed, and their satisfaction at the 
general effect was great. the new curtains, in particular, agree to 
admiration with their surroundings. when mr. denton was dressing for 
dinner, and took stock of his room, in which there was a large amount 
of the chintz displayed, he congratulate himself over and over again 
on the luck which had first made him forget his aunt's commission and 
had then put into his hand this extremely effective means of 
remedy his mistake. the pattern was, as he said at dinner, so 
restful and yet so far from being dull. and miss denton--who, by the 
way, had none of the stuff in her own room--was much disposed to agree 
with him. 

at breakfast next morning he was induce to qualify his satisfaction 
to some extent--but very slightly. "there is one thing i rather 
regret," he said, "that we allow them to join up the vertical band 
of the pattern at the top. i think it would have been better to leave 
that alone." 

"oh?" said his aunt interrogatively. 

"yes: as i was reading in bed last night they kept catching my eye 
rather. that is, i found myself look across at them every now and 
then. there was an effect as if some one kept peep out between the 
curtains in one place or another, where there was no edge, and i think 
that was due to the join up of the band at the top. the only other 
thing that trouble me was the wind." 

"why, i thought it was a perfectly still night." 

"perhaps it was only on my side of the house, but there was enough to 
sway my curtains and rustle them more than i wanted." 

that night a bachelor friend of james denton's came to stay, and was 
lodge in a room on the same floor as his host, but at the end of a 
long passage, halfway down which was a red baize door, put there to 
cut off the draught and intercept noise. 

the party of three had separated. miss denton a good first, the two 
men at about eleven. james denton, not yet inclined for bed, sat him 
down in an arm-chair and read for a time. then he dozed, and then he 
woke, and bethought himself that his brown spaniel, which ordinarily 
slept in his room, had not come upstairs with him. then he thought he 
was mistaken: for happening to move his hand which hung down over the 
arm of the chair within a few inch of the floor, he felt on the back 
of it just the slightest touch of a surface of hair, and stretch it 
out in that direction he stroke and pat a round something. but 
the feel of it, and still more the fact that instead of a responsive 
movement, absolute still greet his touch, made him look over 
the arm. what he had been touching rose to meet him. it was in the 
attitude of one that had crept along the floor on its belly, and it 
was, so far as could be collected, a human figure. but of the face 
which was now rising to within a few inch of his own no feature was 
discernible, only hair. shapeless as it was, there was about it so 
horrible an air of menace that as he bound from his chair and rush 
from the room he heard himself moan with fear: and doubtless he did 
right to fly. as he dashed into the baize door that cut the passage in 
two, and--forgetting that it open towards him--beat against it with 
all the force in him, he felt a soft ineffectual tear at his back 
which, all the same, seem to be grow in power, as if the hand, or 
whatever worse than a hand was there, were becoming more material as 
the pursuer's rage was more concentrated. then he remember the trick 
of the door--he got it open--he shut it behind him--he gain his 
friend's room, and that is all we need know. 

it seem curious that, during all the time that had elapse since the 
purchase of poynter's diary, james denton should not have sought an 
explanation of the presence of the pattern that had been pin into 
it. well, he had read the diary through without finding it mentioned, 
and had conclude that there was nothing to be said. but, on leave 
rendcomb manor (he did not know whether for good), as he naturally 
insist upon do on the day after experience the horror i have 
try to put into words, he took the diary with him. and at his 
seaside lodgings he examine more narrowly the portion whence the 
pattern had been taken. what he remember have suspect about it 
turn out to be correct. two or three leaves were paste together, 
but written upon, as was patent when they were held up to the light. 
they yield easily to steaming, for the paste had lost much of its 
strength, and they contained something relevant to the pattern. 

the entry was made in 1707. 

"old mr. casbury, of acrington, told me this day much of 
young sir everard charlett, whom he remember'd commoner of 
university college, and thought was of the same family as 
dr. arthur charlett, now master of ye coll. this charlett 
was a personable young gent., but a loose atheist 
companion, and a great lifter, as they then call'd the hard 
drinkers, and for what i know do so now. he was noted, and 
subject to severall censure at different times for his 
extravagancies: and if the full history of his debauchery 
had bin known, no doubt would have been expell'd ye coll., 
supposing that no interest had been imploy'd on his behalf, 
of which mr. casbury had some suspicion. he was a very 
beautiful person, and constant wore his own hair, which 
was very abundant, from which, and his loose way of living, 
the cant name for him was absalom, and he was accustom'd to 
say that indeed he believ'd he had shorten old david's 
days, meaning his father, sir job charlett, an old worthy 
cavalier. 

"note that mr. casbury said that he remember not the year 
of sir everard charlett's death, but it was 1692 or 3. he 
die sudden in october. [several lines describe his 
unpleasant habit and reputed delinquency are omitted.] 
have seen him in such topping spirits the night before, 
mr. casbury was amaz'd when he learn'd the death. he was 
found in the town ditch, the hair as was said pluck'd clean 
off his head. most bell in oxford rung out for him, being a 
nobleman, and he was bury next night in st. peter's in the 
east. but two years after, being to be move to his country 
estate by his successor, it was said the coffin, break by 
mischance, prove quite full of hair: which sound fabulous, 
but yet i believe precedent are upon record, as in dr. 
plot's _history of staffordshire_. 

"his chambers being afterwards stripp'd, mr. casbury came by 
part of the hangings of it, which 'twas said this charlett 
had design'd expressly for a memorial of his hair, give 
the fellow that drew it a lock to work by, and the piece 
which i have fasten'd in here was parcel of the same, which 
mr. casbury gave to me. he said he believ'd there was a 
subtlety in the drawing, but had never discover'd it 
himself, nor much like to pore upon it." 

* * * * * 

the money spent upon the curtains might as well have been thrown into 
the fire, as they were. mr. cattell's comment upon what he heard of 
the story took the form of a quotation from shakespeare. you may guess 
it without difficulty. it began with the words "there are more 
things." 




an episode of cathedral history 




an episode of cathedral history 


there was once a learned gentleman who was depute to examine and 
report upon the archive of the cathedral of southminster. the 
examination of these record demand a very considerable expenditure 
of time: hence it became advisable for him to engage lodgings in the 
city: for though the cathedral body were profuse in their offer of 
hospitality, mr. lake felt that he would prefer to be master of his 
day. this was recognize as reasonable. the dean eventually wrote 
advise mr. lake, if he were not already suited, to communicate with 
mr. worby, the principal verger, who occupy a house convenient to 
the church and was prepared to take in a quiet lodger for three or 
four weeks. such an arrangement was precisely what mr. lake desired. 
terms were easily agree upon, and early in december, like another mr. 
datchery (as he remark to himself), the investigate found himself 
in the occupation of a very comfortable room in an ancient and 
"cathedraly" house. 

one so familiar with the customs of cathedral churches, and treat 
with such obvious consideration by the dean and chapter of this 
cathedral in particular, could not fail to command the respect of the 
head verger. mr. worby even acquiesce in certain modification of 
statement he had been accustomed to offer for years to party of 
visitors. mr. lake, on his part, found the verger a very cheery 
companion, and took advantage of any occasion that present itself 
for enjoy his conversation when the day's work was over. 

one evening, about nine o'clock, mr. worby knock at his lodger's 
door. "i've occasion," he said, "to go across to the cathedral, mr. 
lake, and i think i made you a promise when i did so next i would give 
you the opportunity to see what it looks like at night time. it is 
quite fine and dry outside, if you care to come." 

"to be sure i will; very much oblige to you, mr. worby, for thinking 
of it, but let me get my coat." 

"here it is, sir, and i've another lantern here that you'll find 
advisable for the steps, as there's no moon." 

"any one might think we were jasper and durdles, over again, mightn't 
they," said lake, as they cross the close, for he had ascertain 
that the verger had read _edwin drood_. 

"well, so they might," said mr. worby, with a short laugh, "though i 
don't know whether we ought to take it as a compliment. odd ways, i 
often think, they had at that cathedral, don't it seem so to you, sir? 
full choral matins at seven o'clock in the morning all the year round. 
wouldn't suit our boys' voice nowadays, and i think there's one or 
two of the men would be apply for a rise if the chapter was to 
bring it in--particular the alltoes." 

they were now at the south-west door. as mr. worby was unlock it, 
lake said, "did you ever find anybody lock in here by accident?" 

"twice i did. one was a drunk sailor; however he got in i don't know. 
i s'pose he went to sleep in the service, but by the time i got to him 
he was pray fit to bring the roof in. lor'! what a noise that man 
did make! said it was the first time he'd been inside a church for ten 
years, and blest if ever he'd try it again. the other was an old 
sheep: them boys it was, up to their games. that was the last time 
they try it on, though. there, sir, now you see what we look like; 
our late dean use now and again to bring party in, but he prefer 
a moonlight night, and there was a piece of verse he'd coat to 'em, 
relate to a scotch cathedral, i understand; but i don't know; i 
almost think the effect's better when it's all dark-like. seem to add 
to the size and heighth. now if you won't mind stopping somewhere in 
the nave while i go up into the choir where my business lays, you'll 
see what i mean." 

accordingly lake waited, leaning against a pillar, and watch the 
light waver along the length of the church, and up the steps into 
the choir, until it was intercept by some screen or other furniture, 
which only allow the reflection to be seen on the pier and roof. 
not many minutes had pass before worby reappear at the door of the 
choir and by wave his lantern signal to lake to rejoin him. 

"i suppose it _is_ worby, and not a substitute," thought lake to 
himself, as he walk up the nave. there was, in fact, nothing 
untoward. worby show him the papers which he had come to fetch out 
of the dean's stall, and ask him what he thought of the spectacle: 
lake agree that it was well worth seeing. "i suppose," he said, as 
they walk towards the altar-steps together, "that you're too much 
use to go about here at night to feel nervous--but you must get a 
start every now and then, don't you, when a book falls down or a door 
swing to." 

"no, mr. lake, i can't say i think much about noises, not nowadays: 
i'm much more afraid of finding an escape of gas or a burst in the 
stove pipes than anything else. still there have been times, years 
ago. did you notice that plain altar-tomb there--fifteenth century we 
say it is, i don't know if you agree to that? well, if you didn't look 
at it, just come back and give it a glance, if you'd be so good." it 
was on the north side of the choir, and rather awkward placed: only 
about three feet from the enclose stone screen. quite plain, as the 
verger had said, but for some ordinary stone panelling. a metal cross 
of some size on the northern side (that next to the screen) was the 
solitary feature of any interest. 

lake agree that it was not early than the perpendicular period: 
"but," he said, "unless it's the tomb of some remarkable person, 
you'll forgive me for saying that i don't think it's particularly 
noteworthy." 

"well, i can't say as it is the tomb of anybody noted in 'istory," 
said worby, who had a dry smile on his face, "for we don't own any 
record whatsoever of who it was put up to. for all that, if you've 
half an hour to spare, sir, when we get back to the house, mr. lake, i 
could tell you a tale about that tomb. i won't begin on it now; it 
strike cold here, and we don't want to be dawdle about all night." 

"of course i should like to hear it immensely." 

"very well, sir, you shall. now if i might put a question to you," he 
went on, as they pass down the choir aisle, "in our little local 
guide--and not only there, but in the little book on our cathedral in 
the series--you'll find it state that this portion of the building 
was erect previous to the twelfth century. now of course i should be 
glad enough to take that view, but--mind the step, sir--but, i put it 
to you--does the lay of the stone 'ere in this portion of the wall 
(which he tap with his key) do it to your eye carry the flavour 
of what you might call saxon masonry? no? i thought not; no more it 
do to me: now, if you'll believe me, i've said as much to those 
men--one's the librarian of our free libry here, and the other came 
down from london on purpose--fifty times, if i have once, but i might 
just as well have talk to that bit of stonework. but there it is, i 
suppose every one's got their opinions." 

the discussion of this peculiar trait of human nature occupy mr. 
worby almost up to the moment when he and lake re-entered the former's 
house. the condition of the fire in lake's sitting-room led to a 
suggestion from mr. worby that they should finish the evening in his 
own parlour. we find them accordingly settled there some short time 
afterwards. 

mr. worby made his story a long one, and i will not undertake to tell 
it wholly in his own words, or in his own order. lake committed the 
substance of it to paper immediately after hearing it, together with 
some few passage of the narrative which had fixed themselves 
_verbatim_ in his mind; i shall probably find it expedient to condense 
lake's record to some extent. 

mr. worby was born, it appeared, about the year 1828. his father 
before him had been connected with the cathedral, and likewise his 
grandfather. one or both had been choristers, and in later life both 
had done work as mason and carpenter respectively about the fabric. 
worby himself, though possessed, as he frankly acknowledged, of an 
indifferent voice, had been draft into the choir at about ten years 
of age. 

it was in 1840 that the wave of the gothic revival smote the cathedral 
of southminster. "there was a lot of lovely stuff went then, sir," 
said worby, with a sigh. "my father couldn't hardly believe it when he 
got his orders to clear out the choir. there was a new dean just come 
in--dean burscough it was--and my father had been 'prenticed to a good 
firm of joiner in the city, and knew what good work was when he saw 
it. crool it was, he use to say: all that beautiful wainscot oak, as 
good as the day it was put up, and garlands-like of foliage and fruit, 
and lovely old gilding work on the coat of arms and the organ pipes. 
all went to the timber yard--every bit except some little pieces 
work up in the lady chapel, and 'ere in this overmantel. well--i may 
be mistook, but i say our choir never look as well since. still 
there was a lot found out about the history of the church, and no 
doubt but what it did stand in need of repair. there were very few 
winter pass but what we'd lose a pinnicle." mr. lake express his 
concurrence with worby's view of restoration, but own to a fear 
about this point lest the story proper should never be reached. 
possibly this was perceptible in his manner. 

worby hasten to reassure him, "not but what i could carry on about 
that topic for hour at a time, and do do when i see my opportunity. 
but dean burscough he was very set on the gothic period, and nothing 
would serve him but everything must be made agreeable to that. and one 
morning after service he appoint for my father to meet him in the 
choir, and he came back after he'd taken off his robe in the vestry, 
and he'd got a roll of paper with him, and the verger that was then 
brought in a table, and they begun spread it out on the table with 
prayer books to keep it down, and my father help 'em, and he saw it 
was a picture of the inside of a choir in a cathedral; and the 
dean--he was a quick spoken gentleman--he says, 'well, worby, what do 
you think of that?' 'why', say my father, 'i don't think i 'ave the 
pleasure of knowing that view. would that be hereford cathedral, mr. 
dean?' 'no, worby,' say the dean, 'that's southminster cathedral as 
we hope to see it before many years.' 'in-deed, sir,' say my father, 
and that was all he did say--leastways to the dean--but he use to 
tell me he felt really faint in himself when he look round our 
choir as i can remember it, all comfortable and furnished-like, and 
then see this nasty little dry picter, as he call it, drawn out by 
some london architect. well, there i am again. but you'll see what i 
mean if you look at this old view." 

worby reach down a frame print from the wall. "well, the long and 
the short of it was that the dean he hand over to my father a copy 
of an order of the chapter that he was to clear out every bit of the 
choir--make a clean sweep--ready for the new work that was being 
design up in town, and he was to put it in hand as soon as ever he 
could get the breaker together. now then, sir, if you look at that 
view, you'll see where the pulpit use to stand: that's what i want 
you to notice, if you please." it was, indeed, easily seen; an 
unusually large structure of timber with a domed sounding-board, 
standing at the east end of the stalls on the north side of the choir, 
facing the bishop's throne. worby proceed to explain that during the 
alterations, service were held in the nave, the member of the choir 
being thereby disappointed of an anticipate holiday, and the organist 
in particular incur the suspicion of have wilful damage the 
mechanism of the temporary organ that was hire at considerable 
expense from london. 

the work of demolition began with the choir screen and organ loft, and 
proceed gradual eastwards, disclosing, as worby said, many 
interesting features of old work. while this was go on, the 
member of the chapter were, naturally, in and about the choir a great 
deal, and it soon became apparent to the elder worby--who could not 
help overhear some of their talk--that, on the part of the senior 
canon especially, there must have been a good deal of disagreement 
before the policy now being carry out had been adopted. some were of 
opinion that they should catch their death of cold in the 
return-stalls, unprotected by a screen from the draughts in the nave: 
other object to being expose to the view of person in the choir 
aisles, especially, they said, during the sermons, when they found it 
helpful to listen in a posture which was liable to misconstruction. 
the strongest opposition, however, came from the oldest of the body, 
who up to the last moment object to the removal of the pulpit. "you 
ought not to touch it, mr. dean," he said with great emphasis one 
morning, when the two were standing before it: "you don't know what 
mischief you may do." "mischief? it's not a work of any particular 
merit, canon." "don't call me canon," said the old man with great 
asperity, "that is, for thirty years i've been known as dr. ayloff, 
and i shall be obliged, mr. dean, if you would kindly humour me in 
that matter. and as to the pulpit (which i've preach from for thirty 
years, though i don't insist on that) all i'll say is, i _know_ you're 
do wrong in moving it." "but what sense could there be, my dear 
doctor, in leave it where it is, when we're fitting up the rest of 
the choir in a total different _style_? what reason could be 
given--apart from the look of the thing?" "reason! reason!" said old 
dr. ayloff; "if you young men--if i may say so without any disrespect, 
mr. dean--if you'd only listen to reason a little, and not be always 
ask for it, we should get on better. but there, i've said my say." 
the old gentleman hobble off, and as it proved, never enter the 
cathedral again. the season--it was a hot summer--turned sickly on a 
sudden. dr. ayloff was one of the first to go, with some affection of 
the muscle of the thorax, which took him painful at night. and at 
many service the number of choirmen and boys was very thin. 

meanwhile the pulpit had been done away with. in fact, the 
sounding-board (part of which still exist as a table in a 
summer-house in the palace garden) was taken down within an hour or 
two of dr. ayloff's protest. the removal of the base--not effect 
without considerable trouble--disclosed to view, greatly to the 
exultation of the restore party, an altar-tomb--the tomb, of course, 
to which worby had attract lake's attention that same evening. much 
fruitless research was expend in attempt to identify the occupant; 
from that day to this he has never had a name put to him. the 
structure had been most careful box in under the pulpit-base, so 
that such slight ornament as it possessed was not defaced; only on the 
north side of it there was what look like an injury; a gap between 
two of the slab compose the side. it might be two or three inch 
across. palmer, the mason, was direct to fill it up in a week's 
time, when he came to do some other small job near that part of the 
choir. 

the season was undoubted a very try one. whether the church was 
built on a site that had once been a marsh, as was suggested, or for 
whatever reason, the resident in its immediate neighbourhood had, 
many of them, but little enjoyment of the exquisite sunny days and 
the calm nights of august and september. to several of the old 
people--dr. ayloff, among others, as we have seen--the summer prove 
downright fatal, but even among the younger, few escape either a 
sojourn in bed for a matter of weeks, or at the least, a brood 
sense of oppression, accompany by hateful nightmares. gradual 
there formulate itself a suspicion--which grew into a conviction--that 
the alteration in the cathedral had something to say in the matter. 
the widow of a former old verger, a pensioner of the chapter of 
southminster, was visit by dreams, which she retail to her 
friends, of a shape that slip out of the little door of the south 
transept as the dark fell in, and flitted--taking a fresh direction 
every night--about the close, disappear for a while in house after 
house, and finally emerge again when the night sky was paling. she 
could see nothing of it, she said, but that it was a moving form: only 
she had an impression that when it return to the church, as it 
seem to do in the end of the dream, it turn its head: and then, 
she could not tell why, but she thought it had red eyes. worby 
remember hearing the old lady tell this dream at a tea-party in the 
house of the chapter clerk. its recurrence might, perhaps, he said, be 
taken as a symptom of approach illness; at any rate before the end 
of september the old lady was in her grave. 

the interest excited by the restoration of this great church was not 
confine to its own county. one day that summer an f.s.a., of some 
celebrity, visit the place. his business was to write an account of 
the discovery that had been made, for the society of antiquaries, 
and his wife, who accompany him, was to make a series of 
illustrative drawing for his report. in the morning she employ 
herself in making a general sketch of the choir; in the afternoon she 
devoted herself to details. she first drew the newly expose 
altar-tomb, and when that was finished, she call her husband's 
attention to a beautiful piece of diaper-ornament on the screen just 
behind it, which had, like the tomb itself, been completely conceal 
by the pulpit. of course, he said, an illustration of that must be 
made; so she seat herself on the tomb and began a careful drawing 
which occupy her till dusk. 

her husband had by this time finished his work of measure and 
description, and they agree that it was time to be get back to 
their hotel. "you may as well brush my skirt, frank," said the lady, 
"it must have got cover with dust, i'm sure." he obey dutifully; 
but, after a moment, he said, "i don't know whether you value this 
dress particularly, my dear, but i'm inclined to think it's seen its 
best days. there's a great bit of it gone." "gone? where?" said she. 
"i don't know where it's gone, but it's off at the bottom edge behind 
here." she pull it hasty into sight, and was horrify to find a 
jagged tear extend some way into the substance of the stuff; very 
much, she said, as if a dog had rent it away. the dress was, in any 
case, hopeless spoilt, to her great vexation, and though they look 
everywhere, the missing piece could not be found. there were many 
ways, they concluded, in which the injury might have come about, for 
the choir was full of old bit of woodwork with nail stick out of 
them. finally, they could only suppose that one of these had cause 
the mischief, and that the workmen, who had been about all day, had 
carry off the particular piece with the fragment of dress still 
attach to it. 

it was about this time, worby thought, that his little dog began to 
wear an anxious expression when the hour for it to be put into the 
shed in the back yard approached. (for his mother had ordain that it 
must not sleep in the house.) one evening, he said, when he was just 
go to pick it up and carry it out, it look at him "like a 
christian, and wave its 'and, i was go to say--well, you know 'ow 
they do carry on sometimes, and the end of it was i put it under my 
coat, and 'uddled it upstairs--and i'm afraid i as good as deceive my 
poor mother on the subject. after that the dog act very artful with 
'iding itself under the bed for half-an-hour or more before bed-time 
came, and we work it so as my mother never found out what we'd 
done." of course worby was glad of its company anyhow, but more 
particularly when the nuisance that is still remember in 
southminster as "the crying" set in. 

"night after night," said worby, "that dog seem to know it was 
coming; he'd creep out, he would, and snuggle into the bed and cuddle 
right up to me shivering, and when the crying come he'd be like a wild 
thing, shove his head under my arm, and i was fully near as bad. six 
or seven times we'd hear it, not more, and when he'd dror out his 'ed 
again i'd know it was over for that night. what was it like, sir? 
well, i never heard but one thing that seem to hit it off. i 
happen to be play about in the close, and there was two of the 
canon met and said 'good morning' one to another. 'sleep well last 
night?' say one--it was mr. henslow that one, and mr. lyall was the 
other--'can't say i did,' say mr. lyall, 'rather too much of isaiah 
34. 14 for me.' '34. 14,' say mr. henslow, 'what's that?' 'you call 
yourself a bible reader!' say mr. lyall. (mr. henslow, you must know, 
he was one of what use to be term simeon's lot--pretty much what we 
should call the evangelical party.) 'you go and look it up.' i want 
to know what he was get at myself, and so off i ran home and got 
out my own bible, and there it was: 'the satyr shall cry to his 
fellow.' well, i thought, is that what we've been listen to these 
past nights? and i tell you it made me look over my shoulder a time or 
two. of course i'd ask my father and mother about what it could be 
before that, but they both said it was most likely cats: but they 
spoke very short, and i could see they was troubled. my word! that was 
a noise--'ungry-like, as if it was calling after some one that 
wouldn't come. if ever you felt you want company, it would be when 
you was wait for it to begin again. i believe two or three nights 
there was men put on to watch in different parts of the close; but 
they all use to get together in one corner, the nearest they could to 
the high street, and nothing came of it. 

"well, the next thing was this. me and another of the boys--he's in 
business in the city now as a grocer, like his father before him--we'd 
gone up in the close after morning service was over, and we heard old 
palmer the mason bellow to some of his men. so we went up nearer, 
because we knew he was a rusty old chap and there might be some fun 
going. it appear palmer'd told this man to stop up the chink in that 
old tomb. well, there was this man keeping on saying he'd done it the 
best he could, and there was palmer carry on like all possessed 
about it. 'call that making a job of it?' he says. 'if you had your 
rights you'd get the sack for this. what do you suppose i pay you your 
wages for? what do you suppose i'm go to say to the dean and 
chapter when they come round, as come they may do any time, and see 
where you've been bungle about covering the 'ole place with mess 
and plaster and lord know what?' 'well, master, i done the best i 
could,' say the man; 'i don't know no more than what you do 'ow it 
come to fall out this way. i tamp it right in the 'ole,' he says, 
'and now it's fell out,' he says, 'i never see.' 

"'fell out?' say old palmer, 'why it's nowhere near the place. blow 
out, you mean,' and he picked up a bit of plaster, and so did i, that 
was lay up against the screen, three or four feet off, and not dry 
yet; and old palmer he look at it curious-like, and then he turn 
round on me and he says, 'now then, you boys, have you been up to some 
of your games here?' 'no,' i says, 'i haven't, mr. palmer; there's 
none of us been about here till just this minute,' and while i was 
talk the other boy, evans, he got look in through the chink, and 
i heard him draw in his breath, and he came away sharp and up to us, 
and say he, 'i believe there's something in there. i saw something 
shiny.' 'what! i daresay,' say old palmer; 'well, i ain't got time to 
stop about there. you, william, you go off and get some more stuff and 
make a job of it this time; if not, there'll be trouble in my yard,' 
he says. 

"so the man he went off, and palmer too, and us boys stop behind, 
and i say to evans, 'did you really see anything in there?' 'yes,' he 
says, 'i did indeed.' so then i says, 'let's shove something in and 
stir it up.' and we try several of the bit of wood that was lay 
about, but they were all too big. then evans he had a sheet of music 
he'd brought with him, an anthem or a service, i forget which it was 
now, and he roll it up small and shove it in the chink; two or 
three times he did it, and nothing happened. 'give it me, boy,' i 
said, and i had a try. no, nothing happened. then, i don't know why i 
thought of it, i'm sure, but i stoop down just opposite the chink 
and put my two finger in my mouth and whistled--you know the way--and 
at that i seem to think i heard something stirring, and i say to 
evans, 'come away,' i says; 'i don't like this.' 'oh, rot,' he says, 
'give me that roll,' and he took it and shove it in. and i don't 
think ever i see any one go so pale as he did. 'i say, worby,' he 
says, 'it's caught, or else some one's got hold of it.' 'pull it out 
or leave it,' i says, 'come and let's get off.' so he gave a good 
pull, and it came away. leastways most of it did, but the end was 
gone. torn off it was, and evans look at it for a second and then he 
gave a sort of a croak and let it drop, and we both made off out of 
there as quick as ever we could. when we got outside evans say to me, 
'did you see the end of that paper.' 'no,' i says, 'only it was torn.' 
'yes, it was,' he says, 'but it was wet too, and black!' well, partly 
because of the fright we had, and partly because that music was want 
in a day or two, and we knew there'd be a set-out about it with the 
organist, we didn't say nothing to any one else, and i suppose the 
workmen they swept up the bit that was left along with the rest of the 
rubbish. but evans, if you were to ask him this very day about it, 
he'd stick to it he saw that paper wet and black at the end where it 
was torn." 

after that the boys gave the choir a wide berth, so that worby was not 
sure what was the result of the mason's renew mending of the tomb. 
only he made out from fragment of conversation drop by the workmen 
passing through the choir that some difficulty had been met with, and 
that the governor--mr. palmer to wit--had try his own hand at the 
job. a little later, he happen to see mr. palmer himself knock at 
the door of the deanery and being admitted by the butler. a day or so 
after that, he gather from a remark his father let fall at breakfast 
that something a little out of the common was to be done in the 
cathedral after morning service on the morrow. "and i'd just as soon 
it was to-day," his father added, "i don't see the use of running 
risks." "'father,' i says, 'what are you go to do in the cathedral 
to-morrow?' and he turn on me as savage as i ever see him--he was a 
wonderful good-tempered man as a general thing, my poor father was. 
'my lad,' he says, 'i'll trouble you not to go pick up your elders' 
and betters' talk: it's not manners and it's not straight. what i'm 
go to do or not go to do in the cathedral to-morrow is none of 
your business: and if i catch sight of you hanging about the place 
to-morrow after your work's done, i'll send you home with a flea in 
your ear. now you mind that.' of course i said i was very sorry and 
that, and equally of course i went off and laid my plan with evans. 
we knew there was a stair up in the corner of the transept which you 
can get up to the triforium, and in them days the door to it was 
pretty well always open, and even if it wasn't we knew the key usually 
laid under a bit of matting hard by. so we made up our mind we'd be 
putt away music and that, next morning while the rest of the boys 
was clearing off, and then slip up the stairs and watch from the 
triforium if there was any sign of work go on. 

"well, that same night i drop off asleep as sound as a boy does, 
and all of a sudden the dog woke me up, coming into the bed, and 
thought i, now we're go to get it sharp, for he seem more 
frightened than usual. after about five minutes sure enough came this 
cry. i can't give you no idea what it was like; and so near 
too--nearer than i'd heard it yet--and a funny thing, mr. lake, you 
know what a place this close is for an echo, and particular if you 
stand this side of it. well, this crying never made no sign of an echo 
at all. but, as i said, it was dreadful near this night; and on the 
top of the start i got with hearing it, i got another fright; for i 
heard something rustling outside in the passage. now to be sure i 
thought i was done; but i notice the dog seem to perk up a bit, and 
next there was some one whisper outside the door, and i very near 
laugh out loud, for i knew it was my father and mother that had got 
out of bed with the noise. 'whatever is it?' say my mother. 'hush! i 
don't know,' say my father, excited-like, 'don't disturb the boy. i 
hope he didn't hear nothing.' 

"so, me knowing they were just outside, it made me bolder, and i 
slip out of bed across to my little window--giving on the 
close--but the dog he bore right down to the bottom of the bed--and i 
look out. first go off i couldn't see anything. then right down in 
the shadow under a buttress i made out what i shall always say was two 
spot of red--a dull red it was--nothing like a lamp or a fire, but 
just so as you could pick 'em out of the black shadow. i hadn't but 
just sighted 'em when it seem we wasn't the only people that had 
been disturbed, because i see a window in a house on the left-hand 
side become light up, and the light moving. i just turn my head to 
make sure of it, and then look back into the shadow for those two 
red things, and they were gone, and for all i peer about and stared, 
there was not a sign more of them. then come my last fright that 
night--something come against my bare leg--but that was all right: 
that was my little dog had come out of bed, and prance about, making 
a great to-do, only holding his tongue, and me seeing he was quite in 
spirits again, i took him back to bed and we slept the night out! 

"next morning i made out to tell my mother i'd had the dog in my room, 
and i was surprised, after all she'd said about it before, how quiet 
she took it. 'did you?' she says. 'well, by good rights you ought to 
go without your breakfast for do such a thing behind my back: but i 
don't know as there's any great harm done, only another time you ask 
my permission, do you hear?' a bit after that i said something to my 
father about have heard the cat again. '_cats_,' he says, and he 
look over at my poor mother, and she cough and he says, 'oh! ah! 
yes, cats. i believe i heard 'em myself.' 

"that was a funny morning altogether: nothing seem to go right. the 
organist he stop in bed, and the minor canon he forgot it was the 
19th day and wait for the _venite_; and after a bit the deputy he 
set off play the chant for evensong, which was a minor; and then 
the decani boys were laugh so much they couldn't sing, and when it 
came to the anthem the solo boy he got took with the giggles, and made 
out his nose was bleeding, and shove the book at me what hadn't 
practised the verse and wasn't much of a singe if i had known it. 
well, things was rougher, you see, fifty years ago, and i got a nip 
from the counter-tenor behind me that i remembered. 

"so we got through somehow, and neither the men nor the boys weren't 
by way of wait to see whether the canon in residence--mr. henslow 
it was--would come to the vestry and fine 'em, but i don't believe 
he did: for one thing i fancy he'd read the wrong lesson for the first 
time in his life, and knew it. anyhow evans and me didn't find no 
difficulty in slip up the stairs as i told you, and when we got up 
we laid ourselves down flat on our stomach where we could just 
stretch our head out over the old tomb, and we hadn't but just done 
so when we heard the verger that was then, first shut the iron 
porch-gates and lock the south-west door, and then the transept 
door, so we knew there was something up, and they meant to keep the 
public out for a bit. 

"next thing was, the dean and the canon come in by their door on the 
north, and then i see my father, and old palmer, and a couple of their 
best men, and palmer stood a talk for a bit with the dean in the 
middle of the choir. he had a coil of rope and the men had crows. all 
of 'em look a bit nervous. so there they stood talking, and at last 
i heard the dean say, 'well, i've no time to waste, palmer. if you 
think this'll satisfy southminster people, i'll permit it to be done; 
but i must say this, that never in the whole course of my life have i 
heard such arrant nonsense from a practical man as i have from you. 
don't you agree with me, henslow?' as far as i could hear mr. henslow 
said something like 'oh! well we're told, aren't we, mr. dean, not to 
judge others?' and the dean he gave a kind of sniff, and walk 
straight up to the tomb, and took his stand behind it with his back to 
the screen, and the other they come edging up rather gingerly. 
henslow, he stop on the south side and scratch on his chin, he 
did. then the dean spoke up: 'palmer,' he says, 'which can you do 
easiest, get the slab off the top, or shift one of the side slabs?' 

"old palmer and his men they potter about a bit look round the 
edge of the top slab and sound the side on the south and east and 
west and everywhere but the north. henslow said something about it 
being better to have a try at the south side, because there was more 
light and more room to move about in. then my father, who'd been 
watch of them, went round to the north side, and knelt down and 
felt of the slab by the chink, and he got up and dust his knee and 
say to the dean: 'beg pardon, mr. dean, but i think if mr. palmer'll 
try this here slab he'll find it'll come out easy enough. seem to me 
one of the men could prize it out with his crow by means of this 
chink.' 'ah! thank you, worby,' say the dean; 'that's a good 
suggestion. palmer, let one of your men do that, will you?' 

"so the man come round, and put his bar in and bore on it, and just 
that minute when they were all bend over, and we boys got our head 
well out over the edge of the triforium, there come a most fearful 
crash down at the west end of the choir, as if a whole stack of big 
timber had fallen down a flight of stairs. well, you can't expect me 
to tell you everything that happen all in a minute. of course there 
was a terrible commotion. i heard the slab fall out, and the crowbar 
on the floor, and i heard the dean say 'good god!' 

"when i look down again i saw the dean tumble over on the floor, 
the men was making off down the choir, henslow was just go to help 
the dean up, palmer was go to stop the men, as he said afterwards, 
and my father was sitting on the altar step with his face in his 
hands. the dean he was very cross. 'i wish to goodness you'd look 
where you're coming to, henslow,' he says. 'why you should all take 
to your heel when a stick of wood tumble down i cannot imagine,' and 
all henslow could do, explain he was right away on the other side 
of the tomb, would not satisfy him. 

"then palmer came back and report there was nothing to account for 
this noise and nothing seemingly fallen down, and when the dean 
finished feeling of himself they gather round--except my father, he 
sat where he was--and some one light up a bit of candle and they 
look into the tomb. 'nothing there,' say the dean, 'what did i tell 
you? stay! here's something. what's this: a bit of music paper, and a 
piece of torn stuff--part of a dress it looks like. both quite 
modern--no interest whatever. another time perhaps you'll take the 
advice of an educated man'--or something like that, and off he went, 
limp a bit, and out through the north door, only as he went he 
call back angry to palmer for leave the door standing open. palmer 
call out 'very sorry, sir,' but he shrug his shoulders, and 
henslow says, 'i fancy mr. dean's mistaken. i closed the door behind 
me, but he's a little upset.' then palmer says, 'why, where's worby?' 
and they saw him sitting on the step and went up to him. he was 
recover himself, it seemed, and wipe his forehead, and palmer 
help him up on to his legs, as i was glad to see. 

"they were too far off for me to hear what they said, but my father 
pointed to the north door in the aisle, and palmer and henslow both of 
them look very surprise and scared. after a bit, my father and 
henslow went out of the church, and the other made what haste they 
could to put the slab back and plaster it in. and about as the clock 
struck twelve the cathedral was open again and us boys made the best 
of our way home. 

"i was in a great taking to know what it was had given my poor father 
such a turn, and when i got in and found him sitting in his chair 
taking a glass of spirits, and my mother standing look anxious at 
him, i couldn't keep from burst out and making confession where i'd 
been. but he didn't seem to take on, not in the way of lose his 
temper. 'you was there, was you? well did you see it?' 'i see 
everything, father,' i said, 'except when the noise came.' 'did you 
see what it was knock the dean over?' he says, 'that what come out 
of the monument? you didn't? well, that's a mercy.' 'why, what was it, 
father?' i said. 'come, you must have seen it,' he says. '_didn't_ 
you see? a thing like a man, all over hair, and two great eyes to it?' 

"well, that was all i could get out of him that time, and later on he 
seem as if he was ashamed of being so frightened, and he use to put 
me off when i ask him about it. but years after, when i was got to 
be a grown man, we had more talk now and again on the matter, and he 
always said the same thing. 'black it was,' he'd say, 'and a mass of 
hair, and two legs, and the light caught on its eyes.' 

"well, that's the tale of that tomb, mr. lake; it's one we don't tell 
to our visitors, and i should be oblige to you not to make any use of 
it till i'm out of the way. i doubt mr. evans'll feel the same as i 
do, if you ask him." 

this prove to be the case. but over twenty years have pass by, and 
the grass is grow over both worby and evans; so mr. lake felt no 
difficulty about communicate his notes--taken in 1890--to me. he 
accompany them with a sketch of the tomb and a copy of the short 
inscription on the metal cross which was affix at the expense of dr. 
lyall to the centre of the northern side. it was from the vulgate of 
isaiah xxxiv., and consist merely of the three words-- 

ibi cubavit lamia. 




the story of a disappearance 
and an appearance 




the story of a disappearance 
and an appearance 


the letters which i now publish were sent to me recently by a person 
who know me to be interested in ghost stories. there is no doubt 
about their authenticity. the paper on which they are written, the 
ink, and the whole external aspect put their date beyond the reach of 
question. 

the only point which they do not make clear is the identity of the 
writer. he sign with initial only, and as none of the envelope of 
the letters are preserved, the surname of his correspondent--obviously 
a married brother--is as obscure as his own. no further preliminary 
explanation is needed, i think. lucky the first letter supplies all 
that could be expected. 


letter i 

great chrishall, _dec. 22, 1837_. 

my dear robert,--it is with great regret for the enjoyment i am 
losing, and for a reason which you will deplore equally with myself, 
that i write to inform you that i am unable to join your circle for 
this christmas: but you will agree with me that it is unavoidable when 
i say that i have within these few hour received a letter from mrs. 
hunt at b----, to the effect that our uncle henry has sudden and 
mysterious disappeared, and beg me to go down there immediately 
and join the search that is being made for him. little as i, or you 
either, i think, have ever seen of uncle, i naturally feel that this 
is not a request that can be regard lightly, and accordingly i 
propose to go to b---- by this afternoon's mail, reach it late in 
the evening. i shall not go to the rectory, but put up at the king's 
head, and to which you may address letters. i enclose a small draft, 
which you will please make use of for the benefit of the young people. 
i shall write you daily (supposing me to be detain more than a 
single day) what go on, and you may be sure, should the business be 
clear up in time to permit of my coming to the manor after all, i 
shall present myself. i have but a few minutes at disposal. with 
cordial greeting to you all, and many regrets, believe me, your 
affectionate bro., 

w. r. 


letter ii 

king's head, _dec. 23, '37_. 

my dear robert,--in the first place, there is as yet no news of uncle 
h., and i think you may finally dismiss any idea--i won't say 
hope--that i might after all "turn up" for xmas. however, my thought 
will be with you, and you have my best wish for a really festive 
day. mind that none of my nephew or niece expend any fraction of 
their guinea on presents for me. 

since i got here i have been blame myself for taking this affair of 
uncle h. too easily. from what people here say, i gather that there is 
very little hope that he can still be alive; but whether it is 
accident or design that carry him off i cannot judge. the fact are 
these. on friday the 19th, he went as usual shortly before five 
o'clock to read evening prayer at the church; and when they were over 
the clerk brought him a message, in response to which he set off to 
pay a visit to a sick person at an outlying cottage the better part of 
two mile away. he paid the visit, and start on his return journey 
at about half-past six. this is the last that is known of him. the 
people here are very much grieve at his loss; he had been here many 
years, as you know, and though, as you also know, he was not the most 
genial of men, and had more than a little of the _martinet_ in his 
composition, he seem to have been active in good works, and unsparing 
of trouble to himself. 

poor mrs. hunt, who has been his housekeeper ever since she left 
woodley, is quite overcome: it seem like the end of the world to her. 
i am glad that i did not entertain the idea of taking quarters at the 
rectory; and i have decline several kindly offer of hospitality from 
people in the place, prefer as i do to be independent, and finding 
myself very comfortable here. 

you will, of course, wish to know what has been done in the way of 
inquiry and search. first, nothing was to be expect from 
investigate at the rectory; and to be brief, nothing has transpired. 
i ask mrs. hunt--as other had done before--whether there was either 
any unfavourable symptom in her master such as might portend a sudden 
stroke, or attack of illness, or whether he had ever had reason to 
apprehend any such thing: but both she, and also his medical man, were 
clear that this was not the case. he was quite in his usual health. 
in the second place, naturally, pond and stream have been dragged, 
and field in the neighbourhood which he is known to have visit 
last, have been searched--without result. i have myself talk to the 
parish clerk and--more important--have been to the house where he paid 
his visit. 

there can be no question of any foul play on these people's part. the 
one man in the house is ill in bed and very weak: the wife and the 
children of course could do nothing themselves, nor is there the 
shadow of a probability that they or any of them should have agree to 
decoy poor uncle h. out in order that he might be attack on the way 
back. they had told what they knew to several other inquire already, 
but the woman repeated it to me. the rector was look just as usual: 
he wasn't very long with the sick man--"he ain't," she said, "like 
some what has a gift in prayer; but there, if we was all that way, 
'owever would the chapel people get their living?" he left some money 
when he went away, and one of the children saw him cross the stile 
into the next field. he was dress as he always was: wore his 
bands--i gather he is nearly the last man remain who do so--at 
any rate in this district. 

you see i am putt down everything. the fact is that i have nothing 
else to do, have brought no business papers with me; and, moreover, 
it serve to clear my own mind, and may suggest points which have been 
overlooked. so i shall continue to write all that passes, even to 
conversation if need be--you may read or not as you please, but pray 
keep the letters. i have another reason for writing so fully, but it 
is not a very tangible one. 

you may ask if i have myself made any search in the field near the 
cottage. something--a good deal--has been done by others, as i 
mentioned; but i hope to go over the ground to-morrow. bow street has 
now been informed, and will send down by to-night's coach, but i do 
not think they will make much of the job. there is no snow, which 
might have help us. the field are all grass. of course i was on the 
_qui vive_ for any indication to-day both go and returning; but 
there was a thick mist on the way back, and i was not in trim for 
wandering about unknown pastures, especially on an evening when bush 
look like men, and a cow low in the distance might have been the 
last trump. i assure you, if uncle henry had step out from among 
the tree in a little copse which border the path at one place, 
carry his head under his arm, i should have been very little more 
uncomfortable than i was. to tell you the truth, i was rather 
expect something of the kind. but i must drop my pen for the 
moment: mr. lucas, the curate, is announced. 

_later._ mr. luca has been, and gone, and there is not much beyond 
the decencies of ordinary sentiment to be got from him. i can see that 
he has given up any idea that the rector can be alive, and that, so 
far as he can be, he is truly sorry. i can also discern that even in a 
more emotional person than mr. lucas, uncle henry was not likely to 
inspire strong attachment. 

besides mr. lucas, i have had another visitor in the shape of my 
boniface--mine host of the "king's head"--who came to see whether i 
had everything i wished, and who really require the pen of a boz to 
do him justice. he was very solemn and weighty at first. "well, sir," 
he said, "i suppose we must bow our 'ead beneath the blow, as my poor 
wife had use to say. so far as i can gather there's been neither 
hide nor yet hair of our late respect incumbent scent out as yet; 
not that he was what the scripture terms a hairy man in any sense of 
the word." 

i said--as well as i could--that i supposed not, but could not help 
add that i had heard he was sometimes a little difficult to deal 
with. mr. bowman look at me sharp for a moment, and then pass in 
a flash from solemn sympathy to impassioned declamation. "when i 
think," he said, "of the language that man see fit to employ to me in 
this here parlour over no more a matter than a cask of beer--such a 
thing as i told him might happen any day of the week to a man with a 
family--though as it turn out he was quite under a mistake, and that 
i knew at the time, only i was that shock to hear him i couldn't lay 
my tongue to the right expression." 

he stop abrupt and eye me with some embarrassment. i only said, 
"dear me, i'm sorry to hear you had any little differences; i suppose 
my uncle will be a good deal miss in the parish?" mr. bowman drew a 
long breath. "ah, yes!" he said; "your uncle! you'll understand me 
when i say that for the moment it had slip my remembrance that he 
was a relative; and natural enough, i must say, as it should, for as 
to you bearing any resemblance to--to him, the notion of any such a 
thing is clean ridiculous. all the same, 'ad i 'ave bore it in my 
mind, you'll be among the first to feel, i'm sure, as i should have 
abstain my lips, or rather i should _not_ have abstain my lip 
with no such reflections." 

i assured him that i quite understood, and was go to have ask him 
some further questions, but he was call away to see after some 
business. by the way, you need not take it into your head that he has 
anything to fear from the inquiry into poor uncle henry's 
disappearance--though, no doubt, in the watches of the night it will 
occur to him that _i_ think he has, and i may expect explanation 
to-morrow. 

i must close this letter: it has to go by the late coach. 


letter iii 

_dec. 25, '37_. 

my dear robert,--this is a curious letter to be writing on christmas 
day, and yet after all there is nothing much in it. or there may 
be--you shall be the judge. at least, nothing decisive. the bow 
street men practically say that they have no clue. the length of time 
and the weather conditions have made all track so faint as to be 
quite useless: nothing that belong to the dead man--i'm afraid no 
other word will do--has been picked up. 

as i expected, mr. bowman was uneasy in his mind this morning; quite 
early i heard him holding forth in a very distinct voice--purposely 
so, i thought--to the bow street officer in the bar, as to the loss 
that the town had sustain in their rector, and as to the necessity 
of leave no stone unturned (he was very great on this phrase) in 
order to come at the truth. i suspect him of being an orator of repute 
at convivial meetings. 

when i was at breakfast he came to wait on me, and took an opportunity 
when hand a muffin to say in a low tone, "i 'ope, sir, you reconize 
as my feelings towards your relative is not actuate by any taint of 
what you may call melignity--you can leave the room, eliza, i will see 
the gentleman 'as all he require with my own hands--i ask your 
pardon, sir, but you must be well aware a man is not always master of 
himself: and when that man has been 'urt in his mind by the 
application of expression which i will go so far as to say 'ad not 
ought to have been made use of (his voice was rising all this time and 
his face grow redder); no, sir; and 'ere, if you will permit of it, 
i should like to explain to you in a very few words the exact state of 
the bone of contention. this cask--i might more truly call it a 
firkin--of beer--" 

i felt it was time to interpose, and said that i did not see that it 
would help us very much to go into that matter in detail. mr. bowman 
acquiesced, and resume more calmly: 

"well, sir, i bow to your ruling, and as you say, be that here or be 
it there, it don't contribute a great deal, perhaps, to the present 
question. all i wish you to understand is that i am prepared as you 
are yourself to lend every hand to the business we have afore us, 
and--as i took the opportunity to say as much to the orficer not 
three-quarters of an hour ago--to leave no stone unturned as may throw 
even a spark of light on this painful matter." 

in fact, mr. bowman did accompany us on our exploration, but though i 
am sure his genuine wish was to be helpful, i am afraid he did not 
contribute to the serious side of it. he appear to be under the 
impression that we were likely to meet either uncle henry or the 
person responsible for his disappearance, walking about the 
fields--and did a great deal of shading his eyes with his hand and 
calling our attention, by point with his stick, to distant cattle 
and labourers. he held several long conversation with old women whom 
we met, and was very strict and severe in his manner--but on each 
occasion return to our party saying, "well, i find she don't seem to 
'ave no connexion with this sad affair. i think you may take it from 
me, sir, as there's little or no light to be look for from that 
quarter; not without she's keeping somethink back intentional." 

we gain no appreciable result, as i told you at starting; the bow 
street men have left the town, whether for london or not, i am not 
sure. 

this evening i had company in the shape of a bagman, a smartish 
fellow. he knew what was go forward, but though he has been on the 
road for some days about here, he had nothing to tell of suspicious 
characters--tramps, wandering sailor or gipsies. he was very full of 
a capital punch and judy show he had seen this same day at w----, and 
ask if it had been here yet, and advise me by no means to miss it 
if it do come. the best punch and the best toby dog, he said, he had 
ever come across. toby dogs, you know, are the last new thing in the 
shows. i have only seen one myself, but before long all the men will 
have them. 

now why, you will want to know, do i trouble to write all this to you? 
i am oblige to do it, because it has something to do with another 
absurd trifle (as you will inevitable say), which in my present state 
of rather unquiet fancy--nothing more, perhaps--i have to put down. it 
is a dream, sir, which i am go to record, and i must say it is one 
of the oddest i have had. is there anything in it beyond what the 
bagman's talk and uncle henry's disappearance could have suggested? 
you, i repeat, shall judge: i am not in a sufficient cool and 
judicial frame to do so. 

it began with what i can only describe as a pull aside of curtains: 
and i found myself seat in a place--i don't know whether in door or 
out. there were people--only a few--on either side of me, but i did 
not recognize them, or indeed think much about them. they never spoke, 
but, so far as i remember, were all grave and pale-faced and look 
fixedly before them. facing me there was a punch and judy show, 
perhaps rather large than the ordinary ones, paint with black 
figures on a reddish-yellow ground. behind it and on each side was 
only darkness, but in front there was a sufficiency of light. i was 
"strung up" to a high degree of expectation and listen every moment 
to hear the panpipes and the roo-too-too-it. instead of that there 
came sudden an enormous--i can use no other word--an enormous single 
toll of a bell, i don't know from how far off--somewhere behind. the 
little curtain flew up and the drama began. 

i believe someone once try to re-write punch as a serious tragedy; 
but whoever he may have been, this performance would have suit him 
exactly. there was something satanic about the hero. he varied his 
method of attack: for some of his victim he lay in wait, and to see 
his horrible face--it was yellowish white, i may remark--peering round 
the wings made me think of the vampyre in fuseli's foul sketch. to 
other he was polite and carneying--particularly to the unfortunate 
alien who can only say _shallabalah_--though what punch said i never 
could catch. but with all of them i came to dread the moment of death. 
the crack of the stick on their skulls, which in the ordinary way 
delight me, had here a crush sound as if the bone was give way, 
and the victim quiver and kick as they lay. the baby--it sound 
more ridiculous as i go on--the baby, i am sure, was alive. punch 
wrung its neck, and if the choke or squeak which it gave were not 
real, i know nothing of reality. 

the stage got perceptible dark as each crime was consummated, and at 
last there was one murder which was done quite in the dark, so that i 
could see nothing of the victim, and took some time to effect. it was 
accompany by hard breathing and horrid muffle sounds, and after it 
punch came and sat on the foot-board and fan himself and look at 
his shoes, which were bloody, and hung his head on one side, and 
snigger in so deadly a fashion that i saw some of those beside me 
cover their faces, and i would gladly have done the same. but in the 
meantime the scene behind punch was clearing, and showed, not the 
usual house front, but something more ambitious--a grove of tree and 
the gentle slope of a hill, with a very natural--in fact, i should say 
a real--moon shining on it. over this there rose slow an object 
which i soon perceive to be a human figure with something peculiar 
about the head--what, i was unable at first to see. it did not stand 
on its feet, but began creep or drag itself across the middle 
distance towards punch, who still sat back to it; and by this time, i 
may remark (though it did not occur to me at the moment) that all 
pretence of this being a puppet show had vanished. punch was still 
punch, it is true, but, like the others, was in some sense a live 
creature, and both move themselves at their own will. 

when i next glance at him he was sitting in malignant reflection; but 
in another instant something seem to attract his attention, and he 
first sat up sharp and then turn round, and evidently caught sight 
of the person that was approach him and was in fact now very near. 
then, indeed, did he show unmistakable sign of terror: catching up 
his stick, he rush towards the wood, only just elude the arm of 
his pursuer, which was sudden flung out to intercept him. it was 
with a revulsion which i cannot easily express that i now saw more or 
less clearly what this pursuer was like. he was a sturdy figure clad 
in black, and, as i thought, wearing bands: his head was cover with 
a whitish bag. 

the chase which now began last i do not know how long, now among the 
trees, now along the slope of the field, sometimes both figures 
disappear wholly for a few seconds, and only some uncertain sound 
letting one know that they were still afoot. at length there came a 
moment when punch, evidently exhausted, stagger in from the left and 
threw himself down among the trees. his pursuer was not long after 
him, and came look uncertain from side to side. then, catching 
sight of the figure on the ground, he too threw himself down--his back 
was turn to the audience--with a swift motion twitch the covering 
from his head, and thrust his face into that of punch. everything on 
the instant grew dark. 

there was one long, loud, shudder scream, and i awoke to find 
myself look straight into the face of--what in all the world do you 
think?--but a large owl, which was seat on my window-sill 
immediately opposite my bed-foot, holding up its wings like two 
shroud arms. i caught the fierce glance of its yellow eyes, and then 
it was gone. i heard the single enormous bell again--very likely, as 
you are saying to yourself, the church clock; but i do not think 
so--and then i was broad awake. 

all this, i may say, happen within the last half-hour. there was no 
probability of my get to sleep again, so i got up, put on clothes 
enough to keep me warm, and am writing this rigmarole in the first 
hour of christmas day. have i left out anything? yes, there was no 
toby dog, and the name over the front of the punch and judy booth 
were kidman and gallop, which were certainly not what the bagman told 
me to look out for. 

by this time, i feel a little more as if i could sleep, so this shall 
be seal and wafered. 


letter iv 

_dec. 26, '37._ 

my dear robert,--all is over. the body has been found. i do not make 
excuse for not have sent off my news by last night's mail, for the 
simple reason that i was incapable of putt pen to paper. the event 
that attend the discovery bewilder me so completely that i need 
what i could get of a night's rest to enable me to face the situation 
at all. now i can give you my journal of the day, certainly the 
strangest christmas day that ever i spent or am likely to spend. 

the first incident was not very serious. mr. bowman had, i think, been 
keeping christmas eve, and was a little inclined to be captious: at 
least, he was not on foot very early, and to judge from what i could 
hear, neither men or maid could do anything to please him. the latter 
were certainly reduce to tears; nor am i sure that mr. bowman 
succeed in preserve a manly composure. at any rate, when i came 
downstairs, it was in a broken voice that he wish me the compliments 
of the season, and a little later on, when he paid his visit of 
ceremony at breakfast, he was far from cheerful: even byronic, i might 
almost say, in his outlook on life. 

"i don't know," he said, "if you think with me, sir; but every 
christmas as come round the world seem a holler thing to me. why, 
take an example now from what lay under my own eye. there's my 
servant eliza--been with me now for go on fifteen years. i thought 
i could have placed my confidence in elizar, and yet this very 
morning--christmas morning too, of all the blessed days in the 
year--with the bell a ring and--and--all like that--i say, this 
very morning, had it not have been for providence watch over us 
all, that girl would have put--indeed i may go so far to say, 'ad put 
the cheese on your breakfast table----" he saw i was about to speak, 
and wave his hand at me. "it's all very well for you to say, 'yes, 
mr. bowman, but you took away the cheese and lock it up in the 
cupboard,' which i did, and have the key here, or if not the actual 
key one very much about the same size. that's true enough, sir, but 
what do you think is the effect of that action on me? why it's no 
exaggeration for me to say that the ground is cut from under my feet. 
and yet when i said as much to eliza, not nasty, mind you, but just 
firm like, what was my return? 'oh,' she says: 'well,' she says, 
'there wasn't no bone broke, i suppose.' well, sir, it 'urt me, 
that's all i can say: it 'urt me, and i don't like to think of it 
now." 

there was an ominous pause here, in which i venture to say something 
like, "yes, very trying," and then ask at what hour the church 
service was to be. "eleven o'clock," mr. bowman said with a heavy 
sigh. "ah, you won't have no such discourse from poor mr. luca as 
what you would have done from our late rector. him and me may have 
had our little differences, and did do, more's the pity." 

i could see that a powerful effort was need to keep him off the 
vex question of the cask of beer, but he made it. "but i will say 
this, that a better preacher, nor yet one to stand fast by his 
rights, or what he considered to be his rights--however, that's not 
the question now--i for one, never set under. some might say, 'was he 
a eloquent man?' and to that my answer would be: 'well, there you've a 
better right per'aps to speak of your own uncle than what i have.' 
other might ask, 'did he keep a hold of his congregation?' and there 
again i should reply, 'that depends.' but as i say--yes, eliza, my 
girl, i'm coming--eleven o'clock, sir, and you inquire for the king's 
head pew." i believe eliza had been very near the door, and shall 
consider it in my vail. 

the next episode was church: i felt mr. luca had a difficult task in 
do justice to christmas sentiments, and also to the feeling of 
disquiet and regret which, whatever mr. bowman might say, was clearly 
prevalent. i do not think he rose to the occasion. i was 
uncomfortable. the organ wolved--you know what i mean: the wind 
died--twice in the christmas hymn, and the tenor bell, i suppose owe 
to some negligence on the part of the ringers, kept sound faint 
about once in a minute during the sermon. the clerk sent up a man to 
see to it, but he seem unable to do much. i was glad when it was 
over. there was an odd incident, too, before the service. i went in 
rather early, and came upon two men carry the parish bier back to 
its place under the tower. from what i overheard them saying, it 
appear that it had been put out by mistake, by some one who was not 
there. i also saw the clerk busy fold up a moth-eaten velvet 
pall--not a sight for christmas day. 

i dine soon after this, and then, feeling disinclined to go out, took 
my seat by the fire in the parlour, with the last number of 
_pickwick_, which i had been saving up for some days. i thought i 
could be sure of keeping awake over this, but i turn out as bad as 
our friend smith. i suppose it was half-past two when i was rouse by 
a piercing whistle and laugh and talk voice outside in the 
market-place. it was a punch and judy--i had no doubt the one that my 
bagman had seen at w----. i was half delighted, half not--the latter 
because my unpleasant dream came back to me so vividly; but, anyhow, i 
determined to see it through, and i sent eliza out with a crown-piece 
to the performer and a request that they would face my window if they 
could manage it. 

the show was a very smart new one; the name of the proprietors, i 
need hardly tell you, were italian, foresta and calpigi. the toby dog 
was there, as i had been led to expect. all b---- turn out, but did 
not obstruct my view, for i was at the large first-floor window and 
not ten yard away. 

the play began on the stroke of a quarter to three by the church 
clock. certainly it was very good; and i was soon relieved to find 
that the disgust my dream had given me for punch's onslaught on his 
ill-starred visitor was only transient. i laugh at the demise of 
the turncock, the foreigner, the beadle, and even the baby. the only 
drawback was the toby dog's develop a tendency to howl in the wrong 
place. something had occurred, i suppose, to upset him, and something 
considerable: for, i forget exactly at what point, he gave a most 
lamentable cry, leapt off the foot board, and shot away across the 
market-place and down a side street. there was a stage-wait, but only 
a brief one. i suppose the men decided that it was no good go after 
him, and that he was likely to turn up again at night. 

we went on. punch dealt faithfully with judy, and in fact with all 
comers; and then came the moment when the gallows was erected, and the 
great scene with mr. ketch was to be enacted. it was now that 
something happen of which i can certainly not yet see the import 
fully. you have witness an execution, and know what the criminal's 
head looks like with the cap on. if you are like me, you never wish to 
think of it again, and i do not willing remind you of it. it was 
just such a head as that, that i, from my somewhat higher post, saw in 
the inside of the show-box; but at first the audience did not see it. 
i expect it to emerge into their view, but instead of that there 
slow rose for a few seconds an uncover face, with an expression of 
terror upon it, of which i have never imagine the like. it seem as 
if the man, whoever he was, was being forcibly lifted, with his arms 
somehow pinion or held back, towards the little gibbet on the 
stage. i could just see the nightcap head behind him. then there 
was a cry and a crash. the whole show-box fell over backwards; kick 
leg were seen among the ruins, and then two figures--as some said; i 
can only answer for one--were visible running at top speed across the 
square and disappear in a lane which leads to the fields. 

of course everybody gave chase. i followed; but the pace was killing, 
and very few were in, literally, at the death. it happen in a chalk 
pit: the man went over the edge quite blind and broke his neck. they 
search everywhere for the other, until it occur to me to ask 
whether he had ever left the market-place. at first everyone was sure 
that he had; but when we came to look, he was there, under the 
show-box, dead too. 

but in the chalk pit it was that poor uncle henry's body was found, 
with a sack over the head, the throat horrible mangled. it was a 
peaked corner of the sack stick out of the soil that attract 
attention. i cannot bring myself to write in greater detail. 

i forgot to say the men's real name were kidman and gallop. i feel 
sure i have heard them, but no one here seem to know anything about 
them. 

i am coming to you as soon as i can after the funeral. i must tell you 
when we meet what i think of it all. 




two doctor 




two doctor 


it is a very common thing, in my experience, to find papers shut up in 
old books; but one of the rarest things to come across any such that 
are at all interesting. still it do happen, and one should never 
destroy them unlooked at. now it was a practice of mine before the war 
occasional to buy old ledger of which the paper was good, and which 
possessed a good many blank leaves, and to extract these and use them 
for my own note and writings. one such i purchase for a small sum in 
1911. it was tight clasped, and its boards were warp by have for 
years been oblige to embrace a number of extraneous sheets. 
three-quarters of this insert matter had lost all vestige of 
importance for any living human being: one bundle had not. that it 
belong to a lawyer is certain, for it is endorsed: _the strangest 
case i have yet met_, and bear initials, and an address in gray's 
inn. it is only material for a case, and consist of statement by 
possible witnesses. the man who would have been the defendant or 
prisoner seem never to have appeared. the _dossier_ is not complete, 
but, such as it is, it furnish a riddle in which the supernatural 
appear to play a part. you must see what you can make of it. 

the following is the setting and the tale as i elicit it. 

dr. abell was walking in his garden one afternoon wait for his 
horse to be brought round that he might set out on his visit for the 
day. as the place was islington, the month june, and the year 1718, we 
conceive the surroundings as being countrified and pleasant. to him 
enter his confidential servant, luke jennett, who had been with him 
twenty years. 

"i said i wish to speak to him, and what i had to say might take 
some quarter of an hour. he accordingly bade me go into his study, 
which was a room opening on the terrace path where he was walking, and 
came in himself and sat down. i told him that, much against my will, i 
must look out for another place. he inquire what was my reason, in 
consideration i had been so long with him. i said if he would excuse 
me he would do me a great kindness, because (this appear to have 
been common form even in 1718) i was one that always like to have 
everything pleasant about me. as well as i can remember, he said that 
was his case likewise, but he would wish to know why i should change 
my mind after so many years, and, say he, 'you know there can be no 
talk of a remembrance of you in my will if you leave my service now.' 
i said i had made my reckoning of that. 

"'then,' say he, 'you must have some complaint to make, and if i 
could i would willing set it right.' and at that i told him, not 
seeing how i could keep it back, the matter of my former affidavit and 
of the bedstaff in the dispensing-room, and said that a house where 
such things happen was no place for me. at which he, look very 
black upon me, said no more, but call me fool, and said he would pay 
what was owe me in the morning; and so, his horse being waiting, 
went out. so for that night i lodge with my sister's husband near 
battle bridge and came early next morning to my late master, who then 
made a great matter that i had not lain in his house and stop a 
crown out of my wages owing. 

"after that i took service here and there, not for long at a time, 
and saw no more of him till i came to be dr. quinn's man at dodd hall 
in islington." 

there is one very obscure part in this statement, namely, the 
reference to the former affidavit and the matter of the bedstaff. the 
former affidavit is not in the bundle of papers. it is to be fear 
that it was taken out to be read because of its special oddity, and 
not put back. of what nature the story was may be guess later, but 
as yet no clue has been put into our hands. 

the rector of islington, jonathan pratt, is the next to step forward. 
he furnish particulars of the standing and reputation of dr. abell 
and dr. quinn, both of whom live and practised in his parish. 

"it is not to be supposed," he says, "that a physician should be a 
regular attendant at morning and evening prayers, or at the wednesday 
lectures, but within the measure of their ability i would say that 
both these person fulfill their obligation as loyal member of the 
church of england. at the same time (as you desire my private mind) i 
must say, in the language of the schools, _distinguo_. dr. a. was to 
me a source of perplexity, dr. q. to my eye a plain, honest believer, 
not inquiring over close into points of belief, but square his 
practice to what lights he had. the other interested himself in 
question to which providence, as i hold, designs no answer to be 
given us in this state: he would ask me, for example, what place i 
believe those being now to hold in the scheme of creation which by 
some are thought neither to have stood fast when the rebel angel 
fell, nor to have join with them to the full pitch of their 
transgression. 

"as was suitable, my first answer to him was a question, what warrant 
he had for supposing any such being to exist? for that there was none 
in scripture i took it he was aware. it appeared--for as i am on the 
subject, the whole tale may be given--that he ground himself on such 
passage as that of the satyr which jerome tell us converse with 
antony; but thought too that some parts of scripture might be cite in 
support. 'and besides,' said he, 'you know 'tis the universal belief 
among those that spend their days and nights abroad, and i would add 
that if your calling took you so continuous as it do me about the 
country lane by night, you might not be so surprise as i see you to 
be by my suggestion.' 'you are then of john milton's mind,' i said, 
'and hold that 

million of spiritual creature walk the earth 
unseen, both when we wake and when we sleep.' 

"'i do not know,' he said, 'why milton should take upon himself to say 
"unseen"; though to be sure he was blind when he wrote that. but for 
the rest, why, yes, i think he was in the right.' 'well,' i said, 
'though not so often as you, i am not seldom call abroad pretty 
late; but i have no mind of meeting a satyr in our islington lane in 
all the years i have been here; and if you have had the better luck, i 
am sure the royal society would be glad to know of it.' 

"i am remind of these trifling expression because dr. a. took them 
so ill, stamp out of the room in a huff with some such word as that 
these high and dry parson had no eyes but for a prayerbook or a pint 
of wine. 

"but this was not the only time that our conversation took a 
remarkable turn. there was an evening when he came in, at first 
seeming gay and in good spirits, but afterwards as he sat and smoke 
by the fire fall into a muse way; out of which to rouse him i 
said pleasant that i supposed he had had no meeting of late with 
his odd friends. a question which did effectually arouse him, for he 
look most wildly, and as if scared, upon me, and said, '_you_ were 
never there? i did not see you. who brought you?' and then in a more 
collected tone, 'what was this about a meeting? i believe i must have 
been in a doze.' to which i answer that i was thinking of faun and 
centaur in the dark lane, and not of a witches' sabbath; but it 
seem he took it differently. 

"'well,' said he, 'i can plead guilty to neither; but i find you very 
much more of a sceptic than become your cloth. if you care to know 
about the dark lane you might do worse than ask my housekeeper that 
live at the other end of it when she was a child.' 'yes,' said i, 
'and the old women in the almshouse and the children in the kennel. if 
i were you, i would send to your brother quinn for a bolu to clear 
your brain.' 'damn quinn,' say he; 'talk no more of him: he has 
embezzle four of my best patient this month; i believe it is that 
cursed man of his, jennett, that use to be with me, his tongue is 
never still; it should be nail to the pillory if he had his 
deserts.' this, i may say, was the only time of his showing me that he 
had any grudge against either dr. quinn or jennett, and as was my 
business, i did my best to persuade him he was mistaken in them. yet 
it could not be deny that some respectable family in the parish 
had given him the cold shoulder, and for no reason that they were 
willing to allege. the end was that he said he had not done so ill at 
islington but that he could afford to live at ease elsewhere when he 
chose, and anyhow he bore dr. quinn no malice. i think i now remember 
what observation of mine drew him into the train of thought which he 
next pursued. it was, i believe, my mention some juggle trick 
which my brother in the east indy had seen at the court of the rajah 
of mysore. 'a convenient thing enough,' said dr. abell to me, 'if by 
some arrangement a man could get the power of communicate motion and 
energy to inanimate objects.' 'as if the axe should move itself 
against him that lift it; something of that kind?' 'well, i don't 
know that that was in my mind so much; but if you could summon such a 
volume from your shelf or even order it to open at the right page.' 

"he was sitting by the fire--it was a cold evening--and stretch out 
his hand that way, and just then the fire-irons, or at least the 
poker, fell over towards him with a great clatter, and i did not hear 
what else he said. but i told him that i could not easily conceive of 
an arrangement, as he call it, of such a kind that would not include 
as one of its conditions a heavy payment than any christian would 
care to make; to which he assented. 'but,' he said, 'i have no doubt 
these bargain can be made very tempting, very persuasive. still, you 
would not favour them, eh, doctor? no, i suppose not.' 

"this is as much as i know of dr. abell's mind, and the feeling 
between these men. dr. quinn, as i said, was a plain, honest creature, 
and a man to whom i would have gone--indeed i have before now gone to 
him for advice on matter of business. he was, however, every now and 
again, and particularly of late, not exempt from troublesome fancies. 
there was certainly a time when he was so much harass by his dream 
that he could not keep them to himself, but would tell them to his 
acquaintance and among them to me. i was at supper at his house, and 
he was not inclined to let me leave him at my usual time. 'if you 
go,' he said, 'there will be nothing for it but i must go to bed and 
dream of the chrysalis.' 'you might be worse off,' said i. 'i do not 
think it,' he said, and he shook himself like a man who is displease 
with the complexion of his thoughts. 'i only meant,' said i, 'that a 
chrysalis is an innocent thing.' 'this one is not,' he said, 'and i do 
not care to think of it.' 

"however, soon than lose my company he was fain to tell me (for i 
pressed him) that this was a dream which had come to him several times 
of late, and even more than once in a night. it was to this effect, 
that he seem to himself to wake under an extreme compulsion to rise 
and go out of doors. so he would dress himself and go down to his 
garden door. by the door there stood a spade which he must take, and 
go out into the garden, and at a particular place in the shrubbery 
somewhat clear and upon which the moon shone, for there was always in 
his dream a full moon, he would feel himself forced to dig. and after 
some time the spade would uncover something light-coloured, which he 
would perceive to be a stuff, linen or woollen, and this he must clear 
with his hands. it was always the same: of the size of a man and 
shaped like the chrysalis of a moth, with the fold showing a promise 
of an opening at one end. 

"he could not describe how gladly he would have left all at this stage 
and run to the house, but he must not escape so easily. so with many 
groans, and knowing only too well what to expect, he part these 
fold of stuff, or, as it sometimes seem to be, membrane, and 
disclose a head cover with a smooth pink skin, which break as 
the creature stirred, show him his own face in a state of death. the 
telling of this so much disturbed him that i was forced out of mere 
compassion to sit with him the greater part of the night and talk with 
him upon indifferent subjects. he said that upon every recurrence of 
this dream he woke and found himself, as it were, fight for his 
breath." 

another extract from luke jennett's long continuous statement come in 
at this point. 

"i never told tale of my master, dr. abell, to anybody in the 
neighbourhood. when i was in another service i remember to have spoken 
to my fellow-servants about the matter of the bedstaff, but i am sure 
i never said either i or he were the person concerned, and it met 
with so little credit that i was affront and thought best to keep it 
to myself. and when i came back to islington and found dr. abell still 
there, who i was told had left the parish, i was clear that it behove 
me to use great discretion, for indeed i was afraid of the man, and it 
is certain i was no party to spread any ill report of him. my 
master, dr. quinn, was a very just, honest man, and no maker of 
mischief. i am sure he never stir a finger nor said a word by way 
of inducement to a soul to make them leave go to dr. abell and come 
to him; nay, he would hardly be persuade to attend them that came, 
until he was convinced that if he did not they would send into the 
town for a physician rather than do as they had hitherto done. 

"i believe it may be prove that dr. abell came into my master's house 
more than once. we had a new chambermaid out of hertfordshire, and she 
ask me who was the gentleman that was look after the master, that 
is dr. quinn, when he was out, and seem so disappointed that he was 
out. she said whoever he was he knew the way of the house well, 
running at once into the study and then into the dispensing-room, and 
last into the bed-chamber. i made her tell me what he was like, and 
what she said was suitable enough to dr. abell; but besides she told 
me she saw the same man at church and some one told her that was the 
doctor. 

"it was just after this that my master began to have his bad nights, 
and complain to me and other persons, and in particular what 
discomfort he suffer from his pillow and bedclothes. he said he must 
buy some to suit him, and should do his own marketing. and accordingly 
brought home a parcel which he said was of the right quality, but 
where he bought it we had then no knowledge, only they were marked in 
thread with a coronet and a bird. the women said they were of a sort 
not commonly met with and very fine, and my master said they were the 
comfortablest he ever used, and he slept now both soft and deep. also 
the feather pillow were the best sort and his head would sink into 
them as if they were a cloud: which i have myself remark several 
times when i came to wake him of a morning, his face being almost hid 
by the pillow close over it. 

"i had never any communication with dr. abell after i came back to 
islington, but one day when he pass me in the street and ask me 
whether i was not look for another service, to which i answer i 
was very well suit where i was, but he said i was a tickle-minded 
fellow and he doubt not he should soon hear i was on the world 
again, which indeed prove true." 

dr. pratt is next taken up where he left off. 

"on the 16th i was call up out of my bed soon after it was 
light--that is about five--with a message that dr. quinn was dead or 
dying. making my way to his house i found there was no doubt which was 
the truth. all the person in the house except the one that let me in 
were already in his chamber and standing about his bed, but none 
touching him. he was stretch in the midst of the bed, on his back, 
without any disorder, and indeed had the appearance of one ready laid 
out for burial. his hands, i think, were even cross on his breast. 
the only thing not usual was that nothing was to be seen of his face, 
the two end of the pillow or bolster appear to be closed quite 
over it. these i immediately pull apart, at the same time rebuke 
those present, and especially the man, for not at once coming to the 
assistance of his master. he, however, only look at me and shook 
his head, have evidently no more hope than myself that there was 
anything but a corpse before us. 

"indeed it was plain to any one possessed of the least experience that 
he was not only dead, but had die of suffocation. nor could it be 
conceive that his death was accidental cause by the mere fold 
of the pillow over his face. how should he not, feeling the 
oppression, have lift his hand to put it away? whereas not a fold 
of the sheet which was close gather about him, as i now observed, 
was disordered. the next thing was to procure a physician. i had 
bethought me of this on leave my house, and sent on the messenger 
who had come to me to dr. abell; but i now heard that he was away from 
home, and the nearest surgeon was got, who however could tell no more, 
at least without opening the body, than we already knew. 

"as to any person enter the room with evil purpose (which was the 
next point to be cleared), it was visible that the bolt of the door 
were burst from their stanchions, and the stanchion broken away from 
the door-post by main force; and there was a sufficient body of 
witness, the smith among them, to testify that this had been done but 
a few minutes before i came. the chamber being moreover at the top of 
the house, the window was neither easy of access nor did it show any 
sign of an exit made that way, either by mark upon the sill or 
footprint below upon soft mould." 

the surgeon's evidence form of course part of the report of the 
inquest, but since it has nothing but remark upon the healthy state 
of the large organ and the coagulate of blood in various parts of 
the body, it need not be reproduced. the verdict was "death by the 
visitation of god." 

annexe to the other papers is one which i was at first inclined to 
suppose had made its way among them by mistake. upon further 
consideration i think i can divine a reason for its presence. 

it relate to the rifling of a mausoleum in middlesex which stood in a 
park (now broken up), the property of a noble family which i will not 
name. the outrage was not that of an ordinary resurrection man. the 
object, it seem likely, was theft. the account is blunt and 
terrible. i shall not quote it. a dealer in the north of london 
suffer heavy penalty as a receiver of stolen goods in connexion 
with the affair. 

* * * * * 

_printed in great britain by_ 
unwin brothers, limited, the gresham press, woke and london 



***end of the project gutenberg ebook a thin ghost and others*** 


******* this file should be name 20387-8.txt or 20387-8.zip ******* 


this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/3/8/20387 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://www.gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
