the project gutenberg ebook, widdershins, by olive onion 


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 





title: widdershin 

author: olive onion 

release date: november 26, 2004 [ebook #14168] 
[most recently updated: october 24, 2006] 

language: english 


***start of the project gutenberg ebook widdershins*** 


e-text prepared by suzanne shell, mary meehan, and the project gutenberg 
online distribute proofread team 



widdershin 

by 

olive onion 

1911 







"from ghaisttes, ghou and long-leggity 
beasty and things that go 
bump in the night-- 

"good lord, deliver us!" 




note 

i have pleasure in acknowledge the courtesy of the proprietor of 
"shurey's publications" by whose permission "the cigarette case" is 
included in the present volume. also it has been suggest that a 
definition should be given of the word that form the volume's title. 
that word means "contrary to the course of the sun." 

o.o. 




contents 


i. the beckon fair one 
ii. phanta 
iii. rooum 
iv. benlian 
v. io 
vi. the accident 
vii. the cigarette case 
viii. the rocker 
ix. hic jacet 




the beckon fair one 




i 

the three or four "to let" boards had stood within the low paling as 
long as the inhabitant of the little triangular "square" could remember, 
and if they had ever been vertical it was a very long time ago. they now 
overhung the palings each at its own angle, and resemble nothing so 
much as a row of wooden choppers, ever in the act of fall upon some 
passer-by, yet never cutting off a tenant for the old house from the 
stream of his fellows. not that there was ever any great "stream" through 
the square; the stream pass a furlong and more away, beyond the 
intricacy of tenement and alley and byways that had sprung up since the 
old house had been built, hem it in completely; and probably the 
house itself was only suffer to stand pending the falling-in of a lease 
or two, when doubtless a clearance would be made of the whole 
neighbourhood. 

it was of bloomy old red brick, and built into its wall were the crown 
and clasp hand and other insignia of insurance company long since 
defunct. the children of the secluded square had swung upon the low gate 
at the end of the entrance-alley until little more than the solid top bar 
of it remained, and the alley itself ran past board basement window on 
which tramp had chalk their cryptic marks. the path was wash and 
worn uneven by the spill of water from the eaves of the encroach 
next house, and cat and dogs had made the approach their own. the 
chance of a tenant did not seem such as to warrant the keeping of the 
"to let" boards in a state of legible and repair, and as a matter of 
fact they were not so kept. 

for six month oleron had pass the old place twice a day or oftener, on 
his way from his lodgings to the room, ten minutes' walk away, he had 
taken to work in; and for six month no hatchet-like notice-board had 
fallen across his path. this might have been due to the fact that he 
usually took the other side of the square. but he chance one morning to 
take the side that ran past the broken gate and the rain-worn entrance 
alley, and to pause before one of the inclined boards. the board bore, 
besides the agent's name, the announcement, written apparently about the 
time of oleron's own early youth, that the key was to be had at number 
six. 

now oleron was already paying, for his separate bedroom and workroom, 
more than an author who, without private means, habitual disregard his 
public, can afford; and he was pay in addition a small rent for the 
storage of the greater part of his grandmother's furniture. moreover, it 
invariable happen that the book he wish to read in bed was at his 
working-quarters half a mile and more away, while the note or letter he 
had sudden need of during the day was as likely as not to be in the 
pocket of another coat hanging behind his bedroom door. and there were 
other inconvenience in have a divide domicile. therefore oleron, 
brought sudden up by the hatchet-like notice-board, look first down 
through some scanty privet-bushes at the board basement windows, then 
up at the blank and grimy window of the first floor, and so up to the 
second floor and the flat stone coping of the leads. he stood for a 
minute thumb his lean and shaven jaw; then, with another glance at the 
board, he walk slow across the square to number six. 

he knocked, and wait for two or three minutes, but, although the door 
stood open, received no answer. he was knock again when a long-nosed 
man in shirt-sleeves appeared. 

"i was arsk a blessing on our food," he said in severe explanation. 

oleron ask if he might have the key of the old house; and the 
long-nosed man withdrew again. 

oleron wait for another five minutes on the step; then the man, 
appear again and masticate some of the food of which he had spoken, 
announce that the key was lost. 

"but you won't want it," he said. "the entrance door isn't closed, and a 
push'll open any of the others. i'm a agent for it, if you're thinking of 
taking it--" 

oleron recross the square, descended the two steps at the broken gate, 
pass along the alley, and turn in at the old wide doorway. to the 
right, immediately within the door, steps descended to the roomy cellars, 
and the staircase before him had a carve rail, and was broad and 
handsome and filthy. oleron ascend it, avoid contact with the rail 
and wall, and stop at the first landing. a door facing him had been 
board up, but he pushed at that on his right hand, and an insecure bolt 
or staple yielded. he enter the empty first floor. 

he spent a quarter of an hour in the place, and then came out again. 
without mount higher, he descended and recross the square to the 
house of the man who had lost the key. 

"can you tell me how much the rent is?" he asked. 

the man mention a figure, the comparative low of which seem 
account for by the character of the neighbourhood and the abominable 
state of unrepair of the place. 

"would it be possible to rent a single floor?" 

the long-nosed man did not know; they might.... 

"who are they?" 

the man gave oleron the name of a firm of lawyer in lincoln's inn. 

"you might mention my name--barrett," he added. 

pressure of work prevent oleron from go down to lincoln's inn that 
afternoon, but he went on the morrow, and was instantly offer the 
whole house as a purchase for fifty pound down, the remainder of the 
purchase-money to remain on mortgage. it took him half an hour to 
disabuse the lawyer's mind of the idea that he wish anything more of 
the place than to rent a single floor of it. this made certain hum and 
haw of a difference, and the lawyer was by no means certain that it lay 
within his power to do as oleron suggested; but it was finally extract 
from him that, provided the notice-boards were allow to remain up, and 
that, provided it was agree that in the event of the whole house 
letting, the arrangement should terminate automatic without further 
notice, something might be done. that the old place should sudden let 
over his head seem to oleron the slightest of risk to take, and he 
promise a decision within a week. on the morrow he visit the house 
again, went through it from top to bottom, and then went home to his 
lodgings to take a bath. 

he was immensely taken with that portion of the house he had already 
determined should be his own. scrape clean and repainted, and with 
that old furniture of oleron's grandmother's, it ought to be entire 
charming. he went to the storage warehouse to refresh his memory of his 
half-forgotten belongings, and to take measurements; and thence he went 
to a decorator's. he was very busy with his regular work, and could have 
wish that the notice-board had caught his attention either a few month 
early or else later in the year; but the quickest way would be to 
suspend work entire until after his removal.... 

a fortnight later his first floor was paint throughout in a tender, 
elder-flower white, the paint was dry, and oleron was in the middle of 
his installation. he was animated, delighted; and he rub his hand as 
he polish and made disposal of his grandmother's effects--the tall 
lattice-paned china cupboard with its derby and mason and spode, the 
large fold sheraton table, the long, low bookshelf (he had had two 
of them "copied"), the chairs, the sheffield candlesticks, the rivet 
rose-bowls. these things he set against his newly paint elder-white 
walls--walls of wood panel in the happiest proportions, and mould 
and coffer to the low-seated window-recesses in a mood of gaiety and 
rest that the builder of rooms no long know. the ceiling were lofty, 
and faint paint with an old pattern of stars; even the taper 
moulding of his iron fireplace were as delicate design as jewellery; 
and oleron walk about rubbing his hands, frequent stopping for the 
mere pleasure of the glimpse from white room to white room.... 

"charming, charming!" he said to himself. "i wonder what elsie bengough 
will think of this!" 

he bought a bolt and a yale lock for his door, and shut off his quarters 
from the rest of the house. if he now want to read in bed, his book 
could be had for step into the next room. all the time, he thought 
how exceedingly lucky he was to get the place. he put up a hat-rack in 
the little square hall, and hung up his hat and cap and coats; and 
pass through the small triangular square late at night, look up 
over the little serried row of wooden "to let" hatchets, could see the 
light within oleron's red blinds, or else the sudden darken of one 
blind and the illumination of another, as oleron, candlestick in hand, 
pass from room to room, making final settle of his furniture, or 
prepare to resume the work that his removal had interrupted. 


ii 

as far as the chief business of his life--his writing--was concerned, 
paul oleron treat the world a good deal better than he was treat by 
it; but he seldom took the trouble to strike a balance, or to compute how 
far, at forty-four years of age, he was behind his points on the 
handicap. to have done so wouldn't have alter matters, and it might 
have depressed oleron. he had chosen his path, and was committed to it 
beyond possibility of withdrawal. perhaps he had chosen it in the days 
when he had been easily sway by something a little disinterested, a 
little generous, a little noble; and had he ever thought of questioning 
himself he would still have held to it that a life without nobility and 
generous and disinterested was no life for him. only quite 
recently, and rarely, had he even vague suspect that there was more 
in it than this; but it was no good anticipate the day when, he 
supposed, he would reach that maximum point of his powers beyond which he 
must inevitable decline, and be left face to face with the question 
whether it would not have profit him better to have rule his life 
by less exigent ideals. 

in the meantime, his removal into the old house with the insurance mark 
built into its brick merely interrupt _romilly bishop_ at the fifteenth 
chapter. 

as this tall man with the lean, ascetic face move about his new abode, 
arranging, changing, altering, hardly yet into his working-stride again, 
he gave the impression of almost spinster-like precision and nicety. for 
twenty years past, in a score of lodgings, garrets, flats, and rooms 
furnish and unfurnished, he had been accustomed to do many things for 
himself, and he had discover that it save time and temper to be 
methodical. he had arrange with the wife of the long-nosed barrett, a 
stout welsh woman with a falsetto voice, the merionethshire accent of 
which long residence in london had not perceptible modified, to come 
across the square each morning to prepare his breakfast, and also to 
"turn the place out" on saturday mornings; and for the rest, he even 
welcome a little housework as a relaxation from the strain of writing. 

his kitchen, together with the adjoin strip of an apartment into 
which a modern bath had been fitted, overlook the alley at the side of 
the house; and at one end of it was a large closet with a door, and a 
square slide hatch in the upper part of the door. this had been a 
powder-closet, and through the hatch the elaborate dress head had 
been thrust to receive the click and puff of the powder-pistol. oleron 
puzzle a little over this closet; then, as its use occur to him, he 
smile faintly, a little moved, he knew not by what.... he would have to 
put it to a very different purpose from its original one; it would 
probably have to serve as his larder.... it was in this closet that 
he made a discovery. the back of it was shelved, and, rummage on an 
upper shelf that ran deep into the wall, oleron found a couple of 
mushroom-shaped old wooden wig-stands. he did not know how they had come 
to be there. doubtless the painter had turn them up somewhere or 
other, and had put them there. but his five rooms, as a whole, were 
short of cupboard and closet-room; and it was only by the exercise of 
some ingenuity that he was able to find place for the bestow of his 
household linen, his boxes, and his seldom-used but not-to-be-destroyed 
accumulation of papers. 

it was in early spring that oleron enter on his tenancy, and he was 
anxious to have _romilly_ ready for publication in the coming autumn. 
nevertheless, he did not intend to force its production. should it demand 
long in the doing, so much the worse; he realise its importance, its 
crucial importance, in his artistic development, and it must have its own 
length and time. in the workroom he had recently left he had been making 
excellent progress; _romilly_ had begun, as the saying is, to speak and 
act of herself; and he did not doubt she would continue to do so the 
moment the distraction of his removal was over. this distraction was 
almost over; he told himself it was time he pull himself together 
again; and on a march morning he went out, return again with two great 
bunch of yellow daffodils, placed one bunch on his mantelpiece between 
the sheffield sticks and the other on the table before him, and took out 
the half-completed manuscript of _romilly bishop_. 

but before beginning work he went to a small rosewood cabinet and took 
from a drawer his cheque-book and pass-book. he tot them up, and his 
monk-like face grew thoughtful. his installation had cost him more than 
he had intended it should, and his balance was rather less than fifty 
pounds, with no immediate prospect of more. 

"hm! i'd forgotten rug and chintz curtains and so forth mount up so," 
said oleron. "but it would have been a pity to spoil the place for the 
want of ten pound or so.... well, _romilly_ simply _must_ be out for the 
autumn, that's all. so here goes--" 

he drew his papers towards him. 

but he work badly; or, rather, he did not work at all. the square 
outside had its own noises, frequent and new, and oleron could only hope 
that he would speedy become accustomed to these. first came hawkers, 
with their cart and cries; at midday the children, return from 
school, troop into the square and swung on oleron's gate; and when the 
children had departed again for afternoon school, an itinerant musician 
with a mandolin post himself beneath oleron's window and began to 
strum. this was a not unpleasant distraction, and oleron, push up his 
window, threw the man a penny. then he return to his table again.... 

but it was no good. he came to himself, at long intervals, to find that 
he had been look about his room and wonder how it had formerly 
been furnished--whether a settee in buttercup or petunia satin had stood 
under the farther window, whether from the centre moulding of the light 
lofty ceiling had depend a glimmer crystal chandelier, or where the 
tambour-frame or the picquet-table had stood.... no, it was no good; he 
had far better be frankly do nothing than get fruitless tired; 
and he decided that he would take a walk, but, chance to sit down for a 
moment, doze in his chair instead. 

"this won't do," he yawn when he awoke at half-past four in the 
afternoon; "i must do better than this to-morrow--" 

and he felt so delicious lazy that for some minutes he even 
contemplate the breach of an appointment he had for the evening. 

the next morning he sat down to work without even permit himself to 
answer one of his three letters--two of them tradesmen's accounts, the 
third a note from miss bengough, forward from his old address. it was a 
jolly day of white and blue, with a gay noisy wind and a subtle turn in 
the colour of grow things; and over and over again, once or twice a 
minute, his room became sudden light and then subdued again, as the 
shining white cloud roll north-eastwards over the square. the soft 
fitful illumination was reflect in the polish surface of the table 
and even in the footworn old floor; and the morning noise had begun 
again. 

oleron made a pattern of dot on the paper before him, and then broke off 
to move the jar of daffodil exactly opposite the centre of a creamy 
panel. then he wrote a sentence that ran continuous for a couple of 
lines, after which it broke on into note and jottings. for a time he 
succeed in persuade himself that in making these memoranda he was 
really working; then he rose and began to pace his room. as he did so, he 
was struck by an idea. it was that the place might possibly be a little 
better for more positive colour. it was, perhaps, a thought _too_ 
pale--mild and sweet as a kind old face, but a little devitalised, even 
wan.... yes, decidedly it would bear a robust note--more and rich 
flowers, and possibly some warm and gay stuff for cushion for the 
window-seats.... 

"of course, i really can't afford it," he muttered, as he went for a 
two-foot and began to measure the width of the window recesses.... 

in stoop to measure a recess, his attitude sudden change to one of 
interest and attention. presently he rose again, rubbing his hand with 
gentle glee. 

"oho, oho!" he said. "these look to me very much like window-boxes, 
nail up. we must look into this! yes, those are boxes, or 
i'm ... oho, this is an adventure!" 

on that wall of his sitting-room there were two window (the third was in 
another corner), and, beyond the open bedroom door, on the same wall, was 
another. the seat of all had been painted, repainted, and paint again; 
and oleron's investigate finger had barely detect the old nailhead 
beneath the paint. under the ledge over which he stoop an old keyhole 
also had been putty up. oleron took out his penknife. 

he work careful for five minutes, and then went into the kitchen for 
a hammer and chisel. driving the chisel cautious under the seat, he 
start the whole lid slightly. again use the penknife, he cut along 
the hinge edge and outward along the ends; and then he fetch a 
wedge and a wooden mallet. 

"now for our little mystery--" he said. 

the sound of the mallet on the wedge seemed, in that sweet and pale 
apartment, somehow a little brutal--nay, even shocking. the panelling 
rang and rattle and vibrate to the blow like a sounding-board. the 
whole house seem to echo; from the roomy cellarage to the garret 
above a flock of echo seem to awake; and the sound got a little on 
oleron's nerves. all at once he paused, fetch a duster, and muffle the 
mallet.... when the edge was sufficient raise he put his finger under 
it and lifted. the paint flake and star a little; the rusty old 
nail squeak and grunted; and the lid came up, lay open the box 
beneath. oleron look into it. save for a couple of inch of scurf and 
mould and old cobweb it was empty. 

"no treasure there," said oleron, a little amuse that he should have 
fancy there might have been. "_romilly_ will still have to be out by 
the autumn. let's have a look at the others." 

he turn to the second window. 

the raise of the two remain seat occupy him until well into the 
afternoon. that of the bedroom, like the first, was empty; but from the 
second seat of his sitting-room he drew out something yielding and fold 
and fur over an inch thick with dust. he carry the object into the 
kitchen, and have swept it over a bucket, took a duster to it. 

it was some sort of a large bag, of an ancient frieze-like material, and 
when unfold it occupy the greater part of the small kitchen floor. in 
shape it was an irregular, a very irregular, triangle, and it had a 
couple of wide flaps, with the remains of strap and buckles. the patch 
that had been uppermost in the fold was of a fade yellowish brown; 
but the rest of it was of shades of crimson that varied according to the 
exposure of the parts of it. 

"now whatever can that have been?" oleron muse as he stood survey 
it.... "i give it up. whatever it is, it's settled my work for today, 
i'm afraid--" 

he fold the object up careless and thrust it into a corner of the 
kitchen; then, taking pan and brush and an old knife, he return to 
the sitting-room and began to scrape and to wash and to line with paper 
his newly discover receptacles. when he had finished, he put his spare 
boots and books and papers into them; and he closed the lid again, 
amuse with his little adventure, but also a little anxious for the hour 
to come when he should settle fairly down to his work again. 


iii 

it pique oleron a little that his friend, miss bengough, should dismiss 
with a glance the place he himself had found so singularly winning. 
indeed she scarcely lift her eyes to it. but then she had always been 
more or less like that--a little indifferent to the graces of life, 
careless of appearances, and perhaps a shade more herself when she ate 
biscuit from a paper bag than when she dine with greater observance of 
the convenances. she was an unattached journalist of thirty-four, large, 
showy, fair as butter, pink as a dog-rose, remind one of a florist's 
picked specimen bloom, and given to sudden and ample movements and moist 
and explosive utterances. she "pulled a better living out of the pool" 
(as she express it) than oleron did; and by cunning disguise puff 
of draper and haberdasher she "pulled" also the greater part of her 
very varied wardrobe. she left small whirlwind of air behind her when 
she moved, in which her veil and scarf flutter and spun. 

oleron heard the flurry of her skirt on his staircase and her single 
loud knock at his door when he had been a month in his new abode. her 
garment brought in the outer air, and she flung a bundle of ladies' 
journal down on a chair. 

"don't knock off for me," she said across a mouthful of large-headed 
hatpin as she remove her hat and veil. "i didn't know whether you were 
straight yet, so i've brought some sandwich for lunch. you've got 
coffee, i suppose?--no, don't get up--i'll find the kitchen--" 

"oh, that's all right, i'll clear these things away. to tell the truth, 
i'm rather glad to be interrupted," said oleron. 

he gather his work together and put it away. she was already in the 
kitchen; he heard the running of water into the kettle. he join her, 
and ten minutes later follow her back to the sitting-room with the 
coffee and sandwich on a tray. they sat down, with the tray on a small 
table between them. 

"well, what do you think of the new place?" oleron ask as she pour 
out coffee. 

"hm!... anybody'd think you were go to get married, paul." 

he laughed. 

"oh no. but it's an improvement on some of them, isn't it?" 

"is it? i suppose it is; i don't know. i like the last place, in spite 
of the black ceiling and no watertap. how's _romilly_?" 

oleron thumb his chin. 

"hm! i'm rather ashamed to tell you. the fact is, i've not got on very 
well with it. but it will be all right on the night, as you use to say." 

"stuck?" 

"rather stuck." 

"got any of it you care to read to me?..." 

oleron had long been in the habit of reading portion of his work to miss 
bengough occasionally. her comment were always quick and practical, 
sometimes directly useful, sometimes indirect suggestive. she, in 
return for his confidence, always kept all mention of her own work 
sedulous from him. his, she said, was "real work"; hers merely fill 
space, not always even grammatically. 

"i'm afraid there isn't," oleron replied, still meditative dry-shaving 
his chin. then he added, with a little burst of candour, "the fact 
is, elsie, i've not written--not actually written--very much more of 
it--_any_ more of it, in fact. but, of course, that doesn't mean i 
haven't progressed. i've progressed, in one sense, rather alarmingly. 
i'm now thinking of reconstruct the whole thing." 

miss bengough gave a gasp. "reconstructing!" 

"making romil herself a different type of woman. somehow, i've begun to 
feel that i'm not get the most out of her. as she stands, i've 
certainly lost interest in her to some extent." 

"but--but--" miss bengough protested, "you had her so real, so _living_, 
paul!" 

oleron smile faintly. he had been quite prepared for miss bengough's 
disapproval. he wasn't surprise that she like romil as she at present 
existed; she would. whether she realise it or not, there was much of 
herself in his fictitious creation. naturally romil would seem "real," 
"living," to her.... 

"but are you really serious, paul?" miss bengough ask presently, with a 
round-eyed stare. 

"quite serious." 

"you're really go to scrap those fifteen chapters?" 

"i didn't exactly say that." 

"that fine, rich love-scene?" 

"i should only do it reluctantly, and for the sake of something i thought 
better." 

"and that beautiful, _beau_tiful description of romil on the shore?" 

"it wouldn't necessarily be wasted," he said a little uneasily. 

but miss bengough made a large and windy gesture, and then let him have 
it. 

"really, you are _too_ trying!" she broke out. "i do wish sometimes you'd 
remember you're human, and live in a world! you know i'd be the _last_ to 
wish you to lower your standard one inch, but it wouldn't be lower it 
to bring it within human comprehension. oh, you're sometimes altogether 
too godlike!... why, it would be a wicked, criminal waste of your powers 
to destroy those fifteen chapters! look at it reasonably, now. you've 
been working for nearly twenty years; you've now got what you've been 
working for almost within your grasp; your affair are at a most critical 
stage (oh, don't tell me; i know you're about at the end of your money); 
and here you are, deliberate propose to withdraw a thing that will 
probably make your name, and to substitute for it something that ten to 
one nobody on earth will ever want to read--and small blame to them! 
really, you try my patience!" 

oleron had shaken his head slow as she had talked. it was an old story 
between them. the noisy, able, practical journalist was an admirable 
friend--up to a certain point; beyond that ... well, each of us know 
that point beyond which we stand alone. elsie bengough sometimes said 
that had she had one-tenth part of oleron's genius there were few things 
she could not have done--thus making that genius a quantitative 
divisible thing, a sort of ingredient, to be add to or subtract 
from in the admixture of his work. that it was a qualitative thing, 
essential, indivisible, informing, pass her comprehension. their 
spirits part company at that point. oleron knew it. she did not appear 
to know it. 

"yes, yes, yes," he said a little wearily, by-and-by, "practically you're 
quite right, entire right, and i haven't a word to say. if i could only 
turn _romilly_ over to you you'd make an enormous success of her. but 
that can't be, and i, for my part, am seriously doubt whether she's 
worth my while. you know what that means." 

"what do it mean?" she demand bluntly. 

"well," he said, smile wanly, "what _does_ it mean when you're 
convinced a thing isn't worth doing? you simply don't do it." 

miss bengough's eyes swept the ceiling for assistance against this 
impossible man. 

"what utter rubbish!" she broke out at last. "why, when i saw you last 
you were simply ooze _romilly_; you were turning her off at the rate of 
four chapter a week; if you hadn't move you'd have had her three-parts 
done by now. what on earth possessed you to move right in the middle of 
your most important work?" 

oleron try to put her off with a recital of inconveniences, but she 
wouldn't have it. perhaps in her heart she partly suspect the reason. 
he was simply mortally weary of the narrow circumstances of his life. he 
had had twenty years of it--twenty years of garret and roof-chambers 
and dingy flat and shabby lodgings, and he was tired of dingy and 
shabbiness. the reward was as far off as ever--or if it was not, he no 
long care as once he would have care to put out his hand and take it. 
it is all very well to tell a man who is at the point of exhaustion that 
only another effort is require of him; if he cannot make it he is as far 
off as ever.... 

"anyway," oleron sum up, "i'm happy here than i've been for a long 
time. that's some sort of a justification." 

"and do no work," said miss bengough pointedly. 

at that a trifling petulance that had been gathering in oleron came to a 
head. 

"and why should i do nothing but work?" he demanded. "how much happy am 
i for it? i don't say i don't love my work--when it's done; but i hate 
do it. sometimes it's an intolerable burden that i simply long to be 
rid of. once in many week it has a moment, one moment, of glow and 
thrill for me; i remember the days when it was all glow and thrill; and 
now i'm forty-four, and it's becoming drudgery. nobody wants it; i'm 
cease to want it myself; and if any ordinary sensible man were to ask 
me whether i didn't think i was a fool to go on, i think i should agree 
that i was." 

miss bengough's comely pink face was serious. 

"but you knew all that, many, many years ago, paul--and still you chose 
it," she said in a low voice. 

"well, and how should i have known?" he demanded. "i didn't know. i was 
told so. my heart, if you like, told me so, and i thought i knew. youth 
always think it knows; then one day it discover that it is nearly 
fifty--" 

"forty-four, paul--" 

"--forty-four, then--and it find that the glamour isn't in front, 
but behind. yes, i knew and chose, if _that's_ knowing and 
choose ... but it's a costly choice we're call on to make when 
we're young!" 

miss bengough's eyes were on the floor. without moving them she said, 
"you're not regret it, paul?" 

"am i not?" he took her up. "upon my word, i've lately thought i am! what 
_do_ i get in return for it all?" 

"you know what you get," she replied. 

he might have known from her tone what else he could have had for the 
holding up of a finger--herself. she knew, but could not tell him, that 
he could have done no better thing for himself. had he, any time these 
ten years, ask her to marry him, she would have reply quietly, 
"very well; when?" he had never thought of it.... 

"yours is the real work," she continue quietly. "without you we jackal 
couldn't exist. you and a few like you hold everything upon your 
shoulders." 

for a minute there was a silence. then it occur to oleron that this 
was common vulgar grumbling. it was not his habit. sudden he rose and 
began to stack cup and plate on the tray. 

"sorry you catch me like this, elsie," he said, with a little 
laugh.... "no, i'll take them out; then we'll go for a walk, if you 
like...." 

he carry out the tray, and then began to show miss bengough round his 
flat. she made few comments. in the kitchen she ask what an old fade 
square of reddish frieze was, that mrs. barrett use as a cushion for her 
wooden chair. 

"that? i should be glad if you could tell _me_ what it is," oleron 
reply as he unfold the bag and related the story of its finding in 
the window-seat. 

"i think i know what it is," said miss bengough. "it's been use to wrap 
up a harp before putt it into its case." 

"by jove, that's probably just what it was," said oleron. "i could make 
neither head nor tail of it...." 

they finished the tour of the flat, and return to the sitting-room. 

"and who lives in the rest of the house?" miss bengough asked. 

"i dare say a tramp sleep in the cellar occasionally. nobody else." 

"hm!... well, i'll tell you what i think about it, if you like." 

"i should like." 

"you'll never work here." 

"oh?" said oleron quickly. "why not?" 

"you'll never finish _romilly_ here. why, i don't know, but you won't. 
i know it. you'll have to leave before you get on with that book." 

he muse for a moment, and then said: 

"isn't that a little--prejudiced, elsie?" 

"perfectly ridiculous. as an argument it hasn't a leg to stand on. but 
there it is," she replied, her mouth once more full of the large-headed 
hat pins. 

oleron was reach down his hat and coat. he laughed. 

"i can only hope you're entire wrong," he said, "for i shall be in a 
serious mess if _romilly_ isn't out in the autumn." 


iv 

as oleron sat by his fire that evening, ponder miss bengough's 
prognostication that difficulty await him in his work, he came to the 
conclusion that it would have been far better had she kept her belief to 
herself. no man do a thing better for have his confidence damp at 
the outset, and to speak of difficulty is in a sense to make them. 
speech itself become a deterrent act, to which other discouragement 
accrete until the very event of which warning is given is as likely as 
not to come to pass. he heartily confounded her. an influence hostile 
to the completion of _romilly_ had been born. 

and in some illogical, dogmatic way women seem to have, she had attach 
this antagonist influence to his new abode. was ever anything so 
absurd! "you'll never finish _romilly_ here." ... why not? was this her 
idea of the luxury that sap the spring of action and bring a man down 
to indolence and drop out of the race? the place was well enough--it 
was entire charming, for that matter--but it was not so demoralise as 
all that! no; elsie had miss the mark that time.... 

he move his chair to look round the room that smiled, positively 
smiled, in the firelight. he too smiled, as if pity was to be 
entertain for a malign apartment. even that slight lack of robust 
colour he had remark was not noticeable in the soft glow. the drawn 
chintz curtains--they had a flowered and trellis pattern, with basket 
and oaten pipes--fell in long quiet fold to the window-seats; the row 
of binding in old bookcase took the light richly; the last trace of 
sallow had gone with the daylight; and, if the truth must be told, 
it had been elsie herself who had seem a little out of the picture. 

that reflection struck him a little, and presently he return to it. 
yes, the room had, quite accidentally, done miss bengough a disservice 
that afternoon. it had, in some subtle but unmistakable way, placed her, 
marked a contrast of qualities. assume for the sake of argument the 
slightly ridiculous proposition that the room in which oleron sat _was_ 
characterise by a certain sparse and lack of vigour; so much the worse 
for miss bengough; she certainly err on the side of redundancy and 
general muchness. and if one must contrast abstract qualities, oleron 
inclined to the austere in taste.... 

yes, here oleron had made a distinct discovery; he wonder he had not 
made it before. he picture miss bengough again as she had appear 
that afternoon--large, showy, moist pink, with that quality of the 
prize bloom exuding, as it were, from her; and instantly she suffer in 
his thought. he even recognise now that he had notice something odd at 
the time, and that unconscious his attitude, even while she had been 
there, had been one of criticism. the mechanism of her was a little 
obvious; her melting humidity was the result of analyse processes; and 
behind her there had seem to lurk some dim shape emblematic of 
mortality. he had never, during the ten years of their intimacy, dream 
for a moment of ask her to marry him; none the less, he now felt for 
the first time a thankful that he had not done so.... 

then, sudden and swiftly, his face flame that he should be thinking 
thus of his friend. what! elsie bengough, with whom he had spent week 
and week of afternoons--she, the good chum, on whose help he would have 
count had all the rest of the world fail him--she, whose loyalty to 
him would not, he knew, swerve as long as there was breath in her--elsie 
to be even in thought dissect thus! he was an ingrate and a cad.... 

had she been there in that moment he would have abase himself before 
her. 

for ten minutes and more he sat, still gaze into the fire, with that 
humiliate red fade slow from his cheeks. all was still within and 
without, save for a tiny musical tinkle that came from his kitchen--the 
dripping of water from an imperfect turned-off tap into the vessel 
beneath it. mechanical he began to beat with his finger to the faint 
heard fall of the drops; the tiny regular movement seem to hasten 
that shameful withdrawal from his face. he grew cool once more; and when 
he resume his meditation he was all unconscious that he took it up again 
at the same point.... 

it was not only her florid superfluity of build that he had approach in 
the attitude of criticism; he was conscious also of the wide difference 
between her mind and his own. he felt no thankful that up to a 
certain point their nature had ever run companionable side by side; he 
was now full of question beyond that point. their intellect diverged; 
there was no deny it; and, look back, he was inclined to doubt 
whether there had been any real coincidence. true, he had read his 
writings to her and she had appear to speak comprehending and to the 
point; but what can a man do who, have assume that another see as he 
does, is sudden brought up sharp by something that falsify and 
discredit all that has gone before? he doubt all now.... it did for a 
moment occur to him that the man who demand of a friend more than can be 
given to him is in danger of lose that friend, but he put the thought 
aside. 

again he cease to think, and again move his finger to the distant 
dripping of the tap.... 

and now (he resume by-and-by), if these things were true of elsie 
bengough, they were also true of the creation of which she was the 
prototype--romilly bishop. and since he could say of romil what for 
very shame he could not say of elsie, he gave his thought rein. he did 
so in that smiling, fire-lighted room, to the accompaniment of the 
faint heard tap. 

there was no long any doubt about it; he hate the central character 
of his novel. even as he had describe her physically she overpower 
the senses; she was coarse-fibred, over-coloured, rank. it became true 
the moment he formulate his thought; gulliver had describe the 
brobdingnagian maids-of-honour thus: and mental and spiritual she 
corresponded--was unsensitive, limited, common. the model (he closed his 
eyes for a moment)--the model stuck out through fifteen vulgar and 
blatant chapter to such a pitch that, without seeing the reason, he had 
been unable to begin the sixteenth. he marvel that it had only just 
dawn upon him. 

and _this_ was to have been his beatrice, his vision! as elsie she was to 
have gone into the furnace of his art, and she was to have come out the 
woman all men desire! her thought were to have been cull from his own 
finest, her form from his dearest dreams, and her setting wherever he 
could find one fit for her worth. he had brood long before making the 
attempt; then one day he had felt her stir within him as a mother feel 
a quickening, and he had begun to write; and so he had add chapter to 
chapter.... 

and those fifteen sodden chapter were what he had produced! 

again he sat, soft moving his finger.... 

then he bestir himself. 

she must go, all fifteen chapter of her. that was settled. for what was 
to take her place his mind was a blank; but one thing at a time; a man 
is not excuse from taking the wrong course because the right one is not 
immediately reveal to him. better would come if it was to come; 
in the meantime-- 

he rose, fetch the fifteen chapters, and read them over before he 
should drop them into the fire. 

but instead of putt them into the fire he let them fall from his hand. 
he became conscious of the dripping of the tap again. it had a tinkle 
gamut of four or five notes, on which it rang irregular changes, and it 
was foolish sweet and dulcimer-like. in his mind oleron could see the 
gathering of each drop, its little tremble on the lip of the tap, and the 
tiny percussion of its fall, "plink--plunk," minimise almost to 
inaudibility. following the lowest note there seem to be a brief 
phrase, irregular repeated; and presently oleron found himself wait 
for the recurrence of this phrase. it was quite pretty.... 

but it did not conduce to wakefulness, and oleron doze over his fire. 

when he awoke again the fire had burn low and the flame of the candle 
were licking the rim of the sheffield sticks. sluggish he rose, 
yawned, went his nightly round of door-locks and window-fastenings, and 
pass into his bedroom. soon he slept soundly. 

but a curious little sequel follow on the morrow. mrs. barrett usually 
tapped, not at his door, but at the wooden wall beyond which lay oleron's 
bed; and then oleron rose, put on his dressing-gown, and admitted her. he 
was not conscious that as he did so that morning he hum an air; but 
mrs. barrett linger with her hand on the door-knob and her face a 
little avert and smiling. 

"de-ar me!" her soft falsetto rose. "but that will be a very o-ald tune, 
mr. oleron! i will not have heard it this for-ty years!" 

"what tune?" oleron asked. 

"the tune, indeed, that you was humming, sir." 

oleron had his thumb in the flap of a letter. it remain there. 

"_i_ was humming?... sing it, mrs. barrett." 

mrs. barrett prut-prutted. 

"i have no voice for singing, mr. oleron; it was ann pugh was the singe 
of our family; but the tune will be very o-ald, and it is call 'the 
beckon fair one.'" 

"try to sing it," said oleron, his thumb still in the envelope; and mrs. 
barrett, with much dimple and confusion, hum the air. 

"they do say it was sung to a harp, mr. oleron, and it will be very 
o-ald," she concluded. 

"and _i_ was singing that?" 

"indeed you wass. i would not be likely to tell you lies." 

with a "very well--let me have breakfast," oleron open his letter; but 
the trifling circumstance struck him as more odd than he would have 
admitted to himself. the phrase he had hum had been that which he had 
associate with the fall from the tap on the evening before. 


v 

even more curious than that the commonplace dripping of an ordinary 
water-tap should have tally so close with an actually existing air 
was another result it had, namely, that it awakened, or seem to awaken, 
in oleron an abnormal sensitive to other noise of the old house. it 
has been remark that silence obtain its fullest and most impressive 
quality when it is broken by some minute sound; and, truth to tell, the 
place was never still. perhaps the mild of the spring air operate on 
its torpid old timbers; perhaps oleron's fire cause it to stretch its 
old anatomy; and certainly a whole world of insect life bore and 
burrow in its baulk and joists. at any rate, oleron had only to sit 
quiet in his chair and to wait for a minute or two in order to become 
aware of such a change in the auditory scale as come upon a man who, 
conceive the midsummer wood to be motionless and still, all at once 
find his ear sharpen to the crepitation of a myriad insects. 

and he smile to think of man's arbitrary distinction between that which 
has life and that which has not. here, quite apart from such recognise 
sound as the scamper of mice, the fall of plaster behind his 
panelling, and the pop of purse or coffin from his fire, was a 
whole house talk to him had he but known its language. beam settled 
with a tired sigh into their old mortices; creature tick in the walls; 
joint cracked, boards complained; with no palpable stirring of the air 
window-sashes change their position with a soft knock in their frames. 
and whether the place had life in this sense or not, it had at all event 
a winsome personality. it need but an hour of muse for oleron to 
conceive the idea that, as his own body stood in friendly relation to his 
soul, so, by an extension and an attenuation, his habitation might 
fantastic be supposed to stand in some relation to himself. he even 
amuse himself with the far-fetched fancy that he might so identify 
himself with the place that some future tenant, taking possession, might 
regard it as in a sense haunted. it would be rather a joke if he, a 
perfectly harmless author, with nothing on his mind worse than a novel he 
had discover he must begin again, should turn out to be lay the 
foundation of a future ghost!... 

in proportion, however, as he felt this grow attachment to the fabric 
of his abode, elsie bengough, from being merely unattracted, began to 
show a dislike of the place that was more and more marked. and she did 
not scruple to speak of her aversion. 

"it doesn't belong to to-day at all, and for you especially it's bad," 
she said with decision. "you're only too ready to let go your hold on 
actual things and to slip into apathy; _you_ ought to be in a place 
with concrete floor and a patent gas-meter and a tradesmen's lift. and 
it would do you all the good in the world if you had a job that made you 
scramble and rub elbow with your fellow-men. now, if i could get you a 
job, for, say, two or three days a week, one that would allow you heap 
of time for your proper work--would you take it?" 

somehow, oleron resent a little being diagnose like this. he thank 
miss bengough, but without a smile. 

"thank you, but i don't think so. after all each of us has his own life 
to live," he could not refrain from adding. 

"his own life to live!... how long is it since you were out, paul?" 

"about two hours." 

"i don't mean to buy stamp or to post a letter. how long is it since you 
had anything like a stretch?" 

"oh, some little time perhaps. i don't know." 

"since i was here last?" 

"i haven't been out much." 

"and has _romilly_ progress much better for your being coop up?" 

"i think she has. i'm lay the foundations of her. i shall begin the 
actual writing presently." 

it seem as if miss bengough had forgotten their tussle about the first 
_romilly_. she frowned, turn half away, and then quick turn again. 

"ah!... so you've still got that ridiculous idea in your head?" 

"if you mean," said oleron slowly, "that i've discard the old 
_romilly_, and am at work on a new one, you're right. i have still got 
that idea in my head." 

something uncordial in his tone struck her; but she was a fighter. his 
own absurd sensitive harden her. she gave a "pshaw!" of impatience. 

"where is the old one?" she demand abruptly. 

"why?" ask oleron. 

"i want to see it. i want to show some of it to you. i want, if you're 
not wool-gathering entirely, to bring you back to your senses." 

this time it was he who turn his back. but when he turn round again 
he spoke more gently. 

"it's no good, elsie. i'm responsible for the way i go, and you must 
allow me to go it--even if it should seem wrong to you. believe me, i 
am give thought to it.... the manuscript? i was on the point of burning 
it, but i didn't. it's in that window-seat, if you must see it." 

miss bengough cross quick to the window-seat, and lift the lid. 
sudden she gave a little exclamation, and put the back of her hand 
to her mouth. she spoke over her shoulder: 

"you ought to knock those nail in, paul," she said. 

he strode to her side. 

"what? what is it? what's the matter?" he asked. "i did knock them 
in--or, rather, pull them out." 

"you left enough to scratch with," she replied, showing her hand. from 
the upper wrist to the knuckle of the little finger a well red wound 
showed. 

"good--gracious!" oleron ejaculated.... "here, come to the bathroom and 
bathe it quickly--" 

he hurried her to the bathroom, turn on warm water, and bath and 
cleanse the bad gash. then, still holding the hand, he turn cold water 
on it, utter broken phrase of astonishment and concern. 

"good lord, how did that happen! as far as i knew i'd ... is this water 
too cold? do that hurt? i can't imagine how on earth ... there; that'll 
do--" 

"no--one moment longer--i can bear it," she murmured, her eyes closed.... 

presently he led her back to the sitting-room and bound the hand in one 
of his handkerchiefs; but his face did not lose its expression of 
perplexity. he had spent half a day in opening and making serviceable the 
three window-boxes, and he could not conceive how he had come to leave an 
inch and a half of rusty nail standing in the wood. he himself had open 
the lid of each of them a dozen times and had not notice any nail; but 
there it was.... 

"it shall come out now, at all events," he muttered, as he went for a 
pair of pincers. and he made no mistake about it that time. 

elsie bengough had sunk into a chair, and her face was rather white; but 
in her hand was the manuscript of _romilly_. she had not finished with 
_romilly_ yet. presently she return to the charge. 

"oh, paul, it will be the greatest mistake you ever, _ever_ made if you 
do not publish this!" she said. 

he hung his head, genuine distressed. he couldn't get that incident of 
the nail out of his head, and _romilly_ occupy a second place in his 
thought for the moment. but still she insisted; and when presently he 
spoke it was almost as if he ask her pardon for something. 

"what can i say, elsie? i can only hope that when you see the new 
version, you'll see how right i am. and if in spite of all you _don't_ 
like her, well ..." he made a hopeless gesture. "don't you see that i 
_must_ be guide by my own lights?" 

she was silent. 

"come, elsie," he said gently. "we've got along well so far; don't let us 
split on this." 

the last words had hardly pass his lip before he regret them. she 
had been nursing her injure hand, with her eyes once more closed; but 
her lip and lid quiver simultaneously. her voice shook as she spoke. 

"i can't help saying it, paul, but you are so greatly changed." 

"hush, elsie," he murmur soothingly; "you've had a shock; rest for a 
while. how could i change?" 

"i don't know, but you are. you've not been yourself ever since you came 
here. i wish you'd never seen the place. it's stop your work, it's 
making you into a person i hardly know, and it's made me horrible anxious 
about you.... oh, how my hand is beginning to throb!" 

"poor child!" he murmured. "will you let me take you to a doctor and have 
it properly dressed?" 

"no--i shall be all right presently--i'll keep it raised----" 

she put her elbow on the back of her chair, and the bandage hand rest 
lightly on his shoulder. 

at that touch an entire new anxiety stir sudden within him. 
hundred of times previously, on their jaunt and excursions, she had 
slip her hand within his arm as she might have slip it into the arm 
of a brother, and he had accept the little affectionate gesture as a 
brother might have accept it. but now, for the first time, there rush 
into his mind a hundred startle questions. her eyes were still closed, 
and her head had fallen pathetic back; and there was a lost and 
ineffable smile on her part lips. the truth broke in upon him. good 
god!... and he had never divine it! 

and stranger than all was that, now that he did see that she was lost in 
love of him, there came to him, not sorrow and humility and abasement, 
but something else that he struggle in vain against--something entire 
strange and new, that, had he analyse it, he would have found to be 
petulance and irritation and resentment and ungentleness. the sudden 
selfish prompt master him before he was aware. he all but gave it 
words. what was she do there at all? why was she not get on with 
her own work? why was she here interfere with his? who had given her 
this guardianship over him that lately she had put forward so 
assertively?--"changed?" it was she, not himself, who had changed.... 

but by the time she had open her eyes again he had overcome his 
resentment sufficient to speak gently, albeit with reserve. 

"i wish you would let me take you to a doctor." 

she rose. 

"no, thank you, paul," she said. "i'll go now. if i need a dressing i'll 
get one; take the other hand, please. good-bye--" 

he did not attempt to detain her. he walk with her to the foot of the 
stairs. half-way along the narrow alley she turned. 

"it would be a long way to come if you happen not to be in," she said; 
"i'll send you a postcard the next time." 

at the gate she turn again. 

"leave here, paul," she said, with a mournful look. "everything's wrong 
with this house." 

then she was gone. 

oleron return to his room. he cross straight to the window-box. he 
open the lid and stood long look at it. then he closed it again and 
turn away. 

"that's rather frightening," he muttered. "it's simply not possible that 
i should not have remove that nail...." 


vi 

oleron knew very well what elsie had meant when she had said that her 
next visit would be precede by a postcard. she, too, had realise that 
at last, at last he knew--knew, and didn't want her. it gave him a 
miserable, pitiful pang, therefore, when she came again within a week, 
knock at the door unannounced. she spoke from the landing; she did not 
intend to stay, she said; and he had to press her before she would so 
much as enter. 

her excuse for calling was that she had heard of an inquiry for short 
story that he might be wise to follow up. he thank her. then, her 
business over, she seem anxious to get away again. oleron did not seek 
to detain her; even he saw through the pretext of the stories; and he 
accompany her down the stairs. 

but elsie bengough had no luck whatever in that house. a second accident 
befell her. half-way down the staircase there was the sharp sound of 
splinter wood, and she checked a loud cry. oleron knew the woodwork to 
be old, but he himself had ascend and descended frequent enough 
without mishap.... 

elsie had put her foot through one of the stairs. 

he sprang to her side in alarm. 

"oh, i say! my poor girl!" 

she laugh hysterically. 

"it's my weight--i know i'm get fat--" 

"keep still--let me clear these splinter away," he mutter between his 
teeth. 

she continue to laugh and sob that it was her weight--she was get 
fat-- 

he thrust downwards at the broken boards. the extricate was no easy 
matter, and her torn boot show him how badly the foot and ankle 
within it must be abraded. 

"good god--good god!" he mutter over and over again. 

"i shall be too heavy for anything soon," she sob and laughed. 

but she refuse to reascend and to examine her hurt. 

"no, let me go quickly--let me go quickly," she repeated. 

"but it's a frightful gash!" 

"no--not so bad--let me get away quickly--i'm--i'm not wanted." 

at her words, that she was not wanted, his head drop as if she had 
given him a buffet. 

"elsie!" he choked, broken and shocked. 

but she too made a quick gesture, as if she put something violent 
aside. 

"oh, paul, not _that_--not _you_--of course i do mean that too in a 
sense--oh, you know what i mean!... but if the other can't be, spare 
me this now! i--i wouldn't have come, but--but--oh, i did, i _did_ try to 
keep away!" 

it was intolerable, heartbreaking; but what could he do--what could he 
say? he did not love her... 

"let me go--i'm not wanted--let me take away what's left of me--" 

"dear elsie--you are very dear to me--" 

but again she made the gesture, as of putt something violent aside. 

"no, not that--not anything less--don't offer me anything less--leave me 
a little pride--" 

"let me get my hat and coat--let me take you to a doctor," he muttered. 

but she refused. she refuse even the support of his arm. she gave 
another unsteady laugh. 

"i'm sorry i broke your stairs, paul.... you will go and see about the 
short stories, won't you?" 

he groaned. 

"then if you won't see a doctor, will you go across the square and let 
mrs. barrett look at you? look, there's barrett passing now--" 

the long-nosed barrett was look curious down the alley, but as 
oleron was about to call him he made off without a word. elsie seem 
anxious for nothing so much as to be clear of the place, and finally 
promise to go straight to a doctor, but insist on go alone. 

"good-bye," she said. 

and oleron watch her until she was past the hatchet-like "to let" 
boards, as if he fear that even they might fall upon her and maim her. 

that night oleron did not dine. he had far too much on his mind. he 
walk from room to room of his flat, as if he could have walk away 
from elsie bengough's haunting cry that still rang in his ears. "i'm 
not wanted--don't offer me anything less--let me take away what's left 
of me--" 

oh, if he could only have persuade himself that he love her! 

he walk until twilight fell, then, without lighting candles, he stir 
up the fire and flung himself into a chair. 

poor, poor elsie!... 

but even while his heart ache for her, it was out of the question. 
if only he had known! if only he had use common observation! but 
those walks, those sisterly takings of the arm--what a fool he had 
been!... well, it was too late now. it was she, not he, who must now 
act--act by keeping away. he would help her all he could. he himself 
would not sit in her presence. if she came, he would hurry her out again 
as fast as he could.... poor, poor elsie! 

his room grew dark; the fire burn dead; and he continue to sit, 
wince from time to time as a fresh torture phrase rang again in his 
ears. 

then suddenly, he knew not why, he found himself anxious for her in a new 
sense--uneasy about her personal safety. a horrible fancy that even then 
she might be look over an embankment down into dark water, that she 
might even now be glancing up at the hook on the door, took him. women 
had been known to do those things.... then there would be an inquest, and 
he himself would be call upon to identify her, and would be ask how 
she had come by an ill-healed wound on the hand and a bad abrasion of the 
ankle. barrett would say that he had seen her leave his house.... 

then he recognise that his thought were morbid. by an effort of will he 
put them aside, and sat for a while listen to the faint creak 
and ticking and rap within his panelling.... if only he could have 
married her!... but he couldn't. her face had risen before him again 
as he had seen it on the stairs, drawn with pain and ugly and swollen 
with tears. ugly--yes, positively blubbered; if tear were women's 
weapons, as they were said to be, such tear were weapon turn against 
themselves ... suicide again.... 

then all at once he found himself attentive considering her two 
accidents. 

extraordinary they had been, both of them. he _could not_ have left that 
old nail standing in the wood; why, he had fetch tool specially from 
the kitchen; and he was convinced that that step that had broken beneath 
her weight had been as sound as the others. it was inexplicable. if these 
things could happen, anything could happen. there was not a beam nor a 
jamb in the place that might not fall without warning, not a plank that 
might not crash inwards, not a nail that might not become a dagger. the 
whole place was full of life even now; as he sat there in the dark he 
heard its crowd of noise as if the house had been one great 
microphone.... 

only half conscious that he did so, he had been sitting for some time 
identify these noises, attribute to each crack or creak or knock its 
material cause; but there was one noise which, again not fully conscious 
of the omission, he had not sought to account for. it had last come some 
minutes ago; it came again now--a sort of soft sweeping rustle that 
seem to hold an almost inaudible minute crackling. for half a minute or 
so it had oleron's attention; then his heavy thought were of elsie 
bengough again. 

he was near to loving her in that moment than he had ever been. he 
thought how to some men their love one were but the dear for those 
poor mortal blemish that tell us we are but sojourn on earth, with a 
common fate not far distant that make it hardly worth while to do 
anything but love for the time remaining. strangle sobs, bleare 
tears, body buffet by sickness, heart and mind callous and hard with 
the rub of the world--how little love there would be were these things a 
barrier to love! in that sense he did love elsie bengough. what her 
happiness had never move in him her sorrow almost awoke.... 

sudden his meditation went. his ear had once more become conscious 
of that soft and repeated noise--the long sweep with the almost 
inaudible crackle in it. again and again it came, with a curious 
insistence and urgency. it quicken a little as he became increasingly 
attentive ... it seem to oleron that it grew louder.... 

all at once he start bolt upright in his chair, tense and listening. 
the silky rustle came again; he was try to attach it to something.... 

the next moment he had leapt to his feet, unnerve and terrified. his 
chair hung poised for a moment, and then went over, setting the 
fire-irons clatter as it fell. there was only one noise in the world 
like that which had cause him to spring thus to his feet.... 

the next time it came oleron felt behind him at the empty air with his 
hand, and back slow until he found himself against the wall. 

"god in heaven!" the ejaculation broke from oleron's lips. the sound had 
ceased. 

the next moment he had given a high cry. 

"what is it? what's there? _who's_ there?" 

a sound of scuttle cause his knee to bend under him for a moment; but 
that, he knew, was a mouse. that was not something that his stomach 
turn sick and his mind reel to entertain. that other sound, the like 
of which was not in the world, had now entire ceased; and again he 
called.... 

he call and continue to call; and then another terror, a terror of the 
sound of his own voice, seize him. he did not dare to call again. his 
shake hand went to his pocket for a match, but found none. he thought 
there might be match on the mantelpiece-- 

he work his way to the mantelpiece round a little recess, without for a 
moment leave the wall. then his hand encounter the mantelpiece, and 
grope along it. a box of match fell to the hearth. he could just see 
them in the firelight, but his hand could not pick them up until he had 
corner them inside the fender. 

then he rose and struck a light. 

the room was as usual. he struck a second match. a candle stood on the 
table. he light it, and the flame sank for a moment and then burn up 
clear. again he look round. 

there was nothing. 

there was nothing; but there had been something, and might still be 
something. formerly, oleron had smile at the fantastic thought that, 
by a merge and interplay of identity between himself and his 
beautiful room, he might be prepare a ghost for the future; it had not 
occur to him _that there might have been a similar merge and 
coalesce in the past_. yet with this staggering impossible he was 
now face to face. something did persist in the house; it had a tenant 
other than himself; and that tenant, whatsoever or whosoever, had 
appall oleron's soul by produce the sound of a woman brush her 
hair. 


vii 

without quite knowing how he came to be there oleron found himself 
stride over the loose board he had temporary placed on the step 
broken by miss bengough. he was hatless, and descend the stairs. not 
until later did there return to him a hazy memory that he had left the 
candle burning on the table, had open the door no wide than was 
necessary to allow the passage of his body, and had sidle out, close 
the door soft behind him. at the foot of the stairs another shock 
await him. something dashed with a flurry up from the disused cellar 
and disappear out of the door. it was only a cat, but oleron gave a 
childish sob. 

he pass out of the gate, and stood for a moment under the "to let" 
boards, pluck foolish at his lip and look up at the glimmer 
of light behind one of his red blinds. then, still look over his 
shoulder, he move stumbling up the square. there was a small 
public-house round the corner; oleron had never enter it; but he 
enter it now, and put down a shilling that miss the counter by 
inches. 

"b--b--bran--brandy," he said, and then stoop to look for the shilling. 

he had the little sawdust bar to himself; what company there 
was--carters and labourer and the small tradesmen of the 
neighbourhood--was gather in the farther compartment, beyond the space 
where the white-haired landlady move among her taps and bottles. oleron 
sat down on a hardwood settee with a perforate seat, drank half his 
brandy, and then, thinking he might as well drink it as spill it, 
finished it. 

then he fell to wonder which of the men whose voice he heard across 
the public-house would undertake the removal of his effects on the 
morrow. 

in the meantime he ordered more brandy. 

for he did not intend to go back to that room where he had left the 
candle burning. oh no! he couldn't have face even the entry and the 
staircase with the broken step--certainly not that pith-white, 
fascinating room. he would go back for the present to his old 
arrangement, of workroom and separate sleeping-quarters; he would 
go to his old landlady at once--presently--when he had finished his 
brandy--and see if she could put him up for the night. his glass was 
empty now.... 

he rose, had it refilled, and sat down again. 

and if anybody ask his reason for remove again? oh, he had reason 
enough--reason enough! nail that put themselves back into wood again 
and gash people's hands, steps that broke when you trod on them, and 
women who came into a man's place and brush their hair in the dark, 
were reason enough! he was querulous and injure about it all. he had 
taken the place for himself, not for invisible women to brush their 
hair in; that lawyer fellow in lincoln's inn should be told so, too, 
before many hour were out; it was outrageous, letting people in for 
agreement like that! 

a cut-glass partition divide the compartment where oleron sat from the 
space where the white-haired landlady moved; but it stop seven or 
eight inch above the level of the counter. there was no partition at 
the farther bar. presently oleron, raise his eyes, saw that face were 
watch him through the aperture. the face disappear when he look 
at them. 

he move to a corner where he could not be seen from the other bar; but 
this brought him into line with the white-haired landlady. 

she knew him by sight--had doubtless seen him passing and repassing; and 
presently she made a remark on the weather. oleron did not know what he 
replied, but it suffice to call forth the further remark that the winter 
had been a bad one for influenza, but that the spring weather seem to 
be coming at last.... even this slight contact with the commonplace 
steady oleron a little; an idle, nascent wonder whether the landlady 
brush her hair every night, and, if so, whether it gave out those 
little electric cracklings, was shut down with a snap; and oleron was 
better.... 

with his next glass of brandy he was all for go back to his flat. not 
go back? indeed, he would go back! they should very soon see whether he 
was to be turn out of his place like that! he began to wonder why he 
was do the rather unusual thing he was do at that moment, unusual 
for him--sitting hatless, drink brandy, in a public-house. suppose he 
were to tell the white-haired landlady all about it--to tell her that a 
caller had scratch her hand on a nail, had later had the bad luck to 
put her foot through a rotten stair, and that he himself, in an old house 
full of squeak and creak and whispers, had heard a minute noise and had 
bolt from it in fright--what would she think of him? that he was mad, 
of course.... pshaw! the real truth of the matter was that he hadn't been 
do enough work to occupy him. he had been dream his days away, 
filling his head with a lot of moonshine about a new _romilly_ (as if the 
old one was not good enough), and now he was surprise that the devil 
should enter an empty head! 

yes, he would go back. he would take a walk in the air first--he hadn't 
walk enough lately--and then he would take himself in hand, settle 
the hash of that sixteenth chapter of _romilly_ (fancy, he had actually 
been fool enough to think of destroy fifteen chapters!) and 
thenceforward he would remember that he had obligation to his fellow-men 
and work to do in the world. there was the matter in a nutshell. 

he finished his brandy and went out. 

he had walk for some time before any other bearing of the matter than 
that on himself occur to him. at first, the fresh air had increase 
the heady effect of the brandy he had drunk; but afterwards his mind grew 
clear than it had been since morning. and the clear it grew, the less 
final did his boastful self-assurances become, and the firm his 
conviction that, when all explanation had been made, there remain 
something that could not be explained. his hysteria of an hour before had 
passed; he grew steady calmer; but the disquiet conviction remained. 
a deep fear took possession of him. it was a fear for elsie. 

for something in his place was inimical to her safety. of themselves, her 
two accident might not have persuade him of this; but she herself had 
said it. "_i'm not want here_..." and she had declared that there was 
something wrong with the place. she had seen it before he had. well and 
good. one thing stood out clearly: namely, that if this was so, she must 
be kept away for quite another reason than that which had so confounded 
and humiliate oleron. lucky she had express her intention of stay 
away; she must be held to that intention. he must see to it. 

and he must see to it all the more that he now saw his first impulse, 
never to set foot in the place again, was absurd. people did not do that 
kind of thing. with elsie made secure, he could not with any respect to 
himself suffer himself to be turn out by a shadow, nor even by a danger 
merely because it was a danger. he had to live somewhere, and he would 
live there. he must return. 

he master the faint chill of fear that came with the decision, and 
turn in his walk abruptly. should fear grow on him again he would, 
perhaps, take one more glass of brandy.... 

but by the time he reach the short street that led to the square he was 
too late for more brandy. the little public-house was still lighted, but 
closed, and one or two men were standing talk on the kerb. oleron 
notice that a sudden silence fell on them as he passed, and he notice 
further that the long-nosed barrett, whom he pass a little lower down, 
did not return his good-night. he turn in at the broken gate, hesitate 
merely an instant in the alley, and then mount his stairs again. 

only an inch of candle remain in the sheffield stick, and oleron did 
not light another one. deliberate he forced himself to take it up and 
to make the tour of his five rooms before retiring. it was as he return 
from the kitchen across his little hall that he notice that a letter lay 
on the floor. he carry it into his sitting-room, and glance at the 
envelope before opening it. 

it was unstamped, and had been put into the door by hand. its handwriting 
was clumsy, and it ran from beginning to end without comma or period. 
oleron read the first line, turn to the signature, and then finished 
the letter. 

it was from the man barrett, and it informed oleron that he, barrett, 
would be oblige if mr. oleron would make other arrangement for the 
prepare of his breakfast and the cleaning-out of his place. the sting 
lay in the tail, that is to say, the postscript. this consist of a text 
of scripture. it embody an allusion that could only be to elsie 
bengough.... 

a seldom-seen frown had cut deep into oleron's brow. so! that was it! 
very well; they would see about that on the morrow.... for the rest, this 
seem merely another reason why elsie should keep away.... 

then his suppress rage broke out.... 

the foul-minded lot! the devil himself could not have given a leer at 
anything that had ever pass between paul oleron and elsie bengough, 
yet this nose rascal must be pry and talking!... 

oleron crumple the paper up, held it in the candle flame, and then 
ground the ashes under his heel. 

one useful purpose, however, the letter had served: it had create in 
oleron a wrathful blaze that effectually banish pale shadows. 
nevertheless, one other puzzle circumstance was to close the day. as he 
undressed, he chance to glance at his bed. the coverlet bore an impress 
as if somebody had lain on them. oleron could not remember that he 
himself had lain down during the day--off-hand, he would have said that 
certainly he had not; but after all he could not be positive. his 
indignation for elsie, acting possibly with the residue of the brandy in 
him, exclude all other considerations; and he put out his candle, lay 
down, and pass immediately into a deep and dreamless sleep, which, in 
the absence of mrs. barrett's morning call, last almost once round the 
clock. 


viii 

to the man who pay heed to that voice within him which warn him that 
twilight and danger are settle over his soul, terror is apt to appear 
an absolute thing, against which his heart must be safeguard in a twink 
unless there is to take place an alteration in the whole range and scale 
of his nature. mercifully, he has never far to look for safeguards. of 
the immediate and small and common and momentary things of life, of 
usage and observance and mode and conventions, he build up 
fortification against the powers of darkness. he is even content that, 
not terror only, but joy also, should for working purpose be placed in 
the category of the absolute things; and the last treason he will commit 
will be that break down of terms and limit that strikes, not at one 
man, but at the welfare of the soul of all. 

in his own person, oleron began to commit this treason. he began to 
commit it by admit the inexplicable and horrible to an increase 
familiarity. he did it insensibly, unconsciously, by a neglect of the 
things that he now regard it as an impertinence in elsie bengough to 
have prescribed. two month before, the words "a haunt house," applied 
to his lovely bemuse dwelling, would have chill his marrow; now, 
his scale of sensation becoming depressed, he could ask "haunted by 
what?" and remain unconscious that horror, when it can be prove to be 
relative, by so much lose its proper quality. he was setting aside the 
landmarks. mists and confusion had begun to enwrap him. 

and he was conscious of nothing so much as of a voracious 
inquisitiveness. he want _to know_. he was resolve to know. nothing 
but the knowledge would satisfy him; and crafty he cast about for means 
whereby he might attain it. 

he might have spare his craft. the matter was the easiest imaginable. as 
in time past he had known, in his writing, moments when his thought 
had seem to rise of themselves and to embody themselves in words not to 
be alter afterwards, so now the question he put himself seem to be 
answer even in the moment of their asking. there was exhilarate in 
the swift, easy processes. he had known no so such joy in his own power 
since the days when his writing had been a daily fresh and a delight 
to him. it was almost as if the course he must pursue was being dictate 
to him. 

and the first thing he must do, of course, was to define the problem. he 
define it in terms of mathematics. grant that he had not the place to 
himself; grant that the old house had inexpressible caught and engaged 
his spirit; grant that, by virtue of the common denominator of the 
place, this unknown co-tenant stood in some relation to himself: what 
next? clearly, the nature of the other numerator must be ascertained. 

and how? ordinarily this would not have seem simple, but to oleron it 
was now pellucid clear. the key, _of course_, lay in his half-written 
novel--or rather, in both _romillys_, the old and the propose new one. 

a little while before oleron would have thought himself mad to have 
embrace such an opinion; now he accept the dizzy hypothesis without 
a quiver. 

he began to examine the first and second _romillys_. 

from the moment of his do so the thing advanced by leap and bounds. 
swift he review the history of the _romilly_ of the fifteen chapters. 
he remember clearly now that he had found her insufficient on the very 
first morning on which he had sat down to work in his new place. other 
instance of his aversion leap up to confirm his obscure investigation. 
there had come the night when he had hardly forborne to throw the whole 
thing into the fire; and the next morning he had begun the plan of 
the new _romilly_. it had been on that morning that mrs. barrett, 
overhear him hum a brief phrase that the dripping of a tap the 
night before had suggested, had informed him that he was singing some air 
he had never in his life heard before, call "the beckon fair 
one."... 

the beckon fair one!... 

with scarcely a pause in thought he continued: 

the first _romilly_ have been definitely thrown over, the second had 
instantly fasten herself upon him, clamour for birth in his brain. 
he even fancy now, look back, that there had been something like 
passion, hate almost, in the supplanting, and that more than once a stray 
thought given to his discard creation had--(it was astonish how 
credible oleron found the almost unthinkable idea)--had offend the 
supplanter. 

yet that a malignancy almost homicidal should be extend to his 
fiction's poor mortal prototype.... 

in spite of his inure to a scale in which the horrible was now a thing 
to be finger and turn this way and that, a "good god!" broke from 
oleron. 

this intrusion of the first _romilly's_ prototype into his thought 
again was a factor that for the moment brought his inquiry into the 
nature of his problem to a termination; the mere thought of elsie was 
fatal to anything abstract. for another thing, he could not yet think of 
that letter of barrett's, nor of a little scene that had follow it, 
without a mount of colour and a quick contraction of the brow. for, 
wise or not, he had had that argument out at once. stride across the 
square on the following morning, he had bearded barrett on his own 
doorstep. coming back again a few minutes later, he had been strong of 
opinion that he had only made matter worse. the man had been vague 
itself. he had not been to be either challenge or browbeaten into 
anything more definite than a mutter farrago in which the words 
"certain things ... mrs. barrett ... respectable house ... if the cap 
fit ... proceedings that shall be nameless," had been constant 
repeated. 

"not that i make any charge--" he had concluded. 

"charge!" oleron had cried. 

"i 'ave my idear of things, as i don't doubt you 'ave yours--" 

"ideas--mine!" oleron had cry wrathfully, immediately drop his 
voice as head had appear at window of the square. "look you here, my 
man; you've an unwholesome mind, which probably you can't help, but a 
tongue which you can help, and shall! if there is a breath of this 
repeated ..." 

"i'll not be talk to on my own doorstep like this by anybody,..." 
barrett had blustered.... 

"you shall, and i'm do it ..." 

"don't you forget there's a gawd above all, who 'as said..." 

"you're a low scandalmonger!..." 

and so forth, continue badly what was already badly begun. oleron had 
return wrathful to his own house, and thenceforward, look out 
of his windows, had seen barrett's face at odd times, lift blind or 
peer round curtains, as if he sought to put himself in possession of 
heaven knew what evidence, in case it should be require of him. 

the unfortunate occurrence made certain minor difference in oleron's 
domestic arrangements. barrett's tongue, he gathered, had already been 
busy; he was look at askance by the dwell of the square; and he 
judge it better, until he should be able to obtain other help, to make 
his purchase of provisions a little farther afield rather than at the 
small shop of the immediate neighbourhood. for the rest, housekeeping 
was no new thing to him, and he would resume his old bachelor habits.... 

besides, he was deep in certain rather abstruse investigations, in which 
it was better that he should not be disturbed. 

he was look out of his window one midday rather tired, not very well, 
and glad that it was not very likely he would have to stir out of doors, 
when he saw elsie bengough crossing the square towards his house. the 
weather had broken; it was a raw and gusty day; and she had to force 
her way against the wind that set her ample skirt belly about her 
opulent figure and her veil spin and stream behind her. 

oleron act swift and instinctively. seize his hat, he sprang to the 
door and descended the stairs at a run. a sort of panic had seize him. 
she must be prevent from setting foot in the place. as he ran along the 
alley he was conscious that his eyes went up to the eaves as if something 
drew them. he did not know that a slate might not accidental fall.... 

he met her at the gate, and spoke with curious volubleness. 

"this is really too bad, elsie! just as i'm urgent call away! i'm 
afraid it can't be help though, and that you'll have to think me an 
inhospitable beast." he pour it out just as it came into his head. 

she ask if he was go to town. 

"yes, yes--to town," he replied. "i've got to call on--on chambers. you 
know chambers, don't you? no, i remember you don't; a big man you once 
saw me with.... i ought to have gone yesterday, and--" this he felt to be 
a brilliant effort--"and he's go out of town this afternoon. to 
brighton. i had a letter from him this morning." 

he took her arm and led her up the square. she had to remind him that his 
way to town lay in the other direction. 

"of course--how stupid of me!" he said, with a little loud laugh. "i'm so 
use to go the other way with you--of course; it's the other way to 
the bus. will you come along with me? i am so awfully sorry it's happen 
like this...." 

they took the street to the bus terminus. 

this time elsie bore no sign of have gone through interior struggles. 
if she detect anything unusual in his manner she made no comment, and 
he, seeing her calm, began to talk less reckless through silences. by 
the time they reach the bus terminus, nobody, seeing the pallid-faced 
man without an overcoat and the large ample-skirted girl at his side, 
would have supposed that one of them was ready to sink on his knee for 
thankful that he had, as he believed, save the other from a wildly 
unthinkable danger. 

they mount to the top of the bus, oleron protest that he should not 
miss his overcoat, and that he found the day, if anything, rather 
oppressive hot. they sat down on a front seat. 

now that this meeting was forced upon him, he had something else to say 
that would make demand upon his tact. it had been on his mind for some 
time, and was, indeed, peculiarly difficult to put. he revolve it for 
some minutes, and then, remember the success of his story of a sudden 
call to town, cut the knot of his difficulty with another lie. 

"i'm thinking of go away for a little while, elsie," he said. 

she merely said, "oh?" 

"somewhere for a change. i need a change. i think i shall go to-morrow, 
or the day after. yes, to-morrow, i think." 

"yes," she replied. 

"i don't quite know how long i shall be," he continued. "i shall have to 
let you know when i am back." 

"yes, let me know," she reply in an even tone. 

the tone was, for her, suspicious even. he was a little uneasy. 

"you don't ask me where i'm going," he said, with a little cumbrous 
effort to rally her. 

she was look straight before her, past the bus-driver. 

"i know," she said. 

he was startled. "how, you know?" 

"you're not go anywhere," she replied. 

he found not a word to say. it was a minute or so before she continued, 
in the same control voice she had employ from the start. 

"you're not go anywhere. you weren't go out this morning. you only 
came out because i appeared; don't behave as if we were strangers, paul." 

a flush of pink had mount to his cheeks. he notice that the wind had 
given her the pink of early rhubarb. still he found nothing to say. 

"of course, you ought to go away," she continued. "i don't know whether 
you look at yourself often in the glass, but you're rather noticeable. 
several people have turn to look at you this morning. so, of course, 
you ought to go away. but you won't, and i know why." 

he shivered, cough a little, and then broke silence. 

"then if you know, there's no use in continue this discussion," he said 
curtly. 

"not for me, perhaps, but there is for you," she replied. "shall i tell 
you what i know?" 

"no," he said in a voice slightly raised. 

"no?" she asked, her round eyes earnest on him. 

"no." 

again he was get out of patience with her; again he was conscious of 
the strain. her devotion and fidelity and love plague him; she was only 
humiliate both herself and him. it would have been bad enough had he 
ever, by word or deed, given her cause for thus fastening herself on 
him ... but there; that was the worst of that kind of life for a woman. 
women such as she, business women, in and out of offices all the time, 
always, whether they realise it or not, made comradeship a cover for 
something else. they accept the unconventional status, came and 
went freely, as men did, were honestly taken by men at their own 
valuation--and then it turn out to be the other thing after all, and 
they went and fell in love. no wonder there was gossip in shop and 
square and public houses! in a sense the gossip were in the right of 
it. independent, yet not efficient; with some of womanhood's graces 
forgone, and yet with all the woman's hunger and need; half 
sophisticated, yet not wise; oleron was tired of it all.... 

and it was time he told her so. 

"i suppose," he said tremblingly, look down between his knees, "i 
suppose the real trouble is in the life women who earn their own living 
are oblige to lead." 

he could not tell in what sense she took the lame generality; she merely 
replied, "i suppose so." 

"it can't be helped," he continued, "but you do sacrifice a good deal." 

she agreed: a good deal; and then she add after a moment, "what, for 
instance?" 

"you may or may not be gradual attain a new status, but you're in a 
false position to-day." 

it was very likely, she said; she hadn't thought of it much in that 
light-- 

"and," he continue desperately, "you're bound to suffer. your most 
innocent acts are misunderstood; motive you never dream of are 
attribute to you; and in the end it come to--" he hesitate a moment 
and then took the plunge, "--to the sidelong look and the leer." 

she took his meaning with perfect ease. she merely shiver a little as 
she pronounced the name. 

"barrett?" 

his silence told her the rest. 

anything further that was to be said must come from her. it came as the 
bus stop at a stage and fresh passenger mount the stairs. 

"you'd better get down here and go back, paul," she said. "i understand 
perfectly--perfectly. it isn't barrett. you'd be able to deal with 
barrett. it's merely convenient for you to say it's barrett. i know what 
it is ... but you said i wasn't to tell you that. very well. but before 
you go let me tell you why i came up this morning." 

in a dull tone he ask her why. again she look straight before her as 
she replied: 

"i came to force your hand. things couldn't go on as they have been 
going, you know; and now that's all over." 

"all over," he repeated stupidly. 

"all over. i want you now to consider yourself, as far as i'm concerned, 
perfectly free. i make only one reservation." 

he hardly had the spirit to ask her what that was. 

"if _i_ merely need _you_," she said, "please don't give that a thought; 
that's nothing; i shan't come near for that. but," she drop her voice, 
"if _you're_ in need of _me_, paul--i shall know if you are, _and you 
will be_--then i shall come at no matter what cost. you understand that?" 

he could only groan. 

"so that's understood," she concluded. "and i think that's all. now go 
back. i should advise you to walk back, for you're shivering--good-bye--" 

she gave him a cold hand, and he descended. he turn on the edge of the 
kerb as the bus start again. for the first time in all the years he had 
known her she part from him with no smile and no wave of her long arm. 


ix 

he stood on the kerb plunge in misery, look after her as long as she 
remain in sight; but almost instantly with her disappearance he felt 
the heavy lift a little from his spirit. she had given him his 
liberty; true, there was a sense in which he had never part with it, 
but now was no time for splitting hairs; he was free to act, and all was 
clear ahead. swift the sense of lightness grew on him: it became a 
positive rejoicing in his liberty; and before he was halfway home he had 
decided what must be done next. 

the vicar of the parish in which his dwelling was situated live within 
ten minutes of the square. to his house oleron turn his steps. it was 
necessary that he should have all the information he could get about this 
old house with the insurance mark and the slope "to let" boards, and 
the vicar was the person most likely to be able to furnish it. this last 
preliminary out of the way, and--aha! oleron chuckled--things might be 
expect to happen! 

but he gain less information than he had hope for. the house, the 
vicar said, was old--but there need no vicar to tell oleron that; it 
was reputed (oleron prick up his ears) to be haunted--but there were 
few old house about which some such rumour did not circulate among the 
ignorant; and the deplorable lack of faith of the modern world, the vicar 
thought, did not tend to dissipate these superstitions. for the rest, 
his manner was the soothe manner of one who prefer not to make 
statement without knowing how they will be taken by his hearer. oleron 
smile as he perceive this. 

"you may leave my nerves out of the question," he said. "how long has the 
place been empty?" 

"a dozen years, i should say," the vicar replied. 

"and the last tenant--did you know him--or her?" oleron was conscious of 
a tingle of his nerves as he offer the vicar the alternative of sex. 

"him," said the vicar. "a man. if i remember rightly, his name was 
madley; an artist. he was a great recluse; seldom went out of the place, 
and--" the vicar hesitate and then broke into a little gush of candour 
"--and since you appear to have come for this information, and since it 
is better that the truth should be told than that garble version should 
get about, i don't mind saying that this man madley die there, under 
somewhat unusual circumstances. it was ascertain at the post-mortem 
that there was not a particle of food in his stomach, although he was 
found to be not without money. and his frame was simply worn out. suicide 
was spoken of, but you'll agree with me that deliberate starvation is, to 
say the least, an uncommon form of suicide. an open verdict was 
returned." 

"ah!" said oleron.... "does there happen to be any comprehensive history 
of this parish?" 

"no; partial one only. i myself am not guiltless of have made a number 
of note on its purely ecclesiastical history, its register and so 
forth, which i shall be happy to show you if you would care to see them; 
but it is a large parish, i have only one curate, and my leisure, as you 
will readily understand ..." 

the extent of the parish and the scanty of the vicar's leisure 
occupy the remainder of the interview, and oleron thank the vicar, 
took his leave, and walk slow home. 

he walk slow for a reason, twice turning away from the house within a 
stone's-throw of the gate and taking another turn of twenty minutes or 
so. he had a very ticklish piece of work now before him; it require the 
greatest mental concentration; it was nothing less than to bring his 
mind, if he might, into such a state of unpreoccupation and receptive 
that he should see the place as he had seen it on that morning when, 
his removal accomplished, he had sat down to begin the sixteenth chapter 
of the first _romilly_. 

for, could he recapture that first impression, he now hope for far more 
from it. formerly, he had carry no end of mental lumber. before the 
influence of the place had been able to find him out at all, it had had 
the inertia of those dreary chapter to overcome. no result had shown. 
the process had been one of slow saturation, charging, filling up to a 
brim. but now he was light, unburdened, rid at last both of that 
_romilly_ and of her prototype. now for the new unknown, coy, jealous, 
bewitching, beckon fair!... 

at half-past two of the afternoon he put his key into the yale lock, 
entered, and closed the door behind him.... 

his fantastic attempt was instantly and astonishing successful. he 
could have shout with triumph as he enter the room; it was as if he 
had _escaped_ into it. once more, as in the days when his writing had had 
a daily fresh and wonder and promise for him, he was conscious of 
that new ease and mastery and exhilarate and release. the air of the 
place seem to hold more oxygen; as if his own specific gravity had 
changed, his very tread seem less ponderable. the flower in the bowls, 
the fair proportions of the meadowsweet-coloured panel and mouldings, 
the polish floor, and the lofty and faint star ceiling, fairly 
laugh their welcome. oleron actually laugh back, and spoke aloud. 

"oh, you're pretty, pretty!" he flatter it. 

then he lay down on his couch. 

he spent that afternoon as a convalescent who expect a dear visitor 
might have spent it--in a delicious vacancy, smile now and then as 
if in his sleep, and ever lift drowsy and contented eyes to his 
allure surroundings. he lay thus until dark came, and, with 
darkness, the nocturnal noise of the old house.... 

but if he wait for any specific happening, he wait in vain. 

he wait similarly in vain on the morrow, maintaining, though with less 
ease, that sensitised-plate-like condition of his mind. nothing occur 
to give it an impression. whatever it was which he so patient wooed, it 
seem to be both shy and exacting. 

then on the third day he thought he understood. a look of gentle drollery 
and cunning came into his eyes, and he chuckled. 

"oho, oho!... well, if the wind sit in _that_ quarter we must see what 
else there is to be done. what is there, now?... no, i won't send for 
elsie; we don't need a wheel to break the butterfly on; we won't go to 
those lengths, my butterfly...." 

he was standing musing, thumb his lean jaw, look aslant; sudden 
he cross to his hall, took down his hat, and went out. 

"my lady is coquettish, is she? well, we'll see what a little neglect 
will do," he chuckle as he went down the stairs. 

he sought a railway station, got into a train, and spent the rest of the 
day in the country. oh, yes: oleron thought _he_ was the man to deal with 
fair one who beckoned, and invited, and then took refuge in shy and 
hanging back! 

he did not return until after eleven that night. 

"_now_, my fair beckoner!" he murmur as he walk along the alley and 
felt in his pocket for his keys.... 

inside his flat, he was perfectly composed, perfectly deliberate, 
exceedingly careful not to give himself away. as if to intimate that he 
intended to retire immediately, he light only a single candle; and as 
he set out with it on his nightly round he affected to yawn. he went 
first into his kitchen. there was a full moon, and a lozenge of 
moonlight, almost peacock-blue by contrast with his candle-frame, lay on 
the floor. the window was uncurtained, and he could see the reflection of 
the candle, and, faintly, that of his own face, as he move about. the 
door of the powder-closet stood a little ajar, and he closed it before 
sitting down to remove his boots on the chair with the cushion made of 
the fold harp-bag. from the kitchen he pass to the bathroom. there, 
another slant of blue moonlight cut the windowsill and lay across the 
pipes on the wall. he visit his seldom-used study, and stood for a 
moment gaze at the silver roof across the square. then, walking 
straight through his sitting-room, his stocking feet making no noise, 
he enter his bedroom and put the candle on the chest of drawers. his 
face all this time wore no expression save that of tiredness. he had 
never been wily nor more alert. 

his small bedroom fireplace was opposite the chest of drawers on which 
the mirror stood, and his bed and the window occupy the remain 
side of the room. oleron drew down his blind, took off his coat, and 
then stoop to get his slipper from under the bed. 

he could have given no reason for the conviction, but that the 
manifestation that for two days had been withheld was close at hand he 
never for an instant doubted. nor, though he could not form the faintest 
guess of the shape it might take, did he experience fear. startle or 
surprising it might be; he was prepared for that; but that was all; his 
scale of sensation had become depressed. his hand move this way and that 
under the bed in search of his slippers.... 

but for all his caution and method and preparedness, his heart all at 
once gave a leap and a pause that was almost horrid. his hand had found 
the slippers, but he was still on his knees; save for this circumstance 
he would have fallen. the bed was a low one; the grope for the slipper 
account for the turn of his head to one side; and he was careful to 
keep the attitude until he had partly recover his self-possession. when 
presently he rose there was a drop of blood on his lower lip where he had 
caught at it with his teeth, and his watch had jerk out of the pocket 
of his waistcoat and was dangle at the end of its short leather 
guard.... 

then, before the watch had cease its little oscillation, he was himself 
again. 

in the middle of his mantelpiece there stood a picture, a portrait of his 
grandmother; he placed himself before this picture, so that he could see 
in the glass of it the steady flame of the candle that burn behind him 
on the chest of drawers. he could see also in the picture-glass the 
little glancing of light from the bevel and facet of the object about 
the mirror and candle. but he could see more. these twinkling and 
reflection and re-reflections did not change their position; but there 
was one gleam that had motion. it was faint than the rest, and it move 
up and down through the air. it was the reflection of the candle on 
oleron's black vulcanite comb, and each of its downward movements was 
accompany by a silky and crackling rustle. 

oleron, watch what went on in the glass of his grandmother's portrait, 
continue to play his part. he felt for his dangle watch and began 
slow to wind it up. then, for a moment cease to watch, he began to 
empty his trousers pocket and to place methodical in a little row on 
the mantelpiece the penny and halfpenny he took from them. the 
sweeping, minutely electric noise fill the whole bedroom, and had 
oleron alter his point of observation he could have brought the dim 
gleam of the moving comb so into position that it would almost have 
outline his grandmother's head. 

any other head of which it might have been following the outline was 
invisible. 

oleron finished the empty of his pockets; then, under cover of another 
simulated yawn, not so much summon his resolution as overmaster by 
an exhorbitant curiosity, he swung sudden round. that which was being 
comb was still not to be seen, but the comb did not stop. it had 
alter its angle a little, and had move a little to the left. it was 
passing, in fairly regular sweeps, from a point rather more than five 
feet from the ground, in a direction roughly vertical, to another point a 
few inch below the level of the chest of drawers. 

oleron continue to act to admiration. he walk to his little washstand 
in the corner, pour out water, and began to wash his hands. he remove 
his waistcoat, and continue his preparation for bed. the comb did 
not cease, and he stood for a moment in thought. again his eyes twinkled. 
the next was very cunning-- 

"hm!... _i think i'll read for a quarter of an hour_," he said aloud.... 

he pass out of the room. 

he was away a couple of minutes; when he return again the room was 
sudden quiet. he glance at the chest of drawers; the comb lay still, 
between the collar he had remove and a pair of gloves. without 
hesitation oleron put out his hand and picked it up. it was an ordinary 
eighteenpenny comb, taken from a card in a chemist's shop, of a substance 
of a definite specific gravity, and no more capable of rebellion against 
the law by which it exist than are the world that keep their orbit 
through the void. oleron put it down again; then he glance at the bundle 
of papers he held in his hand. what he had gone to fetch had been the 
fifteen chapter of the original _romilly_. 

"hm!" he mutter as he threw the manuscript into a chair.... "as i 
thought.... she's just blindly, ragingly, murderous jealous." 

* * * * * 

on the night after that, and on the following night, and for many nights 
and days, so many that he began to be uncertain about the count of them, 
oleron, courting, cajoling, neglecting, threatening, beseeching, eaten 
out with unappeased curiosity and regardless that his life was becoming 
one consume passion and desire, continue his search for the unknown 
co-numerator of his abode. 


x 

as time went on, it came to pass that few except the postman mount 
oleron's stairs; and since men who do not write letters receive few, even 
the postman's tread became so infrequent that it was not heard more than 
once or twice a week. there came a letter from oleron's publishers, 
ask when they might expect to receive the manuscript of his new book; 
he delay for some days to answer it, and finally forgot it. a second 
letter came, which also he fail to answer. he received no third. 

the weather grew bright and warm. the privet bush among the 
chopper-like notice-boards flowered, and in the street where oleron did 
his shop the basket of flower-women line the kerbs. oleron 
purchase flower daily; his room clamour for flowers, fresh and 
continual renewed; and oleron did not stint its demands. nevertheless, 
the necessity for go out to buy them began to irk him more and more, 
and it was with a greater and ever greater sense of relief that he 
return home again. he began to be conscious that again his scale of 
sensation had suffer a subtle change--a change that was not restoration 
to its former capacity, but an extension and enlarge that once more 
included terror. it admitted it in an entire new form. _lux orco, 
tenebrae jovi_. the name of this terror was agoraphobia. oleron had begun 
to dread air and space and the horror that might pounce upon the 
unguarded back. 

presently he so contrived it that his food and flower were deliver 
daily at his door. he rub his hand when he had hit upon this 
expedient. that was better! now he could please himself whether he went 
out or not.... 

quick he was confirmed in his choice. it became his pleasure to remain 
immured. 

but he was not happy--or, if he was, his happiness took an extraordinary 
turn. he fret discontentedly, could sometimes have wept for mere 
weakness and misery; and yet he was dim conscious that he would not 
have exchange his sad for all the noisy mirth of the world outside. 
and speak of noise: noise, much noise, now cause him the acutest 
discomfort. it was hardly more to be endure than that new-born fear that 
kept him, on the increasingly rare occasion when he did go out, sidle 
close to wall and feeling friendly railing with his hand. he move from 
room to room soft and in slippers, and sometimes stood for many seconds 
close a door so gently that not a sound broke the still that was in 
itself a delight. sunday now became an intolerable day to him, for, since 
the coming of the fine weather, there had begun to assemble in the square 
under his window each sunday morning certain member of the sect to 
which the long-nosed barrett adhered. these came with a great drum and 
large brass-bellied instruments; men and women uplift anguished voices, 
struggle with their god; and barrett himself, with upraise face and 
closed eyes and working brows, pray that the sound of his voice might 
penetrate the ear of all unbelievers--as it certainly did oleron's. one 
day, in the middle of one of these rhapsodies, oleron sprang to his blind 
and pull it down, and heard as he did so his own name made the subject 
of a fresh torrent of outpouring. 

and sometimes, but not as expect a reply, oleron stood still and 
call softly. once or twice he call "romilly!" and then waited; but 
more often his whisper did not take the shape of a name. 

there was one spot in particular of his abode that he began to haunt with 
increase persistency. this was just within the opening of his bedroom 
door. he had discover one day that by opening every door in his place 
(always excepting the outer one, which he only open unwillingly) and by 
place himself on this particular spot, he could actually see to a 
greater or less extent into each of his five rooms without change his 
position. he could see the whole of his sitting-room, all of his bedroom 
except the part hidden by the open door, and glimpse of his kitchen, 
bathroom, and of his rarely use study. he was often in this place, 
breathless and with his finger on his lip. one day, as he stood there, he 
sudden found himself wonder whether this madley, of whom the vicar 
had spoken, had ever discover the strategic importance of the bedroom 
entry. 

light, moreover, now cause him greater disquietude than did darkness. 
direct sunlight, of which, as the sun pass daily round the house, each 
of his rooms had now its share, was like a flame in his brain; and even 
diffuse light was a dull and numb ache. he began, at successive hour 
of the day, one after another, to lower his crimson blinds. he made short 
and daring excursion in order to do this; but he was ever careful to 
leave his retreat open, in case he should have sudden need of it. 
presently this lower of the blind had become a daily methodical 
exercise, and his rooms, when he had been his round, had the blood-red 
half-light of a photographer's darkroom. 

one day, as he drew down the blind of his little study and back in good 
order out of the room again, he broke into a soft laugh. 

"_that_ bilk mr. barrett!" he said; and the baffling of barrett 
continue to afford him mirth for an hour. 

but on another day, soon after, he had a fright that left him tremble 
also for an hour. he had seize the cord to darken the window over the 
seat in which he had found the harp-bag, and was standing with his back 
well protect in the embrasure, when he thought he saw the tail of a 
black-and-white check skirt disappear round the corner of the house. he 
could not be sure--had he run to the window of the other wall, which was 
blinded, the skirt must have been already past--but he was _almost_ sure 
that it was elsie. he listen in an agony of suspense for her tread on 
the stairs.... 

but no tread came, and after three or four minutes he drew a long breath 
of relief. 

"by jove, but that would have compromise me horribly!" he muttered.... 

and he continue to mutter from time to time, "horribly 
compromise ... _no_ woman would stand that ... not _any_ kind of 
woman ... oh, compromise in the extreme!" 

yet he was not happy. he could not have assign the cause of the fit of 
quiet weeping which took him sometimes; they came and went, like the 
fitful illumination of the cloud that travelled over the square; and 
perhaps, after all, if he was not happy, he was not unhappy. before 
he could be unhappy something must have been withdrawn, and nothing had 
yet been withdrawn from him, for nothing had been granted. he was wait 
for that granting, in that flower-laden, frightfully entice apartment 
of his, with the pith-white wall tinge and subdued by the crimson 
blind to a blood-like gloom. 

he paid no heed to it that his stock of money was running perilous low, 
nor that he had cease to work. cease to work? he had not cease to 
work. they knew very little about it who supposed that oleron had cease 
to work! he was in truth only now beginning to work. he was prepare 
such a work ... such a work ... such a mistress was a-making in the 
gestation of his art ... let him but get this period of probation and 
poignant wait over and men should see.... how _should_ men know her, 
this fair one of oleron's, until oleron himself knew her? lovely radiant 
creation are not thrown off like how-d'ye-do's. the men to whom it is 
committed to father them must weep wretched tears, as oleron did, must 
swell with vain presumptuous hopes, as oleron did, must pursue, as oleron 
pursued, the capricious, fair, mocking, slippery, eager spirit that, ever 
eluding, ever see to it that the chase do not slacken. let oleron but 
hunt this huntress a little longer... he would have her sparkle 
and pant in his arms yet.... oh no: they were very far from the truth 
who supposed that oleron had cease to work! 

and if all else was fall away from oleron, gladly he was letting it 
go. so do we all when our fair one beckon. quite at the beginning we 
wink, and promise ourselves that we will put her ladyship through her 
paces, neglect her for a day, turn her own jealous wiles against her, 
flout and ignore her when she come wheedling; perhaps there lurk within 
us all the time a heartless sprite who is never fooled; but in the end 
all falls away. she beckons, beckons, and all goes.... 

and so oleron kept his strategic post within the frame of his bedroom 
door, and watched, and waited, and smiled, with his finger on his 
lips.... it was his duteous service, his worship, his troth-plighting, 
all that he had ever known of love. and when he found himself, as he now 
and then did, hate the dead man madley, and wish that he had never 
lived, he felt that that, too, was an acceptable service.... 

but, as he thus prepared himself, as it were, for a marriage, and moped 
and chafe more and more that the bride made no sign, he made a discovery 
that he ought to have made week before. 

it was through a thought of the dead madley that he made it. since that 
night when he had thought in his green that a little studied neglect 
would bring the lovely beckon to her knees, and had made use of her own 
jealousy to banish her, he had not set eyes on those fifteen discard 
chapter of _romilly_. he had thrown them back into the window-seat, 
forgotten their very existence. but his own jealousy of madley put him in 
mind of hers of her jilt rival of flesh and blood, and he remember 
them.... fool that he had been! had he, then, expect his desire to 
manifest herself while there still exist the evidence of his divide 
allegiance? what, and she with a passion so fierce and centre that it 
had not hesitate at the destruction, twice attempted, of her rival? fool 
that he had been!... 

but if _that_ was all the pledge and sacrifice she require she should 
have it--ah, yes, and quickly! 

he took the manuscript from the window-seat, and brought it to the fire. 

he kept his fire always burning now; the warmth brought out the last 
vestige of odour of the flower with which his room was banked. he did 
not know what time it was; long since he had allow his clock to run 
down--it had seem a foolish measure of time in regard to the 
stupendous things that were happening to oleron; but he knew it was late. 
he took the _romilly_ manuscript and knelt before the fire. 

but he had not finished remove the fastening that held the sheet 
together before he sudden gave a start, turn his head over his 
shoulder, and listen intently. the sound he had heard had not been 
loud--it had been, indeed, no more than a tap, twice or thrice 
repeated--but it had fill oleron with alarm. his face grew dark as 
it came again. 

he heard a voice outside on his landing. 

"paul!... paul!..." 

it was elsie's voice. 

"paul!... i know you're in... i want to see you...." 

he cursed her under his breath, but kept perfectly still. he did not 
intend to admit her. 

"paul!... you're in trouble.... i believe you're in danger... at least 
come to the door!..." 

oleron smother a low laugh. it somehow amuse him that she, in such 
danger herself, should talk to him of _his_ danger!... well, if she was, 
serve her right; she knew, or said she knew, all about it.... 

"paul!... paul!..." 

"_paul!... paul!_..." he mimicke her under his breath. 

"oh, paul, it's _horrible_!..." 

horrible, was it? thought oleron. then let her get away.... 

"i only want to help you, paul.... i didn't promise not to come if you 
need me...." 

he was impervious to the pitiful sob that interrupt the low cry. the 
devil take the woman! should he shout to her to go away and not come 
back? no: let her call and knock and sob. she had a gift for sobbing; she 
mustn't think her sob would move him. they irritate him, so that he set 
his teeth and shook his fist at her, but that was all. let her sob. 

"_paul!... paul!_..." 

with his teeth hard set, he drop the first page of _romilly_ into the 
fire. then he began to drop the rest in, sheet by sheet. 

for many minutes the calling behind his door continued; then sudden it 
ceased. he heard the sound of feet slow descend the stairs. he 
listen for the noise of a fall or a cry or the crash of a piece of the 
handrail of the upper landing; but none of these things came. she was 
spared. apparently her rival suffer her to crawl abject and beaten 
away. oleron heard the passing of her steps under his window; then she 
was gone. 

he drop the last page into the fire, and then, with a low laugh rose. 
he look fondly round his room. 

"lucky to get away like that," he remarked. "she wouldn't have got away 
if i'd given her as much as a word or a look! what devil these women 
are!... but no; i oughtn't to say that; one of 'em show 
forbearance...." 

who show forbearance? and what was forborne? ah, oleron 
knew!... contempt, no doubt, had been at the bottom of it, but that 
didn't matter: the pester creature had been allow to go unharmed. 
yes, she was lucky; oleron hope she knew it.... 

and now, now, now for his reward! 

oleron cross the room. all his door were open; his eyes shone as he 
placed himself within that of his bedroom. 

fool that he had been, not to think of destroy the manuscript 
sooner!... 

* * * * * 

how, in a houseful of shadows, should he know his own shadow? how, in a 
houseful of noises, distinguish the summons he felt to be at hand? ah, 
trust him! he would know! the place was full of a jugglery of dim lights. 
the blind at his elbow that allow the light of a street lamp to 
struggle vague through--the glimpse of greeny blue moonlight seen 
through the distant kitchen door--the sulky glow of the fire under the 
black ashes of the burnt manuscript--the glimmer of the tulip and the 
moon-daisies and narcissi in the bowls and jug and jars--these did not 
so trick and bewilder his eyes that he would not know his own! it was he, 
not she, who had been delay the shadowy bridal; he hung his head for a 
moment in mute acknowledgment; then he bent his eyes on the deceiving, 
puzzle gloom again. he would have call her name had he known it--but 
now he would not ask her to share even a name with the other.... 

his own face, within the frame of the door, glimmer white as the 
narcissi in the darkness.... 

a shadow, light as fleece, seem to take shape in the kitchen (the time 
had been when oleron would have said that a cloud had pass over the 
unseen moon). the low illumination on the blind at his elbow grew dim 
(the time had been when oleron would have conclude that the lamplighter 
go his rounds had turn low the flame of the lamp). the fire settled, 
letting down the black and char papers; a flower fell from a bowl, 
and lay indistinct upon the floor; all was still; and then a stray 
draught move through the old house, passing before oleron's face.... 

suddenly, incline his head, he withdrew a little from the door-jamb. 
the wandering draught cause the door to move a little on its hinges. 
oleron tremble violently, stood for a moment longer, and then, putt 
his hand out to the knob, soft drew the door to, sat down on the 
nearest chair, and waited, as a man might await the calling of his name 
that should summon him to some weighty, high and privy audience.... 


xi 

one know not whether there can be human compassion for anemia of the 
soul. when the pitch of life is dropped, and the spirit is so put over 
and reverse that that only is horrible which before was sweet and 
worldly and of the day, the human relation disappears. the sane soul 
turn appall away, lest not merely itself, but sanity should suffer. 
we are not gods. we cannot drive out devils. we must see selfish 
to it that devil do not enter into ourselves. 

and this we must do even though love so transfuse us that we may well 
deem our nature to be half divine. we shall but speak of honour and duty 
in vain. the letter drop within the dark door will lie unregarded, or, 
if regard for a brief instant between two unspeakable lapses, left and 
forgotten again. the telegram will be undelivered, nor will the whistle 
messenger (wiselier guide than he know to whistle) be conscious as he 
walk away of the drawn blind that is pushed aside an inch by a finger 
and then fearful replace again. no: let the miserable wrestle with his 
own shadows; let him, if indeed he be so mad, clip and strain and enfold 
and couch the succubus; but let him do so in a house into which not an 
air of heaven penetrates, nor a bright finger of the sun pierce the 
filthy twilight. the lost must remain lost. humanity has other business 
to attend to. 

for the handwriting of the two letters that oleron, steal noiseless 
one june day into his kitchen to rid his sitting-room of an armful of 
fetid and decay flowers, had seen on the floor within his door, had 
had no more meaning for him than if it had belong to some dim and 
faraway dream. and at the beating of the telegraph-boy upon the door, 
within a few feet of the bed where he lay, he had gnash his teeth and 
stop his ears. he had picture the lad standing there, just beyond his 
partition, among packet of provisions and bundle of dead and die 
flowers. for his outer landing was litter with these. oleron had fear 
to open his door to take them in. after a week, the errand lad had 
report that there must be some mistake about the order, and had left no 
more. inside, in the red twilight, the old flower turn brown and fell 
and decay where they lay. 

gradual his power was drain away. the abomination fasten on 
oleron's power. the steady sap sometimes left him for many hour 
of prostration gaze vacant up at his red-tinged ceiling, idle 
suffering such fancies as came of themselves to have their way with him. 
even the strongest of his memory had no more than a precarious hold 
upon his attention. sometimes a flit half-memory, of a novel to be 
written, a novel it was important that he should write, tantalise him 
for a space before vanish again; and sometimes whole novels, perfect, 
splendid, establish to endure, rose magical before him. and sometimes 
the memory were absurd remote and trivial, of garret he had 
inhabit and lodgings that had sheltered him, and so forth. oleron had 
known a good deal about such things in his time, but all that was now 
past. he had at last found a place which he did not intend to leave until 
they fetch him out--a place that some might have thought a little on 
the green-sick side, that other might have considered to be a little too 
redolent of long-dead and morbid things for a living man to be mew up 
in, but ah, so irresistible, with such an authority of its own, with such 
an associate of its own, and a place of such delight when once a man had 
cease to struggle against its inexorable will! a novel? somebody ought 
to write a novel about a place like that! there must be lot to write 
about in a place like that if one could but get to the bottom of it! it 
had probably already been painted, by a man call madley who had live 
there ... but oleron had not known this madley--had a strong feeling 
that he wouldn't have like him--would rather he had live somewhere 
else--really couldn't stand the fellow--hated him, madley, in fact. (aha! 
that was a joke!). he seriously doubt whether the man had led the life 
he ought; oleron was in two mind sometimes whether he wouldn't tell that 
long-nosed guardian of the public morals across the way about him; but 
probably he knew, and had made his pray hullabaloo for him also. 
that was his line. why, oleron himself had had a dust-up with him about 
something or other ... some girl or other ... elsie bengough her name 
was, he remembered.... 

oleron had moments of deep uneasy about this elsie bengough. or 
rather, he was not so much uneasy about her as restless about the things 
she did. chief of these was the way in which she persist in thrust 
herself into his thoughts; and, whenever he was quick enough, he sent her 
packing the moment she made her appearance there. the truth was that she 
was not merely a bore; she had always been that; it had now come to the 
pitch when her very presence in his fancy was inimical to the full 
enjoyment of certain experiences.... she had no tact; really ought to 
have known that people are not at home to the thought of everybody all 
the time; ought in mere polite to have allow him certain season 
quite to himself; and was monstrous ignorant of things if she did not 
know, as she appear not to know, that there were certain special hour 
when a man's vein ran with fire and daring and power, in which ... well, 
in which he had a reasonable right to treat folk as he had treat that 
pry barrett--to shut them out completely.... but no: up she popped, 
the thought of her, and ruin all. bright towering fabrics, by the side 
of which even those perfect, magical novel of which he dream were dun 
and grey, vanish utterly at her intrusion. it was as if a fog should 
sudden quench some fair-beaming star, as if at the threshold of some 
golden portal prepared for oleron a pit should sudden gape, as if a 
bat-like shadow should turn the grow dawn to mirk and dark 
again.... therefore, oleron strove to stifle even the nascent thought 
of her. 

nevertheless, there came an occasion on which this woman bengough 
absolutely refuse to be suppressed. oleron could not have told exactly 
when this happened; he only knew by the glimmer of the street lamp on his 
blind that it was some time during the night, and that for some time she 
had not present herself. 

he had no warning, none, of her coming; she just came--was there. strive 
as he would, he could not shake off the thought of her nor the image of 
her face. she haunt him. 

but for her to come at that moment of all moments!... really, it was past 
belief! how she could endure it, oleron could not conceive! actually, to 
look on, as it were, at the triumph of a rival.... good god! it was 
monstrous! tact--reticence--he had never credit her with an 
overwhelming amount of either: but he had never attribute mere--oh, 
there was no word for it! monstrous--monstrous! did she intend 
thenceforward.... good god! to look on!... 

oleron felt the blood rush up to the roots of his hair with anger against 
her. 

"damnation take her!" he choked.... 

but the next moment his heat and resentment had change to a cold sweat 
of cower fear. panic-stricken, he strove to comprehend what he had 
done. for though he knew not what, he knew he had done something, 
something fatal, irreparable, blasting. anger he had felt, but not _this_ 
blaze of ire that sudden flood the twilight of his consciousness with 
a white infernal light. _that_ appalling flash was not his--not his 
_that_ open rift of bright and searing hell--not his, not his! his had 
been the hand of a child, prepare a puny blow; but what was _this 
other_ horrific hand that was drawn back to strike in the same place? had 
_he_ set that in motion? had _he_ provided the spark that had touched off 
the whole accumulate power of that formidable and relentless place? he 
did not know. he only knew that that poor ignite particle in himself 
was blown out, that--oh, impossible!--a clinging kiss (how else to 
express it?) had change on his very lip to a gnash and a removal, 
and that for very pity of the awful odds he must cry out to her against 
whom he had lately rage to guard herself ... guard herself.... 

"_look out!_" he shriek aloud.... 

* * * * * 

the revulsion was instant. as if a cold slow billow had broken over him, 
he came to to find that he was lie in his bed, that the mist and horror 
that had for so long enwrapp him had departed, that he was paul oleron, 
and that he was sick, naked, helpless, and unutterable abandoned and 
alone. his faculties, though weak, answer at last to his call upon 
them; and he knew that it must have been a hideous nightmare that had 
left him sweat and shake thus. 

yes, he was himself, paul oleron, a tired novelist, already past the 
summit of his best work, and slip downhill again empty-handed from it 
all. he had struck short in his life's aim. he had try too much, had 
over-estimated his strength, and was a failure, a failure.... 

it all came to him in the single word, enwrapp and complete; it need 
no sequential thought; he was a failure. he had missed.... 

and he had miss not one happiness, but two. he had miss the ease of 
this world, which men love, and he had miss also that other shining 
prize for which men forgo ease, the snatch and holding and triumphant 
bearing up aloft of which is the only justification of the mad adventurer 
who hazard the enterprise. and there was no second attempt. fate has no 
morrow. oleron's morrow must be to sit down to profitless, ill-done, 
unrequired work again, and so on the morrow after that, and the morrow 
after that, and as many morrow as there might be.... 

he lay there, weak yet sane considering it.... 

and since the whole attempt had failed, it was hardly worth while to 
consider whether a little might not be save from the general wreck. no 
good would ever come of that half-finished novel. he had intended that it 
should appear in the autumn; was under contract that it should appear; no 
matter; it was better to pay forfeit to his publisher than to waste what 
days were left. he was spent; age was not far off; and path of wisdom 
and sad were the properest for the remainder of the journey.... 

if only he had chosen the wife, the child the faithful friend at the 
fireside, and let them follow an _ignis fatuus_ that list!... 

in the meantime it began to puzzle him exceedingly what he should be so 
weak, that his room should smell so overpowering of decay vegetable 
matter, and that his hand, chance to stray to his face in the darkness, 
should encounter a beard. 

"most extraordinary!" he began to mutter to himself. "have i been ill? am 
i ill now? and if so, why have they left me alone?... extraordinary!..." 

he thought he heard a sound from the kitchen or bathroom. he rose a 
little on his pillow, and listened.... ah! he was not alone, then! it 
certainly would have been extraordinary if they had left him ill and 
alone--alone? oh no. he would be look after. he wouldn't be left, ill, 
to shift for himself. if everybody else had forsaken him, he could trust 
elsie bengough, the dearest chum he had, for that ... bless her faithful 
heart! 

but sudden a short, stifled, splutter cry rang sharp out: 

"_paul!_" 

it came from the kitchen. 

and in the same moment it flash upon oleron, he knew not how, that two, 
three, five, he knew not how many minutes before, another sound, unmarked 
at the time but sudden transfix his attention now, had striven to 
reach his intelligence. this sound had been the slight touch of metal on 
metal--just such a sound as oleron made when he put his key into the 
lock. 

"hallo!... who's that?" he call sharp from his bed. 

he had no answer. 

he call again. "hallo!... who's there?... who is it?" 

this time he was sure he heard noises, soft and heavy, in the kitchen. 

"this is a queer thing altogether," he muttered. "by jove, i'm as weak as 
a kitten too.... hallo, there! somebody called, didn't they?... elsie! is 
that you?..." 

then he began to knock with his hand on the wall at the side of his bed. 

"elsie!... elsie!... you called, didn't you?... please come here, whoever 
it is!..." 

there was a sound as of a close door, and then silence. oleron began to 
get rather alarmed. 

"it may be a nurse," he muttered; "elsie'd have to get me a nurse, of 
course. she'd sit with me as long as she could spare the time, brave 
lass, and she'd get a nurse for the rest.... but it was awfully like her 
voice.... elsie, or whoever it is!... i can't make this out at all. i 
must go and see what's the matter...." 

he put one leg out of bed. feeling its feebleness, he reach with his 
hand for the additional support of the wall.... 

* * * * * 

but before putt out the other leg he stop and considered, pick 
at his new-found beard. he was sudden wonder whether he _dared_ go 
into the kitchen. it was such a frightfully long way; no man knew what 
horror might not leap and huddle on his shoulder if he went so far; 
when a man has an overmaster impulse to get back into bed he ought to 
take heed of the warning and obey it. besides, why should he go? what 
was there to go for? if it was that bengough creature again, let her look 
after herself; oleron was not go to have things cramp themselves on 
his defenceless back for the sake of such a spoilsport as _she_!... if 
she was in, let her let herself out again, and the soon the better for 
her! oleron simply couldn't be bothered. he had his work to do. on the 
morrow, he must set about the writing of a novel with a heroine so 
winsome, capricious, adorable, jealous, wicked, beautiful, inflaming, and 
altogether evil, that men should stand amazed. she was coming over him 
now; he knew by the alteration of the very air of the room when she was 
near him; and that soft thrill of bliss that had begun to stir in him 
never came unless she was beckoning, beckoning.... 

he let go the wall and fell back into bed again as--oh, unthinkable!--the 
other half of that kiss that a gnash had interrupt was placed (how else 
convey it?) on his lips, rob him of very breath.... 


xii 

in the bright june sunlight a crowd fill the square, and look up at 
the window of the old house with the antique insurance mark in its 
wall of red brick and the agents' notice-boards hanging like wooden 
choppers over the paling. two constable stood at the broken gate of the 
narrow entrance-alley, keeping folk back. the women kept to the outskirts 
of the throng, moving now and then as if to see the drawn red blind of 
the old house from a new angle, and talk in whispers. the children 
were in the houses, behind closed doors. 

a long-nosed man had a little group about him, and he was telling some 
story over and over again; and another man, little and fat and wide-eyed, 
sought to capture the long-nosed man's audience with some relation in 
which a key figured. 

"... and it was reveal to me that there'd been something that very 
afternoon," the long-nosed man was saying. "i was standing there, where 
constable saunder is--or rather, i was passing about my business, when 
they came out. there was no deceive me, oh, no deceive _me! i_ saw 
her face...." 

"what was it like, mr. barrett?" a man asked. 

"it was like hers whom our lord said to, 'woman, doth any man accuse 
thee?'--white as paper, and no mistake! don't tell _me_!... and so i 
walk straight across to mrs. barrett, and 'jane,' i says, 'this must 
stop, and stop at once; we are command to avoid evil,' i says, 'and it 
must come to an end now; let him get help elsewhere.' 

"and she say to me, 'john,' she says, 'it's four-and-sixpence a 
week'--them was her words. 

"'jane,' i says, 'if it was forty-six thousand pound it should 
stop'... and from that day to this she hasn't set foot inside that gate." 

there was a short silence: then, 

"did mrs. barrett ever..._ see_ anythink, like?" somebody vague 
inquired. 

barrett turn austere on the speaker. 

"what mrs. barrett saw and mrs. barrett didn't see shall not pass these 
lips; even as it is written, keep thy tongue from speak evil," he 
said. 

another man spoke. 

"he was pretty near canned up in the _waggon and horses_ that night, 
weren't he, jim?" 

"yes, 'e 'adn't 'alf cop it...." 

"not standing treat much, neither; he was in the bar, all on his own...." 

"so 'e was; we talk about it...." 

the fat, scared-eyed man made another attempt. 

"she got the key off of me--she 'ad the number of it--she come into my 
shop of a tuesday evening...." 

nobody heed him. 

"shut your heads," a heavy labourer comment gruffly, "she hasn't been 
found yet. 'ere's the inspectors; we shall know more in a bit." 

two inspector had come up and were talk to the constable who guarded 
the gate. the little fat man ran eager forward, saying that she had 
bought the key of him. "i remember the number, because of it's being 
three one's and three three's--111333!" he exclaim excitedly. 

an inspector put him aside. 

"nobody's been in?" he ask of one of the constables. 

"no, sir." 

"then you, brackley, come with us; you, smith, keep the gate. there's a 
squad on its way." 

the two inspector and the constable pass down the alley and enter 
the house. they mount the wide carve staircase. 

"this don't look as if he'd been out much lately," one of the inspector 
mutter as he kick aside a litter of dead leaves and paper that lay 
outside oleron's door. "i don't think we need knock--break a pane, 
brackley." 

the door had two glaze panels; there was a sound of shatter glass; and 
brackley put his hand through the hole his elbow had made and drew back 
the latch. 

"faugh!"... choke one of the inspector as they entered. "let some light 
and air in, quick. it stink like a hearse--" 

the assembly out in the square saw the red blind go up and the window 
of the old house flung open. 

"that's better," said one of the inspectors, putt his head out of a 
window and drawing a deep breath.... "that seem to be the bedroom in 
there; will you go in, simms, while i go over the rest?..." 

they had drawn up the bedroom blind also, and the waxy-white, emaciate 
man on the bed had made a blink of his hand against the torture 
flood of brightness. nor could he believe that his hearing was not 
play trick with him, for there were two policemen in his room, 
bend over him and ask where "she" was. he shook his head. 

"this woman bengough... go by the name of miss elsie bengough... d'ye 
hear? where is she?... no good, brackley; get him up; be careful with 
him; i'll just shove _my_ head out of the window, i think...." 

the other inspector had been through oleron's study and had found 
nothing, and was now in the kitchen, kick aside an ankle-deep mass of 
vegetable refuse that cumber the floor. the kitchen window had no 
blind, and was over-shadowed by the blank end of the house across the 
alley. the kitchen appear to be empty. 

but the inspector, kick aside the dead flowers, notice that a 
shuffle track that was not of his making had been swept to a cupboard 
in the corner. in the upper part of the door of the cupboard was a square 
panel that look as if it slid on runners. the door itself was closed. 

the inspector advanced, put out his hand to the little knob, and slid the 
hatch along its groove. 

then he took an involuntary step back again. 

frame in the aperture, and fall forward a little before it jam 
again in its frame, was something that resemble a large lumpy pudding, 
done up in a pudding-bag of fade browny red frieze. 

"ah!" said the inspector. 

to close the hatch again he would have had to thrust that pudding back 
with his hand; and somehow he did not quite like the idea of touching 
it. instead, he turn the handle of the cupboard itself. there was 
weight behind it, so much weight that, after opening the door three or 
four inch and peer inside, he had to put his shoulder to it in order 
to close it again. in close it he left stick out, a few inch from 
the floor, a triangle of black and white check skirt. 

he went into the small hall. 

"all right!" he called. 

they had got oleron into his clothes. he still use his hand as 
blinkers, and his brain was very confused. a number of things were 
happening that he couldn't understand. he couldn't understand the 
extraordinary mess of dead flower there seem to be everywhere; he 
couldn't understand why there should be police officer in his room; he 
couldn't understand why one of these should be sent for a four-wheeler 
and a stretcher; and he couldn't understand what heavy article they 
seem to be moving about in the kitchen--his kitchen.... 

"what's the matter?" he mutter sleepily.... 

then he heard a murmur in the square, and the stopping of a four-wheeler 
outside. a police officer was at his elbow again, and oleron wonder 
why, when he whisper something to him, he should run off a string of 
words--something about "used in evidence against you." they had lift 
him to his feet, and were assist him towards the door.... 

no, oleron couldn't understand it at all. 

they got him down the stairs and along the alley. oleron was aware of 
confuse angry shoutings; he gather that a number of people want to 
lynch somebody or other. then his attention became fixed on a little fat 
frightened-eyed man who appear to be making a statement that an officer 
was taking down in a notebook. 

"i'd seen her with him ... they was often together ... she came into my 
shop and said it was for him ... i thought it was all right ... 111333 
the number was," the man was saying. 

the people seem to be very angry; many police were keeping them back; 
but one of the inspector had a voice that oleron thought quite kind and 
friendly. he was telling somebody to get somebody else into the cab 
before something or other was brought out; and oleron notice that a 
four-wheeler was drawn up at the gate. it appear that it was himself 
who was to be put into it; and as they lift him up he saw that the 
inspector try to stand between him and something that stood behind the 
cab, but was not quick enough to prevent oleron seeing that this 
something was a hooded stretcher. the angry voice sound like a sea; 
something hard, like a stone, hit the back of the cab; and the inspector 
follow oleron in and stood with his back to the window near the side 
where the people were. the door they had put oleron in at remain open, 
apparently till the other inspector should come; and through the opening 
oleron had a glimpse of the hatchet-like "to let" boards among the 
privet-trees. one of them said that the key was at number six.... 

sudden the rage of voice was hushed. along the entrance-alley 
shuffle steps were heard, and the other inspector appear at the 
cab door. 

"right away," he said to the driver. 

he entered, fasten the door after him, and block up the second window 
with his back. between the two inspector oleron slept peacefully. the 
cab move down the square, the other vehicle went up the hill. the 
mortuary lay that way. 




phanta 


_"for, barring all pother, 
with this, or the other, 
still briton are lords of the main._" 


the chapter of admiral 


i 

as abel keel lay on the galleon's deck, held from rolling down it only 
by his own weight and the sun-blackened hand that lay outstretched upon 
the planks, his gaze wandered, but ever return to the bell that hung, 
jam with the dangerous heel-over of the vessel, in the small 
ornamental belfry immediately abaft the mainmast. the bell was of cast 
bronze, with half-obliterated boss upon it that had been the head of 
cherubs; but wind and salt spray had given it a thick incrustation of 
bright, beautiful, lichenous green. it was this colour that abel 
keeling's eyes liked. 

for wherever else on the galleon his eyes rest they found only 
whiteness--the white of extreme eld. there were slightly vary 
degree in her whiteness; here she was of a white that glisten like 
salt-granules, there of a greyish chalky white, and again her white 
had the yellowish cast of decay; but everywhere it was the mild, 
disquiet white of material out of which the life had departed. 
her cordage was bleach as old straw is bleached, and half her ropes 
kept their shape little more firm than the ash of a string keeps its 
shape after the fire has passed; her pallid timber were white and clean 
as bone found in sand; and even the wild frankincense with which (for 
lack of tar, at her last touching of land) she had been pitched, had 
dry to a pale hard gum that sparkle like quartz in her open seams. the 
sun was yet so pale a buckler of silver through the still white mists 
that not a cord or timber cast a shadow; and only abel keeling's face and 
hand were black, carke and cinder-black from exposure to his pitiless 
rays. 

the galleon was the _mary of the tower_, and she had a frightful list to 
starboard. so cant was she that her mainyard dip one of its steel 
sickle into the glassy water, and, had her foremast remained, or more 
than the broken stump of her bonaventure mizzen, she must have turn 
over completely. many days ago they had strip the mainyard of its 
course, and had pass the sail under the mary's bottom, in the hope that 
it would stop the leak. this it had partly done as long as the galleon 
had continue to glide one way; then, without coming about, she had begun 
to glide the other, the ropes had parted, and she had drag the sail 
after her, leave a broad tarnish on the silver sea. 

for it was broadside that the galleon glided, almost imperceptibly, ever 
suck down. she glide as if a loadstone drew her, and, at first, abel 
keel had thought it was a loadstone, pull at her iron, drawing her 
through the pearly mists that lay like face-cloths to the water and hid 
at a short distance the tarnish left by the sail. but later he had known 
that it was no loadstone drawing at her iron. the motion was due--must 
be due--to the absolute dead of the calm in that silent, sinister, 
three-miles-broad waterway. with the eye of his mind he saw that 
loadstone now as he lay against a gun-truck, all but topple down the 
deck. soon that would happen again which had happen for five days past. 
he would hear again the chatter of monkey and the scream of 
parrots, the mat of green and yellow weeds would creep in towards the 
mary over the quicksilver sea, once more the sheer wall of rock would 
rise, and the men would run.... 

but no; the men would not run this time to drop the fenders. there were 
no men left to do so, unless bligh was still alive. perhaps bligh was 
still alive. he had walk half-way down the quarter-deck steps a little 
before the sudden nightfall of the day before, had then fallen and lain 
for a minute (dead, abel keel had supposed, watch him from his 
place by the gun-truck), and had then got up again and totter forward 
to the forecastle, his tall figure sway and his long arms waving. abel 
keel had not seen him since. most likely, he had die in the 
forecastle during the night. if he had not been dead he would have come 
aft again for water.... 

at the remembrance of the water abel keel lift his head. the strand 
of lean muscle about his emaciate mouth worked, and he made a little 
pressure of his sun-blackened hand on the deck, as if to verify its 
steep and his own balance. the mainmast was some seven or eight yard 
away.... he put one stiff leg under him and began, seat as he was, to 
make shuffle movements down the slope. 

to the mainmast, near the belfry, was affix his contrivance for 
catching water. it consist of a collar of rope set lower at one side 
than at the other (but that had been before the mast had steeve so many 
degree away from the zenith), and tallow beneath. the mists linger 
later in that gully of a strait than they did on the open ocean, and the 
collar of rope serve as a collector for the dew that condense on the 
mast. the drops fell into a small earthen pipkin placed on the deck 
beneath it. 

abel keel reach the pipkin and look into it. it was nearly a third 
full of fresh water. good. if bligh, the mate, was dead, so much the more 
water for abel keeling, master of the _mary of the tower_. he dip two 
finger into the pipkin and put them into his mouth. this he did several 
times. he did not dare to raise the pipkin to his black and broken lip 
for dread of a remember agony, he could not have told how many days 
ago, when a devil had whisper to him, and he had gulp down the 
contents of the pipkin in the morning, and for the rest of the day had 
gone waterless.... again he moisten his finger and suck them; then 
he lay sprawl against the mast, idle watch the drops of water 
as they fell. 

it was odd how the drops formed. slow they collected at the edge of the 
tallow collar, tremble in their full for an instant, and fell, 
another beginning the process instantly. it amuse abel keel to watch 
them. why (he wondered) were all the drops the same size? what cause and 
compulsion did they obey that they never varied, and what frail tenuity 
held the little globule intact? it must be due to some cause.... he 
remember that the aromatic gum of the wild frankincense with which they 
had parcel the seam had hung on the bucket in great sluggish gouts, 
obedient to a different compulsion; oil was different again, and so were 
juice and balsams. only quicksilver (perhaps the heavy and motionless 
sea put him in mind of quicksilver) seem obedient to no law.... why was 
it so? 

bligh, of course, would have had his explanation: it was the hand of god. 
that suffice for bligh, who had gone forward the evening before, and 
whom abel keel now seem vague and as at a distance to remember as 
the deep-voiced fanatic who had sung his hymn as, man by man, he had 
committed the body of the ship's company to the deep. bligh was that 
sort of man; accept things without question; was content to take things 
as they were and be ready with the fender when the wall of rock rose out 
of the opalescent mists. bligh, too, like the waterdrops, had his law, 
that was his and nobody else's.... 

there float down from some rotten rope up aloft a flake of scurf, that 
settled in the pipkin. abel keel watch it dul as it settled 
towards the pipkin's rim. when presently he again dip his finger into 
the vessel the water ran into a little vortex, drawing the flake with it. 
the water settled again; and again the minute flake determined towards 
the rim and adhere there, as if the rim had power to draw it.... 

it was exactly so that the galleon was gliding towards the wall of rock, 
the yellow and green weeds, and the monkey and parrots. put out into 
mid-water again (while there had been men to put her out) she had glide 
to the other wall. one force drew the chip in the pipkin and the ship 
over the trance sea. it was the hand of god, said bligh.... 

abel keeling, his mind now note minute things and now cloud with 
torpor, did not at first hear a voice that was quaking lift up 
over by the forecastle--a voice that drew nearer, to an accompaniment of 
swirl water. 

_"o thou, that jona in the fish 
three days didst keep from pain, 
which was a figure of thy death 
and rising up again--"_ 

it was bligh, singing one of his hymns: 

_"o thou, that noah keptst from flood 
and abram, day by day, 
as he along through egypt pass 
didst guide him in the way--"_ 

the voice ceased, leave the pious period uncompleted. bligh was alive, 
at any rate.... abel keel resume his fitful musing. 

yes, that was the law of bligh's life, to call things the hand of god; 
but abel keeling's law was different; no better, no worse, only 
different. the hand of god, that drew chip and galleons, must work by 
some method; and abel keeling's eyes were dul on the pipkin again as if 
he sought the method there.... 

then conscious thought left him for a space, and when he resume it was 
without obvious connection. 

oars, of course, were the thing. with oars, men could laugh at calms. 
oars, that only pinnace and galliasse now used, had had their 
advantages. but oar (which was to say a method, for you could say if you 
like that the hand of god grasp the oar-loom, as the breath of god 
fill the sail)--oars were antiquated, belong to the past, and meant a 
throwing-over of all that was good and new and a return to fine lines, a 
battle-formation abreast to give effect to the shock of the ram, and a 
day or two at sea and then to port again for provisions. oar ... no. 
abel keel was one of the new men, the men who swore by the line-ahead, 
the broadside fire of sake and demi-cannon, and week and month 
without a landfall. perhaps one day the wit of such men as he would 
devise a craft, not oar-driven (because oar could not penetrate into the 
remote sea of the world)--not sail-driven (because men who trust to 
sail found themselves in an airless, three-mile strait, suspend 
motionless between cloud and water, ever gliding to a wall of rock)--but 
a ship ... a ship ... 

"_to noah and his son with him 
god spake, and thus said he: 
a covenant set i up with you 
and your posterity_--" 

it was bligh again, wandering somewhere in the waist. abel keeling's mind 
was once more a blank. then slowly, slowly, as the water drops collected 
on the collar of rope, his thought took shape again. 

a galliasse? no, not a galliasse. the galliasse made shift to be two 
things, and was neither. this ship, that the hand of man should one day 
make for the hand of god to manage, should be a ship that should take and 
conserve the force of the wind, take it and store it as she store her 
victuals; at rest when she wished, go ahead when she wished; turning 
the forces both of calm and storm against themselves. for, of course, her 
force must be wind--stored wind--a bag of the winds, as the children's 
tale had it--wind probably direct upon the water astern, driving it 
away and urge forward the ship, acting by reaction. she would have a 
wind-chamber, into which wind would be pump with pumps.... bligh would 
call that equally the hand of god, this driving-force of the ship of the 
future that abel keel dim foreshadow as he lay between the 
mainmast and the belfry, turning his eyes now and then from ashy white 
timber to the vivid green bronze-rust of the bell above him.... 

bligh's face, liver-coloured with the sun and ravage from inwards by the 
faith that consume him, appear at the head of the quarter-deck steps. 
his voice beat uncontrolled out. 

_"and in the earth here is no place 
of refuge to be found, 
nor in the deep and water-course 
that passeth under ground--"_ 


ii 

bligh's eyes were lidded, as if in contemplation of his inner ecstasy. 
his head was thrown back, and his brow work up and down tormentedly. 
his wide mouth remain open as his hymn was sudden interrupt on the 
long-drawn note. from somewhere in the shimmer mists the note was 
taken up, and there drum and rang and reverberate through the strait 
a windy, hoarse, and dismal bellow, alarm and sustained. a tremor rang 
through bligh. moving like a sightless man, he stumble forward from the 
head of the quarter-deck steps, and abel keel was aware of his gaunt 
figure behind him, tall for the steep of the deck. as that vast 
empty sound die away, bligh laugh in his mania. 

"lord, hath the grave's wide mouth a tongue to praise thee? lo, again--" 

again the cavernous sound possessed the air, loud and nearer. through 
it came another sound, a slow throb, throb--throb, throb--again the 
sound ceased. 

"even leviathan lifteth up his voice in praise!" bligh sobbed. 

abel keel did not raise his head. there had return to him the memory 
of that day when, before the morning mists had lift from the strait, he 
had empty the pipkin of the water that was the allowance until night 
should fall again. during that agony of thirst he had seen shape and 
heard sound with other than his mortal eyes and ears, and even in the 
moments that had alternate with his lightness, when he had known these 
to be hallucinations, they had come again. he had heard the bell on a 
sunday in his own kentish home, the calling of children at play, the 
unconcerned singing of men at their daily labour, and the laughter and 
gossip of the women as they had spread the linen on the hedge or 
distribute bread upon the platters. these voice had rung in his brain, 
interrupt now and then by the groan of bligh and of two other men who 
had been alive then. some of the voice he had heard had been silent on 
earth this many a long year, but abel keeling, thirst-tortured, had heard 
them, even as he was now hearing that vacant moan with the 
intermittent throb that fill the strait with alarm.... 

"praise him, praise him, praise him!" bligh was calling deliriously. 

then a bell seem to sound in abel keeling's ears, and, as if something 
in the mechanism of his brain had slipped, another picture rose in his 
fancy--the scene when the _mary of the tower_ had put out, to a bravery 
of swinging bell and shrill fife and valiant trumpets. she had not been 
a leper-white galleon then. the scroll-work on her prow had twinkle with 
gilding; her belfry and stern-galleries and elaborate lantern had 
flash in the sun with gold; and her fighting-tops and the war-pavesse 
about her waist had been gay with paint coat and scutcheons. to her 
sail had been stitch gaudy ramp lion of scarlet saye, and from her 
mainyard, now dip in the water, had hung the broad two-tailed pennant 
with the virgin and child embroider upon it.... 

then sudden a voice about him seem to be saying, "_and a 
half-seven--and a half-seven--_" and in a twink the picture in abel 
keeling's brain change again. he was at home again, instruct his son, 
young abel, in the casting of the lead from the skiff they had pull out 
of the harbour. 

"_and a half-seven!_" the boy seem to be calling. 

abel keeling's blacken lip muttered: "excellently well cast, abel, 
excellent well cast!" 

"_and a half-seven--and a half-seven--seven--seven--_" 

"ah," abel keel murmured, "that last was not a clear cast--give me the 
line--thus it should go ... ay, so.... soon you shall sail the sea with 
me in the _mary of the tower_. you are already perfect in the stars and 
the motions of the planets; to-morrow i will instruct you in the use of 
the backstaff...." 

for a minute or two he continue to mutter; then he dozed. when again he 
came to semi-consciousness it was once more to the sound of bells, at 
first faint, then louder, and finally becoming a noisy clamour 
immediately above his head. it was bligh. bligh, in a fresh attack of 
delirium, had seize the bell-lanyard and was ring the bell insanely. 
the cord broke in his fingers, but he thrust at the bell with his hand, 
and again call aloud. 

"upon an harp and an instrument of ten strings ... let heaven and earth 
praise thy name!..." 

he continue to call aloud, and to beat on the bronze-rusted bell. 

_"ship ahoy! what ship's that?"_ 

one would have said that a veritable hail had come out of the mists; but 
abel keel knew those hail that came out of the mists. they came from 
ship which were not there. "ay, ay, keep a good look-out, and have a 
care to your lodemanage," he mutter again to his son.... 

but, as sometimes a sleeper sit up in his dream, or rise from his couch 
and walks, so all of a sudden abel keel found himself on his hand and 
knee on the deck, look back over his shoulder. in some deep-seated 
region of his consciousness he was dim aware that the cant of the deck 
had become more perilous, but his brain received the intelligence and 
forgot it again. he was look out into the bright and baffling mists. 
the buckler of the sun was of a more ardent silver; the sea below it was 
lost in brilliant evaporation; and between them, suspend in the haze, 
no more substantial than the vague darknesse that float before dazzle 
eyes, a pyramid phantom-shape hung. abel keel pass his hand over 
his eyes, but when he remove it the shape was still there, gliding 
slow towards the _mary's_ quarter. its form change as he watch it. 
the spirit-grey shape that had been a pyramid seem to dissolve into 
four upright members, slightly graduate in tallness, that nearest the 
_mary's_ stern the tallest and that to the left the lowest. it might have 
been the shadow of the gigantic set of reed-pipes on which that vacant 
mournful note had been sounded. 

and as he looked, with fool eyes, again his ear became fooled: 

_"ahoy there! what ship's that? are you a ship?... here, give me that 
trumpet--"_ then a metallic barking. _"ahoy there! what the devil are 
you? didn't you ring a bell? ring it again, or blow a blast or something, 
and go dead slow!"_ 

all this came, as it were, indistinctly, and through a sort of high 
singing in abel keeling's own ears. then he fancy a short bewilder 
laugh, follow by a colloquy from somewhere between sea and sky. 

"here, ward, just pinch me, will you? tell me what you see there. i want 
to know if i'm awake." 

"see where?" 

"there, on the starboard bow. (stop that ventilate fan; i can't 
hear myself think.) see anything? don't tell me it's that damn 
dutchman--don't pitch me that old vanderdecken tale--give me an easy 
one first, something about a sea-serpent.... you did hear that bell, 
didn't you?" 

"shut up a minute--listen--" 

again bligh's voice was lift up. 

_"this is the cov'nant that i make: 
from henceforth nevermore 
will i again the world destroy 
with water, as before."_ 

bligh's voice die away again in abel keeling's ears. 

"_oh--my--fat--aunt--julia!_" the voice that seem to come from between 
sea and sky sound again. then it spoke more loudly. "_i say,_" it began 
with careful politeness, "_if you are a ship, do you mind telling us 
where the masquerade is to be? our wireless is out of order, and we 
hadn't heard of it.... oh, you do see it, ward, don't you?... please, 
please tell us what the hell you are!_" 

again abel keel had move as a sleepwalker moves. he had raise 
himself up by the belfry timbers, and bligh had sunk in a heap on the 
deck. abel keeling's movement overturn the pipkin, which race the 
little trickle of its contents down the deck and lodge where the still 
and brim sea made, as it were, a chain with the carve balustrade of 
the quarter-deck--one link a still gleam edge, then a dark baluster, 
and then another gleam link. for one moment only abel keel found 
himself notice that that which had driven bligh aft had been the 
rising of the water in the waist as the galleon settled by the head--the 
waist was now entire submerged; then once more he was absorb in 
his dream, its voices, and its shape in the mist, which had again taken 
the form of a pyramid before his eyeballs. 

"_of course_," a voice seem to be complain anew, and still through 
that confuse din in abel keeling's ears, "_we can't turn a four-inch 
on it.... and, of course, ward, i don't believe in 'em. d'you hear, ward? 
i don't believe in 'em, i say.... shall we call down to old a. b.? this 
might interest his scientific skippership...._" 

"oh, lower a boat and pull out to it--into it--over it--through it--" 

"look at our chaps crowded on the barbette yonder. they've seen it. 
better not give an order you know won't be obeyed...." 

abel keeling, cramped against the antique belfry, had begun to find his 
dream interesting. for, though he did not know her build, that mirage was 
the shape of a ship. no doubt it was project from his brood on ship 
of half an hour before; and that was odd.... but perhaps, after all, it 
was not very odd. he knew that she did not really exist; only the 
appearance of her existed; but things had to exist like that before they 
really existed. before the _mary of the tower_ had exist she had been a 
shape in some man's imagination; before that, some dreamer had dream 
the form of a ship with oars; and before that, far away in the dawn and 
infancy of the world, some seer had seen in a vision the raft before man 
had venture to push out over the water on his two planks. and since this 
shape that rode before abel keeling's eyes was a shape in his, abel 
keeling's dream, he, abel keeling, was the master of it. his own brood 
brain had contrived her, and she was launch upon the illimitable ocean 
of his own mind.... 

_"and i will not unmindful be 
of this, my covenant, pass 
twixt me and you and every flesh 
while that the world should last,"_ 

sang bligh, rapt.... 

but as a dreamer, even in his dream, will scratch upon the wall by his 
couch some key or word to put him in mind of his vision on the morrow 
when it has left him, so abel keel found himself seek some sign to 
be a proof to those to whom no vision is vouchsafed. even bligh sought 
that--could not be silent in his bliss, but lay on the deck there, 
utter great passionate amen and praise his maker, as he said, upon 
an harp and an instrument of ten strings. so with abel keeling. it would 
be the amen of his life to have praise god, not upon a harp, but upon a 
ship that should carry her own power, that should store wind or its 
equivalent as she store her victuals, that should be something wrest 
from the chaos of uninvention and ordered and discipline and 
subordinate to abel keeling's will.... and there she was, that 
ship-shaped thing of spirit-grey, with the four pipes that resemble a 
phantom organ now broadside and of equal length. and the ghost-crew 
of that ship were speak again.... 

the interrupt silver chain by the quarterdeck balustrade had now become 
continuous, and the baluster made a herring-bone over their own 
motionless reflections. the spilt water from the pipkin had dried, and 
the pipkin was not to be seen. abel keel stood beside the mast, erect 
as god made man to go. with his leathery hand he smote upon the bell. he 
wait for the space of a minute, and then cried: 

"ahoy!... ship ahoy!... what ship's that?" 


iii 

we are not conscious in a dream that we are play a game the beginning 
and end of which are in ourselves. in this dream of abel keeling's a 
voice replied: 

"_hallo, it's found its tongue.... ahoy there! what are you?_" 

loud and in a clear voice abel keel called: "are you a ship?" 

with a nervous giggle the answer came: 

"_we are a ship, aren't we, ward? i hardly feel sure.... yes, of course, 
we're a ship. no question about us. the question is what the dickens 
you are._" 

not all the words these voice use were intelligible to abel keeling, 
and he knew not what it was in the tone of these last words that remind 
him of the honour due to the _mary of the tower_. blister-white and at 
the end of her life as she was, abel keel was still jealous of her 
dignity; the voice had a youngish ring; and it was not fitting that young 
chin should be wag about his galleon. he spoke curtly. 

"you that spoke--are you the master of that ship?" 

"_officer of the watch_," the words float back; "_the captain's 
below_." 

"then send for him. it is with master that master hold speech," abel 
keel replied. 

he could see the two shapes, flat and without relief, standing on a high 
narrow structure with rails. one of them gave a low whistle, and seem 
to be fan his face; but the other rumble something into a sort of 
funnel. presently the two shape became three. there was a murmuring, 
as of a consultation, and then sudden a new voice spoke. at its thrill 
and tone a sudden tremor ran through abel keeling's frame. he wonder 
what response it was that that voice found in the forgotten recess of 
his memory.... 

"_ahoy!_" seem to call this new yet faint remember voice. "_what's 
all this about? listen. we're his majesty's destroyer_ seapink, _out of 
devonport last october, and nothing particular the matter with us. now 
who are you?_" 

"the _mary of the tower_, out of the port of rye on the day of saint 
anne, and only two men--" 

a gasp interrupt him. 

"_out of_ where?" that voice that so strange move abel keel said 
unsteadily, while bligh broke into groan of renew rapture. 

"out of the port of rye, in the county of sussex ... nay, give ear, else 
i cannot make you hear me while this man's spirit and flesh wrestle so 
together!... ahoy! are you gone?" for the voice had become a low murmur, 
and the ship-shape had fade before abel keeling's eyes. again and again 
he called. he wish to be informed of the disposition and economy of the 
wind-chamber.... 

"the wind-chamber!" he called, in an agony lest the knowledge 
almost within his grasp should be lost. "i would know about the 
wind-chamber...." 

like an echo, there came back the words, uncomprehending uttered, "_the 
wind-chamber_?..." 

"... that driveth the vessel--perchance 'tis not wind--a steel bow that 
is bent also conserveth force--the force you store, to move at will 
through calm and storm...." 

"can you make out what it's driving at?" 

"oh, we shall all wake up in a minute...." 

"quiet, i have it; the engines; it wants to know about our engines. 
it'll be wanting to see our papers presently. rye port!... well, no harm 
in humour it; let's see what it can make of this. ahoy there!" came 
the voice to abel keeling, a little more strongly, as if a shift wind 
carry it, and speak fast and fast as it went on. "not wind, but 
steam; d'you hear? steam, steam. steam, in eight yarrow water-tube 
boilers. s-t-e-a-m, steam. got it? and we've twin-screw triple expansion 
engines, indicate horse-power four thousand, and we can do 430 
revolution per minute; savvy? is there anything your phantomhood would 
like to know about our armament?..." 

abel keel was mutter fretful to himself. it annoy him that 
words in his own vision should have no meaning for him. how did words 
come to him in a dream that he had no knowledge of when wide awake? the 
_seapink_--that was the name of this ship; but a pink was long and 
narrow, low-carged and square-built aft.... 

"_and as for our armament,_" the voice with the tone that so profound 
trouble abel keeling's memory continued, "_we've two revolving whitehead 
torpedo-tubes, three six-pounders on the upper deck, and that's a 
twelve-pounder forward there by the conning-tower. i forgot to mention 
that we're nickel steel, with a coal capacity of sixty ton in most 
damnable placed bunkers, and that thirty and a quarter knot is about our 
top. care to come aboard?_" 

but the voice was speak still more rapid and feverishly, as if to 
fill a silence with no matter what, and the shape that was utter it 
was strain forward anxious over the rail. 

"_ugh! but i'm glad this happen in the daylight,_" another voice was 
muttering. 

"i wish i was sure it was happening at all.... poor old spook!" 

"i suppose it would keep its feet if her deck was quite vertical. think 
she'll go down, or just melt?" 

"kind of go down ... without wash...." 

"listen--here's the other one now--" 

for bligh was singing again: 

"for, lord, thou know'st our nature such 
if we great things obtain, 
and in the get of the same 
do feel no grief or pain, 

"we little do esteem thereof; 
but, hardly brought to pass, 
a thousand times we do esteem 
more than the other was." 

_"but oh, look--look--look at the other!... oh, i say, wasn't he a grand 
old boy! look!"_ 

for, transfigure abel reeling's form as a prophet's form is 
transfigure in the instant of his rapture, flood his brain with the 
white eureka-light of perfect knowledge, that for which he and his dream 
had been at a standstill had come. he knew her, this ship of the future, 
as if god's finger had bitten her lines into his brain. he knew her as 
those already sink into the grave know things, miraculously, 
completely, accept life's impossible with a nod "of course." 
from the ardent mouth of her eight furnace to the last drip from her 
lubricators, from her bed-plates to the breeches of her quick-firers, he 
knew her--read her gauges, thumb her bearings, gave the range from her 
range-finders, and live the life he live who was in command of her. and 
he would not forget on the morrow, as he had forgotten on many morrows, 
for at last he had seen the water about his feet, and knew that there 
would be no morrow for him in this world.... 

and even in that moment, with but a sand or two to run in his glass, 
indomitable, insatiable, dream dream on dream, he could not die until 
he knew more. he had two question to ask, and a master-question; and but 
a moment remained. sharp his voice rang out. 

"ho, there!... this ancient ship, the _mary of the tower_, cannot steam 
thirty and a quarter knots, but yet she can sail the waters. what 
more do your ship? can she soar above them, as the fowl of the air 
soar?" 

"_lord, he think we're an aeroplane!... no, she can't...._" 

"and can you dive, even as the fish of the deep?" 

"_no.... those are submarine ... we aren't a submarine...._" 

but abel keel wait for no more. he gave an exult chuckle. 

"oho, oho--thirty knots, and but on the face of the waters--no more than 
that? oho!... now _my_ ship, the ship i see as a mother see full-grown 
the child she has but conceived--_my_ ship, i say--oho!--_my_ ship 
shall.... below there--trip that gun!" 

the cry came sudden and alertly, as a muffle sound came from below and 
an ominous tremor shook the galleon. 

"_by jove, her gun are break loose below--that's her finish_--" 

"trip that gun, and double-breech the others!" abel keeling's voice rang 
out, as if there had been any to obey him. he had brace himself within 
the belfry frame; and then in the middle of the next order his voice 
sudden fail him. his ship-shape, that for the moment he had 
forgotten, rode once more before his eyes. this was the end, and his 
master-question, apprehension for the answer to which was now torture 
his face and well-nigh burst his heart, was still unasked. 

"ho--he that spoke with me--the master," he cry in a voice that ran 
high, "is he there?" 

"_yes, yes!_" came the other voice across the water, sick with suspense. 
"_oh, be quick!_" 

there was a moment in which hoarse cries from many voices, a heavy thud 
and rumble on wood, and a crash of timber and a gurgle and a splash were 
indescribable mingled; the gun under which abel keel had lain had 
snap her rotten breech and plunge down the deck, carry bligh's 
unconscious form with it. the deck came up vertical, and for one instant 
long abel keel clung to the belfry. 

"i cannot see your face," he screamed, "but meseems your voice is a voice 
i know. _what is your name_?" 

in a torn sob the answer came across the water: 

"_keeling--abel keeling.... oh, my god!_" 

and abel keeling's cry of triumph, that mount to a victorious "huzza!" 
was lost in the downward plunge of the _mary of the tower_, that left 
the strait empty save for the sun's fiery blaze and the last smoke-like 
evaporate of the mists. 




rooum 


for all i ever knew to the contrary, it was his own name; and something 
about him, name or man or both, always put me in mind, i can't tell you 
how, of negroes. as regards the name, i dare say it was something 
huggermugger in the mere sound--something that i classed, for no 
particular reason, with the dark and ignorant sort of words, such as 
"obi" and "hoodoo." i only know that after i learned that his name was 
rooum, i couldn't for the life of me have thought of him as being call 
anything else. 

the first impression that you got of his head was that it was a patchwork 
of black and white--black bushy hair and short white beard, or else the 
other way about. as a matter of fact, both hair and beard were piebald, 
so that if you saw him in the gloom a dim patch of white show down one 
side of his head, and dark tuft crop up here and there in his beard. 
his eyebrow alone were entire black, with a little sprout of hair 
almost join them. and perhaps his skin help to make me think of 
negroes, for it was very dark, of the dark brown that always seem to 
have more than a hint of green behind it. his forehead was low, and 
score across with deep horizontal furrows. 

we never knew when he was go to turn up on a job. we might not have 
seen him for weeks, but his face was always as likely as not to appear 
over the edge of a crane-platform just when that marvellous mechanical 
intuition of his was badly needed. he wasn't certificated. he wasn't even 
trained, as the rest of us understood training; and he scoff at the 
drawing-office, and laugh outright at logarithm and our laborious 
method of get out quantities. but he could set sheer and tackle in 
a way that made the rest of us look silly. i remember once how, through 
the parting of a chain, a sixty-foot girder had come down and lay under 
a ruck of other stuff, as the bottom chip lie under a pile of 
spellikins--a hopeless-looking smash. myself, i'm certificated twice or 
three times over; but i can only assure you that i want to kick myself 
when, after i'd spent a day and a sleepless night over the job, i saw the 
game of tit-tat-toe that rooum made of it in an hour or two. certificated 
or not, a man isn't a fool who can do that sort of thing. and he was 
one of these fellows, too, who can "find water"--tell you where water is 
and what amount of get it is likely to take, by just walking over the 
place. we aren't certificated up to that yet. 

he was offer good money to stick to us--to stick to our firm--but he 
always shook his black-and-white piebald head. he'd never be able to keep 
the bargain if he were to make it, he told us quite fairly. i know there 
are these chaps who can't endure to be clock to their work with a 
patent time-clock in the morning and release of an evening with a 
whistle--and it's one of the things no master can ever understand. so 
rooum came and went erratically, showing up maybe in leeds or liverpool, 
perhaps next on plymouth breakwater, and once he turn up in an 
out-of-the-way place in glamorganshire just when i was wonder what had 
become of him. 

the way i got to know him (got to know him, i mean, more than just to 
nod) was that he tack himself on to me one night down vauxhall way, 
where we were setting up some small plant or other. we had knock off 
for the day, and i was walking in the direction of the bridge when he 
came up. we walk along together; and we had not gone far before it 
appear that his reason for join me was that he want to know "what 
a molecule was." 

i stare at him a bit. 

"what do you want to know that for?" i said. "what do a chap like you, 
who can do it all backwards, want with molecules?" 

oh, he just want to know, he said. 

so, on the way across the bridge, i gave it him more or less from the 
book--molecular theory and all the rest of it. but, from the childish 
question he put, it was plain that he hadn't got the hang of it at all. 
"did the molecular theory allow things to pass through one another?" he 
want to know; "_could_ things pass through one another?" and a lot of 
ridiculous things like that. i gave it up. 

"you're a genius in your own way, rooum," i said finally; "you know these 
things without the books we plodder have to depend on. if i'd luck like 
that, i think i should be content with it." 

but he didn't seem satisfied, though he drop the matter for that time. 
but i had his acquaintance, which was more than most of us had. he 
ask me, rather timidly, if i'd lend him a book or two. i did so, but 
they didn't seem to contain what he want to know, and he soon return 
them, without remark. 

now you'd expect a fellow to be specially sensitive, one way or another, 
who can tell when there's water a hundred feet beneath him; and as you 
know, the big men are squabble yet about this water-finding business. 
but, somehow, the water-finding puzzle me less than it did that rooum 
should be extraordinarily sensitive to something far commoner and easy 
to understand--ordinary echoes. he couldn't stand echoes. he'd go a 
mile round rather than pass a place that he knew had an echo; and if he 
came on one by chance, sometimes he'd hurry through as quick as he 
could, and sometimes he'd loiter and listen very intently. i rather joke 
about this at first, till i found it really distress him; then, of 
course, i pretended not to notice. we're all cranky somewhere, and for 
that matter, i can't touch a spider myself. 

for the remarkable thing that overtook rooum--(that, by the way, is an 
odd way to put it, as you'll see presently; but the words came that 
way into my head, so let them stand)--for the remarkable thing that 
overtook rooum, i don't think i can begin better than with the first 
time, or very soon after the first time, that i notice this peculiarity 
about the echoes. 

it was early on a particularly dismal november evening, and this time we 
were somewhere out south-east london way, just beyond what they are 
pleased to call the building-line--you know these district of wretched 
tree and grimy field and market-gardens that are about the same to real 
country that a slum is to a town. it rain that night; rain was the most 
appropriate weather for the brickfield and sewage-farms and yard of old 
cart and railway-sleepers we were passing. the rain shone on the black 
hand-bag that rooum always carried; and i suck at the dottle of a pipe 
that it was too much trouble to fill and light again. we were walking in 
the direction of lewisham (i think it would be), and were still a little 
way from that eruption of red-brick house that ... but you've doubtless 
seen them. 

you know how, when they're lay out new roads, they lay down the 
narrow strip of kerb first, with neither sett on the one hand nor 
flagstone on the other? we had come upon one of these. (i had notice 
how, as we had come a few minutes before under a tall hollow-ringing 
railway arch, rooum had all at once stop talking--it was the echo, of 
course, that bother him.) the unmade road to which we had come had 
headless lamp-standards at intervals, and rampart of grey road-metal 
ready for use; and save for the strip of kerb, it was a broth of mud 
and stiff clay. a red light or two show where the road-barriers 
were--they were lay the mains; a green railway light show on an 
embankment; and the lewisham lamp made a rusty glare through the rain. 
rooum went first, walking along the narrow strip of kerb. 

the lamp-standards were a little difficult to see, and when i heard rooum 
stop sudden and draw in his breath sharply, i thought he had walk 
into one of them. 

"hurt yourself?" i said. 

he walk on without replying; but half a dozen yard farther on he 
stop again. he was listen again. he wait for me to come up. 

"i say," he said, in an odd sort of voice, "go a yard or two ahead, will 
you?" 

"what's the matter?" i asked, as i pass ahead. he didn't answer. 

well, i hadn't been leading for more than a minute before he want to 
change again. he was breathing very quick and short. 

"why, what ail you?" i demanded, stopping. 

"it's all right.... you're not play any tricks, are you?..." 

i saw him pass his hand over his brow. 

"come, get on," i said shortly; and we didn't speak again till we struck 
the pavement with the light lamps. then i happen to glance at him. 

"here," i said brusquely, taking him by the sleeve, "you're not well. 
we'll call somewhere and get a drink." 

"yes," he said, again wipe his brow. "i say ... did you hear?" 

"hear what?" 

"ah, you didn't ... and, of course, you didn't feel anything...." 

"come, you're shaking." 

when presently we came to a bright light public-house or hotel, i saw 
that he was shake even worse than i had thought. the shirt-sleeved 
barman notice it too, and watch us curiously. i made rooum sit down, 
and got him some brandy. 

"what was the matter?" i asked, as i held the glass to his lips. 

but i could get nothing out of him except that it was "all right--all 
right," with his head twitch over his shoulder almost as if he had 
touch of the dance. he began to come round a little. he wasn't the kind 
of man you'd press for explanations, and presently we set out again. 
he walk with me as far as my lodgings, refuse to come in, but for all 
that linger at the gate as if loath to leave. i watch him turn the 
corner in the rain. 

we came home together again the next evening, but by a different way, 
quite half a mile longer. he had wait for me a little pertinaciously. 
it seem he want to talk about molecule again. 

well, when a man of his age--he'd be near fifty--begins to ask questions, 
he's rather worse than a child who wants to know where heaven is or some 
such thing--for you can't put him off as you can the child. somewhere or 
other he'd picked up the word "osmosis," and seem to have some 
glimmer of its meaning. he drop the molecules, and began to ask me 
about osmosis. 

"it means, doesn't it," he demanded, "that liquid will work their way 
into one another--through a bladder or something? say a thick fluid and a 
thin: you'll find some of the thick in the thin, and the thin in the 
thick?" 

"yes. the thick into the thin is ex-osmosis, and the other end-osmosis. 
that take place more quickly. but i don't know a deal about it." 

"does it ever take place with solids?" he next asked. 

what was he driving at? i thought; but replied: "i believe that what is 
commonly call 'adhesion' is something of the sort, under another name." 

"a good deal of this bookwork seem to be finding a dozen name for the 
same thing," he grunted; and continue to ask his questions. 

but what it was he really want to know i couldn't for the life of me 
make out. 

well, he was due any time now to disappear again, have work quite six 
week in one place; and he disappeared. he disappear for a good many 
weeks. i think it would be about february before i saw or heard of him 
again. 

it was february weather, anyway, and in an echo enough place that i 
found him--the subway of one of the metropolitan stations. he'd probably 
forgotten the echo when he'd taken the train; but, of course, the 
railway folk won't let a man who happen to dislike echo go wandering 
across the metal where he likes. 

he was twenty yard ahead when i saw him. i recognise him by his patch 
head and black hand-bag. i ran along the subway after him. 

it was very curious. he'd been walking close to the white-tiled wall, 
and i saw him sudden stop; but he didn't turn. he didn't even turn 
when i pull up, close behind him; he put out one hand to the wall, as 
if to steady himself. but, the moment i touched his shoulder, he just 
dropped--just dropped, half on his knee against the white tiling. the 
face he turn round and up to me was transfix with fright. 

there were half a hundred people about--a train was just in--and it isn't 
a difficult matter in london to get a crowd for much less than a man 
crouch terrify against a wall, look over his shoulder as rooum 
looked, at another man almost as terrified. i felt somebody's hand on 
my own arm. evidently somebody thought i'd knock rooum down. 

the terror went slow from his face. he stumble to his feet. i shook 
myself free of the man who held me and step up to rooum. 

"what the devil's all this about?" i demanded, roughly enough. 

"it's all right ... it's all right,..." he stammered. 

"heavens, man, you shouldn't play trick like that!" 

"no ... no ... but for the love of god don't do it again!..." 

"we'll not explain here," i said, still in a good deal of a huff; and 
the small crowd melt away--disappointed, i dare say, that it wasn't 
a fight. 

"now," i said, when we were outside in the crowded street, "you might let 
me know what all this is about, and what it is that for the love of 
god i'm not to do again." 

he was half apologetic, but at the same time half blustering, as if i had 
committed some sort of an outrage. 

"a senseless thing like that!" he mumble to himself. "but there: you 
didn't know.... you _don't_ know, do you?... i tell you, d'you hear, 
_you're not to run at all when i'm about_! you're a nice fellow and all 
that, and get your quantity somewhere near right, if you do go a long 
way round to do it--but i'll not answer for myself if you run, d'you 
hear?... putt your hand on a man's shoulder like that, just when ..." 

"certainly i might have spoken," i agreed, a little stiffly. 

"of course, you ought to have spoken! just you see you don't do it again. 
it's monstrous!" 

i put a curt question. 

"are you sure you're quite right in your head, rooum?" 

"ah," he cried, "don't you think i just fancy it, my lad! nothing so 
easy! i thought you guess that other time, on the new road ... it's as 
plain as a pikestaff... no, no, no! _i_ shall be telling _you_ something 
about molecule one of these days!" 

we walk for a time in silence. 

sudden he asked: "what are you do now?" 

"i myself, do you mean? oh, the firm. a railway job, past pinner. 
but we've a big contract coming on in the west end soon they might 
want you for. they call it 'alterations,' but it's one of these big 
shop-rebuildings." 

"i'll come along." 

"oh, it isn't for a month or two yet." 

"i don't mean that. i mean i'll come along to pin with you now, 
to-night, or whenever you go." 

"oh!" i said. 

i don't know that i specially want him. it's a little wearing, the 
company of a chap like that. you never know what he's go to let you in 
for next. but, as this didn't seem to occur to him, i didn't say 
anything. if he really like catching the last train down, a three-mile 
walk, and then share a double-bedded room at a poor sort of alehouse 
(which was my own programme), he was welcome. we walk a little farther; 
then i told him the time of the train and left him. 

he turn up at euston, a little after twelve. we went down together. it 
was get on for one when we left the station at the other end, and 
then we began the tramp across the weald to the inn. a little to my 
surprise (for i had begun to expect unaccountable behaviour from him) we 
reach the inn without rooum have dodge about change place with 
me, or have fallen cower under a gorse-bush, or anything of 
that kind. our talk, too, was about work, not molecule and osmosis. 

the inn was only a roadside beerhouse--i have forgotten its name--and all 
its sleep accomodation was the one double-bedded room. over the head 
of my own bed the ceiling was cut away, following the roof-line; and the 
wallpaper was perfectly shocking--faded bouquet that made v's and a's, 
interlace everywhere. the other bed was made up, and lay across the 
room. 

i think i only spoke once while we were making ready for bed, and that 
was when rooum took from his black hand-bag a brush and a torn nightgown. 

"that's what you always carry about, is it?" i remarked; and rooum 
grunt something: yes ... never knew where you'd be next ... no harm, 
was it? we tumble into bed. 

but, for all the late of the hour, i wasn't sleepy; so from my own 
bag i took a book, set the candle on the end of the mantel, and began 
to read. mark you, i don't say i was much better informed for the reading 
i did, for i was watch the v's on the wallpaper mostly--that, and 
wonder what was wrong with the man in the other bed who had fallen 
down at a touch in the subway. he was already asleep. 

now i don't know whether i can make the next clear to you. i'm quite 
certain he was sound asleep, so that it wasn't just the fact that he 
spoke. even that is a little unpleasant, i always think, any sort of 
sleep-talking; but it's a very queer sort of sensation when a man 
actually answer a question that's put to him, knowing nothing whatever 
about it in the morning. perhaps i ought not to have put that question; 
have put it, i did the next best thing afterwards, as you'll see in a 
moment ... but let me tell you. 

he'd been asleep perhaps an hour, and i woolgathering about the 
wallpaper, when suddenly, in a far more clear and loud voice than he ever 
use when awake, he said: 

_"what the devil is it prevent me seeing him, then?"_ 

that startle me, rather, for the second time that evening; and i really 
think i had spoken before i had fully realise what was happening. 

"from seeing whom?" i said, sitting up in bed. 

"whom?... you're not attending. the fellow i'm telling you about, who 
runs after me," he answered--answered perfectly plainly. 

i could see his head there on the pillow, black and white, and his 
eyes were closed. he made a slight movement with his arm, but that did 
not wake him. then it came to me, with a sort of start, what was 
happening. i slip half out of bed. would he--would he?--answer 
another question?... i risk it, breathlessly: 

"have you any idea who he is?" 

well, that too he answered. 

"who he is? the runner?... don't be silly. _who else should it be?_" 

with every nerve in me tingling, i try again. 

"what happens, then, when he catch you?" 

this time, i really don't know whether his words were an answer or not; 
they were these: 

"to hear him catching you up ... and then padding away ahead again! all 
right, all right ... but i guess it's weaken him a bit, too...." 

without notice it, i had got out of bed, and had advanced quite to the 
middle of the floor. 

"what did you say his name was?" i breathed. 

but that was a dead failure. he mutter broken for a moment, gave a 
deep trouble sigh, and then began to snore loud and regularly. 

i made my way back to bed; but i assure you that before i did so i fill 
my basin with water, dip my face into it, and then set the candlestick 
afloat in it, leave the candle burning. i thought i'd like to have a 
light.... it had burn down by morning. rooum, i remember, remark on 
the silly practice of reading in bed. 

well, it was a pretty kind of obsession for a man to have, wasn't it? 
somebody running after him all the time, and then ... running on ahead? 
and, of course, on a broad pavement there would be plenty of room for 
this running gentleman to run round; but on an eight- or nine-inch kerb, 
such as that of the new road out lewisham way ... but perhaps he was a 
jump gentleman too, and could jump over a man's head. you'd think he'd 
have to get past some way, wouldn't you?... i remember vague wonder 
whether the name of that runner was not conscience; but conscience isn't 
a matter of molecule and osmosis.... 

one thing, however, was clear; i'd got to tell rooum what i'd learned: 
for you can't get hold of a fellow's secret in ways like that. i lost 
no time about it. i told him, in fact, soon after we'd left the inn the 
next morning--told him how he'd answer in his sleep. 

and--what do you think of this?--he seem to think i ought to have 
guess it! _guessed_ a monstrous thing like that! 

"you're less clever than i thought, with your books and that, if you 
didn't," he grunted. 

"but ... good god, man!" 

"queer, isn't it? but you don't know the queerest ..." 

he ponder for a moment, and then sudden put his lip to my ear. 

"i'll tell you," he whispered. "_it get hard every time_!... at first, 
he just slip through: a bit of a catch at my heart, like when you nod 
off to sleep in a chair and jerk up awake again; and away he went. but 
now it's get grinding, sluggish; and the pain.... you'd notice, that 
night on the road, the little check it gave me; that's past long since; 
and last night, when i'd just brace myself up stiff to meet it, and you 
tap me on the shoulder ..." he pass the back of his hand over his 
brow. 

"i tell you," he continued, "it's an agony each time. i could scream at 
the thought of it. it's oftener, too, now, and he's get stronger. the 
end-osmosis is get to be ex-osmosis--is that right? just let me tell 
you one more thing--" 

but i'd had enough. i'd ask question the night before, but now--well, 
i knew quite as much as, and more than, i wanted. 

"stop, please," i said. "you're either off your head, or worse. let's 
call it the first. don't tell me any more, please." 

"frightened, what? well, i don't blame you. but what would _you_ do?" 

"i should see a doctor; i'm only an engineer," i replied. 

"doctors?... bah!" he said, and spat. 

i hope you see how the matter stood with rooum. what do you make of it? 
could you have believe it--_do_ you believe it?... he'd made a nearish 
guess when he'd said that much of our knowledge is give name to things 
we know nothing about; only rule-of-thumb physics think everything's 
explain in the manual; and you've always got to remember one thing: 
you can call it force or what you like, but it's a certainty that things, 
solid things of wood and iron and stone, would explode, just go off in a 
puff into space, if it wasn't for something just as inexplicable as that 
that rooum said he felt in his own person. and if you can swallow that, 
it's a relatively small matter whether rooum's light-footed familiar 
slip through him unperceived, or had to struggle through obstinately. 
you see now why i said that "a queer thing overtook rooum." 

more: i saw it. this thing, that outrage reason--i saw it happen. that 
is to say, i saw its effects, and it was in broad daylight, on an 
ordinary afternoon, in the middle of oxford street, of all places. there 
wasn't a shadow of doubt about it. people were pressing and jostle 
about him, and sudden i saw him turn his head and listen, as i'd seen 
him before. i tell you, an icy creep ran all over my skin. i fancy i 
felt it approach too, near and nearer.... the next moment he had 
made a sort of gathering of himself, as if against a gust. he stumble 
and thrust--thrust with his body. he swayed, physically, as a tree sway 
in a wind; he clutch my arm and gave a loud scream. then, after 
seconds--minutes--i don't know how long--he was free again. 

and for the colour of his face when by-and-by i glance at it ... well, i 
once saw a swarthy italy fall under a sunstroke, and _his_ face was 
much the same colour that rooum's negro face had gone; a cloudy, whitish 
green. 

"well--you've seen it--what do you think of it?" he gasp presently, 
turning a ghastly grin on me. 

but it was night before the full horror of it had soaked into me. 

soon after that he disappear again. i wasn't sorry. 

* * * * * 

our big contract in the west end came on. it was a time-contract, with 
all manner of penalty clause if we didn't get through; and i assure 
you that we were busy. i myself was far too busy to think of rooum. 

it's a shop now, the place we were working at, or rather one of these 
huge weld of fifty shop where you can buy anything; and if you'd 
seen us there... but perhaps you did see us, for people stood up on the 
tops of omnibus as they passed, to look over the mud-splashed hoarding 
into the great excavation we'd made. it was a sight. staging rose on 
staging, tier on tier, with interminable ladder all over the steel 
structure. three or four squat oti lift crouch like iron turtle on 
top, and a lattice-crane on a towering three-cornered platform rose a 
hundred and twenty feet into the air. at one end of the vast quarry 
was a demolish house, showing flue and fireplace and a score of 
thickness of old wallpaper; and at night--they might well have stood up 
on the tops of the buses! a dozen great splutter violet arc-lights 
half-blinded you; down below were the watchmen's fires; overhead, the 
riveter had their fire-baskets; and in odd corner naphtha-lights 
gutter and flared. and the steel rang with the riveters' hammers, and 
the crane-chains rattle and clashed.... there's not much doubt in _my_ 
mind, it's the engineer who are the architect nowadays. the chaps who 
think they're the architect are only a sort of paperhangers, who hang 
brick and terra-cotta on our work and clap a pinnacle or two on top--but 
never mind that. there we were, sweat and clang and navvying, till 
the day shift came to relieve us. 

and i ought to say that fifty feet above our great gap, and from end to 
end across it, there ran a travel crane on a skeleton line, with 
platform, engine, and wooden cab all compact in one. 

it happen that they had pitch in as one of the foremen some fellow or 
other, a friend of the firm's, a rank duffer, who pester me incessant 
with his questions. i did half his work and all my own, and it hadn't 
improve my temper much. on this night that i'm telling about, he'd been 
play the fool with his question as if a time-contract was a sort of 
summer holiday; and he'd fill me up to that point that i really can't 
say just when it was that rooum put in an appearance again. i think i had 
heard somebody mention his name, but i'd paid no attention. 

well, our johnnie fresh came up to me for the twentieth time that night, 
this time wanting to know something about the overhead crane. at that 
i fairly lost my temper. 

"what ail the crane?" i cried. "it's do its work, isn't it? isn't 
everybody do their work except you? why can't you ask hopkins? isn't 
hopkins there?" 

"i don't know," he said. 

"then," i snapped, "in that particular i'm as ignorant as you, and i hope 
it's the only one." 

but he grab my arm. 

"look at it now!" he cried, pointing; and i look up. 

either hopkins or somebody was dangerous exceed the speed-limit. the 
thing was flying along its thirty yard of rail as fast as a tram, and 
the heavy fall-blocks swung like a ponderous kite-tail, thirty feet 
below. as i watched, the engine brought up within a yard of the end of 
the way, the block crash like a ram into the broken house end, 
fetching down plaster and brick, and then the mechanism was reversed. the 
crane set off at a tear back. 

"who in hell ..." i began; but it wasn't a time to talk. "_hi!_" i 
yelled, and made a spring for a ladder. 

the other had notice it, too, for there were shout all over the place. 
by that time i was halfway up the second stage. again the crane tore 
past, with the massive tackle sweeping behind it, and again i heard the 
crash at the other end. whoever had the handle of it was manage 
it skilfully, for there was barely a foot to spare when it turn again. 

on the fourth platform, at the end of the way, i found hopkins. he was 
white, and seem to be count on his fingers. 

"what's the matter here?" i cried. 

"it's rooum," he answered. "i hadn't step out of the cab, not a 
minute, when i heard the lever go. he's running somebody down, he says; 
he'll run the whole shoot down in a minute--look!..." 

the crane was coming back again. half out of the cab i could see rooum's 
mottled hair and beard. his brow was ribbed like a gridiron, and as he 
rip past one of the arc his face shone like porcelain with the sweat 
that bath it. 

"now ... you!... now, damn you!..." he was shouting. 

"get ready to board him when he reverses!" i shout to hopkins. 

just how we scramble on i don't know. i got one arm over the 
lifting-gear (which, of course, wasn't going), and heard hopkins on 
the other footplate. rooum put the brake down and reversed; again came 
the thud of the fall-blocks; and we were speeding back again over the 
gulf of misty orange light. the staging were throng with gape men. 

"ready? now!" i cry to hopkins; and we sprang into the cab. 

hopkins hit rooum's wrist with a spanner. then he seize the lever, 
jam the brake down and trip rooum, all, as it seemed, in one 
movement. i fell on top of rooum. the crane came to a standstill 
half-way down the line. i held rooum panting. 

but either rooum was strong than i, or else he took me very much 
unawares. all at once he twist clear from my grasp and stumble on his 
knee to the rear door of the cab. he threw up one elbow, and stagger 
to his feet as i made another clutch at him. 

"keep still, you fool!" i bawled. "hit him over the head, hopkins!" 

rooum scream in a high voice. 

"run him down--cut him up with the wheels--down, you!--down, i say!--oh, 
my god!... _ha_!" 

he sprang clear out from the crane door, well-nigh taking me with him. 

i told you it was a skeleton line, two rails and a tie or two. he'd 
actually jump to the right-hand rail. and he was running along 
it--running along that iron tightrope, out over that well of light and 
watch men. hopkins had start the travelling-gear, as if with some 
insane idea of catching him; but there was only one possible end to it. 
he'd gone fully a dozen yards, while i watched, horrible fascinated; and 
then i saw the turn of his head.... 

he didn't meet it this time; he sprang to the other rail, as if to evade 
it.... 

even at the take-off he missed. as far as i could see, he made no attempt 
to save himself with his hands. he just went down out of the field of 
my vision. there was an awful silence; then, from far below ... 

* * * * * 

they weren't the men on the lower stage who move first. the men above 
went a little way down, and then they too stopped. presently two of them 
descended, but by a distant way. they returned, with two bottle of 
brandy, and there was a hasty consultation. two men drank the brandy off 
there and then--getting on for a pint of brandy apiece; then they went 
down, drunk. 

i, hopkins tell me, had got down on my knee in the crane cab, and was 
jabber away cheerful to myself. when i ask him what i said, 
he hesitated, and then said: "oh, you don't want to know that, sir," and 
i haven't ask him since. 

what do _you_ make of it? 




benlian 


i 

it would be different if you had known benlian. it would be different if 
you had had even that glimpse of him that i had the very first time i saw 
him, standing on the little wooden landing at the top of the flight of 
steps outside my studio door. i say "studio"; but really it was just a 
sort of loft look out over the timber-yard, and i use it as a studio. 
the real studio, the big one, was at the other end of the yard, and that 
was benlian's. 

scarcely anybody ever came there. i wonder many a time if the 
timber-merchant was dead or had lost his memory and forgotten all about 
his business; for his stack of floorboards, set criss-crosswise to 
season (you know how they pile them up) were grimy with soot, and nobody 
ever disturbed the row of scaffold-poles that stood like palisade along 
the walls. the entrance was from the street, through a door in a 
billposter's hoarding; and on the river not far away the steamboat 
hooted, and, in windy weather, the floorboard hum to keep them 
company. 

i suppose some of these real, regular artist wouldn't have call me an 
artist at all; for i only paint miniatures, and it was trade-work at 
that, copy from photograph and so on. not that i wasn't jolly good at 
it, and punctual too (lots of these high-flown artist have simply no 
idea of punctuality); and the loft was cheap, and suit me very well. 
but, of course, a sculptor wants a big place on the ground floor; it's 
slow work, that with block of stone and marble that cost you twenty 
pound every time you lift them; so benlian had the studio. his name was 
on a plate on the door, but i'd never seen him till this time i'm telling 
you of. 

i was working that evening at one of the prettiest little things i'd ever 
done: a girl's head on ivory, that i'd stipple up just like ... oh, 
you'd never have thought it was done by hand at all. the daylight had 
gone, but i knew that "prussian" would be about the colour for the eyes 
and the bunch of flower at her breast, and i want to finish. 

i was working at my little table, with a shade over my eyes; and i jump 
a bit when somebody knock at the door--not have heard anybody come up 
the steps, and not have many visitor anyway. (letters were always put 
into the box in the yard door.) 

when i open the door, there he stood on the platform; and i gave a bit 
of a start, have come straight from my ivory, you see. he was one of 
these very tall, gaunt chaps, that make us little fellow feel even 
small than we are; and i wonder at first where his eyes were, they 
were set so deep in the dark cave on either side of his nose. like a 
skull, his head was; i could fancy his teeth curve round inside his 
cheeks; and his zygomatic stuck up under his skin like razorback (but 
if you're not one of us artist you'll not understand that). a bit of 
smoky, greenish sky show behind him; and then, as his eyes move in 
their big pits, one of them caught the light of my lamp and flash like 
a well of lustre. 

he spoke abruptly, in a deep, shaky sort of voice. 

"i want you to photograph me in the morning," he said. i supposed he'd 
seen my printing-frames out on the window-sash some time or other. 

"come in," i said. "but i'm afraid, if it's a miniature you want, that 
i'm retained--my firm retain me--you'd have to do it through them. but 
come in, and i'll show you the kind of thing i do--though you ought to 
have come in the daylight ..." 

he came in. he was wearing a long, grey dressing-gown that came right 
down to his heel and made him look something like a noah's-ark figure. 
seen in the light, his face seem more ghastly bony still; and as he 
glance for a moment at my little ivory he made a sound of contempt--i 
know it was contempt. i thought it rather cheek, coming into my place 
and-- 

he turn his cavernous eyehole on me. 

"i don't want anything of that sort. i want you to photograph me. i'll be 
here at ten in the morning." 

so, just to show him that i wasn't to be treat that way, i said, quite 
shortly, "i can't. i've an appointment at ten o'clock." 

"what's that?" he said--he'd one of these rich deep voice that always 
sound consumptive. 

"take that thing off your eyes, and look at me," he ordered. 

well, i was awfully indignant. 

"if you think i'm go to be told to do things like this--" i began. 

"take that thing off," he just ordered again. 

i've got to remember, of course, that you didn't know benlian. _i_ didn't 
then. and for a chap just to stalk into a fellow's place, and tell him to 
photograph him, and order him about ... but you'll see in a minute. i 
took the shade off my eyes, just to show him that _i_ could browbeat a 
bit too. 

i use to have a tall strip of looking-glass leaning against my wall; for 
though i didn't use model much, it's awfully useful to go to nature for 
odd bit now and then, and i've sketch myself in that glass, oh, 
hundred of times! we must have been standing in front of it, for all at 
once i saw the eyes at the bottom of his pit look rigid over my 
shoulder. without moving his eyes from the glass, and scarcely moving his 
lips, he muttered: 

"get me a pair of gloves, get me a pair of gloves." 

it was a funny thing to ask for; but i got him a pair of my glove from a 
drawer. his hand were shake so that he could hardly get them on, and 
there was a little glisten of sweat on his face, that look like the 
salt that dry on you when you've been bathing in the sea. then i 
turned, to see what it was that he was look so earnest and 
profound at in the mirror. i saw nothing except just the pair of us, he 
with my glove on. 

he step aside, and slow drew the glove off. i think _i_ could have 
bully _him_ just then. he turn to me. 

"did that look all right to you?" he asked. 

"why, my dear chap, whatever ail you?" i cried. 

"i suppose," he went on, "you couldn't photograph me to-night--now?" 

i could have done, with magnesium, but i hadn't a scrap in the place. i 
told him so. he was look round my studio. he saw my camera standing in 
a corner. 

"ah!" he said. 

he made a stride towards it. he unscrew the lens, brought it to the 
lamp, and peer attentive through it, now into the air, now at his 
sleeve and hand, as if look for a flaw in it. then he replace it, and 
pull up the collar of his dressing-gown as if he was cold. 

"well, another night of it," he muttered; "but," he added, facing 
sudden round on me, "if your appointment was to meet your god himself, 
you must photograph me at ten to-morrow morning!" 

"all right," i said, give in (for he seem horrible ill). "draw up to 
the stove and have a drink of something and a smoke." 

"i neither drink nor smoke," he replied, moving towards the door. 

"sit down and have a chat, then," i urged; for i always like to be decent 
with fellows, and it was a lonely sort of place, that yard. 

he shook his head. 

"be ready by ten o'clock in the morning," he said; and he pass down my 
stairs and cross the yard to his studio without even have said "good 
night." 

well, he was at my door again at ten o'clock in the morning, and i 
photograph him. i made three exposures; but the plate were some that 
i'd had in the place for some time, and they'd gone off and fog in the 
developing. 

"i'm awfully sorry," i said; "but i'm go out this afternoon, and will 
get some more, and we'll have another shot in the morning." 

one after the other, he was holding the negative up to the light and 
examine them. presently he put them down quietly, leaning them 
methodical up against the edge of the developing-bath. 

"never mind. it doesn't matter. thank you," he said; and left me. 

after that, i didn't see him for weeks; but at nights i could see the 
light of his roof-window, shining through the wreathe river-mists, and 
sometimes i heard him moving about, and the muffle knock-knocking of his 
hammer on marble. 


ii 

of course i did see him again, or i shouldn't be telling you all this. he 
came to my door, just as he had done before, and at about the same time 
in the evening. he hadn't come to be photograph this time, but for all 
that it was something about a camera--something he want to know. he'd 
brought two books with him, big books, print in german. they were on 
light, he said, and physics (or else it was psychics--i always get those 
two words wrong). they were full of diagram and equation and figures; 
and, of course, it was all mile above my head. 

he talk a lot about "hyper-space," whatever that is; and at first i 
nodded, as if i knew all about it. but he very soon saw that i didn't, 
and he came down to my level again. what he'd come to ask me was this: 
did i know anything, of my own experience, about things "photographing 
through"? (you know the kind of thing: a name that's been paint out on 
a board, say, come up in the plate.) 

well, as it happened, i _had_ once photograph a drawing for a fellow, 
and the easel i had stood it on had come up through the picture; and i 
knew by the way benlian nod that that was the kind of thing he meant. 

"more," he said. 

i told him i'd once seen a photograph of a man with a bowler hat on, and 
the shape of his crown had show through the hat. 

"yes, yes," he said, musing; and then he asked: "have you ever heard of 
things not photograph at all?" 

but i couldn't tell him anything about that; and off he start again, 
about light and physics and so on. then, as soon as i could get a word 
in, i said, "but, of course, the camera isn't art." (some of my 
miniatures, you understand, were jolly nice little things.) 

"no--no," he murmur absently; and then abrupt he said: "eh? what's 
that? and what the devil do _you_ know about it?" 

"well," said i, in a dignified sort of way, "considering that for ten 
years i've been--" 

"chut!... hold your tongue," he said, turning away. 

there he was, talk to me again, just as if i'd ask him in to bully 
me. but you've got to be decent to a fellow when he's in your own place; 
and by-and-by i ask him, but in a cold, off-hand sort of way, how his 
own work was go on. he turn to me again. 

"would you like to see it?" he asked. 

"_aha_!" thought i, "he's got to a sticking-point with his work! it's all 
very well," i thought, "for you to sniff at my miniatures, my friend, but 
we all get stale on our work sometimes, and the fresh eye, even of a 
miniature-painter ..." 

"i shall be glad if i can be of any help to you," i answered, still a bit 
huffish, but bearing no malice. 

"then come," he said. 

we descended and cross the timber-yard, and he held his door open for 
me to pass in. 

it was an enormous great place, his studio, and all full of mist; and the 
gallery that was his bedroom was up a little staircase at the farther 
end. in the middle of the floor was a tall structure of scaffolding, with 
a stage or two to stand on; and i could see the dim ghostly marble figure 
in the gloom. it had been jack up on a heavy base; and as it would have 
taken three or four men to put it into position, and scarcely a stranger 
had enter the yard since i had been there, i knew that the figure must 
have stood for a long time. sculpture's weary, slow work. 

benlian was potter about with a taper at the end of a long rod; and 
sudden the overhead gas-ring burst into light. i placed myself before 
the statue--to criticise, you know. 

well, it didn't seem to me that he need to have turn up his nose at 
my ivories, for i didn't think much of his statue--except that it was a 
great, lumping, extraordinary piece of work. it had an outstretched arm 
that, i remember thinking, was absolutely misshapen--disproportioned, 
big enough for a giant, ridiculous out of drawing. and as i look at 
the thing this way and that, i knew that his eyes in their deep cellar 
never left my face for a moment. 

"it's a god," he said by-and-by. 

then i began to tell him about that monstrous arm; but he cut me very 
short. 

"i say it's a god," he interrupted, look at me as if he would have 
eaten me. "even you, child as you are, have seen the gods men have made 
for themselves before this. half-gods they've made, all good or all evil 
(and then they've call them the devil). this is _my_ god--the god of 
good and of evil also." 

"er--i see," i said, rather taken aback (but quite sure he was off his 
head for all that). then i look at the arm again; a child could have 
seen how wrong it was.... 

but suddenly, to my amazement, he took me by the shoulder and turn me 
away. 

"that'll do," he said curtly. "i didn't ask you to come in here with a 
view to learning anything from you. i want to see how it struck you. i 
shall send for you again--and again--" 

then he began to jabber, half to himself. 

"bah!" he muttered. "'is that all?' they ask before a stupendous thing. 
show them the ocean, the heavens, infinity, and they ask, 'is that all?' 
if they saw their god face to face they'd ask it!... there's only one 
cause, that works now in good and now in evil, but show it to them and 
they put their head on one side and begin to appraise and patronise 
it!... i tell you, what's seen at a glance flies away at a glance. gods 
come slow over you, but presently, ah! they begin to grip you, and at 
the end there's no flee from them! you'll tell me more about my statue 
by-and-by!... what was that you said?" he demanded, facing swift round 
on me. "that arm? ah, yes; but we'll see what you say about that arm six 
month from now! yes, the arm.... now be off!" he ordered me. "i'll send 
for you again when i want you!" 

he thrust me out. 

"an asylum, mr. benlian," i thought as i cross the yard, "is the place 
for you!" you see, i didn't know him then, and that he wasn't to be 
judge as an ordinary man is. just you wait till you see.... 

and straight away, i found myself vow that i'd have nothing more to do 
with him. i found myself resolve that, as if i were making up my mind 
not to smoke or drink--and (i don't know why) with a similar sense that i 
was deprive myself of something. but, somehow, i forgot, and within a 
month he'd been in several times to see me, and once or twice had fetch 
me in to see his statue. 

in two month i was in an extraordinary state of mind about him. i was 
familiar with him in a way, but at the same time i didn't know one scrap 
more about him. because i'm a fool (oh, yes, i know quite well, now, what 
i am) you'll think i'm talk folly if i even begin to tell you what 
sort of a man he was. i don't mean just his knowledge (though i think he 
knew everything--sciences, languages, and all that) for it was far more 
than that. somehow, when he was there, he had me all restless and uneasy; 
and when he wasn't there i was (there's only the one word for it) 
jealous--as jealous as if he'd been a girl! even yet i can't make it 
out.... 

and he knew how unsettled he'd got me; and i'll tell you how i found that 
out. 

straight out one night, when he was sitting up in my place, he ask me: 
"do you like me, pudgie?" (i forgot to say that i'd told him they use to 
call me pudgie at home, because i was little and fat; it was odd, the 
number of things i told him that i wouldn't have told anybody else.) 

"do you like me, pudgie?" he said. 

as for my answer, i don't know how it spurt out. i was much more 
surprise than he was, for i really didn't intend it. it was for all the 
world as if somebody else was talk with my mouth. 

"_i loathe and adore you!_" it came; and then i look round, awfully 
startle to hear myself saying that. 

but he didn't look at me. he only nodded. 

"yes. of good and evil too--" he mutter to himself. and then all of a 
sudden he got up and went out. 

i didn't sleep for ever so long after that, thinking how odd it was i 
should have said that. 

well (to get on), after that something i couldn't account for began to 
come over me sometimes as i worked. it began to come over me, without any 
warning, that he was thinking of me down there across the yard. i use to 
_know_ (this must sound awfully silly to you) that he was down yonder, 
thinking of me and do something to me. and one night i was so sure 
that it wasn't fancy that i jump straight up from my work, and i'm not 
quite sure what happen then, until i found myself in his studio, just 
as if i'd walk there in my sleep. 

and he seem to be wait for me, for there was a chair by his own, in 
front of the statue. 

"what is it, benlian?" i burst out. 

"ah!" he said.... "well, it's about that arm, pudgie; i want you to tell 
me about the arm. do it look so strange as it did?" 

"no," i said. 

"i thought it wouldn't," he observed. "but i haven't touched it, 
pudgie--" 

so i stay the evening there. 

but you must not think he was always do that thing--whatever it 
was--to me. on the other hand, i sometimes felt the oddest sort of 
release (i don't know how else to put it) ... like when, on one of these 
muggy, earthy-smelling days, when everything's melancholy, the wind 
freshen up sudden and you breathe again. and that (i'm try to take 
it in order, you see, so that it will be plain to you) bring me to the 
time i found out that _he_ did that too, and knew when he was do it. 

i'd gone into his place one night to have a look at his statue. it was 
surprising what a lot i was finding out about that statue. it was still 
all out of proportion (that is to say, i knew it must be--remembered i'd 
thought so--though it didn't annoy me now quite so much. i suppose i'd 
lost _my_ fresh eye by that time). somehow, too, my own miniature had 
begun to look a bit kiddish; they made me impatient; and that's horrible, 
to be discontented with things that once seem jolly good to you. 

well, he'd been look at me in the hungriest sort of way, and i look 
at the statue, when all at once that feeling of release and lightness 
came over me. the first i knew of it was that i found myself thinking of 
some rather important letters my firm had written to me, wanting to know 
when a job i was do was go to be finished. i thought myself it was 
time i got it finished; i thought i'd better set about it at once; and i 
sat sudden up in my chair, as if i'd just come out of a sleep. and, 
look at the statue, i saw it as it had seem at first--all misshapen 
and out of drawing. 

the very next moment, as i was rising, i sat down again as sudden as if 
somebody had pull me back. 

now a chap doesn't like to be change about like that; so, without 
look at benlian, i mutter a bit testily, "don't, benlian!" 

then i heard him get up and knock his chair away. he was standing behind 
me. 

"pudgie," he said, in a move sort of voice, "i'm no good to you. get out 
of this. get out--" 

"no, no, benlian!" i pleaded. 

"get out, do you hear, and don't come again! go and live somewhere 
else--go away from london--don't let me know where you go--" 

"oh, what have i done?" i ask unhappily; and he was mutter again. 

"perhaps it would be better for me too," he muttered; and then he added, 
"come, bundle out!" 

so in home i went, and finished my ivory for the firm; but i can't tell 
you how friendless and unhappy i felt. 

now i use to know in those days a little girl--a nice, warm-hearted 
little thing, just friendly you know, who use to come to me sometimes in 
another place i live at and mend for me and so on. it was an awful long 
time since i'd seen her; but she found me out one night--came to that 
yard, walk straight in, went straight to my linen-bag, and began to 
look over my things to see what want mending, just as she use to. i 
don't mind confess that i was a bit sweet on her at one time; and it 
made me feel awfully mean, the way she came in, without ask any 
questions, and took up my mending. 

so she sat do my things, and i sat at my work, glad of a bit of 
company; and she chat as she worked, just jolly and gentle and not at 
all reproach me. 

but as sudden as a shot, right in the middle of it all, i found myself 
wonder about benlian again. and i wasn't only wondering; somehow i was 
horrible uneasy about him. it came to me that he might be ill or 
something. and all the fun of her have come to see me was gone. i found 
myself do all sort of stupid things to my work, and glancing at my 
watch that was lie on the table before me. 

at last i couldn't stand it any longer. i got up. 

"daisy," i said, "i've got to go out now." 

she seem surprised. 

"oh, why didn't you tell me i'd been keeping you!" she said, get up 
at once. 

i mutter that i was awfully sorry.... 

i packed her off. i closed the door in the hoarding behind her. then i 
walk straight across the yard to benlian's. 

he was lie on a couch, not do anything. 

"i know i ought to have come sooner, benlian," i said, "but i had 
somebody with me." 

"yes," he said, look hard at me; and i got a bit red. 

"she's awfully nice," i stammered; "but you never bother with girls, and 
you don't drink or smoke--" 

"no," he said. 

"well," i continued, "you ought to have a little relaxation; you're 
knock yourself up." and, indeed, he look awfully ill. 

but he shook his head. 

"a man's only a definite amount of force in him, pudgie," he said, "and 
if he spend it in one way he go short in another. mine goes--there." 
he glance at the statue. "i rarely sleep now," he added. 

"then you ought to see a doctor," i said, a bit alarmed. (i'd felt sure 
he was ill.) 

"no, no, pudgie. my force is all go there--all but the minimum that 
can't be helped, you know.... you've heard artist talk about 'putting 
their soul into their work,' pudgie?" 

"don't rub it in about my rotten miniatures, benlian," i ask him. 

"you've heard them say that; but they're charlatans, professional 
artists, all, pudgie. they haven't got any soul big than a sixpence 
to put into it.... you know, pudgie, that force and matter are the same 
thing--that it's decided nowadays that you can't define matter otherwise 
than as 'a point of force'?" 

"yes," i found myself saying eagerly, as if i'd heard it dozen of times 
before. 

"so that if they could put their soul into it, it would be just as easy 
for them to put their _bodies_ into it?..." 

i had drawn very close to him, and again--it was not fancy--i felt as if 
somebody, not me, was use my mouth. a flash of comprehension seem to 
come into my brain. 

"_not that, benlian_?" i cry breathlessly. 

he nod three or four times, and whispered. i really don't know why we 
both whispered. 

"_really that, benlian_?" i whisper again. 

"shall i show you?... i try my hardest not to, you know,..." he still 
whispered. 

"yes, show me!" i reply in a suppress voice. 

"don't breathe a sound then! i keep them up there...." 

he put his finger to his lip as if we had been two conspirators; then he 
tiptoe across the studio and went up to his bedroom in the gallery. 
presently he tiptoe down again, with some rolled-up papers in his hand. 
they were photographs, and we stoop together over a little table. his 
hand shook with excitement. 

"you remember this?" he whispered, showing me a rough print. 

it was one of the print from the fog plate that i'd taken after that 
first night. 

"come close to me if you feel frightened, pudgie," he said. "you said 
they were old plates, pudgie. no no; the plate were all right; it's _i_ 
who am wrong!" 

"of course," i said. it seem so natural. 

"this one," he said, taking up one that was number "1," "is a plain 
photograph, in the flesh, before it started; _you_ know! now look at 
this, and this--" 

he spread them before me, all in order. 

"2" was a little fogged, as if a novice had taken it; on "3" a sort of 
cloudy veil partly obliterate the face; "4" was still further smudge 
and lost; and "5" was a figure with glove hand held up, as a man hold 
his hand up when he is cover by a gun. the face of this one was 
completely blot out. 

and it didn't seem in the least horrible to me, for i kept on murmuring, 
"of course, of course." 

then benlian rub his hand and smile at me. "i'm making good 
progress, am i not?" he said. 

"splendid!" i breathed. 

"better than you know, too," he chuckled, "for you're not properly under 
yet. but you will be, pudgie, you will be--" 

"yes, yes!... will it be long, benlian?" 

"no," he replied, "not if i can keep from eat and sleep and 
thinking of other things than the statue--and if you don't disturb me by 
have girl about the place, pudgie." 

"i'm awfully sorry," i said contritely. 

"all right, all right; ssh!... this, you know, pudgie, is my own studio; 
i bought it; i bought it purposely to make my statue, my god. i'm passing 
nicely into it; and when i'm quite passed--_quite_ passed, pudgie--you 
can have the key and come in when you like." 

"oh, thanks awfully," i murmur gratefully. 

he nudge me. 

"what would they think of it, pudgie--those of the exhibition and 
academies, who say 'their soul are in their work'? what would the 
cackle think of it, pudgie?" 

"aren't they fools!" i chuckled. 

"and i shall have _one_ worshipper, shan't i, pudgie?" 

"rather!" i replied. "isn't it splendid!... oh, need i go back just yet?" 

"yes, you must go now; but i'll send for you again very soon.... you know 
i try to do without you, pudge; i try for thirteen days, and it 
nearly kill me! that's past. i shan't try again. now off you trot, my 
pudgie--" 

i wink at him knowingly, and came skip and dance across the yard. 


iii 

it's just silly--that's what it is--to say that something of a man 
doesn't go into his work. 

why, even those wretched little ivory of mine, the thick-headed fellow 
who paid for them knew my touch in them, and once spotted it instantly 
when i try to slip in another chap's who was hard up. benlian use to 
say that a man went about spread himself over everything he came in 
contact with--diffusing some sort of influence (as far as i could make it 
out); and the mistake was, he said, that we went through the world just 
waste it instead of direct it. and if benlian didn't understand all 
about those things, i should jolly well like to know who does! a chap 
with a great abound will and brain like him, it's only natural he 
should be able to pass himself on, to a statue or anything else, when he 
really tried--did without food and talk and sleep in order to save 
himself up for it! 

"a man can't both _do_ and _be_," i remember he said to me once. "he's so 
much force, no more, and he can either make himself with it or something 
else. if he try to do both, he do both imperfectly. i'm go to do 
_one_ perfect thing." oh, he was a queer chap! fancy, a fellow making a 
thing like that statue, out of himself, and then wanting somebody to 
adore him! 

and i hadn't the faintest conception of how much i did adore him till 
yet again, as he had done before, he seem to--you know--to take 
himself away from me again, leave me all alone, and so wretched!... and 
i was angry at the same time, for he'd promise me he wouldn't do it 
again.... (this was one night, i don't remember when.) 

i ran to my landing and shout down into the yard. 

"benlian! benlian!" 

there was a light in his studio, and i heard a muffle shout come back. 

"keep away--keep away--keep away!" 

he was struggling--i knew he was struggle as i stood there on my 
landing--struggling to let me go. and i could only run and throw myself 
on my bed and sob, while he try to set me free, who didn't want to be 
set free ... he was have a terrific struggle, all alone there.... 

(he told me afterwards that he _had_ to eat something now and then and to 
sleep a little, and that weaken him--strengthened him--strengthened 
his body and weaken the passing, you know.) 

but the next day it was all right again. i was benlian's again. and i 
wondered, when i remember his struggle, whether a die man had ever 
fought for life as hard as benlian was fight to get away from it and 
pass himself. 

the next time after that that he fetch me--called me--whatever you like 
to name it--i burst into his studio like a bullet. he was sunk in a big 
chair, gaunt as a mummy now, and all the life in him seem to burn in 
the bottom of his deep eye-sockets. at the sight of him i fiddle with 
my knuckle and giggled. 

"you _are_ go it, benlian!" i said. 

"am i not?" he replied, in a voice that was scarcely a breath. 

"you _meant_ me to bring the camera and magnesium, didn't you?" (i had 
snatch them up when i felt his call, and had brought them.) 

"yes. go ahead." 

so i placed the camera before him, made all ready, and took the magnesium 
ribbon in a pair of pincers. 

"are you ready?" i said; and light the ribbon. 

the studio seem to leap with the blind glare. the ribbon spat and 
spluttered. i snap the shutter, and the fumes drift away and hung 
in cloud in the roof. 

"you'll have to walk me about soon, pudgie, and bang me with bladders, as 
they do the opium-patients," he said sleepily. 

"let me take one of the statue now," i said eagerly. 

but he put up his hand. 

"no, no. _that's_ too much like test our god. faith's the food they 
feed gods on, pudgie. we'll let the s.p.r. people photograph it when it's 
all over," he said. "now get it developed." 

i develop the plate. the obliterate now seem complete. 

but benlian seem dissatisfied. 

"there's something wrong somewhere," he said. "it isn't so perfect as 
that yet--i can feel within me it isn't. it's merely that your camera 
isn't strong enough to find me, pudgie." 

"i'll get another in the morning," i cried. 

"no," he answered. "i know something better than that. have a cab here by 
ten o'clock in the morning, and we'll go somewhere." 

by half-past ten the next morning we had driven to a large hospital, and 
had gone down a lot of steps and along corridor to a basement room. 
there was a stretcher couch in the middle of the room, and all manner of 
queer appliances, frames of ground glass, tube of glass blown into 
extraordinary shapes, a dynamo, and a lot of other things all about. a 
couple of doctor were there too, and benlian was talk to them. 

"we'll try my hand first," benlian said by-and-by. 

he advanced to the couch, and put his hand under one of the frames of 
ground glass. one of the doctor did something in a corner. a harsh 
crackling fill the room, and an unearthly, fluorescent light shot and 
flood across the frame where benlian's hand was. the two doctor 
looked, and then start back. one of them gave a cry. he was sickly 
white. 

"put me on the couch," said benlian. 

i and the doctor who was not ill lift him on the canvas stretcher. the 
green-gleaming frame of fluctuate light was pass over the whole of 
his body. then the doctor ran to a telephone and call a colleague.... 

we spent the morning there, with dozen of doctor coming and going. then 
we left. all the way home in the cab benlian chuckle to himself. 

"that scared 'em, pudgie!" he chuckled. "a man they can't x-ray--that 
scared 'em! we must put that down in the diary--" 

"wasn't it ripping!" i chuckle back. 

he kept a sort of diary or record. he gave it to me afterwards, but 
they've borrow it. it was as big as a ledger, and immensely valuable, 
i'm sure; they oughtn't to borrow valuable things like that and not 
return them. the laugh that benlian and i have had over that diary! 
it fool them all--the clever x-ray men, the artist of the academies, 
everybody! written on the fly-leaf was "_to my pudgie_." i shall publish 
it when i get it back again. 

benlian had now got frightfully weak; it's awfully hard work, passing 
yourself. and he had to take a little milk now and then or he'd have 
die before he had quite finished. i didn't bother with miniature any 
longer, and when angry letters came from my employer we just put them 
into the fire, benlian and i, and we laughed--that is to say, i laughed, 
but benlian only smiled, being too weak to laugh really. he'd lot of 
money, so that was all right; and i slept in his studio, to be there for 
the passing. 

and that wouldn't be very long now, i thought; and i was always look 
at the statue. things like that (in case you don't know) have to be done 
gradually, and i supposed he was busy filling up the inside of it and 
hadn't got to the outside yet--for the statue was much the same to look 
at. but, reckoning off his sip of milk and snatch of sleep, he was 
making splendid progress, and the figure must be get very full now. 
i was awfully excited, it was get so near.... 

and then somebody came bother and nearly spoil all. it's odd, but i 
really forget exactly what it was. i only know there was a funeral, and 
people were sob and look at me, and somebody said i was callous, 
but somebody else said, "no, look at him," and that it was just the other 
way about. and i think i remember, now, that it wasn't in london, for i 
was in a train; but after the funeral i dodge them, and found myself 
back at euston again. they follow me, but i shook them off. i lock my 
own studio up, and lay as quiet as a mouse in benlian's place when they 
came hammer at the door.... 

* * * * * 

and now i must come to what you'll call the finish--though it's awfully 
stupid to call things like that "finishes." 

i'd slip into my own studio one night--i forget what for; and i'd gone 
quietly, for i knew they were following me, those people, and would catch 
me if they could. it was a thick, misty night, and the light came 
stream up through benlian's roof window, with the shadow of the 
window-divisions lose themselves like dark ray in the fog. a lot of 
hoot was go on down the river, steamer and barges.... oh, i know 
what i'd come into my studio for! it was for those negatives. benlian 
want them for the diary, so that it could be seen there wasn't any 
fake about the prints. for he'd said he would make a final spurt that 
evening and get the job finished. it had taken a long time, but i'll bet 
_you_ couldn't have pass _yourself_ any quicker. 

when i got back he was sitting in the chair he'd hardly left for weeks, 
and the diary was on the table by his side. i'd taken all the scaffolding 
down from the statue, and he was ready to begin. he had to waste one last 
bit of strength to explain to me, but i drew as close as i could, so that 
he wouldn't lose much. 

"now, pudgie," i just heard him say, "you've behave splendidly, and 
you'll be quite still up to the finish, won't you?" 

i nodded. 

"and you mustn't expect the statue to come down and walk about, 
or anything like that," he continued. "_those_ aren't the really 
wonderful things. and no doubt people will tell you it hasn't changed; 
but you'll know better! it's much more wonderful that i should be there 
than that they should be able to prove it, isn't it?... and, of course, 
i don't know exactly how it will happen, for i've never done this 
before.... you have the letter for the s.p.r.? they can photograph it if 
they want.... by the way, you don't think the same of my statue as you 
did at first, do you?" 

"oh, it's wonderful!" i breathed. 

"and even if, like the god of the others, it doesn't vouchsafe a special 
sign and wonder, it's benlian, for all that?" 

"oh, do be quick, benlian! i can't bear another minute!" 

then, for the last time, he turn his great eaten-out eyes on me. 

"_i seal you mine, pudgie_!" he said. 

then his eyes fasten themselves on the statue. 

i wait for a quarter of an hour, scarcely breathing. benlian's breath 
came in little flutters, many seconds apart. he had a little clock on the 
table. twenty minutes passed, and half an hour. i was a little 
disappointed, really, that the statue wasn't go to move; but benlian 
knew best, and it was filling quiet up with him instead. then i thought 
of those zigzag bunch of lightning they draw on the electric-belt 
advertisements, and i was rather glad after all that the statue _wasn't_ 
go to move. it would have been a little cheap, that ... vulgar, in a 
sense.... he was breathing a little more sharp now, as if in pain, but 
his eyes never moved. a dog was howling somewhere, and i hope that the 
hoot of the tug wouldn't disturb benlian.... 

nearly an hour had pass when, all of a sudden, i pushed my chair 
farther away and cower back, gnawing my fingers, very frightened. 
benlian had sudden moved. he'd set himself forward in his chair, and he 
seem to be strangling. his mouth was wide open, and he began to make 
long harsh "_aaaaah-aaaah's_!" i shouldn't have thought passing yourself 
was such agony.... 

and then i gave a scream--for he seem to be thrust himself back in 
his chair again, as if he'd change his mind and didn't want to pass 
himself at all. but just you ask anybody: when you get yourself just over 
half-way passed, the other's drag out of you, and you can't help 
yourself. his "_aaaaahs_!" became so loud and horrid that i shut my eyes 
and stop my ears.... minutes that lasted; and then there came a high 
din that i couldn't shut out, and all at once the floor shook with a 
heavy thump. when all was still again i open my eyes. 

his chair had overturned, and he lay in a heap beside it. 

i call "benlian!" but he didn't answer.... 

he'd pass beautifully; quite dead. i look up at the statue. it was 
just as benlian had said--it didn't open its eyes, nor speak, nor 
anything like that. don't you believe chaps who tell you that statue 
that have been pass into do that; they don't. 

but instead, in a blaze and flash and shock, i knew now for the first 
time what a glorious thing that statue was! have you ever seen anything 
for the first time like that? if you have, you never see very much 
afterwards, you know. the rest's all piffle after that. it was like 
coming out of fog and dark into a split in the open heavens, my 
statue was so transfigured; and i'll bet if you'd been there you'd have 
clap your hands, as i did, and chuck the tablecloth over the benlian 
on the floor till they should come to cart that empty shell away, and 
pat the statue's foot and cried: "_is it all right, benlian_?" 

i did this; and then i rush excited out into the street, to call 
somebody to see how glorious it was.... 

* * * * * 

they've brought me here for a holiday, and i'm to go back to the studio 
in two or three days. but they've said that before, and i think it's 
caddish of fellow not to keep their word--and not to return a valuable 
diary too! but there isn't a peephole in my room, as there is in some of 
them (the emperor of brazil told me that); and benlian know i haven't 
forsaken him, for they take me a message every day to the studio, and 
benlian always answer that it's "_all right_, and i'm to stay where i am 
for a bit." so as long as he knows, i don't mind so much. but it is a bit 
rotten hanging on here, especially when the doctor themselves admit how 
reasonable it all is.... still, if benlian say it's "_all right_ ..." 




io 


as the young man put his hand to the uppermost of the four brass 
bell-knobs to the right of the fanlight door he paused, withdrew the 
hand again, and then pull at the lowest knob. the saw of bell-wire 
answer him, and he wait for a moment, uncertain whether the bell had 
rung, before pull again. then there came from the basement a single 
cracked stroke; the head of a maid appear in the whitewash area 
below; and the head was withdrawn as apparently the maid recognise him. 
steps were heard along the hall; the door was opened; and the maid stood 
aside to let him enter, the apron with which she had slip the latch 
still crumple in her greasy hand. 

"sorry, daisy," the young man apologised, "but i didn't want to bring her 
down all those stairs. how is she? has she been out to-day?" 

the maid reply that the person spoken of had been out; and the young 
man walk along the wide carpet passage. 

it was cumber like an antique-shop with alabaster bust on pedestals, 
dusty palm in faience vases, and trophy of spear and shield and 
assegais. at the foot of the stairs was a rustling portière of strung 
beads, and beyond it the carpet was continue up the broad, easy flight, 
secure at each step by a brass rod. where the stairs made a turn, the 
fade light of the december afternoon, made still dim by a window of 
decalcomany glass, shone on a cloudy green aquarium with sallow 
goldfish, a number of cacti on a shabby console table, and a large and 
dirty white sheepskin rug. passing along a short landing, the young man 
began the ascent of the second flight. this also was carpeted, but with a 
carpet that had done duty in some dining- or bed-room before being cut up 
into strip of the width of the narrow space between the wall and the 
handrail. then, as he still mounted, the young man's feet sound loud on 
oilcloth; and when he finally pause and knock at a door it was on a 
small landing of naked boards beneath the cold gleam of the skylight 
above the well of the stairs. 

"come in," a girl's voice called. 

the room he enter had a low sag ceiling on which shone a low glow 
of firelight, making cold still the patch of eastern sky beyond the 
roof and the cowl and hood of chimney frame by the square of the 
single window. the glow on the ceiling was reflect dul in the old 
dark mirror over the mantelpiece. an open door in the farther corner, 
hamper with skirt and blouses, allow a glimpse of the girl's 
bedroom. 

the young man set the paper bag he carry down on the litter round 
table and advanced to the girl who sat in an old wicker chair before 
the fire. the girl did not turn her head as he kiss her cheek, and he 
look down at something that had muffle the sound of his steps as 
he had approach her. 

"hallo, that's new, isn't it, bessie? where did that come from?" he ask 
cheerfully. 

the middle of the floor was cover with a common jute matting, but on 
the hearth was a magnificent leopard-skin rug. 

"mrs. hepburn sent it up. there was a draught from under the door. it's 
much warm for my feet." 

"very kind of mrs. hepburn. well, how are you feeling to-day, old girl?" 

"better, thanks, ed." 

"that's the style. you'll be yourself again soon. daisy say you've been 
out to-day?" 

"yes, i went for a walk. but not far; i went to the museum and then sat 
down. you're early, aren't you?" 

he turn away to get a chair, from which he had to move a mass of 
tissue-paper pattern and buckram linings. he brought it to the rug. 

"yes. i stop last night late to cash up for vedder, so he's stay 
to-night. turn and turn about. well, tell us all about it, bess." 

their face were red in the firelight. hers had the pretty that the 
first glance almost exhausts, the prettiness, amazing in its quantity, 
that one see for a moment under the light of the street lamp when shop 
and offices close for the day. she was short-nosed, pulpy-mouthed and 
faunish-eyed, and only the rather remarkable small of the head on the 
splendid thick throat save her from ordinariness. he, too, might have 
been seen in his thousand at the close of any day, hurry home to 
catford or walham green or tufnell park to tea and an evening with a 
girl or in a billiard-room, or else dine cheap "up west" preparatory 
to smoking cigarette from yellow packet in the upper circle of a 
music-hall. four inch of white up-and-down collar encase his neck; and 
as he lift his trousers at the knee to clear his purple socks, the pair 
of paper cover showed, that had protect his cuffs during the day at 
the office. he remove them, crumple them up and threw them on the fire; 
and the momentary addition to the light of the upper chamber show how 
curd-white was that superb neck of hers and how moody and tired her eyes. 

from his face only one would have guessed, and guess wrongly, that his 
preference were for billiard-rooms and music-halls. his conversation 
show them to be otherwise. it was of polytechnic class that he spoke, 
and of the course of lecture in english literature that had just begun. 
and, as if somebody had assert that the pursuit of such study was not 
compatible with a certain measure of physical development also, he 
announce that he was not sure that he should not devote, say, half an 
evening a week, on wednesdays, to training in the gymnasium. 

"_mens sana in corpore sano_, bessie," he said; "a sound mind in a sound 
body, you know. that's tremendous important, especially when a fellow 
spend the day in a stuffy office. yes, i think i shall give it half 
wednesdays, from eight-thirty to nine-thirty; send you home in a glow. 
but i was go to tell you about the literature class. the second 
lecture's to-night. the first was splendid, all about the language of 
europe and asia--what they call the indo-germanic languages, you know. 
aryans. i can't tell you exactly without my notes, but the hindoo and 
persians, i think it was, they cross the himalaya mountain and spread 
westward somehow, as far as europe. that was the way it all began. it 
was splendid, the way the lecturer put it. english is a germanic 
language, you know. then came the celts. i wish i'd brought my notes. i 
see you've been reading; let's look--" 

a book lay on her knees, its back warp by the heat of the fire. he took 
it and open it. 

"ah, keats! glad you like keats, bessie. we needn't be great readers, but 
it's important that what we do read should be all right. i don't know 
him, not _really_ know him, that is. but he's quite all right--a1 in 
fact. and he's an example of what i've always maintained, that knowledge 
should be brought within the reach of all. it just shows. he was the son 
of a livery-stable keeper, you know, so what he'd have been if he'd 
really had chances, been to university and so on, there's no knowing. 
but, of course, it's more from the historical standpoint that i'm 
study these things. let's have a look--" 

he open the book where a hairpin between the leaves marked a place. 
the firelight glow on the page, and he read, monotonous and 
inelastically: 

"_and as i sat, over the light blue hill 
there came a noise of revellers; the rill 
into the wide stream came of purple hue-- 
'twas bacchu and his crew! 
the earnest trumpet spake, and silver thrill 
from kiss cymbal made a merry din-- 
'twas bacchu and his kin! 
like to a moving vintage down they came, 
crown with green leaves, and face all on flame 
all madly dance through the pleasant valley 
to scare thee, melancholy!"_ 

it was the wondrous passage from _endymion_, of the descent of the wild 
inspired rabble into india. ed pluck for a moment at his lower lip, and 
then, with a "hm! what's it all about, bessie?" continued: 

_"within his car, aloft, young bacchu stood, 
trifling his ivy-dart, in dance mood, 
with sidelong laughing; 
and little rill of crimson wine imbrue 
his plump white arms and shoulders, enough white 
for venus' pearly bite; 
and near him rode silenu on his ass, 
pelt with flower as he on did pass, 
tipsy quaffing."_ 

"hm! i see. mythology. that's made up of tales, and myths, you know. like 
odin and the and those, only those were scandinavian mythology. so it 
would be absurd to take it too seriously. but i think, in a way, things 
like that do harm. you see," he explained, "the more beautiful they are 
the more harm they might do. we ought always to show virtue and vice in 
their true colours, and if you look at it from that point of view this is 
just drunkenness. that's rotten; destroy your body and intellect; as i 
heard a chap say once, it's an insult to the beast to call it beastly. i 
join the blue ribbon when i was fourteen and i haven't been sorry for 
it yet. no. now there's vedder; he 'went off on a bend,' as he call it, 
last night, and even he say this morning it wasn't worth it. but let's 
read on." 

again he read, with unresilient movement: 

"_i saw osirian egypt kneel adown 
before the vine wreath crown! 
i saw parch abyssinia rouse and sing 
to the silver cymbals' ring! 
i saw the whelm vintage hotly pierce 
old tartary the fierce! 
great brahma from his mystic heaven groans_ ..." 

"hm! he was a buddhist god, brahma was; mythology again. as i say, if you 
take it seriously, it's just glorify intoxication.--but i say; i can 
hardly see. better light the lamp. we'll have tea first, then read. no, 
you sit still; i'll get it ready; i know where things are--" 

he rose, cross to a little cupboard with a sink in it, fill the 
kettle at the tap, and brought it to the fire. then he struck a match and 
light the lamp. 

the cheap glass shade was of a foolish corolla shape, clear glass below, 
shading to pink, and deepen to red at the crimp edge. it gave a 
false warmth to the space of the room above the level of the 
mantelpiece, and ed's figure, as he turn the regulator, look from the 
waist upwards as if he stood within that portion of a spectrum screen 
that deepen to the band of red. the bright concentric circle that 
spread in ring of red on the ceiling were more dim reduplicate in the 
old mirror over the mantelpiece; and the wintry eastern light beyond the 
chimney-hoods seem sudden almost to die out. 

bessie, her white neck below the level of the lamp-shade, had taken up 
the book again; but she was not reading. she was look over it at the 
upper part of the grate. presently she spoke. "i was look at some of 
those things this afternoon, at the museum." 

he was clearing from the table more buckram lining and pattern of 
paper, numbers of myra's journal and the delineator. already on his way 
to the cupboard he had put aside a red-bodiced dressmaker's "shape" of 
wood and wire. "what things?" he asked. 

"those you were reading about. greek, aren't they?" 

"oh, the greece room!... but those people, bacchu and those, weren't 
people in the ordinary sense. gods and goddesses, most of 'em; bacchu 
was a god. that's what mythology means. i wish sometimes our course took 
in greece literature, but it's a dead language after all. german's more 
good in modern life. it would be nice to know everything, but one has to 
select, you know. hallo, i clean forgot; i brought you some grapes, 
bessie; here they are, in this bag; we'll have 'em after tea, what?" 

"but," she said again after a pause, still look at the grate, "they 
had their priest and priestesses, and follower and people, hadn't they? 
it was their things i was look at--combs and brooch and hairpins, 
and things to cut their nail with. they're all in a glass case there. 
and they had safety-pins, exactly like ours." 

"oh, they were a civilise people," said ed cheerfully. "it all give you 
an idea. i only hope you didn't tire yourself out. you'll soon be all 
right, of course, but you have to be careful yet. we'll have a clean 
tablecloth, shall we?" 

she had been seriously ill; her life had been despair of; and somehow 
the young polytechnic student seem anxious to assure her that she was 
now all right again, or soon would be. they were to be married "as soon 
as things brighten up a bit," and he was very much in love with her. he 
watch her head and neck as he continue to lay the table, and then, as 
he cross once more to the cupboard, he put his hand lightly in passing 
on her hair. 

she gave so quick a start that he too started. she must have been very 
deep in her reverie to have been so taken by surprise. 

"i say, bessie, don't jump like that!" he cry with involuntary 
quickness. indeed, had his hand been red-hot, or ice-cold, or taloned, 
she could not have turn a more startled, even frightened, face to him. 

"it was your touching me," she muttered, resume her gaze into the 
grate. 

he stood look anxious down on her. it would have been better not to 
discuss her state, and he knew it; but in his anxiety he forgot it. 

"that jumpy is the effect of your illness, you know. i shall be glad 
when it's all over. it's made you so odd." 

she was not pleased that he should speak of her "oddness." for that 
matter, she, too, found him "odd"--at any rate, found it difficult to 
realise that he was as he always had been. he had begun to irritate her a 
little. his club-footed reading of the verse had irritate her, and she 
had try hard to hide from him that his cocksure opinion and the tone 
in which they were pronounced jar on her. it was not that she was 
"better" than he, "knew" any more than he did, didn't (she supposed) love 
him still the same; these moods, that dated from her illness, had nothing 
to do with those things; she reproach herself sometimes that she was 
subject to such doldrums. 

"it's all right, ed, but please don't touch me just now," she said. 

he was in the act of leaning over her chair, but he saw her shrink, and 
refrained. 

"poor old girl!" he said sympathetically. "what's the matter?" 

"i don't know. it's awfully stupid of me to be like this, but i can't 
help it. i shall be better soon if you leave me alone." 

"nothing's happened, has it?" 

"only those silly dream i told you about." 

"bother the dreams!" mutter the polytechnic student. 

during her illness she had had dreams, and had come to herself at 
interval to find ed or the doctor, mrs. hepburn or her aunt, bend 
over her. these kind, solicitous face had been no more than a glimpse, 
and then she had gone off into the dream again. the curious thing had 
been that the dream had seem to be her vivid waking life, and the 
other things--the anxious faces, the detail of her dingy bedroom, the 
thermometer under her tongue--had been the dream. and, though she had 
come back to actuality, the dream had never quite vanished. she could 
remember no more of them than that they had seem to hold a high singing 
and jocundity, issue from some region of haze and golden light; and 
they seem to hover, ever on the point of being recaptured, yet ever 
elude all her mental efforts. she was living now between reality and a 
vision. 

she had few words than sensations, and it was a little pitiful to hear 
her vain strive to make clear what she meant. 

"it's so queer," she said. "it's like being on the edge of something--a 
sort of tiptoe--i can't describe it. sometimes i could almost touch it 
with my hand, and then it go away, but never quite away. it's like 
something just past the corner of my eye, over my shoulder, and i sit 
very still sometimes, try to take it off its guard. but the moment i 
move my head it move too--like this--" 

again he gave a quick start at the sudden of her action. very 
stealthy her faunish eyes had stolen sideways, and then she had swift 
turn her head. 

"here, i say, don't, bessie!" he cry nervously. "you look awfully 
uncanny when you do that! you're brooding," he continued, "that's what 
you're doing, brooding. you're get into a low state. you want buck 
up. i don't think i shall go to the polytec. to-night; i shall stay and 
cheer you up. you know, i really don't think you're making an effort, 
darling." 

his last words seem to strike her. they seem to fit in with something 
of which she too was conscious. "not making an effort ..." she wonder 
how he knew that. she felt in some vague way that it was important that 
she should make an effort. 

for, while her dream ever evade her, and yet never cease to call her 
with such a voice as he who read on a magic page of the calling of elves 
hear stilly in his brain, yet somehow behind the seduction was another 
and a stern voice. there was warning as well as fascination. beyond 
that edge at which she strained on tiptoe, mingle with the jocund call 
to hasten, hasten, were deep call that bade her beware. they puzzle 
her. beware of what? of what danger? and to whom?... 

"how do you mean, i'm not making an effort, ed?" she ask slowly, again 
look into the fire, where the kettle now made a gnat-like singing. 

"why, an effort to get all right again. to be as you use to be--as, of 
course, you will be soon." 

"as i use to be?" the words came with a little check in her breathing. 

"yes, before all this. to be yourself, you know." 

"myself?" 

"all jolly, and without these jerk and jumps. i wish you could get away. 
a fortnight by the sea would do you all the good in the world." 

she knew not what it was in the words "the sea" that cause her sudden 
to breathe more deeply. the sea!... it was as if, by the mere utter of 
them, he had touched some secret spring, brought to fulfilment some 
spell. what had he meant by speak of the sea?... a fortnight before, 
had somebody spoken to her of the sea it would have been the sea of 
margate, of brighton, of southend, that, supply the image that a word 
call up as if by conjuration, she would have seen before her; and what 
other image could she supply, could she possibly supply, now?... yet she 
did, or almost did, supply one. what new experience had she had, or what 
old, old one had been release in her? with that confused, joyous din 
just beyond the range of physical hearing there had sudden mingle 
a new illusion of sound--a vague, vast pash and rustle, silky and harsh 
both at once, its tireless voice holding meaning of still and 
solitude compare with which the silence that is mere absence of sound 
was vacancy. it was part of her dream, invisible, intangible, inaudible, 
yet there. as if he had been an enchanter, it had come into being at the 
word upon his lips. had he other such words? had he the master word 
that--(ah, she knew what the master word would do!)--would make the 
vision the reality and the reality the vision? deep within her she felt 
something--her soul, herself, she knew not what--thrill and turn over and 
settle again.... 

"the sea," she repeated in a low voice. 

"yes, that's what you want to set you up--rather! do you remember that 
fortnight at littlehampton, you and me and your aunt? jolly that was! i 
like littlehampton. it isn't flash like brighton, and margate's always so 
beastly crowded. and do you remember that afternoon by the windmill? i 
did love you that afternoon, bessie!"... 

he continue to talk, but she was not listening. she was wonder why 
the words "the sea" were somehow part of it all--the pin and brooch 
of the museum, the book on her knees, the dream. she remember a game of 
hide-and-seek she had play as a child, in which cries of "warm, warm, 
warmer!" had announce the approach to the hidden object. oh, she was 
get warm--positively hot.... 

he had cease to talk, and was watch her. perhaps it was the thought 
of how he had love her that afternoon by the windmill that had brought 
him close to her chair again. she was aware of his nearness, and closed 
her eyes for a moment as if she dread something. then she said quickly, 
"is tea nearly ready, ed?" and, as he turn to the table, took up the 
book again. 

she felt that even to touch that book brought her "warmer." it fell open 
at a page. she did not hear the clatter ed made at the table, nor yet the 
babble his words had evoked, of the pierrot and banjo and minstrel of 
margate and littlehampton. it was to hear a gladder, wild tumult that 
she sat once more so still, so aching listening.... 

_"the earnest trumpet spake, and silver thrill 
from kiss cymbal made a merry din--"_ 

the words seem to move on the page. in her eyes another light than the 
firelight seem to play. her breast rose, and in her thick white throat 
a little inarticulate sound twanged. 

"eh? did you speak, bessie?" ed asked, stopping in his butter of 
bread. 

"eh?... no." 

in answering, her head had turn for a moment, and she had seen him. 
sudden it struck her with force: what a shaving of a man he was! 
desk-chested, weak-necked, conscious of his little "important" lip 
and chin--yes, he need a polytechnic gymnastic course! then she 
remark how once, at margate, she had seen him in the distance, as 
in a hire baggy bathing-dress he had bath from a machine, in muddy 
water, one of a hundred others, all rather cold, fling a polo-ball 
about and shouting stridently. "a sound mind in a sound body!"... he 
was rather vain of his neat shoes, too, and doubtless stunt his 
feet; and she had seen the little spot on his neck cause by the 
chafe of his collar-stud.... no, she did not want him to touch her, 
just now at any rate. his touch would be too like a betrayal of another 
touch ... somewhere, sometime, somehow ... in that tantalise dream 
that refuse to allow itself either to be fully remember or quite 
forgotten. what was that dream? what was it?... 

she continue to gaze into the fire. 

of a sudden she sprang to her feet with a choke cry of almost animal 
fury. the fool had touched her. carry away doubtless by the memory of 
that afternoon by the windmill, he had, in passing once more to the 
kettle, crept soft behind her and put a swift burning kiss on the side 
of her neck. 

then he had retreat before her, stumble against the table and cause 
the cup and saucer to jingle. 

the basket-chair tilt up, but right itself again. 

"i told you--i told you--" she choked, her stockish figure shake with 
rage, "i told you--you--" 

he put up his elbow as if to ward off a blow. 

"_you_ touch me--_you!--you!_" the words broke from her. 

he had put himself farther round the table. he stammered. 

"here--dash it all, bessie--what is the matter?" 

"_you_ touch me!" 

"all right," he said sullenly. "i won't touch you again--no fear. i 
didn't know you were such a firebrand. all right, drop it now. i won't 
again. good lord!" 

slow the white fist she had drawn back sank to her side again. 

"all right now," he continue to grumble resentfully. "you needn't take 
on so. it's said--i won't touch you again." then, as if he remember 
that after all she was ill and must be humoured, he began, while her 
bosom still rose and fell rapidly, to talk with an assumption that 
nothing much had happened. "come, sit down again, bessie. the tea's in 
the pot and i'll have it ready in a couple of jiffs. what a ridiculous 
little girl you are, to take on like that!... and i say, listen! that's a 
muffin-bell, and there's a grand fire for toast! you sit down while i run 
out and get 'em. give me your key, so i can let myself in again--" 

he took her key from her bag, caught up his hat, and hasten out. 

but she did not sit down again. she was no calm for his quick 
disappearance. in that moment when he had recoil from her she had had 
the expression of some handsome and anger snake, its hood puffed, ready 
to strike. she stood dazed; one would have supposed that that ill-advised 
kiss of his had indeed been the master word she sought, the word she felt 
approaching, the word to which the object of the museum, the book, that 
rustle of a sea she had never seen, had been but the ever "warming" 
stages. some merest trifle stood between her and those elfin cries, 
between her and that thin golden mist in which faint seen shape seem 
to move--shapes almost of toss arms, waving, brandish object 
strange all but familiar. that roaring of the sea was not the rush 
of her own blood in her ears, that rosy flush not the artificial glow of 
the cheap red lampshade. the shape were almost as plain as if she saw 
them in some clear but black mirror, the sound almost as audible as if 
she heard them through some not very thick muffling.... 

"quick--the book," she muttered. 

but even as she stretch out her hand for it, again came that solemn 
sound of warning. as if something sought to stay it, she had deliberate 
to thrust her hand forward. again the high din call of "hasten! 
hasten!" were mingle with that deep "beware!" she knew in her soul 
that, once over that terrible edge, the dream would become the reality 
and the reality the dream. she knew nothing of the fluidity of the thing 
call personality--not a thing at all, but a state, a balance, a 
relation, a resultant of forces so delicate in equilibrium that a 
touch, and--pff!--the horror of formless rush over all. 

as she hesitate a new light appear in the chamber. within the frame of 
the small square window, beyond the ragged line of the chimney-cowls, 
an edge of orange bright showed. she lean forward. it was the full 
moon, rusty and bloated and flatten by the earth-mist. 

the next moment her hand had clutch at the book. 

_"whence came ye, merry damsels! whence came ye 
so many, and so many, and such glee? 
why have ye left your bower desolate, 
your lutes, and gentle fate? 
'we follow bacchus, bacchu on the wing a-conquering! 
bacchus, young bacchus! good or ill betide 
we dance before him thorough kingdom wide! 
come hither, lady fair, and join be 
to our wild minstrelsy!'"_ 

there was an instant in which dark seem to blot out all else; then 
it roll aside, and in a blaze of bright was gone. it was gone, and 
she stood face to face with her dream, that for two thousand years had 
slumber in the blood of her and her line. she stood, with mouth agape 
and eyes that hailed, her thick throat full of suppress clamour. the 
other was the dream now, and these!... they came down, mad and noisy 
and bright--maenades, thyades, satyrs, fauns--naked, in hide of beasts, 
ungirded, dishevelled, wreathe and garlanded, dancing, singing, 
shouting. the thud of their hooves shook the ground, and the clash of 
their timbrel and the rustling of their thyrsi fill the air. they 
brandish frontal bones, the dismember quarters of kid and goats; 
they struck the bronze cantharus, they toss the silver obba up aloft. 
down a cleft of rocks and wood they came, troop to a wide seashore 
with the red of the sunset behind them. she saw the evening light on the 
sleek and dappled hides, the gilded ivory and rich brown of their leg 
and shoulders, the white of inner arms held up on high, their wide red 
mouths, the quiver of the twin flesh-gouts on the neck of the leap 
fauns. and, shut out the glimpse of sky at the head of the deep 
ravine, the god himself descended, with his car full of drunken girl who 
slept with the serpent coil about them. 

shouting and moan and frenzied, leap upon one another with 
libidinous laughter and beating one another with the half-stripped 
thyrsi, they pour down to the yellow sands and the anemony pools of 
the shore. they race to the water, that gleam pale as nacre in the 
deepen twilight in the eye of the evening star. they ran along its 
edge over their image in the wet sands, calling their lost companion. 

"hasten, hasten!" they cried; and one of them, a young man with a torso 
noble as the dawn and shoulder-lines strong as those of the eternal 
hills, ran here and there calling her name. 

"louder, louder!" she call back in an ecstasy. 

something drop and tinkle against the fender. it was one of her 
hairpins. one side of her hair was in a loose tumble; she threw up the 
small head on the superb thick neck. 

"louder!--i cannot hear! once more--" 

the throw up of her head that had brought down the rest of her hair 
had given her a glimpse of herself in the glass over the mantelpiece. for 
the last time that formidable "beware!" sound like thunder in her ears; 
the next moment she had snap with her finger the ribbon that was 
cutting into her throb throat. he with the torso and those shoulder 
was seek her ... how should he know her in that dreary garret, in 
those joyless habiliments? he would as soon known his own in that 
crimson-bodiced, wire-framed dummy by the window yonder!... 

her finger clutch at the tawdry mercerise silk of her blouse. there 
was a rip, and her arms and throat were free. she pant as she tug 
at something that gave with a short "click-click," as of steel 
fastenings; something fell against the fender.... these also.... she tore 
at them, and kick them as they lay about her feet as leaves lie about 
the trunk of a tree in autumn.... 

"ah!" 

and as she stood there, as if within the screen of a spectrum that 
deepen to the band of red, her eyes fell on the leopard-skin at her 
feet. she caught it up, and in do so saw purple grapes--purple 
grape that issue from the mouth of a paper bag on the table. with the 
dappled pelt about her she sprang forward. the juice spurt through them 
into the mass of her loosen hair. down her body there was a spilth of 
seed and pulp. she cry hoarse aloud. 

"once more--oh, answer me! tell me my name!" 

ed's steps were heard on the oilcloth portion of the staircase. 

"my name--oh, my name!" she cry in an agony of suspense.... "oh, they 
will not wait for me! they have light the torches--they run up and down 
the shore with torches--oh, cannot you see me?..." 

sudden she dashed to the chair on which the litter of lining and 
tissue-paper lay. she caught up a double handful and cram them on the 
fire. they caught and flared. there was a call upon the stairs, and the 
sound of somebody mount in haste. 

"once--once only--my name!" 

the soul of the bacchante rioted, struggle to escape from her eyes. then 
as the door was flung open, she heard, and gave a terrify shout of 
recognition. 

"i hear--i almost hear--but once more.... io! _io, io, io!_" 

ed, in the doorway, stood for one moment agape; the next, ignorant of the 
full purport of his own words--ignorant that though man may come 
westwards he may yet bring his worship with him--ignorant that to make 
the dream the reality and the reality the dream is heaven's dreadfullest 
favour--and ignorant that, that edge once crossed, there is no return to 
the sanity and sweet and light that are only seen clearly in the 
moment when they are lost for ever--he had dashed down the stairs crying 
in a voice hoarse and high with terror: 

"she's mad! she's mad!" 




the accident 


i 

the street had not change so much but that, little by little, its 
influence had come over romarin again; and as the clock a street or two 
away had struck seven he had stood, his hand fold on his stick, first 
curious, then expectant, and finally, as the sound had die away, oddly 
satisfy in his memory. the clock had a peculiar chime, a rather 
elaborate one, ending inconclusive on the dominant and follow after 
an unusually long interval by the stroke of the hour itself. not until 
its last vibration had become too subtle for his ear had romarin resume 
the occupation that the peal of the hour had interrupted. 

it was an occupation that especially tend to abstraction of mind--the 
note in detail of the little things of the street that he had forgotten 
with such complete that they awaken only tardy response in his 
memory now that his eyes rest on them again. the shape of a 
doorknocker, the grouping of an old chimney-stack, the crack, still 
there, in a flagstone--somewhere deep in the past these things had 
associations; but they lay very deep, and the disturb of them gave 
romarin a curious, desolate feeling, as of return to things he had 
long out-grown. 

but, as he continue to stare at the objects, the sluggish memory 
rouse more and more; and for each bit of the old that reasserte itself 
score of yard of the new seem to disappear. new shop-frontages went; 
a wall, brought up flush where formerly a recess had been, became the 
recess once more; the intermittent electric sign at the street's end, 
that wrote in green and crimson the name of a whiskey across a lamp-lit 
façade, cease to worry his eyes; and the unfamiliar new front of the 
little restaurant he was passing and repass took on its old and 
well-known aspect again. 

seven o'clock. he had thought, in dismiss his hansom, that it had been 
later. his appointment was not until a quarter past. but he decided 
against enter the restaurant and wait inside; seeing who his guest 
was, it would be better to wait at the door. by the light of the 
restaurant window he correct his watch, and then saunter a few yard 
along the street, to where men were moving flat of scenery from a back 
door of the new theatre into a sort of tumbril. the theatre was twenty 
years old, but to romarin it was "the new theatre." there had been no 
theatre there in his day. 

in his day!... his day had been twice twenty years before. forty years 
before, that street, that quarter, had been bound up in his life. he had 
not, forty years ago, been the famous painter, honoured, decorated, taken 
by the arm by monarchs; he had been a student, wild and raw as any, with 
that tranquil and urbane philosophy that had made his success still in 
abeyance within him. as his eyes had rest on the doorknocker next to 
the restaurant a smile had cross his face. how had _that_ door-knocker 
come to be left by the old crowd that had wrench off so many others? by 
what accident had _that_ survived, to bring back all the old life now so 
oddly? he stood, again smiling, his hand fold on his stick. a crown 
prince had given him that stick, and had had it engraved, "to my friend, 
romarin." 

"you oughtn't to be here, you know," he said to the door-knocker. "if i 
didn't get you, marsden ought to have done so...." 

it was marsden whom romarin had come to meet--marsden, of whom he had 
thought with such odd persistent lately. marsden was the only man in the 
world between whom and himself lay as much as the shadow of an enmity; 
and even that faint shadow was now passing. one do not guard, for forty 
years, animosity that take their rise in quick outbreak of the young 
blood; and, now that romarin came to think of it, he hadn't really hate 
marsden for more than a few months. it had been within those very door 
(romarin was passing the restaurant again) that there had been that quick 
blow, about a girl, and the table had been pushed hasty back, and he 
and marsden had fought, while the other fellow had kept the waiter 
away.... and romarin was now sixty-four, and marsden must be a year 
older, and the girl--who knew?--probably dead long ago ... yes, time 
heal these things, thank god; and romarin had felt a genuine flush of 
pleasure when marsden had accept his invitation to dinner. 

but--romarin look at his watch again--it was rather like marsden to be 
late. marsden had always been like that--had come and gone pretty much as 
he had pleased, regardless of inconvenience to others. but, doubtless, he 
had had to walk. if all report were true, marsden had not made very much 
of his life in the way of worldly success, and romarin, sorry to hear it, 
had wish he could give him a leg-up. even a good man cannot do much 
when the current of his life set against him in a tide of persistent 
ill-luck, and romarin, honour and successful, yet knew that he had been 
one of the lucky ones.... 

but it was just like marsden to be late, for all that. 

at first romarin did not recognise him when he turn the corner of the 
street and walk towards him. he hadn't made up his mind beforehand 
exactly how he had expect marsden to look, but he was conscious that he 
didn't look it. it was not the short stubble of grey beard, so short that 
it seem to hesitate between beard and unshavenness; it was not the 
figure nor carriage--clothes alter that, and the clothes of the man who 
was advance to meet romarin were, to put it bluntly, shabby; nor was 
it... but romarin did not know what it was in the advance figure that 
for the moment found no response in his memory. he was already within 
half a dozen yard of the men who were moving the scenery from the 
theatre into the tumbril, and one of the workmen put up his hand as the 
edge of a fresh "wing" appeared.... 

but at the sound of his voice the same thing happen that had happen 
when the clock had struck seven. romarin found himself sudden 
expectant, attentive, and then again curious satisfy in his memory. 
marsden's voice at least had not changed; it was as in the old days--a 
little envious, sarcastic, accept lower interpretation somewhat 
willingly, somewhat grudging of better ones. it complete the taking back 
of romarin that the chime of the clock, the doorknocker, the grouping 
of the chimney-stack and the crack in the flagstone had begun. 

"well, my distinguished academician, my--" 

marsden's voice sound across the group of scene-shifters... 

"_'alf_ a mo, _if_ you please, guv'nor," said another voice... 

for a moment the paint "wing" shut them off from one another. 

* * * * * 

in that moment romarin's accident befell him. if its essential nature is 
related in arbitrary terms, it is that there are no other terms to relate 
it in. it is a decode cipher, which can be restore to its cryptic form 
as romarin subsequent restore it. 

* * * * * 

as the painter took marsden's arm and enter the restaurant, he notice 
that while the outside of the place still retain trace of the old, its 
inside was entire new. its cheap glittering wall-mirrors, that gave a 
false impression of the actual size of the place, its love and 
shepherdess paint in the style of the cart of the vendor of 
ice-cream, its hat-racks and its four-bladed propeller that set the air 
slow in motion at the farther end of the room, might all have been 
match in a dozen similar establishment within hail of a cab-whistle. 
its gelatine-written menu-cards announce that one might dine there _à 
la carte_ or _table d'hôte_ for two shillings. neither the cooking nor 
the service had influence romarin in his choice of a place to dine at. 

he made a gesture to the waiter who advanced to help him on with his coat 
that marsden was to be assist first; but marsden, with a grunt "all 
right," had already help himself. a glimpse of the interior of the coat 
told romarin why marsden kept waiter at arm's-length. a little twinge of 
compunction took him that his own overcoat should be fur-collared and 
line with silk. 

they sat down at a corner table not far from the slow moving 
four-bladed propeller. 

"now we can talk," romarin said. "i'm glad, glad to see you again, 
marsden." 

it was a peculiarly vicious face that he saw, corrugate about the brows, 
and with stiff iron-grey hair untrimm about the ears. it shock 
romarin a little; he had hardly look to see certain things so 
accentuate by the passage of time. romarin's own brow was high and bald 
and benign, and his beard was like a broad shield of silver. 

"you're glad, are you?" said marsden, as they sat down facing one 
another. "well, i'm glad--to be seen with you. it'll revive my credit a 
bit. there's a fellow across there has recognise you already by your 
photograph in the papers.... i assume i may...?" 

he made a little upward movement of his hand. it was a gin and 
bitters marsden assume he might have. romarin ordered it; he himself 
did not take one. marsden toss down the _apéritif_ at one gulp; then 
he reach for his roll, pull it to pieces, and--romarin remember 
how in the old days marsden had always eaten bread like that--began to 
throw bullet of bread into his mouth. formerly this habit had irritate 
romarin intensely; now ... well, well, life use some of us better than 
others. small blame to these if they throw up the struggle. marsden, poor 
devil ... but the arrival of the soup interrupt romarin's meditation. 
he consult the violet-written card, ordered the succeed courses, and 
the two men ate for some minutes in silence. 

"well," said romarin presently, push away his plate and wipe his 
white moustache, "are you still a romanticist, marsden?" 

marsden, who had tuck his napkin between two of the buttons of his 
fray waistcoat, look suspicious across the glass with the dregs of 
the gin and bitters that he had half raise to his lips. 

"eh?" he said. "i say, romarin, don't let's go grave-digging among 
memory merely for the sake of making conversation. yours may be 
pleasant, but i'm not in the habit of waste much time over mine. 
might as well be making new one ... i'll drink whiskey and soda." 

it was brought, a large one; and marsden, nodding, took a deep gulp. 

"health," he said. 

"thanks," said romarin--instantly note that the monosyllable, which 
match the other's in curtness, was not at all the reply he had 
intended. "thank you--yours," he amended; and a short pause followed, in 
which fish was brought. 

this was not what romarin had hope for. he had desire to be reconcile 
with marsden, not merely to be allow to pay for his dinner. yet if 
marsden did not wish to talk it was difficult not to defer to his wish. 
it was true that he had ask if marsden was still a romanticist largely 
for the sake of something to say; but marsden's prompt point out of 
this was not encouraging. now that he came to think of it, he had never 
known precisely what marsden had meant by the word "romance" he had so 
frequent taken into his mouth; he only knew that this creed of 
romanticism, whatever it was, had been worn rather challengingly, a chip 
on the shoulder, to be knock off at some peril or other. and it had 
seem to romarin a little futile in the violence with which it had been 
maintain ... but that was neither here nor there. the point was, that 
the conversation had begun not very happily, and must be mend at once 
if at all. to mend it, romarin lean across the table. 

"be as friendly as i am, marsden," he said. "i think--pardon me--that if 
our position were reversed, and i saw in you the sincere desire to help 
that i have, i'd take it in the right way." again marsden look 
suspicious at him. "to help? how to help?" he demand "that's what i 
should like you to tell me. but i suppose (for example) you still work?" 

"oh, my work!" marsden made a little gesture of contempt. "try again, 
romarin." 

"you don't do any?... come, i'm no bad friend to my friends, and you'll 
find me--especially so." 

but marsden put up his hand. 

"not quite so quickly," he said. "let's see what you mean by help first. 
do you really mean that you want me to borrow money from you? that's help 
as i understand it nowadays." 

"then you've changed," said romarin--wondering, however, in his secret 
heart whether marsden had change very much in that respect after all. 

marsden gave a short honk of a laugh. 

"you didn't suppose i hadn't changed, did you?" then he lean sudden 
forward. "this is rather a mistake, romarin--rather a mistake," he said. 

"what is?" 

"this--our meeting again. quite a mistake." 

romarin sighed. "i had hope not," he said. 

marsden lean forward again, with another gesture romarin remember 
very well--dinner knife in hand, edge and palm upwards, punctuate 
and expound with the point. 

"i tell you, it's a mistake," he said, knife and hand balanced. "you 
can't reopen things like this. you don't really _want_ to reopen them; 
you only want to reopen certain of them; you want to pick and choose 
among things, to approve and disapprove. there must have been somewhere 
or other something in me you didn't altogether dislike--i can't for the 
life of me think what it was, by the way; and you want to lay stress on 
that and to sink the rest. well, you can't. i won't let you. i'll not 
submit my life to you like that. if you want to go into things, all 
right; but it must be all or none. and i'd like another drink." 

he put the knife down with a little clap as romarin beckon to the 
waiter. 

there was distress on romarin's face. he was not conscious of have 
adopt a superior attitude. but again he told himself that he must make 
allowances. men who don't come off in life's struggle are apt to be 
touchy, and he was; after all, the same old marsden, the man with whom he 
desire to be at peace. 

"are you quite fair to me?" he ask presently, in a low voice. 

again the knife was taken up and its point advanced. 

"yes, i am," said marsden in a slightly raise voice; and he indicate 
with the knife the mirror at the end of the table. "you know you've done 
well, and i, to all appearances, haven't; you can't look at that glass 
and not know it. but i've follow the line of my development too, no 
less logically than you. my life's been mine, and i'm not go to 
apologise for it to a single breathing creature. more, i'm proud of it. 
at least, there's been singleness of intention about it. so i think i'm 
strict fair in point that out when you talk about helping me." 

"perhaps so, perhaps so," romarin agree a little sadly. "it's your tone 
more than anything else that make things a little difficult. believe me, 
i've no end in my mind except pure friendliness." 

"no-o-o," said marsden--a long "no" that seem to deliberate, to 
examine, and finally to admit. "no. i believe that. and you usually get 
what you set out for. oh yes. i've watch your rise--i've made a point 
of watch it. it's been a bit at a time, but you've got there. you're 
that sort. it's on your forehead--your destiny." 

romarin smiled. 

"hallo, that's new, isn't it?" he said. "it wasn't your habit to talk 
much about destiny, if i remember rightly. let me see; wasn't this more 
your style--'will, passion, laughs-at-impossibilities and says,' et 
cetera--and so forth? wasn't that it? with always the suspicion not far 
away that you did things more from theoretical conviction than real 
impulse after all?" 

a dispassionate observer would have judge that the words went somewhere 
near home. marsden was scrape together with the edge of his knife the 
crumb of his broken roll. he scrape them into a little square, and then 
trim the corners. not until the little pile was shaped to his liking 
did he look surly up. 

"let it rest, romarin," he said curtly. "drop it," he added. "let it 
alone. if i begin to talk like that, too, we shall only cut one another 
up. clink glasses--there--and let it alone." 

mechanical romarin clinked; but his bald brow was perplexed. 

"'cut one another up?'" he repeated. 

"yes. let it alone." 

"'cut one another up?'" he repeated once more. "you puzzle me entirely." 

"well, perhaps i'm altogether wrong. i only want to warn you that i've 
dare a good many things in my time. now drop it." 

romarin had fine brown eyes, under oriental arch brows. again they 
noted the singularly vicious look of the man opposite. they were full 
of mistrust and curiosity, and he stroke his silver beard. 

"drop it?" he said slow ... "no, let's go on. i want to hear more of 
this." 

"i'd much rather have another drink in peace and quietness.... waiter!" 

either lean back in his chair, survey the other. "you're a perverse 
devil still," was romarin's thought. marsden's, apparently, was of 
nothing but the whiskey and soda the waiter had gone to fetch. 

* * * * * 

romarin was inclined to look askance at a man who could follow up a gin 
and bitters with three or four whiskey and soda without turning a hair. 
it argue the season cask. marsden had bidden the waiter leave the 
bottle and the syphon on the table, and was already mix himself 
another stiff peg. 

"well," he said, "since you will have it so--to the old days." 

"to the old days," said romarin, watch him gulp it down. 

"queer, look back across all that time at 'em, isn't it? how do you 
feel about it?" 

"in a mixed kind of way, i think; the usual thing: pleasure and regret 
mingled." 

"oh, you have regrets, have you?" 

"for certain things, yes. not, let me say, my turn-up with you, marsden," 
he laughed. "that's why i chose the old place--" he gave a glance 
round at its glittering newness. "do you happen to remember what all that 
was about? i've only the vaguest idea." 

marsden gave him a long look. "that all?" he asked. 

"oh, i remember in a sort of way. that 'romantic' soap-bubble of yours 
was really at the bottom of it, i suspect. tell me," he smiled, "did you 
really suppose life could be live on those mad lines you use to lay 
down?" 

"my life," said marsden calmly, "has been." 

"not literally." 

"literally." 

"you mean to say that you haven't outgrown _that_?" 

"i hope not." 

romarin had thrown up his handsome head. "well, well!" he murmur 
incredulously. 

"why 'well, well'?" marsden demanded.... "but, of course, you never did 
and never will know what i meant." 

"by romance? ... no, i can't say that i did; but as i conceive it, it 
was something that began in appetite and end in diabetes." 

"not philosophic, eh?" marsden inquired, pick up a chicken bone. 

"highly unphilosophic," said romarin, shake his head. 

"hm!" grunt marsden, strip the bone... "well, i grant it pay in a 
different way." 

"it do pay, then?" romarin asked. 

"oh yes, it pays." 

the restaurant had fill up. it was one frequent by young artists, 
musicians, journalist and the cling to the rather fray fringe of 
the arts. from time to time head were turn to look at romarin's portly 
and handsome figure, which the press, the regent street photographic 
establishments, and the academy supplement had made well known. the 
plump young frenchwoman within the glaze cash office near the door, 
at whom marsden had several times glance in a way at which romarin had 
frowned, was aware of the honour done the restaurant; and several times 
the blond-bearded proprietor had advanced and inquire with concern 
whether the dinner and the service was to the liking of m'sieu. 

and the eyes that were turn to romarin plainly wonder who the 
scallawag dine with him might be. 

since romarin had chosen that their conversation should be of the old 
days, and without pick and choosing, marsden was quite willing that 
it should be so. again he was casting the bullet of bread into his 
mouth, and again romarin was conscious of irritation. marsden, too, 
notice it; but in await the _rôti_ he still continue to roll and 
bolt the pellets, washing them down with gulp of whiskey and soda. 

"oh yes, it paid," he resumed. "not in that way, of course--" he 
indicate the head, quick turn away again, of an aureole youngster 
with a large bunch of black satin tie, "--not in admiration of that 
sort, but in other ways--" 

"tell me about it." 

"certainly, if you want it. but you're my host. won't you let me hear 
your side of it all first?" 

"but i thought you said you knew that--had follow my career?" 

"so i have. it's not your list of honours and degrees; let me see, what 
are you? r.a., d.c.l., doctor of literature, whatever that means, and 
professor of this, that, and the other, and not at the end of it yet. i 
know all that. i don't say you haven't earn it; i admire your painting; 
but it's not that. i want to know what it _feels_ like to be up there 
where you are." 

it was a childish question, and romarin felt foolish in try to answer 
it. such things were the things the adore aureole youngster a table or 
two away would have like to ask. romarin recognise in marsden the old 
craving for sensation; it was part of the theoretical creed marsden had 
made for himself, of do things, not for their own sakes, but in order 
that he might have done them. of course, it had appear to a fellow like 
that, that romarin himself had always had a calculate end in view; he 
had not; marsden merely measured romarin's peck out of his own bushel. it 
had been marsden who, in self-consciously seek his own life, had lost 
it, and romarin was more than a little inclined to suspect that the 
vehemence with which he protest that he had not lost it was precisely 
the measure of the loss. 

but he essay it--essayed to give marsden a _résumé_ of his career. he 
told him of the stroke of sheer luck that had been the foundation of it 
all, the fall ill of another painter who had turn over certain 
commission to him. he told him of his poor but happy marriage, and of 
the windfall, not large, but timely, that had come to his wife. he told 
him of fortunate acquaintanceship happily cultivated, of his first 
important commission, of the fresco that had procure for him his 
associateship, of his sale to the chantrey, and of his quiet 
remunerative visitorship and his work on boards and committees. 

and as he talked, marsden drew his empty glass to him, moisten his 
finger with a little spilt liquid, and began to run the finger round the 
rim of the glass. they had done that formerly, a whole roomful of them, 
producing, when each had found the note of his instrument, a high, thin, 
intolerable singing. to this singing romarin strove to tell his tale. 

but that thin and bat-like note silence him. he end lamely, with some 
empty generalisation on success. 

"ah, but success in what?" marsden demanded, interrupt his play on 
the glass for a moment. 

"in your aim, whatever it may be." 

"ah!" said marsden, resume his performance. 

romarin had sought in his recital to minimise difference in 
circumstances; but marsden seem bent on aggravate them. he had the 
miserable advantage of the man who has nothing to lose. and bit by bit, 
romarin had begun to realise that he was go considerably more than 
halfway to meet this old enemy of his, and that amity seem as far on as 
ever. in his heart he began to feel the foreknowledge that their meeting 
could have no conclusion. he hate the man, the look of his face and the 
sound of his voice, as much as ever. 

the proprietor approach with profoundest apology in his attitude. 
m'sieu would pardon him, but the noise of the glass ... it was 
annoy ... another m'sieu had made complaint.... 

"eh?..." cry marsden. "oh, that! certainly! it can be put to a much 
better purpose." 

he refill the glass. 

the liquor had begun to tell on him. a quarter of the quantity would have 
made a clean-living man incapable drunk, but it had only made marsden's 
eyes bright. he gave a sarcastic laugh. 

"and is that all?" he asked. 

romarin reply shortly that that was all. 

"you've miss out the r.a., and the d.c.l." 

"then let me add that i'm a doctor of civil law and a full member of the 
royal academy," said romarin, almost at the end of his patience. "and 
now, since you don't think much of it, may i hear your own account?" 

"oh, by all means. i don't know, however, that--" he broke off to throw a 
glance at a woman who had just enter the restaurant--a divest glance 
that cause romarin to redden to his crown and drop his eyes. "i was 
go to say that you may think as little of my history as i do of yours. 
supple woman that; when the rather scraggy blonde do take it into her 
head to be a devil she's the worst kind there is...." 

without apology romarin look at his watch. 

"all right," said marsden, smiling, "for what _i've_ got out of life, 
then. but i warn you, it's entire discreditable." 

romarin did not doubt it. 

"but it's mine, and i boast of it. i've done--barring receiving honours 
and degrees--everything--everything! if there's anything i haven't done, 
tell me and lend me a sovereign, and i'll go and do it." 

"you haven't told the story." 

"that's so. here go then ... well, you know, unless you've forgotten, 
how i began...." 

fruit and nutshell and nutcracker lay on the table between them, and at 
the end of it, shield from draughts by the menu cards, the coffee 
apparatus simmer over its elusive blue flame. romarin was taking the 
rind from a pear with a table-knife, and marsden had decline port in 
favour of a small golden liqueur of brandy. every seat in the restaurant 
was now occupied, and the proprietor himself had brought his finest 
cigarette and cigars. the waiter pour out the coffee, and departed 
with the apparatus in one hand and his napkin in the other. 

marsden was already well into his tale... 

the frightful unction with which he told it appall romarin. it was as 
he had said--there was nothing he had not done and did not exult in with 
a sickening exultation. it had, indeed, end in diabetes. in the pitiful 
hunting down of sensation to the last inch he had been fiendishly 
ingenious and utterly unimaginative. his unholy curiosity had spare 
nothing, his unnatural appetite had known no truth. it was grin sin. 
the detail of it simply cannot be told.... 

and his vanity in it all was prodigious. romarin was pale as he listened. 
what! in order that _this_ malignant growth in society's breast should 
be able to say "i know," had sanctities been profaned, sweet convention 
assailed, purity blackened, sound infected, and all that was bright 
and of the day been sunk in the quagmire that this creature of the night 
had called--yes, still called--by the gentle name of romance? yes, 
so it had been. not only had men and women suffer dishonour, but 
manhood and womanhood and the clean institution by which alone the 
creature was suffer to exist had been brought to shame. and what was he 
to look at when it was all done?... 

"romance--beauty--the beauty of things as they are!" he croaked. 

if face in the restaurant were now turn to romarin, it was the horror 
on romarin's own face that drew them. he drew out his handkerchief and 
mop his brow. 

"but," he stammer presently, "you are speak of 
generalities--horrible theories--things diabolical conceivable 
to be done--" 

"what?" cry marsden, checked for a moment in his horrible triumph. "no, 
by god! i've done 'em, done 'em! don't you understand? if you don't, 
question me!..." 

"no, no!" cry romarin. 

"but i say yes! you came for this, and you shall have it! i try to stop 
you, but you want it, and by god you shall have it! you think your 
life's been full and mine empty? ha ha!... romance! i had the conviction 
of it, and i've had the courage too! i haven't told you a tenth of it! 
what would you like? chamber-windows when love was hot? the killing of a 
man who stood in my way? (i've fought a duel, and killed.) the squeeze 
of the juice out of life like _that_?" he pointed to romarin's plate; 
romarin had been eat grapes. "did you find me saying i'd do a thing 
and then drawing back from it when we--" he made a quick gesture of both 
hand towards the middle of the restaurant floor. 

"when we fought--?" 

"yes, when we fought, here!... oh no, oh no! i've lived, i tell you, 
every moment! not a title, not a degree, but i've live such a life as 
you never dream of--!" 

"thank god--" 

but sudden marsden's voice, which had risen, drop again. he began to 
shake with interior chuckles. they were the old, old chuckles, and they 
fill romarin with a hatred hardly to be borne. the sound of the 
animal's voice had begun it, and his every word, look, movement, 
gesture, since they had enter the restaurant, had add to it. and he 
was now chuckling, chuckling, shake with chuckles, as if some 
monstrous tit-bit still remain to be told. already romarin had toss 
aside his napkin, beckon to the waiter, and said, "m'sieu dine 
with me...." 

"ho ho ho ho!" came the drunken sounds. "it's a long time since m'sieu 
dine here with his old friend romarin! do you remember the last time? do 
you remember it? _pif, pan_! two smack across the table, romarin--oh, 
you got it in very well!--and then, _brrrrr_! quick! back with the 
tables--all the fellow round--farquharson for me and smith for you, and 
then to it, romarin!... and you really don't remember what it was all 
about?..." 

romarin had remembered. his face was not the face of the philosophical 
master of life now. 

"you said she shouldn't--little pattie hine you know--you said she 
shouldn't--" 

romarin sprang half from his chair, and brought his fist down on the 
table. 

"and by heaven, she didn't! at least that's one thing you haven't done!" 

marsden too had risen unsteadily. 

"oho, oho? you think that?" 

a wild thought flash across romarin's brain. 

"you mean--?" 

"i mean?... oho, oho! yes, i mean! she did, romarin...." 

the mirrors, misty seen through the smoke of half a hundred cigar and 
cigarettes, the love and shepherdess of the garish walls, the diner 
start up in their places, all sudden seem to swing round in a 
great half-circle before romarin's eyes. the next moment, feeling as if 
he stood on something on which he found it difficult to keep his balance, 
he had caught up the table-knife with which he had peel the pear and 
had struck at the side of marsden's neck. the round blade snapped, but 
he struck again with the broken edge, and left the knife where it 
entered. the table appear uptilte almost vertical; over it marsden's 
head disappeared; it was follow by a shower of glass, cigars, 
artificial flower and the tablecloth at which he clutched; and the 
dirty america cloth of the table top was left bare. 

* * * * * 

but the edge behind which marsden's face had disappear remain 
vertical. a group of scene-shifters were moving a flat of scenery from a 
theatre into a tumbril-like cart... 

and romarin knew that, past, present, and future, he had seen it all in 
an instant, and that marsden stood behind that paint wing. 

and he knew, too, that he had only to wait until that flat pass and to 
take marsden's arm and enter the restaurant, _and it would be so_. a 
drown man is said to see all in one unmeasurable instant of time; a 
year-long dream is but, they say, an instantaneous arrangement in the 
moment of waking of the molecule we associate with ideas; and the past 
of history and the future of prophecy are fold up in the mystic moment 
we call the present.... 

_it would come true_.... 

for one moment romarin stood; the next, he had turn and run for his 
life. 

at the corner of the street he collide with a loafer, and only the wall 
save them from go down. feverishly romarin plunge his hand into his 
pocket and brought out a handful of silver. he cram it into the 
loafer's hand. 

"here--quick--take it!" he gasped. "there's a man there, by that 
restaurant door--he's wait for mr. romarin--tell him--tell him--tell 
him mr. romarin's had an accident--" 

and he dashed away, leave the man look at the silver in his palm. 




the cigarette case 


"a cigarette, loder?" i said, offering my case. for the moment lode was 
not smoking; for long enough he had not been talking. 

"thanks," he replied, taking not only the cigarette, but the case also. 
the other went on talking; lode became silent again; but i notice 
that he kept my cigarette case in his hand, and look at it from time to 
time with an interest that neither its design nor its costly seem 
to explain. presently i caught his eye. 

"a pretty case," he remarked, putt it down on the table. "i once had 
one exactly like it." 

i answer that they were in every shop window. 

"oh yes," he said, putt aside any question of rarity.... "i lost 
mine." 

"oh?..." 

he laughed. "oh, that's all right--i got it back again--don't be afraid 
i'm go to claim yours. but the way i lost it--found it--the whole 
thing--was rather curious. i've never been able to explain it. i wonder 
if you could?" 

i answer that i certainly couldn't till i'd heard it, whereupon loder, 
taking up the silver case again and holding it in his hand as he talked, 
began: 

"this happen in provence, when i was about as old as marsham there--and 
every bit as romantic. i was there with carroll--you remember poor old 
carroll and what a blade of a boy he was--as romantic as four marsham 
roll into one. (excuse me, marsham, won't you? it's a romantic tale, 
you see, or at least the setting is.) ... we were in provence, carroll 
and i; twenty-four or thereabouts; romantic, as i say; and--and this 
happened. 

"and it happen on the top of a whole lot of other things, you must 
understand, the things that do happen when you're twenty-four. if it 
hadn't been provence, it would have been somewhere else, i suppose, 
nearly, if not quite as good; but this was provence, that smell (as you 
might say) of twenty-four as it smell of argelasse and wild lavender and 
broom.... 

"we'd had the dickens of a walk of it, just with knapsacks--had start 
somewhere in the ardèche and tramp south through the vine and almond 
and olives--montélimar, orange, avignon, and a fortnight at that blanch 
skeleton of a town, le baux. we'd nothing to do, and had gone just where 
we liked, or rather just where carroll had liked; and carroll had had the 
_de bello gallico_ in his pocket, and had had a notion, i fancy, of 
taking in the whole ground of the roman conquest--i remember he lug me 
off to some place or other, pourrières i believe its name was, because--i 
forget how many thousands--were kill in a river-bed there, and they 
stove in the water-casks so that if the men want water they'd have to 
go forward and fight for it. and then we'd gone on to arles, where 
carroll had fallen in love with everything that had a bow of black 
velvet in her hair, and after that tarascon, nîmes, and so on, the usual 
round--i won't bother you with that. in a word, we'd had two month of 
it, eat almond and apricot from the trees, watch the women at the 
communal washing-fountains under the dark plane-trees, singing _magali_ 
and the _qué cantes_, and carroll yarn away all the time about caesar 
and vercingetorix and dante, and try to learn provençal so that he 
could read the stuff in the _journal des félibriges_ that he'd never have 
look at if it had been in english.... 

"well, we got to darbisson. we'd run across some young chap or 
other--rangon his name was--who was a vine-planter in those parts, and 
rangon had ask us to spend a couple of days with him, with him and his 
mother, if we happen to be in the neighbourhood. so as we might as 
well happen to be there as anywhere else, we sent him a postcard and 
went. this would be in june or early in july. all day we walk across 
a plain of vines, past hurdle of wattle _cannes_ and great wind-screens 
of velvety cypresses, sixty feet high, all white with dust on the north 
side of 'em, for the mistral was have its three-days' revel, and it 
whistle and roar through the _cannes_ till score of yard of 'em 
at a time were bowed nearly to the earth. a roaring day it was, i 
remember.... but the wind fell a little late in the afternoon, and we 
were pore over what it had left of our ordnance survey--like fools, 
we'd got the unmounted paper map instead of the linen ones--when rangon 
himself found us, coming out to meet us in a very badly turned-out trap. 
he drove us back himself, through darbisson, to the house, a mile and a 
half beyond it, where he live with his mother. 

"he spoke no english, rangon didn't, though, of course, both france and 
provençal; and as he drove us, there was carroll, use him as a 
franco-provençal dictionary, pepper him with question about the name 
of things in the patois--i beg its pardon, the language--though there's 
a good deal of my eye and betty martin about that, and i fancy this 
félibrige business will be in a good many pieces when frédéric mistral 
is under that court-of-love pavilion arrangement he's had put up for 
himself in the graveyard at maillanne. if the language has got to go, 
well, it's got to go, i suppose; and while i personally don't want to 
give it a kick, i rather sympathise with the government. those jaunt of 
a sunday out to le baux, for instance, with paper lantern and bengal 
fire and a fellow spout _o blanche venus d'arles_--they're well 
enough, and compare favourable with our bank holiday and sunday league 
picnics, but ... but that's nothing to do with my tale after all.... so 
he drove on, and by the time we got to rangon's house carroll had learned 
the greater part of _magali_.... 

"as you, no doubt, know, it's a restricted sort of life in some respects 
that a young _vigneron_ lives in those parts, and it was as we reach 
the house that rangon remember something--or he might have been try 
to tell us as we came along for all i know, and not been able to get a 
word in edgeways for carroll and his provençal. it seem that his mother 
was away from home for some days--apologies of the most profound, of 
course; our host was the soul of courtesy, though he did try to get at 
us a bit later.... we express our polite regrets, naturally; but i 
didn't quite see at first what difference it made. i only began to see 
when rangon, with more apologies, told us that we should have to go back 
to darbisson for dinner. it appear that when madame rangon went away 
for a few days she disperse the whole of the female side of her 
establishment also, and she'd left her son with nobody to look after 
him except an old man we'd seen in the yard mending one of these 
double-cylindered sulphur-sprinklers they clap across the horse's back 
and drive between the row of vines.... rangon explain all this as we 
stood in the hall drink an _apéritif_--a hall crowded with oak 
furniture and photograph and a cradle-like bread-crib and door opening 
to right and left to the other rooms of the ground floor. he had also, it 
seemed, to ask us to be so infinite obliging as to excuse him for one 
hour after dinner--our postcard had come unexpectedly, he said, and 
already he had made an appointment with his agent about the _vendange_ 
for the coming autumn.... we, beg him, of course, not to allow us to 
interfere with his business in the slightest degree. he thank us a 
thousand times. 

"'but though we dine in the village, we will take our own wine with us,' 
he said, 'a wine _surfin_--one of my wines--you shall see--' 

"then he show us round his place--i forget how many hundred of acre 
of vines, and into the great building with the press and pump and 
cask and the huge barrel they call the thunderbolt--and about seven 
o'clock we walk back to darbisson to dinner, carry our wine with us. 
i think the restaurant we dine in was the only one in the place, and our 
gaillard of a host--he was a straight-backed, well-set-up chap, with 
rather fine eyes--did us on the whole pretty well. his wine certainly was 
good stuff, and set our tongue going.... 

"a moment ago i said a fellow like rangon leads a restricted sort of life 
in those parts. i saw this more clearly as dinner went on. we dine by an 
open window, from which we could see the stream with the plank across it 
where the women wash clothes during the day and assemble in the 
evening for gossip. there were a dozen or so of them there as we dined, 
laugh and chat in low tones--they all seem pretty--it was 
quick fall dusk--all the girl are pretty then, and are quite 
conscious of it--_you_ know, marsham. behind them, at the end of the 
street, one of these great cypress wind-screens show black against the 
sky, a ragged edge something like the line the needle draw on a rainfall 
chart; and you could only tell whether they were men or women under the 
plantain by their voice ripple and chatter and sudden a deep 
note.... once i heard a muffle scuffle and a sound like a kiss.... it 
was then that rangon's little trouble came out.... 

"it seem that he didn't know any girls--wasn't allow to know any 
girls. the girl of the village were pretty enough, but you see how it 
was--he'd a position to keep up--appearances to maintain--couldn't be 
familiar during the year with the girl who gather his grape for him 
in the autumn.... and as soon as carroll gave him a chance, _he_ began to 
ask _us_ questions, about england, english girls, the liberty they had, 
and so on. 

"of course, we couldn't tell him much he hadn't heard already, but that 
made no difference; he could stand any amount of that, our strapping 
young _vigneron_; and he ask us question by the dozen, that we both 
try to answer at once. and his delight and envy!... what! in england 
did the young men see the young women of their own class without 
restraint--the sister of their friends _même_--even at the house? was it 
permit that they drank tea with them in the afternoon, or went without 
invitation to pass the _soirée_?... he had all the later prévosts in his 
room, he told us (i don't doubt he had the early one also); prévost 
and the disestablish between them must be play the mischief 
with the convent system of education for young girls; and our young man 
was--what d'you call it?--'co-ed'--co-educationalist--by jove, yes!... he 
seem to marvel that we should have left a country so blessed as england 
to visit his dusty, wild-lavender-smelling, girl-less provence.... you 
don't know half your luck, marsham.... 

"well, we talk after this fashion--we'd left the dining-room of the 
restaurant and had plant ourselves on a bench outside with rangon 
between us--when rangon sudden look at his watch and said it was time 
he was off to see this agent of his. would we take a walk, he ask us, 
and meet him again there? he said.... but as his agent live in the 
direction of his own home, we said we'd meet him at the house in an hour 
or so. off he went, envy every englishman who stepped, i don't 
doubt.... i told you how old--how young--we were.... heigho!... 

"well, off go rangon, and carroll and i got up, stretch ourselves, 
and took a walk. we walk a mile or so, until it began to get pretty 
dark, and then turned; and it was as we came into the black of one of 
these cypress hedge that the thing i'm telling you of happened. the 
hedge took a sharp turn at that point; as we came round the angle we saw 
a couple of women's figures hardly more than twenty yard ahead--don't 
know how they got there so suddenly, i'm sure; and that same moment i 
found my foot on something small and white and glimmer on the grass. 

"i picked it up. it was a handkerchief--a woman's--embroidered-- 

"the two figures ahead of us were walking in our direction; there was 
every probability that the handkerchief belong to one of them; so we 
step out.... 

"at my 'pardon, madame,' and lift hat one of the figures turn her 
head; then, to my surprise, she spoke in english--cultivated english. 
i held out the handkerchief. it belong to the elder lady of the two, 
the one who had spoken, a very gentle-voiced old lady, old by very many 
years than her companion. she took the handkerchief and thank me.... 

"somebody--sterne, isn't it?--says that englishmen don't travel to see 
englishmen. i don't know whether he'd stand to that in the case of 
englishwomen; carroll and i didn't.... we were walking rather slow 
along, four abreast across the road; we ask permission to introduce 
ourselves, did so, and received some name in return which, strange 
enough, i've entire forgotten--i only remember that the ladies were 
aunt and niece, and live at darbisson. they shook their head when i 
mention m. rangon's name and said we were visiting him. they didn't 
know him.... 

"i'd never been in darbisson before, and i haven't been since, so i don't 
know the map of the village very well. but the place isn't very big, 
and the house at which we stop in twenty minutes or so is probably 
there yet. it had a large double door--a double door in two senses, 
for it was a big _porte-cochère_ with a small door inside it, and an 
iron grille shut in the whole. the gentle-voiced old lady had already 
taken a key from her reticule and was thank us again for the little 
service of the handkerchief; then, with the little gesture one make when 
one has found oneself on the point of omit a courtesy, she gave a 
little musical laugh. 

"'but,' she said with a little movement of invitation, 'one see so 
few compatriot here--if you have the time to come in and smoke a 
cigarette ... also the cigarette,' she added, with another ripple 
laugh, 'for we have few callers, and live alone--' 

"hastily as i was about to accept, carroll was before me, profess a 
nostalgia for the sound of the english tongue that made his recent 
protestation about provençal a shameless hypocrisy. persuasive young 
rascal, carroll was--poor chap ... so the elder lady open the grille 
and the wooden door beyond it, and we entered. 

"by the light of the candle which the younger lady took from a bracket 
just within the door we saw that we were in a handsome hall or vestibule; 
and my wonder that rangon had made no mention of what was apparently a 
considerable establishment was increase by the fact that its tenant 
must be known to be english and could be seen to be entire charming. i 
couldn't understand it, and i'm afraid hypothese rush into my head 
that cast doubt on the rangons--you know--whether _they_ were all right. 
we knew nothing about our young planter, you see.... 

"i look about me. there were tub here and there against the walls, 
gaily painted, with glossy-leaved aloe and palm in them--one of the 
aloes, i remember, was flowering; a little fountain in the middle made a 
tinkle noise; we put our cap on a carve and gilt console table; and 
before us rose a broad staircase with shallow steps of spotless stone and 
a beautiful wrought-iron handrail. at the top of the staircase were more 
palm and aloes, and double door paint in a clear grey. 

"we follow our hostess up the staircase. i can hear yet the sharp 
clean click our boots made on that hard shiny stone--see the lights of 
the candle gleam on the handrail ... the young girl--she was not much 
more than a girl--pushed at the doors, and we went in. 

"the room we enter was all of a piece with the rest for rather 
old-fashioned fineness. it was large, lofty, beautiful kept. carroll 
went round for miss ... whatever her name was ... lighting candle in 
sconces; and as the flame crept up they glimmer on a beautiful 
polish floor, which was bare except for an eastern rug here and there. 
the elder lady had sat down in a gilt chair, louis fourteenth i should 
say, with a striped rep of the colour of a petunia; and i really don't 
know--don't smile, smith--what induce me to lead her to it by the 
finger-tips, bend over her hand for a moment as she sat down. there 
was an old tambour-frame behind her chair, i remember, and a vast oval 
mirror with cluster candle-brackets fill the greater part of the 
farther wall, the brightest and clearest glass i've ever seen...." 

he paused, look at my cigarette case, which he had taken into his hand 
again. he smile at some recollection or other, and it was a minute or 
so before he continued. 

"i must admit that i found it a little annoying, after what we'd 
been talk about at dinner an hour before, that rangon wasn't with 
us. i still couldn't understand how he could have neighbour so 
charming without knowing about them, but i didn't care to insist on 
this to the old lady, who for all i knew might have her own reason 
for keeping to herself. and, after all, it was our place to return 
rangon's hospitality in london if he ever came there, not, so to speak, 
on his own doorstep.... so presently i forgot all about rangon, and i'm 
pretty sure that carroll, who was talk to his companion of some 
félibrige junketing or other and have the air of gounod's _mireille_ 
hum soft over to him, didn't waste a thought on him either. soon 
carroll--you remember what a pretty crooning, hum voice he had--soon 
carroll was murmur what they call 'seconds,' but so low that the sound 
hardly came across the room; and i came in with a soft bass note from 
time to time. no instrument, you know; just an unaccompanied murmur no 
loud than an aeolian harp; and it sound infinite sweet and 
plaintive and--what shall i say?--weak--attenuated--faint--'pale' you 
might almost say--in that formal, rather old-fashioned _salon_, with that 
great clear oval mirror throw back the still flame of the candle in 
the sconce on the walls. outside the wind had now fallen completely; all 
was very quiet; and sudden in a voice not much loud than a sigh, 
carroll's companion was singing _oft in the stilly night_--you know 
it...." 

he broke off again to murmur the beginning of the air. then, with a 
little laugh for which we saw no reason, he went on again: 

"well, i'm not go to try to convince you of such a special and 
delicate thing as the charm of that hour--it wasn't more than an 
hour--it would be all about an hour we stayed. things like that just 
have to be said and left; you destroy them the moment you begin to 
insist on them; we've every one of us had experience like that, and 
don't say much about them. i was as much in love with my old lady as 
carroll evidently was with his young one--i can't tell you why--being 
in love has just to be taken for grant too, i suppose... marsham 
understands.... we smoke our cigarettes, and sang again, once more 
filling that clear-painted, quiet apartment with a murmur no loud 
than if a light breeze found that the bell of a bed of flower were 
really bell and play on 'em. the old lady move her finger gently 
on the round table by the side of her chair,.. oh, infinite pretty it 
was.... then carroll wander off into the _qué cantes_--awfully 
pretty--'it is not for myself i sing, but for my friend who is near 
me'--and i can't tell you how like four old friends we were, those two 
so oddly met ladies and carroll and myself.... and so to _oft in the 
stilly night_ again.... 

"but for all the sweet and the glamour of it, we couldn't stay on 
indefinitely, and i wonder what time it was, but didn't ask--anything 
to do with clock and watches would have seem a cold and mechanical 
sort of thing just then.... and when presently we both got up neither 
carroll nor i ask to be allow to call again in the morning to 
thank them for a charming hour.... and they seem to feel the same as 
we did about it. there was no 'hoping that we should meet again in 
london'--neither an au revoir nor a good-bye--just a tacit understanding 
that that hour should remain isolated, accept like a good gift without 
look the gift-horse in the mouth, single, unattached to any hour 
before or after--i don't know whether you see what i mean.... give me a 
match somebody.... 

"and so we left, with no more than looks exchange and finger-tips 
rest between the back of our hand and our lip for a moment. we 
found our way out by ourselves, down that shallow-stepped staircase with 
the handsome handrail, and let ourselves out of the double door and 
grille, close it softly. we made for the village without speak a 
word.... heigho!..." 

lode had picked up the cigarette case again, but for all the way his 
eyes rest on it i doubt whether he really saw it. i'm pretty sure he 
didn't; i knew when he did by the glance he shot at me, as much as to say 
"i see you're wonder where the cigarette case come in."... he 
resume with another little laugh. 

"well," he continued, "we got back to rangon's house. i really don't 
blame rangon for the way he took it when we told him, you know--he 
thought we were pull his leg, of course, and he wasn't have any; not 
he! there were no english ladies in darbisson, he said.... we told him as 
nearly as we could just where the house was--we weren't very precise, i'm 
afraid, for the village had been in dark as we had come through it, 
and i had to admit that the cypress hedge i try to describe where we'd 
met our friends was a good deal like other cypress hedges--and, as i say, 
rangon wasn't taking any. i myself was rather annoy that he should 
think we were return his hospitality by try to get at him, and it 
wasn't very easy either to explain in my france and carroll's provençal 
that we were go to let the thing stand as it was and weren't go to 
call on our charming friends again.... the end of it was that rangon 
just laugh and yawned.... 

"'i knew it was good, my wine,' he said, 'but--' a shrug said the rest. 
'not so good as all that,' he meant.... 

"then he gave us our candles, show us to our rooms, shook hands, and 
march off to his own room and the prévosts. 

"i dream of my old lady half the night. 

"after coffee the next morning i put my hand into my pocket for my 
cigarette case and didn't find it. i went through all my pockets, and 
then i ask carroll if he'd got it. 

"'no,' he replied.... 'think you left it behind at that place last 
night?' 

"'yes; did you?' rangon pop in with a twinkle. 

"i went through all my pocket again. no cigarette case.... 

"of course, it was possible that i'd left it behind, and i was annoy 
again. i didn't want to go back, you see.... but, on the other hand, i 
didn't want to lose the case--it was a present--and rangon's smile 
nettle me a good deal, too. it was both a challenge to our truthful 
and a testimonial to that very good wine of his.... 

"'might have done,' i grunted.... 'well, in that case we'll go and get 
it.' 

"'if one try the restaurant first--?' rangon suggested, smile again. 

"'by all means,' said i stuffily, though i remember have the case 
after we'd left the restaurant. 

"we were round at the restaurant by half-past nine. the case wasn't 
there. i'd known jolly well beforehand it wasn't, and i saw rangon's 
mouth twitch with amusement. 

"'so we now seek the abode of these english ladies, _hein_?' he said. 

"'yes,' said i; and we left the restaurant and strode through the village 
by the way we'd taken the evening before.... 

"that vigneron's smile became more and more irritate to me.... 'it is 
then the next village?' he said presently, as we left the last house and 
came out into the open plain. 

"we went back.... 

"i was irritate because we were two to one, you see, and carroll back 
me up. 'a double door, with a grille in front of it,' he repeated for 
the fiftieth time.... rangon merely reply that it wasn't our good faith 
he doubted. he didn't actually use the word 'drunk.'... 

"'_mais tiens_,' he said suddenly, try to conceal his mirth. '_si 
c'est possible... si c'est possible_... a double door with a grille? but 
perhaps that i know it, the domicile of these so elusive ladies.... come 
this way.' 

"he took us back along a plantain-groved street, and sudden turn up 
an alley that was little more than two gutter and a crack of sky 
overhead between two broken-tiled roofs. it was a dilapidated, desert 
_ruelle_, and i was positively angry when rangon pointed to a blister 
old _porte-cochère_ with a half-unhinged railing in front of it. 

"'is it that, your house?' he asked. 

"'no,' say i, and 'no,' say carroll ... and off we start again.... 

"but another half-hour brought us back to the same place, and carroll 
scratch his head. 

"'who lives there, anyway?' he said, glower at the _porte-cochère_, 
chin forward, hand in pockets. 

"'nobody,' say rangon, as much as to say 'look at it!' 'm'sieu then 
meditate taking it?'... 

"then i struck in, quite out of temper by this time. 

"'how much would the rent be?' i asked, as if i really thought of taking 
the place just to get back at him. 

"he mention something ridiculous small in the way of francs. 

"'one might at least see the place,' say i. 'can the key be got?' 

"he bowed. the key was at the baker's, not a hundred yard away, he 
said.... 

"we got the key. it was the key of the inner wooden door--that grid of 
rusty iron didn't need one--it came clean off its single hinge when 
carroll touched it. carroll opened, and we stood for a moment motion 
to one another to step in. then rangon went in first, and i heard him 
murmur 'pardon, mesdames.'... 

"now this is the odd part. we pass into a sort of vestibule or hall, 
with a burst lead pipe in the middle of a dry tank in the centre of it. 
there was a broad staircase rising in front of us to the first floor, and 
double door just seen in the half-light at the head of the stairs. old 
tub stood against the walls, but the palm and aloe in them were 
dead--only a cabbage-stalk or two--and the rusty hoop lay on the ground 
about them. one tub had come to pieces entire and was no more than a 
heap of staves on a pile of spilt earth. and everywhere, everywhere was 
dust--the floor was an inch deep in dust and old plaster that muffle our 
footsteps, cobweb hung like old duster on the walls, a regular goblin's 
tatter of cobweb drape the little bracket inside the door, and the 
wrought-iron of the hand-rail was closed up with web in which not even a 
spider moved. the whole thing was preposterous.... 

"'it is possible that for even a less rental--' 

"rangon murmured, drag his forefinger across the hand-rail and 
leave an inch-deep furrow.... 

"'come upstairs,' said i suddenly.... 

"up we went. all was in the same state there. a clutter of stuff came 
down as i pushed at the double door of the _salon_, and i had to strike 
a stinking france sulphur match to see into the room at all. underfoot 
was like walking on thickness of flannel, and except where we put 
our feet the place was as printless as a snowfield--dust, dust, unbroken 
grey dust. my match burn down.... 

"'wait a minute--i've a _bougie_,' said carroll, and struck the wax 
match.... 

"there were the old sconces, with never a candle-end in them. there was 
the large oval mirror, but hardly reflect carroll's match for the 
dust on it. and the broken chair were there, all gutless, and the 
rickety old round table.... 

"but sudden i dart forward. something new and bright on the table 
twinkle with the light of carroll's match. the match went out, and by 
the time carroll had light another i had stopped. i want rangon to 
see what was on the table.... 

"'you'll see by my footprint how far from that table _i've_ been,' i 
said. 'will you pick it up?' 

"and rangon, step forward, picked up from the middle of the table--my 
cigarette case." 

* * * * * 

lode had finished. nobody spoke. for quite a minute nobody spoke, and 
then lode himself broke the silence, turning to me. 

"make anything of it?" he said. 

i lift my eyebrows. "only your _vigneron's_ explanation--" i began, but 
stop again, seeing that wouldn't do. 

"_any_body make anything of it?" said loder, turning from one to another. 

i gather from smith's face that he thought one thing might be made of 
it--namely, that lode had invent the whole tale. but even smith 
didn't speak. 

"were any english ladies ever found to have live in the place--murdered, 
you know--bodies found and all that?" young marsham ask diffidently, 
yearning for an obvious completeness. 

"not that we could ever learn," lode replied. "we made inquiry 
too.... so you all give it up? well, so do i...." 

and he rose. as he walk to the door, myself following him to get his 
hat and stick, i heard him hum soft the lines--they are from 
_oft in the stilly night_-- 

"_i seem like one who tread alone 
some banquet-hall deserted, 
whose guest are fled, whose garland dead, 
and all but he--departed!_" 




the rocker 


i 

there was little need for the swart gipsy to explain, as they stood 
knee-deep in the snow round the bailiff of the abbey farm, what it 
was that had sent them. the unbroken white of the upland told that, 
and, even as they spoke, there came up the hill the dark figures of the 
farm men with shovels, on their way to dig out the sheep. in the summer, 
the bailiff would have been the first to call the gipsy vagabond 
and roost-robbers; now ... they had women with them too. 

"the hare and fox were down four days ago, and the liquid-manure pump 
like a snow man," the bailiff said.... "yes, you can lie in the laithe 
and welcome--if you can find 'em. maybe you'll help us find our sheep 
too--" 

the gipsy had done so. coming back again, they had had some ado to 
discover the spot where their three caravan made a hummock of white 
against a broken wall. 

the women--they had four women with them--began that afternoon to weave 
the mat and basket they hawk from door to door; and in the forenoon 
of the following day one of them, the black-haired, soft-voiced quean 
whom the bailiff had heard call annabel, set her babe in the sling on 
her back, tuck a bundle of long cane-loops under her oxter, and trudge 
down between eight-foot wall of snow to the abbey farm. she stood in the 
lattice porch, dark and handsome against the whiteness, and then, 
advancing, put her head into the great hall-kitchen. 

"has the lady any chair for the gipsy woman to mend?" she ask in a 
soft and insinuate voice.... 

they brought her the old chairs; she seat herself on a box in the 
porch; and there she wove the strip of cane in and out, secure each 
one with a little wooden peg and a tap of her hammer. the child remain 
in the sling at her back, taking the breast from time to time over her 
shoulder; and the silver wedding ring could be seen as she whip the 
cane, back and forth. 

as she worked, she cast curious glance into the old hall-kitchen. the 
snow outside cast a pallid, upward light on the heavy ceiling-beams; this 
was reflect in the polish stone floor; and the children, who at first 
had shy stop their play, seeing the strange woman in the porch--the 
nearest thing they had seen to gipsy before had been the old itinerant 
glazier with his frame of glass on his back--resumed it, but still eye 
her from time to time. in the ancient walnut chair by the hearth sat the 
old, old lady who had told them to bring the chairs. her hair, almost 
as white as the snow itself, was pile up on her head _à la marquise_; 
she was knitting; but now and then she allow the needle in the little 
wooden sheath at her waist to lie idle, closed her eyes, and rock 
soft in the old walnut chair. 

"ask the woman who is mending the chair whether she is warm enough 
there," the old lady said to one of the children; and the child went 
to the porch with the message. 

"thank you, little missie--thank you, lady dear--annabel is quite warm," 
said the soft voice; and the child return to the play. 

it was a childish game of funeral at which the children played. the hand 
of death, hover over the dolls, had single out flora, the 
articulation of whose sawdust body were seam and whose boots were 
paint on her calves of fibrous plaster. for the greater solemnity, the 
children had made themselves sweeping train of the garment of their 
elders, and those with crop curl had drape their head with shawls, 
the fringe of which they had comb out with their finger to simulate 
hair--long hair, such as sabrina, the eldest, had hanging so low down 
her back that she could almost sit on it. a cylindrical-bodied horse, 
convertible (when his flat head came out of its socket) into a 
locomotive, head the sad _cortège_; then came the defunct flora; then 
came jack, the raffish sailor doll, with other dolls; and the children 
follow with hush whisperings. 

the youngest of the children pass the high-backed walnut chair in which 
the old lady sat. she stopped. 

"aunt rachel--" she whispered, slow and grave opening very wide and 
close very tight her eyes. 

"yes, dear?" 

"flora's dead!" 

the old lady, when she smiled, did so less with her lip than with her 
fade cheeks. so sweet was her face that you could not help wondering, 
when you look on it, how many men had also look upon it and love it. 
somehow, you never wonder how many of them had been love in return. 

"i'm so sorry, dear," aunt rachel, who in reality was a great-aunt, said. 
"what did she die of this time?" 

"she die of ... brown titu ... 'n now she's go to be bury in a 
grave as little as her bed." 

"in a what, dear?" 

"as little ... dread ... as little as my bed ... you say it, sabrina." 

"she means, aunt rachel, 

"_teach me to live that i may dread 
the grave as little as my bed,_" 

sabrina, the eldest, interpreted. 

"ah!... but won't you play at cheerful things, dears?" 

"yes, we will, presently, aunt rachel; gee up, horse!... shall we go and 
ask the chair-woman if she's warm enough?" 

"do, dears." 

again the message was taken, and this time it seem as if annabel, the 
gipsy, was not warm enough, for she gather up her loop of cane and 
brought the chair she was mending a little way into the hall-kitchen 
itself. she sat down on the square box they use to cover the sewing 
machine. 

"thank you, lady dear," she murmured, lift her handsome almond eyes to 
aunt rachel. aunt rachel did not see the long, furtive, curious glance. 
her own eyes were closed, as if she was tired; her cheek were smiling; 
one of them had drop a little to one shoulder, as it might have 
drop had she held in her arms a babe; and she was rocking, softly, 
slowly, the rocker of the chair making a little regular noise on the 
polish floor. 

the gipsy woman beckon to one of the children. 

"tell the lady, when she wakes, that i will tack a strip of felt to the 
rocker, and then it will make no noise at all," said the low and 
wheedle voice; and the child retired again. 

the interment of flora proceeded.... 

an hour later flora had taken up the burden of life again. it was as 
angela, the youngest, was chastise her for some offence, that sabrina, 
the eldest, look with wonder eyes on the babe in the gipsy's sling. 
she approach on tiptoe. 

"may i look at it, please?" she ask timidly. 

the gipsy set one shoulder forward, and sabrina put the shawl gently 
aside, peer at the dusky brown morsel within. 

"sometime, perhaps--if i'm very careful--" 

sabrina venture diffidently, "--if i'm _very_ careful--may i hold it?" 

before replying, the gipsy once more turn her almond eyes towards aunt 
rachel's chair. aunt rachel had been awaken for the conclusion of 
flora's funeral, but her eyes were closed again now, and once more her 
cheek was drop in that tender suggestive little gesture, and she 
rocked. but you could see that she was not properly asleep.... it was, 
somehow, less to sabrina, still peer at the babe in the sling, than to 
aunt rachel, apparently asleep, that the gipsy seem to reply. 

"you'll know some day, little missis, that a wean know its own pair of 
arms," her seductive voice came. 

and aunt rachel heard. she open her eyes with a start. the little 
regular noise of the rocker ceased. she turn her head quickly; 
tremulous she began to knit again; and, as her eyes rest on the 
sidelong eyes of the gipsy woman, there was an expression in them that 
almost resemble fright. 


ii 

they began to deck the great hall-kitchen for christmas, but the snow 
still lay thick over hill and valley, and the gipsies' caravan remain 
by the broken wall where the drift had overtaken them. though all the 
chair were mended, annabel still came daily to the farm, sat on the box 
they use to cover the sewing machine, and wove mats. as she wove them, 
aunt rachel knitted, and from time to time fragment of talk pass 
between the two women. it was always the white-haired lady who spoke 
first, and annabel made all sort of salute and obeisance with her eyes 
before replying. 

"i have not seen your husband," aunt rachel said to annabel one day. (the 
children at the other end of the apartment had convert a chest into an 
altar, and were solemnise the nuptials of the resurrect flora and 
jack, the raffish sailor-doll.) 

annabel made rove play with her eyes. "he is up at the caravans, lady 
dear," she replied. "is there anything annabel can bid him do?" 

"nothing, thank you," said aunt rachel. 

for a minute the gipsy watch aunt rachel, and then she got up from the 
sewing machine box and cross the floor. she lean so close towards her 
that she had to put up a hand to steady the babe at her back. 

"lady dear," she murmur with irresistible softness, "your husband died, 
didn't he?" 

on aunt rachel's finger was a ring, but it was not a wedding ring. it was 
a hoop of pearls. 

"i have never had a husband," she said. 

the gipsy glance at the ring. "then that is--?" 

"that is a betrothal ring," aunt rachel replied. 

"ah!..." said annabel. 

then, after a minute, she drew still closer. her eyes were fixed on aunt 
rachel's, and the insinuate voice was very low. 

"ah!... and did _it_ die too, lady dear?" 

again came that quick, half-affrighted look into aunt rachel's face. her 
eyes avoid those of the gipsy, sought them, and avoid them again. 

"did what die?" she ask slow and guardedly.... 

the child at the gipsy's back did not need suck; nevertheless, annabel's 
finger work at her bosom, and she move the sling. as the child 
settled, annabel gave aunt rachel a long look. 

"why do you rock?" she ask slowly. 

aunt rachel was trembling. she did not reply. in a voice soft as slide 
water the gipsy continued: 

"lady dear, we are a strange folk to you, and even among us there are 
those who shuffle the pack of cards and read the palm when silver has 
been put upon it, knowing nothing... but some of us _see_--some of us 
_see_." 

it was more than a minute before aunt rachel spoke. 

"you are a woman, and you have your babe at your breast now.... every 
woman see the thing you speak of." 

but the gipsy shook her head. "you speak of seeing with the heart. i 
speak of eyes--these eyes." 

again came a long pause. aunt rachel had given a little start, but had 
become quiet again. when at last she spoke it was in a voice scarcely 
audible. 

"that cannot be. i know what you mean, but it cannot be.... he die 
on the eve of his wedding. for my bridal clothes they made me black 
garment instead. it is long ago, and now i wear neither black nor white, 
but--" her hand made a gesture. aunt rachel always dress as if to suit 
a sorrow that time had deprived of bitterness, in such a tender and 
fleecy grey as one see in the mists that lie like lawn over hedgerow 
and copse early of a midsummer's morning. "therefore," she resumed, "your 
heart may see, but your eyes cannot see that which never was." 

but there came a sudden note of masterful into the gipsy's voice. 

"with my eyes--_these_ eyes," she repeated, point to them. 

aunt rachel kept her own eyes obstinate on her knitting needles. "none 
except i have seen it. it is not to be seen," she said. 

the gipsy sat sudden erect. 

"it is not so. keep still in your chair," she ordered, "and i will tell 
you when--" 

it was a curious thing that followed. as if all the will went out of 
her, aunt rachel sat very still; and presently her hand flutter and 
dropped. the gipsy sat with her own hand fold over the mat on her 
knees. several minutes passed; then, slowly, once more that sweetest of 
smile stole over aunt rachel's cheeks. once more her head dropped. her 
hand moved. noiseless on the rocker that the gipsy had pad with 
felt the chair began to rock. annabel lift one hand. 

"_dovo se li_" she said. "it is there." 

aunt rachel did not appear to hear her. with that ineffable smile still 
on her face, she rocked.... 

then, after some minutes, there cross her face such a look as visit 
the face of one who, waking from sleep, strain his faculty to 
recapture some blissful and vanish vision.... 

"_jal_--it is gone," said the gipsy woman. 

aunt rachel open her eyes again. she repeated dul after annabel: 

"it is gone." 

"ghosts," the gipsy whisper presently, "are of the dead. therefore it 
must have lived." 

but again aunt rachel shook her head. "it never lived." 

"you were young, and beautiful?..." 

still the shake of the head. "he die on the eve of his wedding. they 
took my white garment away and gave me black ones. how then could 
it have lived?" 

"without the kiss, no.... but sometimes a woman will lie through her 
life, and at the graveside still will lie.... tell me the truth." 

but they were the same words that aunt rachel repeated: "he die on the 
eve of his wedding; they took away my wedding garments...." from her lip 
a lie could hardly issue. the gipsy's face became grave.... 

she broke another long silence. 

"i believe," she said at last. "it is a new kind--but no more wonderful 
than the other. the other i have seen, now i have seen this also. tell 
me, do it come to any other chair?" 

"it was his chair; he die in it," said aunt rachel. 

"and you--shall you die in it?" 

"as god wills." 

"has ... _other life_ ... visit it long?" 

"many years; but it is always small; it never grows." 

"to their mother babe never grow. they remain ever babes.... none other 
has ever seen it?" 

"except yourself, none. i sit here; presently it creeps into my arms; it 
is small and warm; i rock, and then... it goes." 

"would it come to another chair?" 

"i cannot tell. i think not. it was his chair." 

annabel mused. at the other end of the room flora was now bestow on 
jack, the disreputable sailor. the gipsy's eyes rest on the bridal 
party.... 

"yet another might see it--" 

"none has." 

"no; but yet.... the door do not always shut behind us suddenly. 
perhaps one who has toddle but a step or two over the threshold might, 
by look back, catch a glimpse.... what is the name of the smallest 
one?" 

"angela." 

"that means 'angel'... look, the doll who die yesterday is now being 
married.... it may be that life has not yet seal the little one's eyes. 
will you let annabel ask her if she see what it is you hold in your 
arms?" 

again the voice was soft and wheedling.... 

"no, annabel," said aunt rachel faintly. 

"will you rock again?" 

aunt rachel made no reply. 

"rock..." urge the cajole voice. 

but aunt rachel only turn the betrothal ring on her finger. over at the 
altar jack was leer at his new-made bride, past decency; and little 
angela held the wooden horse's head, which had part from its body. 

"rock, and comfort yourself--" tempt the voice. 

then slow aunt rachel rose from her chair. 

"no, annabel," she said gently. "you should not have spoken. when the 
snow melt you will go, and come no more; why then did you speak? it was 
mine. it was not meant to be seen by another. i no long want it. please 
go." 

the swarthy woman turn her almond eyes on her once more. 

"you cannot live without it," she said as she also rose.... 

and as jack and his bride left the church on the reheade horse, aunt 
rachel walk with hanging head from the apartment. 


iii 

thenceforward, as day follow day, aunt rachel rock no more; and with 
the packing and partial melting of the snow the gipsy up at the 
caravan judge it time to be off about their business. it was on the 
morning of christmas eve that they came down in a body to the abbey 
farm to express their thanks to those who had befriend them; but the 
bailiff was not there. he and the farm men had cease work, and were 
down at the church, practise the carols. only aunt rachel sat, still 
and knitting, in the black walnut chair; and the children play on the 
floor. 

a night in the toy-box had apparently bred discontent between jack 
and flora--or perhaps they sought to keep their countenance before 
the world; at any rate, they sat on opposite side of the room, jack 
keeping boon company with the lead soldiers, his spouse reposing, her 
lead-balanced eyes closed, in the broken clockwork motor-car. with the 
air of perform some vague momentous ritual, the children were 
kiss one another beneath the bunch of mistletoe that hung from the 
centre beam. in the interval of kiss they told one another in 
whisper that aunt rachel was not very well, and angela woke flora to 
tell her that aunt rachel had brown titu also. 

"stay you here; i will give the lady dear our thanks," said annabel to 
the group of gipsy gather about the porch; and she enter the 
great hall-kitchen. she approach the chair in which aunt rachel sat. 

there was obeisance in the bend of her body, but command in her long 
almond eyes, as she spoke. 

"lady dear, you must rock or you cannot live." 

aunt rachel did not look up from her work. 

"rocking, i should not live long," she replied. 

"we are leave you." 

"all leave me." 

"annabel fear she has taken away your comfort." 

"only for a little while. the door close behind us, but it open again." 

"but for that little time, rock--" 

aunt rachel shook her head. 

"no. it is finished. another has seen.... say good-bye to your 
companions; they are very welcome to what they have had; and god speed 
you." 

"they thank you, lady dear.... will you not forget that annabel saw, and 
rock?" 

"no more." 

annabel stoop and kiss the hand that bore the betrothal hoop of 
pearls. the other hand aunt rachel placed for a moment upon the smoky 
head of the babe in the sling. it tremble as it rest there, but the 
tremor passed, and annabel, turning once at the porch, gave her a last 
look. then she departed with her companions. 

that afternoon, jack and flora had shaken down to wedlock as married 
folk should, and sat together before the board spread with the dolls' 
tea-things. the pallid light in the great hall-kitchen faded; the candle 
were lighted; and then the children, first borrowing the stocking of 
their elder to hang at the bed's foot, were packed off early--for it was 
the custom to bring them down again at midnight for the carols. aunt 
rachel had their good-night kisses, not as she had them every night, but 
with the special ceremony of the mistletoe. 

other folk, grown folk, sat with aunt rachel that evening; but the old 
walnut chair did not move upon its rockers. there was merry talk, but 
aunt rachel took no part in it. the board was spread with ale and cheese 
and spice loaf for the carol-singers; and the time drew near for their 
coming. 

when at midnight, faint on the air from the church below, there came 
the chime of christmas morning, all bestir themselves. 

"they'll be here in a few minutes," they said; "somebody go and bring the 
children down;" and within a very little while subdued noise were heard 
outside, and the lift of the latch of the yard gate. the children were 
in their nightgowns, hardly fully awake; a low voice outside was heard 
give orders; and then there arose on the night the carol. 

"hush!" they said to the wonder children; "listen!..." 

it was the cherry tree carol that rose outside, of how sweet mary, the 
queen of galilee, besought joseph to pluck the cherry for her babe, and 
joseph refused; and the voice of the singers, that had begun 
hesitatingly, grew strong and loud and free. 

"... and joseph wouldn't pluck the cherries," somebody was whisper to 
the tiny angela.... 

"_mary said to cherry tree, 
'bow down to my knee, 
that i may pluck cherry 
for my babe and me._'" 

the carol sang; and "now listen, darling," the one who held angela 
murmured.... 

"_the uppermost spray then 
bowed down to her knee; 
'thus you may see, joseph, 
these cherry are for me.' 

"'o, eat your cherries, mary, 
give them your babe now; 
o, eat your cherries, mary, 
that grew upon the bough._'" 

the little angela, within the arms that held her, murmured, "it's the 
gipsies, isn't it, mother?" 

"no, darling. the gipsy have gone. it's the carol-singers, singing 
because jesus was born." 

"but, mother ... it _is_ the gipsies, isn't it?... 'cos look..." 

"look where?" 

"at aunt rachel, mother ... the gipsy woman wouldn't go without her 
little baby, would she?" 

"no, she wouldn't do that." 

"then has she _lent_ it to aunt rachel, like i lend my new toy 
sometimes?" 

the mother glance across at aunt rachel, and then gather the 
night-gowned figure more closely. 

"the darling's only half awake," she murmured.... "poor aunt rachel's 
sleepy too...." 

aunt rachel, her head dropped, her hand lightly fold as if about some 
shape that none saw but herself, her face again ineffable with that 
sweet and peaceful smile, was once more rock soft in her chair. 




hic jacet 

a tale of artistic conscience 

introduction 


as i light my guest down the stairs of my chelsea lodgings, turn up 
the hall gas that they might see the steps at the front door, and shook 
hand with them, i bade them good night the more heartily that i was glad 
to see their backs. lest this should seem but an inhospitable confession, 
let me state, first, that they had invite themselves, drop in in 
one and two until seven or eight of them had assemble in my garret, 
and, secondly, that i was rather extraordinarily curious to know why, at 
close on midnight, the one i knew least well of all had seen fit to 
remain after the other had taken their departure. to these two 
consideration i must add a third, namely, that i had become tardy 
conscious that, if andriaovsky had not linger of himself, i should 
certainly have ask him to do so. 

it was to nothing more than a glance, swift and momentary, direct by 
andriaovsky to myself while the other had talked, that i trace this 
desire to see more of the little polish painter; but a glance derive its 
import from the circumstance under which it is given. that rapid turning 
of his eyes in my direction an hour before had held a hundred questions, 
implications, criticisms, incredulities, condemnations. it had been one 
of those uncovenanted gesture that hold the promise of the treasure of 
an eternal friendship. i wonder as i turn down the gas again and 
remount the stairs what personal message and reproach in it had lump 
me in with the others; and by the time i had reach my own door again a 
phrase had fitted itself in my mind to that quick, ironic turning of 
andriaovsky's eyes: _"et tu, brute!..."_ 

he was standing where i had left him, his small shabby figure in the 
attitude of a diminutive colossus on my hearthrug. about him were the 
recently vacate chairs, solemn and ridiculous suggestive of still 
continue the high and choice conversation that had lately finished. the 
same fancy had evidently taken andriaovsky, for he was turning from chair 
to chair, his head a little on one side, mischievous and aggravating 
smiling. as one of them, the deep wicker chair that jamison had occupied, 
sudden gave a little creak of itself, as wicker will when release from 
a strain, his smile broaden to a grin. i had been on the point of 
sitting down in that chair, but i change my mind and took another. 

"that's right," said andriaovsky, in that wonderful english which he had 
picked up in less than three years, "don't sit in the wisdom-seat; you 
might profane it." 

i knew what he meant. i felt for my pipe and slow fill it, not 
replying. then, slow wag his head from side to side, with his eyes 
humorous and bantering on mine, he utter the very words i had 
mental associate with that glance of his. 

_"et tu, brute!"_ he said, wag away, so that with each wag the lens 
of his spectacles caught the light of the lamp on the table. 

i too smile as i felt for a match. 

"it _was_ rather much, wasn't it?" i said. 

but he sudden stop his wagging, and held up a not very clean 
forefinger. his whole face was altogether too confounded intelligent. 

"oh no, you don't!" he said peremptorily. "no get out of it like 
that the moment they've turn their backs! no running--what is it?--no 
running with the hare and hunting with the hounds! _you_ helped, you 
know!" 

i confess i fidget a little. 

"but hang it all, what could i do? they were in my place," i broke out. 

he chuckled, enjoy my discomfiture. then his eyes fell on those absurd 
and solemn chair again. 

"look at 'em--the art shades in conference!" he chuckled. "that 
rush-seated one, it was talk half an hour ago about 'scherzos in 
silver and grey!' ... nice, fresh green stuff!" 

to shut him up i told him that he would find cigarette and tobacco on 
the table. 

"'scherzos in silver and grey'!" he chuckle again as he took a 
cigarette.... 

all this, perhaps, needs some explanation. it had been the usual thing, 
usual in those days, twenty years ago--smarming about art and the arts 
and so forth. they--"we," as apparently andriaovsky had linger behind 
for the purpose of remind me--had perhaps talk a little more 
soaring than the ordinary, that was all. there had been jamison in the 
wicker chair, full to the lip and running over with the colour 
suggestion of the late edward calvert; gibbs, in a pulpy state of 
adoration of the less legitimate side of the painting of watts; and 
magnani, who had advanced that an essential one underlie all the 
arts, and had triumphant prove his thesis by analogy with the law of 
the co-relation of forces. a book call music and morals had appear 
about that time, and on it they--we--had risen to regions of kite-high 
lunacy about colour symphonies, orgy of formless colour thrown on a 
magic-lantern screen--vieux jeu enough at this time of day. a young 
newspaper man, too, had made mental note of our adjectives, for use in 
his weekly (i nearly spelt it "weakly") half-column of art criticism; 
and--and here was andriaovsky, grin at the chairs, and mimick 
it all with diabolical glee. 

"'scherzos in silver and grey'--'word pastels'--' lyrics in stone!'" 
he chuckled. "and what was it the fat fellow said?' a siren song in 
marble!' phew!... well, i'll get along. i shall just be in time to get 
a pint of bitter to wash it all down if i'm quick... bah!" he broke out 
suddenly. "good men build up form and forms--keep the arts each after 
its kind--raise up the dike so that we shan't all be swept away by night 
and nothingness--and these rats come nose and burrow and undermine 
it all!... _et tu, brute!_" 

"well, when you've finished rubbing it in--" i grunted. 

"as if _you_ didn't know better!... is that your way of get back on 
'em, now that you've chuck drawing and gone in for writing books? 
phew i... well, i'll go and get my pint of beer--" 

but he didn't go for his pint of beer. instead, he began to prowl about 
my room, pryingly, nosingly, touching things here and there. i watch 
him as he pass from one thing to another. he was very little, and very, 
very shabby. his trousers were frayed, and the sole of one of his boots 
flap distressingly. his old bowler hat--he had not thought it 
necessary to wait until he got outside before thrust it on the back of 
his head--was so limp in substance that i verily believe that had he run 
incautious downstairs he would have found when he got to the bottom 
that its crown had sunk in of its own weight. in spite of his remark 
about the pint of beer, i doubt if he had the price of one in his pocket. 

"what's this, brutus--a concertina?" he sudden asked, stopping before 
the collapsible case in which i kept my rather old dress suit. 

i told him what it was, and he hoist up his shoulders. 

"and these things?" he asked, moving to something else. 

they were a pair of boot-trees of which i had permit myself the 
economy. i remember they cost me four shilling in the old brompton 
road. 

"and that's your bath, i suppose.... dumb-bells too.... and--_oh, good 
lord!_..." 

he had picked up, and drop again as if it had been hot, somebody or 
other's card with the date of a "day" written across the corner of it.... 

as i help him on with his overcoat he made no secret of the condition 
of its armhole and lining. i don't for one moment suppose that the 
garment was his. i took a candle to light him down as soon as it should 
please him to depart. 

"well, so long, and joy to you on the high road to success," he said with 
another grin for which i could have bundle him down the stairs.... 

in later days i never look to andriaovsky for tact; but i stare at him 
for his lack of it that night. and as i stare i notice for the first 
time the broad and low pylon of his forehead, his handsome mouth and 
chin, and the fire and wit and scorn that smoulder behind his cheap 
spectacles. i look again; and his smallness, his malice, his pathetic 
little brag about his poverty, seem all to disappear. he had 
stroll back to my hearthrug, wishing, i have no doubt now, to be able 
to exclaim sudden that it was too late for the pint of beer for which 
he hadn't the money, and to curse his luck; and the pigmy quality of his 
colossusship had somehow gone. 

as i watch him, a neighbouring clock struck the half-hour, and he 
did even as i had surmised--cursed the close time of the english 
public-houses.... 

i light him down. for one moment, under the hall gas, he almost drop 
his jesting manner. 

"you _do_ know better, harrison, you know," he said. "but, of course, 
you're go to be a famous author in almost no time. oh, _ca se 
voit_! no garret for _you_! it was a treat,' the way you handle those 
fellows--really ... well don't forget us other when you're up there--i 
may want you to write my 'life' some day...." 

i heard the slap of the loose sole as he shuffle down the path. at 
the gate he turn for a moment. 

"good night, brutus," he called. 

when i had mount to my garret again my eyes fell once more on that 
ridiculous assemblage of empty chairs, all solemn talk to one 
another. i burst out into a laugh. then i undressed, put my jacket on the 
hanger, took the morrow's boots from the tree and tree those i had 
removed, change the pair of trousers under my mattress, and went, still 
laugh at the chairs, to bed. 

this was michael andriaovsky, the polish painter, who die four week 
ago. 


i 

i knew the reason of maschka's visit the moment she was announced. even 
in the stressful moments of the funeral she had found time to whisper to 
me that she hope to call upon me at an early date. i dismiss the 
amanuensis to whom i was dictate the last story of the fourth series of 
_martin renard_, gave a few hasty instruction to my secretary, and told 
the servant to show miss andriaovsky into the drawing-room, to ask her 
to be so good as to excuse me for five minutes, to order tea at once, and 
then to bring my visitor up to the library. 

a few minutes later she was shown into the room. 

she was dress in the same plainly cut costume of dead black she 
had worn at the funeral, and had pushed up her heavy veil over the 
close-fitting cap of black fur that accentuate her sclavonic appearance. 
i notice again with distress the pallor of her face and the bistre 
ring that week of nursing had put under her dark eyes. i notice also 
her resemblance, in feature and stature, to her brother. i placed a chair 
for her; the tea-tray follow her in; and without more than a murmur 
greeting she peel off her glove and prepared to preside at the tray. 

she had fill the cups, and i had hand her toast, before she spoke. 
then: 

"i suppose you know what i've come about," she said. 

i nodded. 

"long, long ago you promise it. nobody else can do it. the only question 
is 'when.'" 

"that's the only question," i agreed. 

"we, naturally," she continued, after a glance in which her eyes mute 
thank me for my imply promise, "are anxious that it should be as soon 
as possible; but, of course--i shall quite understand--" 

she gave a momentary glance round my library. i help her out. 

"you mean that i'm a very important person nowadays, and that you're 
afraid to trespass on my time. never mind that. i shall find time 
for this. but tell me before we go any further exactly how you stand and 
precisely what it is you expect." 

brief she did so. it did not in the least surprise me to learn that her 
brother had die penniless. 

"and if you hadn't undertaken the 'life,'" she said, "he might just as 
well not have work in poverty all these years. you can, at least, see 
to his fame." 

i nod again gravely, and ruminate for a moment. then i spoke. 

"i can write it, fully and in detail, up to five years ago," i said. "you 
know what happen then. i try my best to help him, but he never would 
let me. tell me, maschka, why he wouldn't sell me that portrait." 

i knew instantly, from her quick confusion, that her brother had spoken 
to her about the portrait he had refuse to sell me, and had probably 
told her the reason for his refusal. i watch her as she evade the 
question as well as she could. 

"you know how--queer--he was about who he sold his things to. and as for 
those five years in which you saw less of him, schofield will tell you 
all you want to know." 

i relinquish the point. "who's schofield?" i ask instead. 

"he was a very good friend of michael's--of both of us. you can talk 
quite freely to him. i want to say at the beginning that i should like 
him to be associate with you in this." 

i don't know how i divine on the spot her relation to schofield, whoever 
he was. she told me that he too was a painter. 

"michael thought very highly of his things," she said. 

"i don't know them," i replied. 

"you probably wouldn't," she returned.... 

but i caught the quick drop of her eyes from their brief excursion round 
my library, and i felt something within me stiffen a little. it did not 
need maschka andriaovsky to remind me that i had not attain my position 
without--let us say--splitting certain differences; the loose of 
the expression can be correct hereafter. life consist very largely of 
compromises. you doubtless know my name, whichever country or hemisphere 
you happen to live in, as that of the creator of martin renard, the 
famous and popular detective; and i was not at that moment disposed to 
apologise, either to maschka or schofield or anybody else, for have 
written the story at the bidding of a gape public. the moment the 
public show that it want something better i was prepared to give it. 
in the meantime, i sat in my very comfortable library, secure shield 
from distress by my balance at my banker's. 

"well," i said after a moment, "let's see how we stand. and first 
as to what you're likely to get out of this. it go without saying, 
of course, that by writing the 'life' i can get you any amount of 
'fame'--advertisement, newspaper talk, and all the things that, it struck 
me, michael always treat with especial scorn. my name alone, i say, 
will do that. but for anything else i'm by no means so sure. you see," i 
explained, "it doesn't follow that because i can sell hundred of 
thousand of... you know what... that i can sell anything i've a mind to 
sign." i said it, confident that she had not live all those years with 
her brother without have learned the axiomatic nature of it. to my 
discomfiture, she began to talk like a callow student. 

"i should have thought that it follow that if you could sell 
something--" she hesitate only for a moment, then courageous gave the 
other stuff its proper adjective, "--something rotten, you could have 
sold something good when you had the chance." 

"then if you thought that you were wrong," i reply brief and 
concisely. 

"_michael_ couldn't, of course," she said, putt michael out of the 
question with a little wave of her hand, "because michael was--i mean, 
michael wasn't a business man. you are." 

"i'm speak as one," i replied. "i don't waste time in give people 
what they don't want. that is business. i don't undertake your brother's 
'life' as a matter of business, but as an inestimable privilege. i 
repeat, it doesn't follow that the public will buy it." 

"but--but--" she stammered, "the public will buy a _pill_ if they see 
your name on the testimonial!" 

"a pill--yes," i said sadly.... genius and a pill were, alas, different 
things. "but," i add more cheerfully, "you can never tell what the 
public will do. they _might_ buy it--there's no telling except by 
trying--" 

"well, schofield think they will," she informed me with decision. 

"i dare say he does, if he's an artist. they mostly do," i replied. 

"he doesn't think michael will ever be popular," she emphasise the 
adjective slightly, "but he do think he has a considerable following if 
they could only be discovered." 

i sighed. all artist think that. they will accept any compromise except 
the one that is offer to them.... i try to explain to maschka that in 
this world we have to stand to the chance of all or nothing. 

"you've got to be one thing or the other--i don't know that it matter 
very much which," i said. "there's michael's way, and there's... mine. 
that's all. however, we'll try it. all you can say to me, and more, i'll 
say to a publisher for you. but he'll probably wink at me." 

for a moment she was silent. then she said: "schofield rather fancies one 
publisher." 

"oh? who's he?" i asked. 

she mention a name. if i knew anything at all of business she might as 
well have offer _the life of michael andriaovsky_ to the religious 
tract society at once.... 

"hm!... and has mr. schofield any other suggestions?" i inquired. 

he had. several. i saw that schofield's position would have to be define 
before we went any further. 

"hm!" i said again. "well, i shall have to rely on schofield for those 
five years in which i saw little of michael; but unless schofield know 
more of publishing than i do, and can enforce a better contract and a 
large sum on account than i can, i really think, maschka, that you'll do 
better to leave things to me. for one thing, it's only fair to me. my 
name hasn't much of an artistic value nowadays, but it has a very 
considerable commercial one, and my worth to publisher isn't as a writer 
of the lives of geniuses." 

i could see she didn't like it; but that couldn't be helped. it had to be 
so. then, as we sat for a time in silence over the fire, i notice again 
how like her brother she was. she was not, it was true, much like him as 
he had been on that last visit of mine to him ... and i sigh as i 
remember that visit. the dreadful scene had come back to me.... 

on account, i suppose, of the divergence of our paths, i had not even 
heard of his illness until almost the finish. immediately i had hasten 
to the hampstead "home," only to find him already in the agony. he had 
not been too far gone to recognise me, however, for he had mutter 
something broken about "knowing better," that a spasm had interrupted. 
besides myself, only maschka had been there; and i had been thankful for 
the summons that had call her for a moment out of the room. i had still 
retain his already cold hand; his brow had work with that dreadful 
struggle; and his eyes had been closed. 

but sudden he had open them, and the next moment had sat up on his 
pillow. he had striven to draw his hand from mine. 

"who are you?" he had sudden demanded, not knowing me. 

i had come close to him. "you know me, andriaovsky--harrison?" i had 
ask sorrowfully. 

i had been on the point of repeating my name but suddenly, after holding 
my eyes for a moment with a look the profundity and familiarity of which 
i cannot express, he had broken into the most ghastly haunting laugh i 
have ever heard. 

"_harrison?_" the words had broken throaty from him.... "_oh yes; i 
know you!... you shall very soon know that i know you if... if..._" 

the cough and rattle had come as maschka had rush into the room. in ten 
seconds andriaovsky had fallen back, dead. 


ii 

that same evening i began to make note for andriaovsky's "life." on the 
following day, the last of the fourth series of the _martin renards_ 
occupy me until i was thankful to get to bed. but thereafter i could 
call rather more of my time my own, and i began in good earnest to devote 
myself to the "life." 

maschka had spoken no more than the truth when she had said that of all 
men living none but i could write that "life." his remain behind in my 
chelsea garret that evening after the other had left had been the 
beginning of a friendship that, barring that lapse of five years at the 
end, had been for twenty years one of completest intimacy. whatever money 
there might or might not be in the book, i had seen _my_ opportunity in 
it--the opportunity to make it the vehicle for all the aspirations, 
faiths, enthusiasms, and exaltation we had shared; and i myself did not 
realise until i began to note them down one tithe of the subtle links and 
association that had weld our soul together. 

even the outward and visible sign of these had been wonderful. setting 
out from one or other of the score of garret and cheap lodgings we had 
in our time inhabited, we had wander together, day after day, night 
after night, far down east, where, as we had thread our way among the 
barrel of soused herring and the stalls and barrow of unleavened 
bread, he had taught me scraps of hebrew and polish and yiddish; up into 
the bright west, where he could never walk a quarter of a mile without 
meeting one of his extraordinary acquaintances--furred music-hall 
managers, hawker of bootlaces, commercial magnate of his own faith, 
touts, crossing-sweepers, paint women; into soho, where he had name 
for the very horse on the cab-ranks and the dogs who slumber under the 
counter of the seller of france literature; out to the naphtha-lights 
and cries of the saturday night street market of islington and the north 
end road; into city church on wintry afternoons, into the studio of 
famous artist full of handsome dress women, into the studio of 
artist not famous, at the end of dark and break-neck corridors; to tea 
at the suburban home of barmaid and chorus girls, to dinner in the 
stable of a cavalry-barracks, to supper in cabmen's shelters. he was 
possessed in some mysterious way of the password to door in hoarding 
behind which excavation were in progress; he knew by name the butcher 
of the deptford yards, the men in the blood-caked clothes, so inure to 
blood that they may not with safety to their lives swear at one another; 
he took me into an opium-cellar within a stone's-throw of oxford street, 
and into a roof-chamber to call upon certain friends of his ... well, 
they _said_ they were fire extinguishers, so i'd better not say they 
were bombs. up, down; here, there; good report, but more frequent 
evil ... we had known this side of our london as well as two men may. and 
our other adventure and peregrinations, not of the body, but of the 
spirit ... but these must be spoken of in their proper place. 

i had arrange with maschka that schofield should bring me the whole of 
the work andriaovsky had left behind him; and he arrive late one 
afternoon in a fourwheeler, with four great package done up in brown 
paper. i found him to be a big, shaggy-browed, red-haired, raw-boned 
lancashire man of five-and-thirty, given to confidential demonstration 
at the length of a button-shank, quite unconscious of the gulf between 
his words and his right to employ them, and bent on assert an equality 
that i did not dispute by a rather aggressive use of my surname. 
andriaovsky had appoint him his executor, and he had ever the air of 
suspect that the appointment was go to be challenged. 

"a'm glad to be associate with ye in this melancholy duty, harrison," he 
said. "now we won't waste words. miss andriaovsky has told me precisely 
how matter stand. i had, as ye know, the honour to be poor michael's 
close friend for a period of five years, and my knowledge of him is 
entire at your disposal." 

i answer that i should be seriously handicap without it. 

"just so. it is miss andriaovsky's desire that we should pull together. 
now, in the firrst place, what is your idea about the forrm the book 
should take?" 

"in the first place, if you don't mind," i replied, "perhaps we'd better 
run over together the things you've brought. the daylight will be gone 
soon." 

"just as ye like, harrison," he said, "just as ye like. it's all the same 
to me...." 

i clear a space about my writing-table at the window, and we turn to 
the artistic remains of michael andriaovsky. 

i was astonished, first, at the enormous quantity of the stuff, and next 
at its utter and complete revelation of the man. in a flash i realise 
how superb that portion at least of the book was go to be. and 
schofield explain that the work he had brought represent but a 
fraction of the whole that was at our disposal. 

"ye'll know with what foolish generous poor michael always gave his 
things away," he said. "hallard has a grand set; so has connolly; and 
from time to time he behave varry handsome to myself. artist of varry 
considerable talent both hallard and connolly are; michael thought 
varry highly of their abilities. they express the deepest interest in the 
shape your worrk will take; and that remind me. i myself have draft a 
rough scenario of the forrm it appear to me the 'life' might with 
advantage be cast in. a purely private opinion, ye'll understand, 
harrison, which ye'll be entire at liberty to disregard...." 

"well, let's finish with the work first," i said. 

with boards, loose sheets, scraps of paper, notes, studies, canvas 
stretch and strip from their stretchers, we paved half the library 
floor, schofield keeping up all the time a running fire of "grand, 
grand! a masterpiece! a gem, that, harrison!" they were all that he said, 
and presently i cease to hear his voice. the splendour of the work 
issue undimm even from the severe test of schofield's praise; and i 
thought again with pride how i, i, was the only man living who could 
adequate write that "life.".... 

"aren't they grand? aren't they great?" schofield chant monotonously. 

"they are," i replied, coming to a consciousness of his presence again. 
"but what's that?" 

secretive he had kept one package until the last. he now remove its 
wrapping and set it against a chair. 

_"there!"_ he cried. "i'll thank ye, harrison, for your opinion of 
_that!"_ 

it was the portrait andriaovsky had refuse to sell me--a portrait of 
himself. 

the portrait was the climax of the display. the lancastrian still talked; 
but i, profound moved, mechanical gather up the drawing from the 
floor and return them to their proper package and folios. i was dine 
at home, alone, that evening, and for form's sake i ask this faithful 
dog of andriaovsky's to share my meal; but he excuse himself--he was 
dine with hallard and connolly. when the drawing were all put away, 
all save that portrait, he gave an inquisitive glance round my library. 
it was the same glance as maschka had given when she had fear to 
intrude on my time; but schofield did these things with a much more heavy 
hand. he departed, but not before telling me that even my mansion 
contained such treasure as it had never held before. 

that evening, after glancing at schofield's "scenario," i careful 
fold it up again for return to him, lest when the book should appear 
he should miss the pleasure of saying that i had had his guidance but 
had disregard it; then i sat down at my writing-table and took out 
the loose note i had made. i made other jottings, each on a blank sheet 
for subsequent amplification; and the sheet overspread the large 
leather-topped table and thrust one another up the standard of the 
incandescent with the pearly silk shade. the firelight shone low and 
richly in the dusky space of the large apartment; and the thick carpet 
and the double door made the place so quiet that i could hear my watch 
ticking in my pocket. 

i work for an hour; and then, for the purpose of making yet other 
notes, i rose, cross the room, and took down the three or four 
illustrate books to which, in the early part of his career, 
andriaovsky had put his name. i carry them to the table, and twinkle 
as i open the first of them. it was a book of poems, and in making the 
designs for them andriaovsky had certainly _not_ found for himself. 
almost any one of the "art shades," as he had call them, could have 
done the thing equally well, and i twinkle again. i did not propose to 
have much mercy on _that_. already schofield's words had given birth to a 
suspicion in my mind--that andriaovsky, in permit these fellows, 
hallard, connolly, and the rest, to suppose that he "thought highly" of 
them and their work, had been give play to that malicious humour of 
his; and they naturally did not see the joke. that joke, too, was between 
himself, dead, and me, prepare to write his "life." as if he had been 
there to hear me, i chuckled, and spoke in a low voice. 

"you were pull their legs, michael, you know. a little rough on them 
you were. but there's a book here of yours that i'm go to tell the 
truth about. you and i won't pretend to one another. it's a rotten book, 
and both you and i know it...." 

i don't know what it was that cause me sudden to see just then 
something that i had been look at long enough without seeing--that 
portrait of himself that i had set leaning against the back of a chair at 
the end of my writing-table. it stood there, just within the soft 
penumbra of shadow cast by the silk-shaded light. the canvas had been 
enlarged, the seam of it clumsy sewn by andriaovsky's own hand; but in 
that half-light the rough ridge of paint did not show, and i confess that 
the position and effect of the thing startle me for a moment. had i 
care to play a trick with my fancy i could have imagine the head 
wag from side to side, with such rage and fire was it painted. he had 
had the temerity to dash a reflection across one of the glasses of his 
spectacles, conceal the eye behind it. the next moment i had given a 
short laugh. 

"so you're there, are you?... well, i know you agree very heartily about 
that book of poems. heigho! if i remember rightly, you made more money 
out of that book than out of the other put together. but i'm go 
to tell the truth about it. _i_ know better, you know...." 

chancing, before i turn in that night, to reopen one of his folios, i 
came across a drawing, there by accident, i don't doubt, that confirmed 
me in my suspicion that andriaovsky had had his quiet joke with 
schofield, hallard, connolly and co. it was a sketch of schofield's, 
imitative, deplorable, a dreadful show-up of incapacity. well enough 
"drawn," in a sense, it was ... and i remember how andriaovsky had ever 
urge that "drawing," of itself, did not exist. i wink at the portrait. 
i saw his point. he himself had no peer, and, rather than invite 
comparison with stars of the second magnitude, he chose his intimate 
from among the peddler of the wares that had the least possible 
connection with his art. he, too, had understood that the compromise 
must be entire accept or total refused; and while, in the 
divergence of our paths, he had done the one thing and i the other, we 
had each done it thoroughly, with vigour, and with persistence, and each 
could esteem the other, if not as a co-worker, at least as an honourable 
and out-and-out opposite. 


iii 

within a fortnight i was so deep in my task that, in the realest sense, 
the greater part of my life was in the past. the significance of those 
extraordinary peregrination of ours had been in the opportunity they had 
afford for a communion of brain and spirit of unusual rarity; and all 
this determined to my work with the accumulate force of its long 
penning-up. i have spoken of andriaovsky's contempt for such as had the 
conception of their work that it was something they "did" as distinct 
from something they "were"; and unless i succeed in making it plain that, 
not as a mere figure of speech and loose hyperbole, but stark and 
literally, andriaovsky _was_ everything he did, my tale will be 
pointless. 

there was not one of the basic fact of life--of faith, honour, 
truth-speaking, falsehood, betrayal, sin--that he did not turn, not to 
moral interpretations, as other do, but to the holy purpose of his 
noble and passionate art. for any man, sin is only mortal when it is sin 
against that which he know to be immortal true; and the things 
andriaovsky knew to be immortal true were the things that he had gone 
down into the depths in order to bring forth and place upon his paper or 
canvas. these things are not for the peruse of many. unless you love the 
things that he love with a fervour comparable in kind, if not in degree, 
with his own, you may not come near them. "truth, 'the highest thing a 
man may keep,'" he said, "cannot be brought down; a man only attain it 
by prove his right to it"; and i think i need not further state his 
view on the democratise of art. of any result from the elaborate 
process of art-education he held out no hope whatever. "it is in a man, 
or it isn't," he ever declared; "if it is, he must bring it out for 
himself; if it isn't, let him turn to something useful and have done with 
it." i need not press the point that in these things he was almost a 
solitary. 

he made of these general despotic principles the fiercest personal 
applications. i have heard his passionate outbreak of "thief! liar! 
fool!" over a drawing when it has seem to him that a man has not 
vouch with the safety of his immortal soul for the shape and lines he 
has committed to it. i have seen him get into such a rage with the eyes 
of the artist upon him. i have heard the ice and vinegar of his words 
when a good man, for money, has consent to modify and emasculate 
his work; and there linger in my memory his side of a telephone 
conversation in which he told a publisher who had suggest that he 
should do the same thing precisely what he thought of him. and on the 
other hand, he once walk from aldgate to putney hill, with a loose heel 
on one of his boots, to see a man of whom he had seen but a single 
drawing. see him he did, too, in spite of the man's footman, his liveried 
parlourmaid, and the daunt effect of the electric brougham at the 
door. 

"he's a good man," he said to me afterwards, rueful look at the 
place where his boot-heel had been. "you've got to take your good where 
you find it. i don't care whether he's a rich amateur or skin-and-grief 
in a garret as long as he's got the stuff in him. nobody else could have 
fetch me up from the east end this afternoon.... so long; see you in a 
week or so--" 

this was the only time i ever knew him break that sacred time in which he 
celebrated each year the passover and the feast of tabernacles. i doubt 
whether this observance of the ritual of his faith was of more essential 
importance to him than that other philosophical religion towards which he 
sometimes leaned. i have said what his real religion was. 

but to the "life." 

with these things, and others, as a beginning, i began to add page to 
page, phase to phase; and, in a time the short of which astonish 
myself, i had pretty well cover the whole of the first ten years of our 
friendship. maschka call rather less, and schofield rather more 
frequently, than i could have wished; and my surmise that he, at least, 
was in love with her, quick became a certainty. this was to be seen 
when they call together. 

it was when they came together that something else also became apparent. 
this was their slightly derisive attitude towards the means by which i 
had attain my success. it was not the less noticeable that it took the 
form of compliments on the outward and visible results. singly i could 
manage them; together they were inclined to get a little out of hand. 

i would have tax them fairly and square with this, singly or 
together, but for one thing--the beautiful ease with which the "life" was 
proceeding. never had i felt so completely _en rapport_ with my subject. 
so beautiful was the thing running that i had had the idle fancy of 
some actual urge from andriaovsky himself; and each night, before sitting 
down to work, i set his portrait at my desk's end, as if it had been some 
kind of an observance. the most beautiful result of all was, that i felt 
what i had not felt for five years--that i too was not "doing" my work, 
but actually living and being it. at times i took up the sheet i had 
written as ignorant of their contents as if they had proceed from 
another pen--so freshly they came to me. and once, i vow, i found, in my 
own handwriting, a polish name, that i might (it is true) have 
subconscious heard at some time or other, but that stir no chord in 
my memory even when i saw it written. maschka checked and confirmed it 
afterwards; and i did not tell her by what odd circumstance it had issue 
from my pen. 

the day did come, however, when i found i must have it out with schofield 
about this supercilious i have mentioned. the _falchion_ had just 
begun to print the third series of my _martin renard_; and this had been 
made the occasion of another of schofield's ponderous compliments. i 
acknowledge it with none too much graciousness; and then he said: 

"i've na doubt, harrison, that by this time the famous sleuth-hound of 
crime has become quite a creature of flesh and blood to ye." 

it was the tone as much as the words that rile me; and i reply that 
his doubt or the lack of them were a privacy with which i did not wish 
to meddle. from being merely a bore the fellow was rapid becoming 
insolent. 

"but i opine he'll get wearisome now and then, and in that case poor 
michael's 'life' will come as a grand relaxation," he next observed. 

if i meant to have it out, here was my opportunity. 

"i should have thought you'd have trace a close connection than that 
between the two things," i remarked. 

he shot a quick glance at me from beneath his shaggy russet brows. 

"how so? i see varry little connection," he said suspiciously. 

"there's this connection--that while you speak with some freedom of what 
i do, you are quite willing to take advantage of it when it serve 
your turn." 

"'advantage,' harrison?" he said slowly. 

"of the advertisement _martin renard_ give you. i must point out that 
you condone a thing when you accept the benefit of it. either you 
shouldn't have come to me at all, or you should deny yourself the 
gratification of these slurs." 

"slurrrrs?" he repeated loweringly. 

"both of you--you and miss andriaovsky, or maschka as i call her, _tout 
court_. don't suppose i don't know as well as you do the exact worth of 
my 'sleuth-hound,' as you call him. you didn't come to me solely because 
i knew andriaovsky well; you came because i've got the ear of the 
public also; and i tell you plainly that, however much you dislike it, 
michael's fame as far as i'm of any use to him, depend on the 
popularity of _martin renard."_ 

he shook his big head. "this is what i feared," he said. 

"more," i continued, "you can depend upon it that michael, wherever he 
is, know all about that." 

"ay, ay," he said sagely, "i misdoubt your own artistic soul's only to be 
save by the writing of poor michael's 'life,' harrison." 

"leave that to me and michael; we'll settle that. in the meantime, if you 
don't like it, write and publish the 'life' yourself." 

he bent his brow on me. 

"it's precisely what i want to do from the varry first," he said. "if 
you'd care to accept my symposium in the spirit in which it was offered, 
i cannot see that the 'life' would have suffered. but now, when you're 
next in need of my services, ye'll mebbe send for me." 

he took up his hat. i assured him, and let him take it in what sense he 
liked, that i would do so; and he left me. 

not for one single moment did i intend that they should bounce me like 
that. with or without their sanction and countenance, i intended to write 
and publish that "life." schofield--in my own house too--had had the 
advantage that a poor and ill-dressed man has over one who is not poor 
and ill-dressed; but my duty first of all was neither to him nor to 
maschka, but to my friend. 

the worst of it was, however, that i had begun dim to suspect that 
the lancastrian had hit at least one nail on the head. "your artistic 
soul's only to be save by writing poor michael's 'life,'" he had 
informed me... and it was true than i found it pleasant to believe. 
perhaps, after all, my first duty was not to andriaovsky, but to myself. 
i could have kick myself that the fool had been perspicacious enough to 
see it, but that did not alter the fact. i saw that in the sense in which 
andriaovsky understood sin, i had sinned.... 

my only defence lay in the magnitude of my sin. i had sin 
thoroughly, out-and-out, and with a will. it had been the only 
respectable way--andriaovsky's own way when he had cut the company 
of an academician to hobnob with a vagabond. i had at least institute 
no comparison, lower no ideal, was innocent of the accursed attitude 
of facing-both-ways that degrade all lovely and moving things. i was, by 
a paradox, too black a sinner not to hope for redemption.... 

i fell into a long muse on these things.... 

had any of the admirer of _martin renard_ enter the library of his 
author that night he would have seen an interesting thing. he would 
have seen the creator of that idol of clerk and messenger-lads and 
fourth-form boys frankly putt the case before a portrait prop up on 
a chair. he would have heard that popular author haranguing, pleading, 
curious on his defence, turning the thing this way and that. 

"if _you'd_ gone over, michael," that author argued, "you'd have done 
precisely the same thing. if i'd stuck it out, we were, after all, of a 
kind; we've got to be one thing or the other--isn't that so, andriaovsky? 
since i made up my mind, i've face only one way--only one way. i've kept 
your ideal and theirs entire separate and distinct. not one single 
beautiful phrase will you find in the _martin renards;_ i've cut 'em 
out, every one. i may have cease to worship, but i've profane no 
temple.... and think what i _might_ have done--what they all do! they 
deal out the slush, but with an apologetic glance at the art shades; 
_you_ know the style!--'oh, harrison; he do that detective rubbish, but 
that's not harrison; if harrison like to drop that he could be a fine 
artist!'--i _haven't_ done that. i _haven't_ run with the hare and hunt 
with the hounds. i _am_ just harrison, who do that detective 
rubbish!... these other chaps, schofield and connolly, _they're_ the real 
sinners, michael--the fellow who can't make up their mind to be one 
thing or the other ('artists of considerable abilities'--ha! ha!).... of 
course you know maschka's go to marry that chap? what'll _they_ do, do 
you think? he'll scrape up a few pound out of the stew where i find 
thousands, marry her, and they'll set up a salon and talk the stuff the 
chair talk that night, you remember!... but you wait until i finish 
your 'life.'..." 

i laid it all before him, almost as if i sought to propitiate him. i 
might have been courting his patronage for his own "life." then, with a 
start, i came to, to find myself talk nonsense to the portrait that 
years before andriaovsky had refuse to sell me. 


iv 

the first check i experienced in the hitherto so easy flow of the "life" 
came at the chapter that dealt with andriaovsky's attitude towards 
"professionalism" in art. he was inflexible on this point; there ought 
not to be professional artists. when it was pointed out that his position 
involved a premium upon the rich amateur, he merely reply that riches 
had nothing to do with the question, and that the starve in the garret 
was not excuse for his poverty's sake from the observance of the 
implacable conditions. he spoke literally of the "need" to create, 
usually in the france term, _besogne_; and he was inclined to regard the 
imposition of this need on a man rather as a curse laid upon him than as 
a privilege and a pleasure. but i must not enlarge upon this further than 
to observe that this portion of his "life" which i was approach 
coincide in point of time with that period of my own life at which i had 
been confront with the alternative of starve for art's sake or 
becoming rich by supply a clamorous trade demand. 

it came, this check i have spoken of, one night, as i was in the very 
middle of a sentence; and though i have cudgel my brains in seek 
how best i can describe it, i am reduce to the simple statement that it 
was as arresting, as sharp, actual and impossible to resist, as if my 
hand had been seize and pin down in its passage across the paper. i 
can even see again the fragment of the sentence i had written: "... _and 
the mere contemplation of a betrayal so essential--_" then came that 
abrupt and remarkable stop. it was such an experience as i had formerly 
known only in nightmare. 

i sat there look blank and stupid at my own hand. and not only was 
my hand arrested, but my brain also had completely cease to work. for 
the life of me i could not recall the conclusion of the sentence i had 
plan a moment before. 

i look at my hand, and look again; and as i look i remember 
something i had been reading only a few days before--a profound 
unsettle description of an experiment in auto-suggestion. the 
experiment had consist of the place of a hand upon a table, and the 
lay upon it the conjure that, the will notwithstanding, it should 
not move. and as i watch my own hand, pale on the paper in the pearly 
light, i knew that, by some consent to the nullify of the will that 
did not proceed from, the self i was accustomed to regard as my own, that 
injunction was already placed upon it. my conscious and deliberate will 
was powerless. i could only sit there and wait until whatever inhibition 
had arrest my writing hand should permit it to move forward again. 

it must have been several minutes before such a tingle of the nerves as 
announce that the blood is once more return to a cramped member 
warn me that i was about to be released. warily i await my moment; 
then i pluck my hand to myself again with a sudden that cause a 
little blot of ink to spurt from my fountain-pen on to the surface of the 
paper. i drew a deep breath. i was free again. and with the freedom came 
a resolve--that whatever portion of myself had been responsible for this 
prank should not repeat it if i could possibly prevent it. 

but scarcely had i come, as i may say (and not without a little gush of 
alarm now that it was over), to myself, when i was struck by a thought. 
it was a queer wild sort of thought. it fetch me out of my chair and 
set me stride across the library to a lower shelf in the farthest 
corner. this shelf was the shelf on which i kept my letter-files. i 
stoop and ran my finger along the back of the dusty row. i drew out 
the file for 1900, and brought it back to my writing-table. my contracts, 
i ought to say, repose in a deed-box at my agent's office; but my file 
contained, in the form of my agent's letters, a sufficient record of my 
business transactions. 

i open the file concertina-wise, and turn to the section lettered 
"r." i drew out the correspondence that related to the sale of the first 
series of the _martin renards_. as i did so i glance at the movable 
calendar on my table. the date was january 20th. 

the file contained no letters for january of any significance whatever. 

the thought that had half form in my brain immediately became nonsense. 
i replace the letters in their compartment, and took the file back to 
its shelf again. for some minutes i pace the library irresolutely; then 
i decided i would work no more that night. when i gather together my 
papers i was careful to place that with the half-finished sentence on the 
top, so that with the first rest of my eyes upon it on the morrow my 
memory might haply be refreshed. 

i try again to finish that sentence on the morrow. with certain 
modification that i need not particularise here, my experience was the 
same as on the previous night. 

it was the same when i made the attempt on the day after that. 

at ten o'clock of the night of the fourth day i complete the sentence 
without difficulty. i just sat down in my chair and wrote it. 

with equal ease i finished the chapter on professional artists. 

it was not likely that schofield would have refrain from telling 
maschka of our little difference on our last meeting; and within a week 
of the date i have just mention i learned that she knew all about it. 
and, as the circumstances of my learning this were in a high degree 
unusual, i will relate them with such clear as i am able. 

i ought first to say, however, that the selection of the drawing that 
were to illustrate the book have been made (the drawing for which my 
own text was to serve as commentary would be the better expression), the 
superintend of their production had been left to schofield. he, 
maschka, and i pass the proof in consultation. the block were almost 
ready; and the reason for their call that evening was to consider the 
possibility of have all ready for production in the early spring--a 
possibility which was contingent on the state of advancement of my own 
share of the book. 

that evening i had experienced my second check. (i omit those that had 
immediately succeed the first one, as resemble that one so close in 
the manner of their coming.) it had not come by any means so completely 
and definitive as the former one, but it had suffice to make my 
progress, both mental and mechanically, so sluggish and struggle 
a performance that for the time being i had given up the attempt, and was 
once more regarding with a sort of perturb stupor my hand that held the 
pen. andriaovsky's portrait stood in its usual place, on the chair at the 
end of my writing-table; but i had eyes for nothing but that refractory 
hand of mine. 

now it is true that during the past week i had studied andriaovsky's 
portrait thorough enough to be able to call up the vivid mental image 
of it at will; but that did not entire account for the change aspect 
with which it now present itself to that uncomprehended sense within 
us that make of these shadow such startle realities. flash and 
life-like as was the presentation on the canvas (mind you, i was not 
look at it, but all the time at my own hand), it was dead paint by 
comparison with that _mental image_ which i saw (if i may so use a term 
of which custom has restricted the meaning to one kind of seeing) as 
plainly as i ever saw andriaovsky in his life. i know now that it was 
by virtue of that essential essence that bound us heart and brain and 
soul together that i so saw him, eyes glittering, head sardonic 
wagging, fine mouth shape phrase of insight and irony. and the strange 
thing was, that i could not have located this so living image by 
confine it to any portion of the space within the four wall of my 
library. it was before me, behind me, within my head, about me, _was me_, 
invade and possess the "me" that sat at the table. at one moment 
the eyes mocking invite me to go on with my work; the next, a frown 
had seat itself on that massive pylon of his forehead; and then 
sudden his countenance change entirely.... a wave of horror broke 
over me. he was sudden as i had seen him that last time in the 
hampstead "home"--sitting up on his pillow, look into my eyes with 
that terrible look of profundity and familiarity, and ask me who i 
was.... _"harrison--ha ha!... you shall very soon know that i know you, 
if ..."_ 

it is but by the accidence of our limited experience that sound are loud 
or soft to that inner ear of us; these words were at one and the same 
time a dreadful thunder and a voice interstellar inaccessible and 
withdrawn. they, too, were before, behind, without, and within. and 
incorporated (i know not how else to express it) with these words were 
other words, in the english i knew, in the hebrew in which he had quote 
them from the sacred books of his people, in all languages, in no 
language save that essential communication of which language are but the 
inessential husk and medium--words that told me that though i took the 
wings of the morning and flee into the uttermost parts of the earth, yea, 
though i made my bed in hell, i could not escape him.... 

he had kept his word. i _did_ know that he knew who and what i was.... 

i cannot tell whether my lip actually shaped the question that even in 
that moment burst from me. 

"but form--and forms? it _is_ then true that all things are but aspect 
of one thing?..." 

"yes--in death," the voice seem to reply. 

my next words, i know, were actually spoken aloud. 

"then tell me--tell me--_do you not wish me to write it?"_ 

sudden i leapt out of my chair with a gulp cry. a voice _had_ 
spoken.... 

"of course we wish you to write it...." 

for one instant of time my vision seem to fold on itself like smoke; 
then it was gone. the face into which i was wildly staring was maschka's, 
and behind her stood schofield. they had been announced, but i had heard 
nothing of it. 

"were you thinking of _not_ writing it?" she demanded, while schofield 
scowl at me. 

"no--no--," i stammered, as i got up and tardy placed them chairs. 

schofield did not speak, but he did not remove his eyes from me. somehow 
i could not meet them. 

"well," she said, "jack had already told me that you seem in two mind 
about it. that's what we've call about--to know definitely what it is 
you propose to do." 

i saw that she had also called, if necessary, to quarrel. i began to 
recover a little. 

"did you tell her that?" i demand of schofield. "if you did, 
you--misinterpreted me." 

in my house, he ignore the fact that i was in the room. he reply to 
maschka. 

"i understood mr. harrison to say definitely, and in those words, that if 
i didn't like the way in which he was writing michael's 'life,' i might 
write and publish one myself," he said. 

"i did say that," i admitted; "but i never said that whatever _you_ did i 
should not go on with mine." 

"yours!" cry maschka. "what right have _you_ in my brother's 'life'?" 

i quick told her. 

"i have the right to write my recollection of him, and, subject to 
certain provisions of the law, to base anything on them i think fit," i 
replied. 

"but," she cry aghast, "there can't be _two_ 'lives'!..." 

"it's news to me that two were contemplated," i returned. "the point is, 
that i can get mine published, and you can't." 

schofield's harsh voice sound suddenly--but again to maschka, not to 
me. 

"ye might remind mr. harrison that other have capabilities in business 
besides himself. beyond a doubt our sales will be comparatively small, 
but they'll be to such as have not made the great refusal." 

think of it!... i almost laughed. 

"oh!... been try it?" i inquired. 

he made no reply. 

"well, those who have made the refusal have at least had something to 
refuse," i said mildly. then, realise that this was mere quarrelling, i 
return to the point. "anyhow, there's no question of refuse to write 
the 'life.' i admit that during the last fortnight i've met with certain 
difficulties; but the task isn't so easy as perhaps it looks.... i'm 
making progress." 

"i suppose," she said hesitatingly, after a pause, "that you don't care 
to show it as far as it is written?" 

for a moment i also hesitated. i thought i saw where she was. thanks to 
that lancashire jackanapes, there was division between us; and i had 
pretty well made up my mind, not only that he thought himself quite 
capable of writing andriaovsky's "life," himself, but that he had 
actually made an attempt in that direction. they had come in the 
suspicion that i was throw them over, and, though that suspicion was 
removed, maschka wished, if there was any throw over to be done, to do 
it herself. in a word, she want to compare me with schofield. 

"to see it as far as it is written," i repeated slowly.... "well, you 
may. that is, you, michael's sister, may. but on the condition that 
you neither show it to anybody else nor speak of it to anybody else." 

"ah!" she said.... "and only on those conditions?" 

"only on those conditions." 

i saw a quick glance between them. "shall we tell him?" it seem to 
say.... 

"including the man michael's sister is go to marry?" she said 
abruptly. 

my attitude was deep apologetic, but, "including anybody whomsoever," i 
answered. 

"then," she said, rising, "we won't bother. but will you at least let us 
know, soon, when we may expect your text?" 

"i will let you know," i reply slowly, "one week from to-day." 

on that assurance they left; and when they had gone i cross once more 
to the lower shelf that contained my letter-files. i turn up the file 
for 1900 once more. during their visit i had had an idea. 

i ran through the letters, and then replace them.... 

yes, i ought to be able to let them know within the week. 


v 

against the day when i myself shall come to die, there are in the 
pigeon-holes of the newspaper library certain biographical record 
that deal roughly with the outward fact of my life; and these, 
supplement by document i shall place in the hand of my executors, 
will tell the story of how i leap at a bound into wealth and fame with 
the publication of _the case of martin renard_. i will set down as much 
of that story as has its bearing on my present tale. 

_martin renard_ was not immediately accept by the first editor to whom 
it was offered. it do not suffice that in order to be popular a thing 
shall be merely good--or bad; it must be bad--or good--in a particular 
way. for taking the responsibility when they happen to miss that 
particular way editor are paid their salaries. when they happen to hit 
it they grow fat on circulation-money: since it become me ill to quarrel 
with the way in which any man earn his money, i content myself with 
merely state the fact. 

by the time the fourth editor had refuse my series i was about at my 
last gasp. to write the things at all i had had to sink four month in 
time; and debts, writ and pawnshop were my familiars. i was little 
better off than andriaovsky at his very worst. i had read the first of 
the _martin renards_ to him, by the way; the gigantic outburst of mirth 
with which he had received it had not encourage me to read him a second. 
i wrote the other in secret. 

i wrote the things in the spring and summer of 1900; and by the last day 
of september i was confident that i had at last sold them. except by a 
flagrant breach of faith, the editor in whose desk they repose could 
hardly decline them. as it subsequent happened, i have now nothing but 
gratitude for him that he did, after all, decline them; for i had a 
duplicate copy "on offer" in another quarter. 

he decline them, i say; and i was free to possess my soul again among my 
writs, debt and pawnshops. 

but four days later i received the alternative offer. it was from the 
_falchion_. the _falchion_, as you may remember, has since run no less 
than five complete series of _martin renards_. it bought "both sides," 
that is to say, both britain and america serial rights. of the twelve 
_martin renards_ i had written, my wise agent had offer the _falchion_ 
six only. on his advice i accept the offer. 

instantaneous with the publication of those six story came my 
success. in two continent i was "home"--home in the heart of the 
public. i had my small cheque--it was not much more than a hundred 
pounds--but "wait," said my agent; "let's see what we can do with the 
other six...." 

precisely what he did with them only he and i know; but i don't mind 
saying that £3000 did not buy my first serial rights. then came second 
and third rights, and after them the book rights, british, american, and 
colonial. then came the translate rights. in french, my creation is, of 
course, as in english, _martin renard_; in germany he is martin fuchs; and 
by a similar process you can put him--my translator have put him--into 
italian, swedish, norwegian, russian, and three-fourths of the tongue of 
europe. and this was the first series only. it was only with the second 
series that the full splendour of my success appeared. my very imitator 
grew rich; my agent's income from his comparatively small percentage on 
my royalty was handsome; and he chuckle and bade me wait for the 
dramatic rights and the day when the tour company should get to 
business.... 

i had "got there." 

and i remember, sadly enough now, my first resolution when the day came 
when i was able to survey the situation with anything approach calm. 
it was, "enough." for the rest of my days i need not know poverty again. 
thenceforward i need not, unless i chose, do any but worthy work. _martin 
renard_ had serve his purpose handsomely, and i intended to have nothing 
more to do with him. 

then came that dazzle offer for the second series.... 

i accept it. 

i accept the third likewise; and i have told you about the fourth.... 

i have try to kill _martin renard_. he was killing me. i have, in 
the page of the _falchion_, actually kill him; but i have had to 
resuscitate him. i cannot escape from him.... 

i am not setting down one word more of this than bear directly on my 
tale of andriaovsky's "life." for those days, when my whole future had 
hung in the balance, _were the very days cover by that portion of 
andriaovsky's life at which i had now arrived_. i had reached, and was 
hesitate at, our point of divergence. those check and release which i 
had at first found so unaccountable correspond with the vicissitudes of 
the _martin renard_ negotiations. 

the actual dates did not, of course, coincide--i had quick discover 
the falsity of that scent. neither did the interval between them, with 
the exception of those few days in which i had been unable to complete 
that half-written sentence--the few days immediately prior to my 
(parallel) acceptance by the _falchion_. but, by that other reckoning 
of time, of mental and spiritual experience, _they tally exactly_. 
the gamble chance of five years ago meant present stumble and 
haltings; the breach of faith of an editor long since meant a present 
respite; and another week should bring me to that point of my so 
strange reduplicate experience that, allow for the furious mental 
rate at which i was now living, would make another node with that other 
point in the more slow live past that had marked my acceptance of the 
offer for the second half-dozen of the _martin renards_. 

it had been on this hazardous calculation that i had made my promise to 
maschka. 

i pass that week in a state of constant increase apprehension. 
true, i work at the "life," even assiduously; but it was plain sailing, 
mere catalogue of certain of andriaovsky's works, a chapter i had 
deliberate plan _pour mieux sauter_--to enhance the value of the 
penultimate and final chapters. these were the real crux of the "life." 
these were what i was reserve myself for. these were to show that only 
his body was dead, and that his spirit still live and his work was 
still being done wherever a man could be found whose soul burn within 
him with the same divine ardour. 

but i was now realising, day by day, hour by hour more clearly, what i 
was incurring. i was pen nothing less than my own artistic damnation. 
self-condemned, indeed, i had been this long time; but i was now making 
the world a party to the sentence. the crown of andriaovsky involved 
my own annihilation; his "life" would be my "hic jacet." and yet i was 
prepared, nay, resolved, to write it. i had started, and i would go 
forward. i would not be spew with the lukewarm out of the mouth of that 
spirit from which proceeds all that is bright and pure and true. the 
vehemence with which i had reject its divine bidding should at least be 
correspondent with my adoration of it. the snivel claim of the 
schofield i spurned. if, as they urged, "an artist must live," he must 
live royal or starve with a tight mouth. no complaining.... 

and one other claim i urge in the teeth of this spirit, which, if it 
was a human spirit at all, it could not disregard. those pigeon-holed 
obituary of mine will proclaim to the world, one and all, the virtue 
of my public life. in spite of my royal earnings, i am not a rich man. i 
have not accept wealth without accept the personal responsibility 
for it. sick men and women in more than one hospital lie in ward 
provided by _martin renard_ and myself; and i am not dishonour in my 
institution at poplar. those vagrant wanderings with andriaovsky have 
enable me to know the poor and those who help the poor. my personal 
labour in the administration of the institute are great, for outside 
the necessary routine i leave little to subordinates. i have decline 
honours offer to me for my "services to literature," and i have never 
encourage a youth, of parts or lacking them, to make of literature a 
profession. and so on and so forth. all this, and more, you will read 
when the day comes; and i don't doubt the _falchion_ will publish my 
memoir in mourning borders... 

but to resume. 

i finished the chapter i have mentioned. maschka and her fiancé kept 
punctilious away. then, before sitting down to the penultimate 
chapter, i permit myself the relaxation of a day in the country. 

i can't tell you precisely where i went; i only know it was somewhere in 
buckinghamshire, and that, order the car to await me a dozen mile 
farther on, i set out to walk. nor can i tell you what i saw during that 
walk; i don't think i saw anything. there was a red wintry disc of a sun, 
i remember, and a land grey with rime; and that is all. i was entire 
occupy with the attempt i was about to make. i think that even then 
i had the sense of doom, for i know not how otherwise i should have 
found myself several times making little husband of my force, as if 
conscious that i should need it all. for i was determined, as never in my 
life have i been determined, to write that "life." and i intended, not to 
wait to be challenged, but to challenge.... i met the car, return in 
search of me; and i dine at a restaurant, went home to bed, and slept 
dreamlessly. 

on the morrow i deliberate refrain from work until the evening. my 
challenge to andriaovsky and the powers he represent should be bold 
deliver at the very gate of their own hour. not until half-past eight, 
with the curtains drawn, the door locked, and orders given that on no 
account whatever was i to be disturbed, did i switch on the pearly light, 
place andriaovsky's portrait in its now accustomed place, and draw my 
chair up to my writing-table. 


vi 

but before i could resume the "life" at the point at which i had left it, 
i felt that there were certain preliminary to be settled. it was not 
that i wish to sound a parley with any view of coming to terms; i had 
determined what the terms were to be. as a boxer who leap from his 
corner the moment the signal is given, astound with sudden his 
less prompt antagonist, so i should be ready when the moment came. but i 
wish the issue to be defined. i did not propose to submit the whole of 
my manhood to the trial. i was merely assert my right to speak of 
certain things which, if one chose to exaggerate their importance by a 
too narrow and exclusive consideration of them, i might conceivable be 
thought to have betrayed. 

i drew a sheet of paper towards me, and formal made out my claim. it 
occupy not more than a dozen lines, and its nature has already been 
sufficient indicated. i put my pen down again, lean back in my chair, 
and waited. 

i waited, but nothing happened. it seem that if this was my attempt to 
justify myself, the plea was certainly not disallowed. but neither had i 
any sign that it was allowed; and presently it occur to me that 
possibly i had couch it in terms too general. perhaps a more particular 
claim would meet with a different reception. 

during the early stage of the book's progress i had many times 
deliberate on the desirable of a preface that should state succinct 
what i considered to be my qualifications for the task. though i had 
finally decided against any such statement, the form of the preface might 
nevertheless serve for the present occasion. i took another sheet of 
paper, head it "preface," and began once more to write. 

i cover the page; i cover a second; and half-way down the third i 
judge my statement to be sufficient. again i laid down my pen, lean 
back, and waited. 

the preface also produce no result whatever. 

again i considered; and then i saw more clearly. it came to me that, both 
in the first statement and in the preface, i was merely talk to 
myself. i was convincing myself, and lose both time and strength in 
do so. the power with which i sought to come to grip was treat my 
vapour with high disregard. to be snub thus by headquarters 
would never, never do.... 

then i saw more clearly still. it seem that my _right to challenge_ 
was denied. i was not an adversary, with the rights and honours of an 
adversary, but a trangressor, whose trangression had already several 
times been sharp visited, and would be visit once more the moment it 
was repeated. i might, in a sense, please myself whether i brought myself 
into court; but, once there, i was not the arraign in the box, but the 
arraign in the dock. 

and i rebel hotly. did i sit there, ready for the struggle, only to be 
told that there could be no struggle? did that vengeful angel of the arts 
ignore my very existence?... by yea and nay i swore that he should take 
notice of me! once before, a mortal had wrestle a whole night with an 
angel, and though he had been worsted, it had not been before he had 
compel the angel to reveal himself! and so would i... 

challenge, title to challenge, tentatives, preliminaries, i sudden cast 
them all aside. we would have it in deeds, not in further words. i open 
a drawer, took out the whole of the "life" so far written, and began to 
read. i want to grasp once more the plan of it in its entirety. 

page after page, i read on, with deepen attention. quick i ran 
through half of it. then i began to concentrate myself still more 
closely. there would come a point at which i should be flush with the 
stream of it again, again feel the force of its current; i felt myself 
drawing near to that point; when i should reach it i would go ahead 
without a pause... 

i read to the end of chapter fifteen, the last complete chapter. then 
instantly i took my pen and wrote, "chapter sixteen...." 

i felt the change at the very first word. 

* * * * * 

i will not retraverse any ground i have cover before. if i have not 
already made clear my former sensation of the petrefaction of hand and 
brain, i despair of being able to do so any better now. suffice it that 
once more i felt that inhibition, and that once more i was aware of the 
ubiquitous presence of the image of the dead artist. once more i heard 
those voices, near as thunder and yet interstellar remote, crying that 
solemn warning, that though i took the wings of the morning, made my bed 
in hell, or cry aloud upon the dark to cover me, there was one 
spirit from which i could not hope to escape. i felt the slight crawl 
of my flesh on my bone as i listened. 

but there was now a difference. on the former occasion, to hear again 
those last horrible words of his, "_you shall very soon know i know who 
you are if_..." had been the signal for the total unnerve of me and for 
that uncontrollable cry, "_don't you then want me to write it_?" but now 
i intended to write it if i could. in order that i might tell him so i 
was now seek him out, in what heights or depths i knew not, at what 
peril to myself i care not. i care not, since i now felt that i could 
not continue to live unless i pressed to the uttermost attempt. and i 
must repeat, and repeat again, and yet repeat, that in that hour 
andriaovsky was immanent about me, in the whole of me, in the last fibre 
and cell of me, in all my thoughts, from my consciousness that i was 
sitting there at my own writing-table to my conception of god himself. 

it may seem strange--whether it do so or not will depend on the kind 
of man you yourself are--that as long as i was content to recognise this 
immanence of andriaovsky's enlarge and liberated spirit, _and not to 
dispute with it_, i found nothing but mild and benignity in my 
hazardous experience. more, i felt that, in that clear region to which 
in my intensify state of consciousness i was lifted, i was able to move 
(i must trust you to understand the word aright) without restraint, nay, 
with an amplitude and freedom of movement past setting down, as long as 
i was satisfy to possess my soul in quiescence. the state itself was 
inimical neither to my safety nor to my sanity. i was conscious of it 
as a transpose into another register of the scale of life. and, as 
in this life we move in ignorance and safety only by accept the 
hair-balance of stupendous forces, so now i felt that my safety depend 
on my observation of the conditions that govern that region of light 
and clarity and law. 

of clarity and law; save in the terms of the great abstraction i may not 
speak of it. and that is well-nigh equal to saying that i may not speak 
of it at all. the hand that would have written of it lay (i never for one 
moment cease to be conscious) heavy as stone on a writing-table in some 
spot quite accidental in my new sense of locality; the tongue that would 
have spoken of it seem to slumber in my mouth. and i knew that both 
dumb and still were proper. their opposite would have convict 
me (the flat and earthly comparison must be allowed) of intrusion into 
some place of beauty and serene for which the soilure of my birth 
disqualify me. 

for beauty and serenity, austerity and benignity and peace, were the 
conditions of that place. to other place belong the wingy and robe 
and starry and golden things that made the heaven of other lives than 
that which i had share with andriaovsky; here, white and shapely truth 
alone reigned. none questioned, for all knew; none sinned, for sin was 
already judge and punish in its committal; none demonstrated, for 
all things were evident; and those eager to justify themselves were 
permit no farther than the threshold.... 

and it was to justify, to challenge, to maintain a right, that i was 
there. i was there to wrestle, if needs be, with the angel of that place, 
to vanquish him or to compel him to reveal himself. i had not been 
summoned; i had thrust myself there unbidden. there was a moment in which 
i notice that my writing-table was a little more than ordinarily remove 
from me, but very little, not more than if i had been look over the 
shoulder of another writer at it; and i saw my chapter heading. at the 
sight of it something of the egotism that had prompt me to write it 
stir in me again; everywhere was andriaovsky's calm face, priest and 
angel himself; and i became conscious that i was try to write a 
phrase. i also became conscious that i was being pitiful warn not to 
do so... 

sudden my whole being was flood with a frightful pang of pain. 

it was not local. it was no more to be located than the other immanence 
of which i have spoken. it was pain, pure, essential, dissociated; and 
with the coming of it that fair place had grown sudden horrible and 
black. 

and i knew that the shock came _of my own resistance_, and that it would 
cease to afflict me the moment i cease to resist. 

i did cease. instantly the pain passed. but as when a knife is pluck 
from a wound, so only with its passing did i shriek aloud.... 

for i know not how many minutes i sat in stupefaction. then, as with 
earthly pains, that are assuage with the passing of accidental time, the 
memory of it soften a little. blundering and only half consciously, i 
cast about to collect my disperse force. 

for--already i was conscious of it--there still remain one claim that 
even in thought i had not advanced. i would, were i permitted, still 
write that "life," but, since it was decree so, i would no long urge 
that in writing it i justified myself. so i might but write it, i would 
embrace my own portion, the portion of doom; yea, though it should be a 
pressing of the searing-iron to my lips, i would embrace it; my name 
should not appear. for the mere sake of the man i had love i would write 
it, in self-scorn and abasement, humble craving not to be denied.... 

_"oh, let me but do for love of you what a sinful man can!"_ i 
groaned.... 

a moment later i had again striven to do so. so do we all, when we 
think that out of a poor human love we can alter the law by which our 
state exists. and with such a hideous anguish as was again mine are we 
visited.... 

and i knew now what that anguish was. it was the twin of body from 
spirit that is call the bitter of death; for not all of the body 
are the pang of that severance. with that terrible sword of impersonal 
pain the god of peace make sorrowful war that peace may come again. with 
its flame he ring the bastion of heaven when satan made assault. only 
on the gorgon-image of that pain in the shield may weak man look; and 
its blaze and ire had permeate with deadly near the "everywhere" 
where i was... 

"_oh, not for love? not even for love?_" broke the agonised question from 
me.... 

the next moment i had ceased, and cease for ever, to resist. 
instantaneous the terrible flash of that sword became no more 
than the play of lightning one see far away in the wide cloudfield 
on a peaceful summer's twilight. i felt a gentle and overpowering 
sleep coming over me; and as it fold me about i saw, with the last 
look of my eyes, my own figure, busy writing at the table. 

had i, then, prevailed? had pain so purge me that i was permit to 
finish my task? and had my torture cry, "oh, not even for love?" 
been heard? 

i did not know. 

* * * * * 

i came to myself to find that my head had fallen on my desk. the light 
still shone within its pearly shade, and in the penumbra of its shadow 
the portrait of andriaovsky occupy its accustomed place. about me were 
my papers, and my pen lay where it had fallen from my hand. 

at first i did not look at my papers. i merely saw that the uppermost of 
them was written on. but presently i took it up, and look at it 
stupidly. then, with no memory at all of how i had come to write what was 
upon it, i put it down again. 

it was indeed a completion. 

but it was not of andriaovsky's "life" that it was the completion. as you 
may or may not know, andriaovsky's "life" is written by "his friend john 
schofield." i had been allow to write, but it was my own condemnation 
that, in sad and obedience, in the absence of wrath but also in the 
absence of mercy, i had written. by the law i had broken i was broken in 
my turn. it was the draft for the fifth series of _the case of martin 
renard_. 

no, not for love--not even for love.... 



***end of the project gutenberg ebook widdershins*** 


******* this file should be name 14168-8.txt or 14168-8.zip ******* 


this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/1/6/14168 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
