the project gutenberg ebook of shadowings, by lafcadio hearn 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: shadow 

author: lafcadio hearn 

release date: november 5, 2010 [ebook #34215] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook shadow *** 




produce by juliet sutherland, ernest schaal, and the 
online distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









shadow 

by lafcadio hearn 
lecturer on english literature in 
the imperial university, tÔkyÔ, japan 

_author of_ "exotics and retrospectives," 
"in ghostly japan," etc., etc. 


[decoration] 


boston 
little, brown, and company 
1919 




_copyright, 1900_, 
by little, brown, and company 

_all rights reserved_ 


printer 
s. j. parkhill & co. boston, u. s. a. 




contents 


story from strange books: 

i. the reconciliation 5 

ii. a legend of fugen-bosatsu 15 

iii. the screen-maiden 23 

iv. the corpse-rider 33 

v. the sympathy of benten 41 

vi. the gratitude of the samÉbito 57 

japan studies: 

i. sÉmi 71 

ii. japan female name 105 

iii. old japan song 157 

fantasies: 

i. noctilucÆ 197 

ii. a mystery of crowd 203 

iii. gothic horror 213 

iv. levitate 225 

v. nightmare-touch 235 

vi. reading from a dream-book 249 

vii. in a pair of eyes 265 




illustration 


_facing page_ 

plate i 72 
1-2, _young sémi._ 
3-4, _haru-zémi_, also call _nawashiro-zémi_. 

plate ii 76 
"_shinné-shinné_" also call _yama-zémi_, and 
_kuma-zémi_. 

plate iii 80 
_aburazémi._ 

plate iv 84 
1-2, _mugikari-zémi_, also call _goshiki-zémi_. 
3, _higurashi_. 
4, "_min-min-zémi_." 

plate v 88 
1, "_tsuku-tsuku-bôshi_," also call 
"_kutsu-kutsu-bôshi_," etc. (_cosmopsaltria 
opalifera?_) 
2, _tsurigané-zémi_. 
3, _the phantom_. 




story from strange books 

il avait vu brûler d'étranges pierres, 
jadis, dan le brasier de la pensée ... 

Émile verhaeren 




the reconciliation[1] 

[decoration] 

[1] the original story is to be found in the curious volume 
entitle _konséki-monogatari_ 

there was a young samurai of kyôto who had been reduce to poverty by 
the ruin of his lord, and found himself oblige to leave his home, and 
to take service with the governor of a distant province. before quit 
the capital, this samurai divorce his wife,--a good and beautiful 
woman,--under the belief that he could better obtain promotion by 
another alliance. he then married the daughter of a family of some 
distinction, and took her with him to the district whither he had been 
called. 

* * * * * 

but it was in the time of the thoughtless of youth, and the sharp 
experience of want, that the samurai could not understand the worth of 
the affection so lightly cast away. his second marriage did not prove a 
happy one; the character of his new wife was hard and selfish; and he 
soon found every cause to think with regret of kyôto days. then he 
discover that he still love his first wife--loved her more than he 
could ever love the second; and he began to feel how unjust and how 
thankless he had been. gradual his repentance deepen into a remorse 
that left him no peace of mind. memory of the woman he had 
wronged--her gentle speech, her smiles, her dainty, pretty ways, her 
faultless patience--continually haunt him. sometimes in dream he saw 
her at her loom, weave as when she toil night and day to help him 
during the years of their distress: more often he saw her kneel alone 
in the desolate little room where he had left her, veil her tear 
with her poor worn sleeve. even in the hour of official duty, his 
thought would wander back to her: then he would ask himself how she was 
living, what she was doing. something in his heart assured him that she 
could not accept another husband, and that she never would refuse to 
pardon him. and he secret resolve to seek her out as soon as he could 
return to kyôto,--then to beg her forgiveness, to take her back, to do 
everything that a man could do to make atonement. but the years went 
by. 

at last the governor's official term expired, and the samurai was free. 
"now i will go back to my dear one," he vow to himself. "ah, what a 
cruelty,--what a folly to have divorce her!" he sent his second wife to 
her own people (she had given him no children); and hurry to kyôto, 
he went at once to seek his former companion,--not allow himself even 
the time to change his travelling-garb. 

* * * * * 

when he reach the street where she use to live, it was late in the 
night,--the night of the tenth day of the ninth month;--and the city was 
silent as a cemetery. but a bright moon made everything visible; and he 
found the house without difficulty. it had a desert look: tall weeds 
were grow on the roof. he knock at the sliding-doors, and no one 
answered. then, finding that the door had not been fasten from 
within, he pushed them open, and entered. the front room was matless and 
empty: a chilly wind was blow through crevice in the planking; and 
the moon shone through a ragged break in the wall of the alcove. other 
rooms present a like forlorn condition. the house, to all seeming, was 
unoccupied. nevertheless, the samurai determined to visit one other 
apartment at the further end of the dwelling,--a very small room that 
had been his wife's favorite resting-place. approach the 
sliding-screen that closed it, he was startle to perceive a glow 
within. he pushed the screen aside, and utter a cry of joy; for he saw 
her there,--sewing by the light of a paper-lamp. her eyes at the same 
instant met his own; and with a happy smile she greet him,--asking 
only:--"when did you come back to kyôto? how did you find your way here 
to me, through all those black rooms?" the years had not change her. 
still she seem as fair and young as in his fondest memory of her;--but 
sweet than any memory there came to him the music of her voice, with 
its tremble of pleased wonder. 

then joyful he took his place beside her, and told her all:--how 
deep he repent his selfishness,--how wretched he had been without 
her,--how constant he had regret her,--how long he had hope and 
plan to make amends;--caressing her the while, and ask her 
forgiveness over and over again. she answer him, with loving 
gentleness, according to his heart's desire,--entreating him to cease 
all self-reproach. it was wrong, she said, that he should have allow 
himself to suffer on her account: she had always felt that she was not 
worthy to be his wife. she knew that he had separate from her, 
notwithstanding, only because of poverty; and while he live with her, 
he had always been kind; and she had never cease to pray for his 
happiness. but even if there had been a reason for speak of amends, 
this honorable visit would be ample amends;--what greater happiness than 
thus to see him again, though it were only for a moment? "only for a 
moment!" he answered, with a glad laugh,--"say, rather, for the time of 
seven existences! my love one, unless you forbid, i am coming back to 
live with you always--always--always! nothing shall ever separate us 
again. now i have means and friends: we need not fear poverty. to-morrow 
my goods will be brought here; and my servant will come to wait upon 
you; and we shall make this house beautiful.... to-night," he added, 
apologetically, "i came thus late--without even change my dress--only 
because of the longing i had to see you, and to tell you this." she 
seem greatly pleased by these words; and in her turn she told him 
about all that had happen in kyôto since the time of his 
departure,--excepting her own sorrows, of which she sweet refuse to 
speak. they chat far into the night: then she conduct him to a 
warm room, facing south,--a room that had been their bridal chamber in 
former time. "have you no one in the house to help you?" he asked, as 
she began to prepare the couch for him. "no," she answered, laugh 
cheerfully: "i could not afford a servant;--so i have been living all 
alone." "you will have plenty of servant to-morrow," he said,--"good 
servants,--and everything else that you need." they lay down to 
rest,--not to sleep: they had too much to tell each other;--and they 
talk of the past and the present and the future, until the dawn was 
grey. then, involuntarily, the samurai closed his eyes, and slept. 

* * * * * 

when he awoke, the daylight was stream through the chink of the 
sliding-shutters; and he found himself, to his utter amazement, lie 
upon the naked boards of a moulder floor.... had he only dream a 
dream? no: she was there;--she slept.... he bent above her,--and 
looked,--and shrieked;--for the sleeper had no face!... before him, 
wrap in its grave-sheet only, lay the corpse of a woman,--a corpse so 
waste that little remain save the bones, and the long black tangle 
hair. 

* * * * * 

slowly,--as he stood shudder and sickening in the sun,--the icy 
horror yield to a despair so intolerable, a pain so atrocious, that he 
clutch at the mock shadow of a doubt. feign ignorance of the 
neighborhood, he venture to ask his way to the house in which his wife 
had lived. 

"there is no one in that house," said the person questioned. "it use to 
belong to the wife of a samurai who left the city several years ago. he 
divorce her in order to marry another woman before he went away; and 
she fret a great deal, and so became sick. she had no relative in 
kyôto, and nobody to care for her; and she die in the autumn of the 
same year,--on the tenth day of the ninth month...." 




a legend of fugen-bosatsu[2] 

[decoration] 

[2] from the old story-book, _jikkun-shô_ 


there was once a very pious and learned priest, call shôku shônin, who 
live in the province of harima. for many years he meditate daily upon 
the chapter of fugen-bosatsu [the bodhisattva samantabhadra] in the 
sûtra of the loto of the good law; and he use to pray, every morning 
and evening, that he might at some time be permit to behold 
fugen-bosatsu as a living presence, and in the form describe in the 
holy text.[3] 

[3] the priest's desire was probably inspired by the promise 
record in the chapter entitle "the encouragement of 
samantabhadra" (see kern's translate of the saddharma 
pundarîka in the _sacred books of the east_,--pp. 
433-434):--"then the bodhisattva mahâsattva samantabhadra 
said to the lord: ... 'when a preach who apply himself 
to this dharmaparyâya shall take a walk, then, o lord, will 
i mount a white elephant with six tusks, and betake myself 
to the place where that preach is walking, in order to 
protect this dharmaparyâya. and when that preacher, apply 
himself to this dharmaparyâya, forgets, be it but a single 
word or syllable, then will i mount the white elephant with 
six tusks, and show my face to that preacher, and repeat 
this entire dharmaparyâya."--but these promise refer to 
"the end of time." 

one evening, while he was recite the sûtra, drowsy overcame him; 
and he fell asleep leaning upon his _kyôsoku_.[4] then he dreamed; and 
in his dream a voice told him that, in order to see fugen-bosatsu, 
he must go to the house of a certain courtesan, known as the 
"yujô-no-chôja,"[5] who live in the town of kanzaki. immediately upon 
awakening he resolve to go to kanzaki;--and, making all possible haste, 
he reach the town by the evening of the next day. 

[4] the _kyôsoku_ is a kind of pad arm-rest, or arm-stool, 
upon which the priest lean one arm while reading. the use 
of such an arm-rest is not confined, however, to the 
buddhist clergy. 

[5] a yujô, in old days, was a singing-girl as well as a 
courtesan. the term "yujô-no-chôja," in this case, would 
mean simply "the first (or best) of yujô." 

when he enter the house of the _yujô_, he found many person already 
there assembled--mostly young men of the capital, who had been attract 
to kanzaki by the fame of the woman's beauty. they were feast and 
drinking; and the _yujô_ was play a small hand-drum (_tsuzumi_), 
which she use very skilfully, and singing a song. the song which she 
sang was an old japan song about a famous shrine in the town of 
murozumi; and the words were these:-- 

_within the sacred water-tank[6] of murozumi in suwô, 
even though no wind be blowing, 
the surface of the water is always rippling._ 

[6] _mitarai_. _mitarai_ (or _mitarashi_) is the name 
especially given to the water-tanks, or water-fonts--of 
stone or bronze--placed before shintô shrine in order 
that the worship may purify his lip and hand before 
making prayer. buddhist tank are not so named. 

the sweet of the voice fill everybody with surprise and delight. 
as the priest, who had taken a place apart, listen and wondered, the 
girl sudden fixed her eyes upon him; and in the same instant he saw 
her form change into the form of fugen-bosatsu, emit from her brow a 
beam of light that seem to pierce beyond the limit of the universe, 
and riding a snow-white elephant with six tusks. and still she sang--but 
the song also was now transformed; and the words came thus to the ear 
of the priest:-- 

_on the vast sea of cessation, 
though the wind of the six desire and of the five corruption 
never blow, 
yet the surface of that deep is always cover 
with the billow of attainment to the reality-in-itself._ 

dazzle by the divine ray, the priest closed his eyes: but through their 
lid he still distinct saw the vision. when he open them again, it 
was gone: he saw only the girl with her hand-drum, and heard only the 
song about the water of murozumi. but he found that as often as he shut 
his eyes he could see fugen-bosatsu on the six-tusked elephant, and 
could hear the mystic song of the sea of cessation. the other person 
present saw only the _yujô_: they had not beheld the manifestation. 

then the singe sudden disappear from the banquet-room--none could 
say when or how. from that moment the revelry ceased; and gloom took 
the place of joy. after have wait and sought for the girl to no 
purpose, the company disperse in great sorrow. last of all, the priest 
departed, bewilder by the emotion of the evening. but scarcely had 
he pass beyond the gate, when the _yujô_ appear before him, and 
said:--"friend, do not speak yet to any one of what you have seen this 
night." and with these words she vanish away,--leaving the air fill 
with a delicious fragrance. 

* * * * * 

the monk by whom the foregoing legend was recorded, comment upon it 
thus:--the condition of a _yujô_ is low and miserable, since she is 
condemn to serve the lust of men. who therefore could imagine 
that such a woman might be the _nirmanakaya_, or incarnation, of a 
bodhisattva. but we must remember that the buddha and the bodhisattva 
may appear in this world in countless different forms; choosing, 
for the purpose of their divine compassion, even the most humble or 
contemptible shape when such shape can serve them to lead men into 
the true path, and to save them from the peril of illusion. 




the screen-maiden[7] 

[decoration] 

[7] related in the _otogi-hyaku-monogatari_ 


say the old japan author, hakubai-en rosui:--[8] 

"in china and in japan books there are related many stories,--both 
of ancient and of modern times,--about pictures that were so beautiful 
as to exercise a magical influence upon the beholder. and concerning 
such beautiful pictures,--whether pictures of flower or of bird or of 
people, paint by famous artists,--it is further told that the shape 
of the creature or the persons, therein depicted, would separate 
themselves from the paper or the silk upon which they had been painted, 
and would perform various acts;--so that they became, by their own will, 
really alive. we shall not now repeat any of the story of this 
class which have been known to everybody from ancient times. but 
even in modern times the fame of the pictures paint by hishigawa 
kichibei--'hishigawa's portraits'--has become widespread in the land." 

[8] he die in the eighteenth year of kyôhô (1733). the painter 
to whom he refers--better known to collector as hishigawa 
kichibei moronobu--flourished during the latter part of the 
seventeenth century. beginning his career as a dyer's 
apprentice, he won his reputation as an artist about 1680, 
when he may be said to have found the _ukiyo-yé_ school of 
illustration. hishigawa was especially a delineate of what 
are call _fûryû_, ("elegant manners"),--the aspect of 
life among the upper class of society. 

he then proceeds to relate the following story about one of the 
so-called portraits:-- 

there was a young scholar of kyôto whose name was tokkei. he 
use to live in the street call muromachi. one evening, 
while on his way home after a visit, his attention was attract 
by an old single-leaf screen (_tsuitaté_), expose for sale 
before the shop of a dealer in second-hand goods. it was only 
a paper-covered screen; but there was paint upon it the 
full-length figure of a girl which caught the young man's 
fancy. the price ask was very small: tokkei bought the 
screen, and took it home with him. 

when he look again at the screen, in the solitude of his 
own room, the picture seem to him much more beautiful than 
before. apparently it was a real likeness,--the portrait of a 
girl fifteen or sixteen years old; and every little detail 
in the painting of the hair, eyes, eyelashes, mouth, had 
been execute with a delicacy and a truth beyond praise. the 
_manajiri_[9] seem "like a lotos-blossom courting favor"; the 
lip were "like the smile of a red flower"; the whole young face 
was inexpressible sweet. if the real girl so portray had been 
equally lovely, no man could have look upon her without lose 
his heart. and tokkei believe that she must have been thus 
lovely;--for the figure seem alive,--ready to reply to anybody 
who might speak to it. 

[9] also written _méjiri_,--the exterior canthu of the 
eye. the japan (like the old greece and the old 
arabia poets) have many curious dainty words and 
simile to express particular beauty of the hair, 
eyes, eyelids, lips, fingers, etc. 

gradually, as he continue to gaze at the picture, he felt 
himself bewitch by the charm of it. "can there really have 
been in this world," he murmur to himself, "so delicious a 
creature? how gladly would i give my life--nay, a thousand 
years of life!--to hold her in my arms even for a moment!" (the 
japan author say "for a few seconds.") in short, he became 
enamoured of the picture,--so much enamoured of it as to feel 
that he never could love any woman except the person whom it 
represented. yet that person, if still alive, could no long 
resemble the painting: perhaps she had been bury long before 
he was born! 

day by day, nevertheless, this hopeless passion grew upon 
him. he could not eat; he could not sleep: neither could he 
occupy his mind with those study which had formerly delight 
him. he would sit for hour before the picture, talk to 
it,--neglecting or forget everything else. and at last he 
fell sick--so sick that he believe himself go to die. 

now among the friends of tokkei there was one venerable scholar 
who knew many strange things about old pictures and about young 
hearts. this age scholar, hearing of tokkei's illness, came to 
visit him, and saw the screen, and understood what had happened. 
then tokkei, being questioned, confessed everything to his 
friend, and declared:--"if i cannot find such a woman, i shall 
die." 

the old man said:-- 

"that picture was paint by hishigawa kichibei,--painted from 
life. the person whom it represent is not now in the world. 
but it is said that hishigawa kichibei paint her mind as well 
as her form, and that her spirit lives in the picture. so i 
think that you can win her." 

tokkei half rose from his bed, and stare eager at the 
speaker. 

"you must give her a name," the old man continued;--"and you 
must sit before her picture every day, and keep your thought 
constant fixed upon her, and call her gently by the name which 
you have given her, _until she answer you_...." 

"answers me!" exclaim the lover, in breathless amazement. 

"oh, yes," the adviser responded, "she will certainly answer 
you. but you must be ready, when she answer you, to present her 
with what i am go to tell you...." 

"i will give her my life!" cry tokkei. 

"no," said the old man;--"you will present her with a cup of 
wine that has been bought at one hundred different wine-shops. 
then she will come out of the screen to accept the wine. after 
that, probably she herself will tell you what to do." 

with these words the old man went away. his advice arouse 
tokkei from despair. at once he seat himself before the 
picture, and call it by the name of a girl--(what name the 
japan narrator has forgotten to tell us)--over and over 
again, very tenderly. that day it made no answer, nor the next 
day, nor the next. but tokkei did not lose faith or patience; 
and after many days it sudden one evening answer to its 
name,-- 

"_hai!_" (yes.) 

then quickly, quickly, some of the wine from a hundred different 
wine-shops was pour out, and reverential present in a 
little cup. and the girl step from the screen, and walk 
upon the matting of the room, and knelt to take the cup from 
tokkei's hand,--asking, with a delicious smile:-- 

"how could you love me so much?" 

say the japan narrator: "she was much more beautiful than the 
picture,--beautiful to the tip of her finger-nails,--beautiful 
also in heart and temper,--lovelier than anybody else in the 
world." what answer tokkei made to her question is not recorded: 
it will have to be imagined. 

"but will you not soon get tired of me?" she asked. 

"never while i live!" he protested. 

"and after--?" she persisted;--for the japan bride is not 
satisfy with love for one life-time only. 

"let us pledge ourselves to each other," he entreated, "for the 
time of seven existences." 

"if you are ever unkind to me," she said, "i will go back to the 
screen." 

* * * * * 

they pledge each other. i suppose that tokkei was a good 
boy,--for his bride never return to the screen. the space that 
she had occupy upon it remain a blank. 

* * * * * 

exclaim the japan author,-- 

"how very seldom do such things happen in this world!" 




the corpse-rider[10] 

[decoration] 

[10] from the _konséki-monogatari_ 


the body was cold as ice; the heart had long cease to beat: yet there 
were no other sign of death. nobody even spoke of bury the woman. 
she had die of grief and anger at have been divorced. it would have 
been useless to bury her,--because the last undying wish of a die 
person for vengeance can burst asunder any tomb and rift the heaviest 
graveyard stone. people who live near the house in which she was lie 
flee from their homes. they knew that she was only _waiting for the 
return of the man who had divorce her_. 

at the time of her death he was on a journey. when he came back and was 
told what had happened, terror seize him. "if i can find no help before 
dark," he thought to himself, "she will tear me to pieces." it was yet 
only the hour of the dragon;[11] but he knew that he had no time to 
lose. 

[11] _tatsu no koku_, or the hour of the dragon, by old japan 
time, began at about eight o'clock in the morning. 

he went at once to an _inyôshi_[12] and beg for succor. the _inyôshi_ 
knew the story of the dead woman; and he had seen the body. he said to 
the supplicant:--"a very great danger threaten you. i will try to save 
you. but you must promise to do whatever i shall tell you to do. there 
is only one way by which you can be saved. it is a fearful way. but 
unless you find the courage to attempt it, she will tear you limb from 
limb. if you can be brave, come to me again in the evening before 
sunset." the man shuddered; but he promise to do whatever should be 
require of him. 

[12] _inyôshi_, a professor or master of the science of 
_in-yô_,--the old china nature-philosophy, base upon the 
theory of a male and a female principle pervade the 
universe. 

* * * * * 

at sunset the _inyôshi_ went with him to the house where the body was 
lying. the _inyôshi_ pushed open the sliding-doors, and told his client 
to enter. it was rapid grow dark. "i dare not!" gasp the man, 
quake from head to foot;--"i dare not even look at her!" "you will 
have to do much more than look at her," declared the _inyôshi_;--"and 
you promise to obey. go in!" he forced the tremble into the house and 
led him to the side of the corpse. 

* * * * * 

the dead woman was lie on her face. "now you must get astride upon 
her," said the _inyôshi_, "and sit firm on her back, as if you were 
riding a horse.... come!--you must do it!" the man shiver so that the 
_inyôshi_ had to support him--shivered horribly; but he obeyed. "now 
take her hair in your hands," command the _inyôshi_,--"half in the 
right hand, half in the left.... so!... you must grip it like a bridle. 
twist your hand in it--both hands--tightly. that is the way!... listen 
to me! you must stay like that till morning. you will have reason to be 
afraid in the night--plenty of reason. but whatever may happen, never 
let go of her hair. if you let go,--even for one second,--she will tear 
you into gobbets!" 

the _inyôshi_ then whisper some mysterious words into the ear of the 
body, and said to its rider:--"now, for my own sake, i must leave you 
alone with her.... remain as you are!... above all things, remember that 
you must not let go of her hair." and he went away,--closing the door 
behind him. 

* * * * * 

hour after hour the man sat upon the corpse in black fear;--and the hush 
of the night deepen and deepen about him till he scream to break 
it. instantly the body sprang beneath him, as to cast him off; and the 
dead woman cry out loudly, "oh, how heavy it is! yet i shall bring 
that fellow here now!" 

then tall she rose, and leap to the doors, and flung them open, and 
rush into the night,--always bearing the weight of the man. but he, 
shut his eyes, kept his hand twist in her long hair,--tightly, 
tightly,--though fear with such a fear that he could not even moan. 
how far she went, he never knew. he saw nothing: he heard only the sound 
of her naked feet in the dark,--_picha-picha_, _picha-picha_,--and the 
hiss of her breathing as she ran. 

at last she turned, and ran back into the house, and lay down upon the 
floor exactly as at first. under the man she pant and moan till the 
cock began to crow. thereafter she lay still. 

but the man, with chatter teeth, sat upon her until the _inyôshi_ 
came at sunrise. "so you did not let go of her hair!"--observed the 
_inyôshi_, greatly pleased. "that is well ... now you can stand up." he 
whisper again into the ear of the corpse, and then said to the 
man:--"you must have pass a fearful night; but nothing else could have 
save you. hereafter you may feel secure from her vengeance." 

[decoration] 

the conclusion of this story i do not think to be morally satisfying. 
it is not record that the corpse-rider became insane, or that his 
hair turn white: we are told only that "he worship the _inyôshi_ 
with tear of gratitude." a note append to the recital is equally 
disappointing. "it is reported," the japan author says, "that a 
grandchild of the man [_who rode the corpse_] still survives, and that a 
grandson of the _inyôshi_ is at this very time living in a village 
call otokunoi-mura [_probably pronounced otonoi-mura_]." 

this village-name do not appear in any japan directory of to-day. 
but the name of many town and village have been change since the 
foregoing story was written. 




the sympathy of benten[13] 

[decoration] 

[13] the original story is in the _otogi-hyaku-monogatari_ 


in kyôto there is a famous temple call amadera. sadazumi shinnô, the 
fifth son of the emperor seiwa, pass the greater part of his life 
there as a priest; and the grave of many celebrated person are to be 
seen in the temple-grounds. 

but the present edifice is not the ancient amadera. the original temple, 
after the lapse of ten centuries, fell into such decay that it had to be 
entire rebuilt in the fourteenth year of genroku (1701 a. d.). 

a great festival was held to celebrate the rebuild of the amadera; 
and among the thousand of person who attend that festival there was 
a young scholar and poet name hanagaki baishû. he wander about the 
newly-laid-out grounds and gardens, delight by all that he saw, until 
he reach the place of a spring at which he had often drunk in former 
times. he was then surprise to find that the soil about the spring had 
been dug away, so as to form a square pond, and that at one corner of 
this pond there had been set up a wooden tablet bearing the words 
_tanjô-sui_ ("birth-water").[14] he also saw that a small, but very 
handsome temple of the goddess benten had been erect beside the pond. 
while he was look at this new temple, a sudden gust of wind blew to 
his feet a _tanzaku_,[15] on which the following poem had been written:-- 

shirushi aréto 
iwai zo somuru 
tama hôki, 
toruté bakari no 
chigiri narétomo. 

[14] the word _tanjô_ (birth) should here be understood in its 
mystical buddhist meaning of new life or rebirth, rather 
than in the western signification of birth. 

[15] _tanzaku_ is the name given to the long strip or ribbon 
of paper, usually colored, upon which poem are written 
perpendicularly. poem written upon _tanzaku_ are suspend 
to tree in flower, to wind-bells, to any beautiful object 
in which the poet has found an inspiration. 

this poem--a poem on first love (_hatsu koi_), compose by the famous 
shunrei kyô--was not unfamiliar to him; but it had been written upon 
the _tanzaku_ by a female hand, and so exquisite that he could 
scarcely believe his eyes. something in the form of the characters,--an 
indefinite grace,--suggested that period of youth between childhood and 
womanhood; and the pure rich color of the ink seem to bespeak the 
purity and goodness of the writer's heart.[16] 

[16] it is difficult for the inexperienced europe eye to 
distinguish in china or japan writing those 
characteristic imply by our term "hand"--in the sense of 
individual style. but the japan scholar never forget 
the peculiarity of a handwriting once seen; and he can 
even guess at the approximate age of the writer. china 
and japan author claim that the color (quality) of the 
ink use tell something of the character of the writer. as 
every person grounds or prepare his or her own ink, the 
deep and clear black would at least indicate something 
of personal careful and of the sense of beauty. 

baishû careful fold up the _tanzaku_, and took it home with him. 
when he look at it again the writing appear to him even more 
wonderful than at first. his knowledge in caligraphy assured him only 
that the poem had been written by some girl who was very young, very 
intelligent, and probably very gentle-hearted. but this assurance 
suffice to shape within his mind the image of a very charming person; 
and he soon found himself in love with the unknown. then his first 
resolve was to seek out the writer of the verses, and, if possible, make 
her his wife.... yet how was he to find her? who was she? where did she 
live? certainly he could hope to find her only through the favor of the 
gods. 

but presently it occur to him that the gods might be very willing 
to lend their aid. the _tanzaku_ had come to him while he was 
standing in front of the temple of benten-sama; and it was to this 
divinity in particular that lovers were wont to pray for happy union. 
this reflection impel him to beseech the goddess for assistance. 
he went at once to the temple of benten-of-the-birth-water 
(_tanjô-sui-no-benten_) in the grounds of the amadera; and there, with 
all the fervor of his heart, he made his petition:--"o goddess, pity 
me!--help me to find where the young person lives who wrote the 
_tanzaku_!--vouchsafe me but one chance to meet her,--even if only for 
a moment!" and after have made this prayer, he began to perform a 
seven days' religious service (_nanuka-mairi_)[17] in honor of the 
goddess; vow at the same time to pass the seventh night in ceaseless 
worship before her shrine. 

[17] there are many kind of religious exercises call _mairi_. 
the performer of a _nanuka-mairi_ pledge himself to pray 
at a certain temple every day for seven days in succession. 

* * * * * 

now on the seventh night,--the night of his vigil,--during the hour when 
the silence is most deep, he heard at the main gateway of the 
temple-grounds a voice calling for admittance. another voice from within 
answered; the gate was opened; and baishû saw an old man of majestic 
appearance approach with slow steps. this venerable person was clad 
in robe of ceremony; and he wore upon his snow-white head a black cap 
(_eboshi_) of the form indicate high rank. reach the little temple 
of benten, he knelt down in front of it, as if respectful await 
some order. then the outer door of the temple was opened; the hanging 
curtain of bamboo behind it, conceal the inner sanctuary, was roll 
half-way up; and a _chigo_[18] came forward,--a beautiful boy, with long 
hair tie back in the ancient manner. he stood at the threshold, and 
said to the old man in a clear loud voice:-- 

[18] the term _chigo_ usually means the page of a noble 
household, especially an imperial page. the _chigo_ who 
appear in this story is of course a supernatural 
being,--the court-messenger of the goddess, and her 
mouthpiece. 

"there is a person here who has been pray for a love-union not 
suitable to his present condition, and otherwise difficult to bring 
about. but as the young man is worthy of our pity, you have been call 
to see whether something can be done for him. if there should prove to 
be any relation between the party from the period of a former birth, 
you will introduce them to each other." 

on receiving this command, the old man bowed respectful to the 
_chigo_: then, rising, he drew from the pocket of his long left sleeve a 
crimson cord. one end of this cord he pass round baishû's body, as if 
to bind him with it. the other end he put into the flame of one of the 
temple-lamps; and while the cord was there burning, he wave his hand 
three times, as if to summon somebody out of the dark. 

immediately, in the direction of the amadera, a sound of coming steps 
was heard; and in another moment a girl appeared,--a charming girl, 
fifteen or sixteen years old. she approach gracefully, but very 
shyly,--hiding the lower part of her face with a fan; and she knelt down 
beside baishû. the _chigo_ then said to baishû:-- 

"recently you have been suffering much heart-pain; and this desperate 
love of yours has even impair your health. we could not allow you to 
remain in so unhappy a condition; and we therefore summon the 
old-man-under-the-moon[19] to make you acquaint with the writer of 
that _tanzaku_. she is now beside you." 

[19] _gekkawô_. this is a poetical appellation for the god 
of marriage, more usually known as _musubi-no-kami_. 
throughout this story there is an interesting mingle of 
shintô and buddhist ideas. 

with these words, the _chigo_ retired behind the bamboo curtain. then 
the old man went away as he had come; and the young girl follow him. 
simultaneous baishû heard the great bell of the amadera sound the 
hour of dawn. he prostrate himself in thanksgiving before the shrine of 
benten-of-the-birth-water, and proceed homeward,--feeling as if 
awaken from some delightful dream,--happy at have seen the charming 
person whom he had so fervent pray to meet,--unhappy also because of 
the fear that he might never meet her again. 

but scarcely had he pass from the gateway into the street, when he saw 
a young girl walking alone in the same direction that he was going; and, 
even in the dusk of the dawn, he recognize her at once as the person to 
whom he had been introduce before the temple of benten. as he quicken 
his pace to overtake her, she turn and salute him with a graceful 
bow. then for the first time he venture to speak to her; and she 
answer him in a voice of which the sweet fill his heart with 
joy. through the yet silent street they walk on, chat happily, 
till they found themselves before the house where baishû lived. there he 
paused--spoke to the girl of his hope and fears. smiling, she 
asked:--"do you not know that i was sent for to become your wife?" and 
she enter with him. 

* * * * * 

becoming his wife, she delight him beyond expectation by the charm of 
her mind and heart. moreover, he found her to be much more accomplished 
than he had supposed. besides being able to write so wonderfully, she 
could paint beautiful pictures; she knew the art of arrange flowers, 
the art of embroidery, the art of music; she could weave and sew; and 
she knew everything in regard to the management of a house. 

* * * * * 

it was in the early autumn that the young people had met; and they live 
together in perfect accord until the winter season began. nothing, 
during those months, occur to disturb their peace. baishû's love for 
his gentle wife only strengthen with the passing of time. yet, 
strange enough, he remain ignorant of her history,--knew nothing 
about her family. of such matter she had never spoken; and, as the gods 
had given her to him, he imagine that it would not be proper to 
question her. but neither the old-man-under-the-moon nor any one else 
came--as he had feared--to take her away. nobody even made any inquiry 
about her. and the neighbors, for some undiscoverable reason, act as 
if total unaware of her presence. 

baishû wonder at all this. but stranger experience were await 
him. 

one winter morning he happen to be passing through a somewhat remote 
quarter of the city, when he heard himself loud call by name, and 
saw a man-servant making sign to him from the gateway of a private 
residence. as baishû did not know the man's face, and did not have a 
single acquaintance in that part of kyôto, he was more than startle by 
so abrupt a summons. but the servant, coming forward, salute him with 
the utmost respect, and said, "my master greatly desire the honor of 
speak with you: deign to enter for a moment." after an instant of 
hesitation, baishû allow himself to be conduct to the house. a 
dignified and richly dress person, who seem to be the master, 
welcome him at the entrance, and led him to the guest-room. when the 
courtesy due upon a first meeting had been fully exchanged, the host 
apologize for the informal manner of his invitation, and said:-- 

"it must have seem to you very rude of us to call you in such a way. 
but perhaps you will pardon our impolite when i tell you that we 
act thus upon what i firm believe to have been an inspiration from 
the goddess benten. now permit me to explain. 

"i have a daughter, about sixteen years old, who can write rather 
well,[20] and do other things in the common way: she has the ordinary 
nature of woman. as we were anxious to make her happy by finding a good 
husband for her, we pray the goddess benten to help us; and we sent to 
every temple of benten in the city a _tanzaku_ written by the girl. some 
nights later, the goddess appear to me in a dream, and said: 'we have 
heard your prayer, and have already introduce your daughter to the 
person who is to become her husband. during the coming winter he will 
visit you.' as i did not understand this assurance that a presentation 
had been made, i felt some doubt; i thought that the dream might have 
been only a common dream, signify nothing. but last night again i saw 
benten-sama in a dream; and she said to me: 'to-morrow the young man, of 
whom i once spoke to you, will come to this street: then you can call 
him into your house, and ask him to become the husband of your daughter. 
he is a good young man; and later in life he will obtain a much higher 
rank than he now holds.' then benten-sama told me your name, your age, 
your birthplace, and describe your features and dress so exactly that 
my servant found no difficulty in recognize you by the indication 
which i was able to give him." 

[20] as it is the old japan rule that parent should speak 
depreciating of their children's accomplishment the 
phrase "rather well" in this connection would mean, for the 
visitor, "wonderfully well." for the same reason the 
expression "common way" and "ordinary nature," as 
subsequent used, would imply almost the reverse of the 
literal meaning. 

* * * * * 

this explanation bewilder baishû instead of reassure him; and his 
only reply was a formal return of thanks for the honor which the master 
of the house had spoken of do him. but when the host invite him to 
another room, for the purpose of present him to the young lady, his 
embarrassment became extreme. yet he could not reasonably decline the 
introduction. he could not bring himself, under such extraordinary 
circumstances, to announce that he already had a wife,--a wife given to 
him by the goddess benten herself; a wife from whom he could not even 
think of separating. so, in silence and trepidation, he follow his 
host to the apartment indicated. 

then what was his amaze to discover, when present to the daughter 
of the house, that she was the very same person whom he had already 
taken to wife! 

_the same,--yet not the same._ 

she to whom he had been introduce by the old-man-under-the-moon, was 
only the soul of the beloved. 

she to whom he was now to be wedded, in her father's house, was the 
body. 

benten had wrought this miracle for the sake of her worshippers. 

[decoration] 

the original story break off sudden at this point, leave several 
matter unexplained. the ending is rather unsatisfactory. one would like 
to know something about the mental experience of the real maiden during 
the married life of her phantom. one would also like to know what became 
of the phantom,--whether it continue to lead an independent existence; 
whether it wait patient for the return of its husband; whether it 
paid a visit to the real bride. and the book say nothing about these 
things. but a japan friend explain the miracle thus:-- 

"the spirit-bride was really form out of the _tanzaku_. so it is 
possible that the real girl did not know anything about the meeting at 
the temple of benten. when she wrote those beautiful character upon the 
_tanzaku_, something of her spirit pass into them. therefore it was 
possible to evoke from the writing the double of the writer." 




the gratitude of the samébito[21] 

[decoration] 

[21] the original of this story may be found in the book call 
_kibun-anbaiyoshi_ 


there was a man name tawaraya tôtarô, who live in the province of Ômi. 
his house was situated on the shore of lake biwa, not far from the 
famous temple call ishiyamadera. he had some property, and live in 
comfort; but at the age of twenty-nine he was still unmarried. his 
greatest ambition was to marry a very beautiful woman; and he had not 
been able to find a girl to his liking. 

one day, as he was passing over the long bridge of séta,[22] he saw a 
strange being crouch close to the parapet. the body of this being 
resemble the body of a man, but was black as ink; its face was like the 
face of a demon; its eyes were green as emeralds; and its beard was like 
the beard of a dragon. tôtarô was at first very much startled. but the 
green eyes look at him so gently that after a moment's hesitation he 
venture to question the creature. then it answer him, saying: "i am a 
_samébito_,[23]--a shark-man of the sea; and until a short time ago i 
was in the service of the eight great dragon-kings [_hachi-dai-ryû-Ô_] 
as a subordinate officer in the dragon-palace [_ryûgû_].[24] but 
because of a small fault which i committed, i was dismiss from the 
dragon-palace, and also banish from the sea. since then i have been 
wandering about here,--unable to get any food, or even a place to lie 
down. if you can feel any pity for me, do, i beseech you, help me to 
find a shelter, and let me have something to eat!" 

[22] the long bridge of séta (_séta-no-naga-hashi_), famous in 
japan legend, is nearly eight hundred feet in length, 
and command a beautiful view. this bridge cross the 
waters of the sétagawa near the junction of the stream with 
lake biwa. ishiyamadera, one of the most picturesque 
buddhist temple in japan, is situated within a short 
distance from the bridge. 

[23] literally, "a shark-person," but in this story the 
_samébito_ is a male. the character for _samébito_ can 
also be read _kôjin_,--which is the usual reading. in 
dictionary the word is loose render by "merman" or 
"mermaid;" but as the above description shows, the 
_samébito_ or _kôjin_ of the far east is a conception 
have little in common with the western idea of a merman 
or mermaid. 

[24] _ryûgû_ is also the name given to the whole of that 
fairy-realm beneath the sea which figures in so many 
japan legends. 

this petition was utter in so plaintive a tone, and in so humble a 
manner, that tôtarô's heart was touched. "come with me," he said. "there 
is in my garden a large and deep pond where you may live as long as you 
wish; and i will give you plenty to eat." 

the _samébito_ follow tôtarô home, and appear to be much pleased 
with the pond. 

thereafter, for nearly half a year, this strange guest dwelt in the 
pond, and was every day supply by tôtarô with such food as 
sea-creatures like. 

[_from this point of the original narrative the shark-man is 
refer to, not as a monster, but as a sympathetic person of 
the male sex._] 

now, in the seventh month of the same year, there was a female 
pilgrimage (_nyonin-môdé_) to the great buddhist temple call miidera, 
in the neighboring town of Ôtsu; and tôtarô went to Ôtsu to attend the 
festival. among the multitude of women and young girl there assembled, 
he observe a person of extraordinary beauty. she seem about sixteen 
years old; her face was fair and pure as snow; and the lovely of 
her lip assured the behold that their every utterance would sound "as 
sweet as the voice of a nightingale singing upon a plum-tree." tôtarô 
fell in love with her at sight. when she left the temple he follow her 
at a respectful distance, and discover that she and her mother were 
stay for a few days at a certain house in the neighboring village of 
séta. by questioning some of the village folk, he was able also to learn 
that her name was tamana; that she was unmarried; and that her family 
appear to be unwill that she should marry a man of ordinary 
rank,--for they demand as a betrothal-gift a casket contain ten 
thousand jewels.[25] 

[25] _tama_ in the original. this word _tama_ has a multitude of 
meanings; and as here use it is quite as indefinite as our 
own terms "jewel," "gem," or "precious stone." indeed, it 
is more indefinite, for it signify also a bead of coral, 
a ball of crystal, a polish stone attach to a hairpin, 
etc., etc. later on, however, i venture to render it by 
"ruby,"--for reason which need no explanation. 

* * * * * 

tôtarô return home very much dismay by this information. the more 
that he thought about the strange betrothal-gift demand by the girl's 
parents, the more he felt that he could never expect to obtain her for 
his wife. even supposing that there were as many as ten thousand jewel 
in the whole country, only a great prince could hope to procure them. 

but not even for a single hour could tôtarô banish from his mind the 
memory of that beautiful being. it haunt him so that he could neither 
eat nor sleep; and it seem to become more and more vivid as the days 
went by. and at last he became ill,--so ill that he could not lift his 
head from the pillow. then he sent for a doctor. 

the doctor, after have made a careful examination, utter an 
exclamation of surprise. "almost any kind of sickness," he said, "can be 
cure by proper medical treatment, except the sickness of love. your 
ailment is evidently love-sickness. there is no cure for it. in ancient 
times rôya-Ô hakuyo die of that sickness; and you must prepare yourself 
to die as he died." so saying, the doctor went away, without even give 
any medicine to tôtarô. 

* * * * * 

about this time the shark-man that was living in the garden-pond heard 
of his master's sickness, and came into the house to wait upon tôtarô. 
and he tend him with the utmost affection both by day and by night. 
but he did not know either the cause or the serious nature of the 
sickness until nearly a week later, when tôtarô, thinking himself about 
to die, utter these words of farewell:-- 

"i suppose that i have had the pleasure of care for you thus long, 
because of some relation that grew up between us in a former state of 
existence. but now i am very sick indeed, and every day my sickness 
become worse; and my life is like the morning dew which pass away 
before the setting of the sun. for your sake, therefore, i am trouble 
in mind. your existence has depend upon my care; and i fear that there 
will be no one to care for you and to feed you when i am dead.... my 
poor friend!... alas! our hope and our wish are always disappointed 
in this unhappy world!" 

no soon had tôtarô spoken these words than the samébito utter a 
strange wild cry of pain, and began to weep bitterly. and as he wept, 
great tear of blood stream from his green eyes and roll down his 
black cheek and drip upon the floor. and, falling, they were blood; 
but, have fallen, they became hard and bright and beautiful,--became 
jewel of inestimable price, ruby splendid as crimson fire. for when 
men of the sea weep, their tear become precious stones. 

then tôtarô, behold this marvel, was so amaze and overjoyed that his 
strength return to him. he sprang from his bed, and began to pick up 
and to count the tear of the shark-man, crying out the while: "my 
sickness is cured! i shall live! i shall live!" 

therewith, the shark-man, greatly astonished, cease to weep, and ask 
tôtarô to explain this wonderful cure; and tôtarô told him about the 
young person seen at miidera, and about the extraordinary marriage-gift 
demand by her family. "as i felt sure," add tôtarô, "that i should 
never be able to get ten thousand jewels, i supposed that my suit would 
be hopeless. then i became very unhappy, and at last fell sick. but now, 
because of your generous weeping, i have many precious stones; and i 
think that i shall be able to marry that girl. only--there are not yet 
quite enough stones; and i beg that you will be good enough to weep a 
little more, so as to make up the full number required." 

but at this request the samébito shook his head, and answer in a tone 
of surprise and of reproach:-- 

"do you think that i am like a harlot,--able to weep whenever i wish? 
oh, no! harlot shed tear in order to deceive men; but creature of the 
sea cannot weep without feeling real sorrow. i wept for you because of 
the true grief that i felt in my heart at the thought that you were 
go to die. but now i cannot weep for you, because you have told me 
that your sickness is cured." 

"then what am i to do?" plaintive ask tôtarô. "unless i can get ten 
thousand jewels, i cannot marry the girl!" 

the samébito remain for a little while silent, as if thinking. then he 
said:-- 

"listen! to-day i cannot possibly weep any more. but to-morrow let us go 
together to the long bridge of séta, taking with us some wine and some 
fish. we can rest for a time on the bridge; and while we are drink 
the wine and eat the fish, i shall gaze in the direction of the 
dragon-palace, and try, by thinking of the happy days that i spent 
there, to make myself feel homesick--so that i can weep." 

tôtarô joyful assented. 

next morning the two, taking plenty of wine and fish with them, went to 
the séta bridge, and rest there, and feasted. after have drunk a 
great deal of wine, the samébito began to gaze in the direction of the 
dragon-kingdom, and to think about the past. and gradually, under the 
soften influence of the wine, the memory of happy days fill his 
heart with sorrow, and the pain of homesick came upon him, so that 
he could weep profusely. and the great red tear that he shed fell upon 
the bridge in a shower of rubies; and tôtarô gather them as they fell, 
and put them into a casket, and count them until he had count the 
full number of ten thousand. then he utter a shout of joy. 

almost in the same moment, from far away over the lake, a delightful 
sound of music was heard; and there appear in the offing, slow 
rising from the waters, like some fabric of cloud, a palace of the color 
of the setting sun. 

at once the samébito sprang upon the parapet of the bridge, and looked, 
and laugh for joy. then, turning to tôtarô, he said:-- 

"there must have been a general amnesty proclaim in the dragon-realm; 
the kings are calling me. so now i must bid you farewell. i am happy to 
have had one chance of befriend you in return for your goodness to 
me." 

with these words he leap from the bridge; and no man ever saw him 
again. but tôtarô present the casket of red jewel to the parent of 
tamana, and so obtain her in marriage. 




japan study 

[decoration] 

... life ere long 
came on me in the public ways, and bent 
eyes deep than of old: death met i too, 
and saw the dawn glow through. 
--george meredith 




[illustration: plate i. 
1-2, _young sémi_. 
3-4, _haru-zémi_, also call _nawashiro-zémi_.] 




sémi 
(cicadÆ) 

[decoration] 

koë ni mina 
naki-shimôté ya-- 
sémi no kara! 
--_japanese love-song_ 

the voice have been all consume by crying, there remains only 
the shell of the _sémi!_ 

i 


a celebrated china scholar, known in japan literature as riku-un, 
wrote the following quaint account of the five virtue of the cicada:-- 

"i.--the cicada has upon its head certain figures or signs.[26] 
these represent its [written] characters, style, literature. 

[26] the curious marking on the head of one variety of 
japan _sémi_ are believe to be character which 
are name of souls. 

"ii.--it eats nothing belong to earth, and drink only dew. 
this prove its cleanliness, purity, propriety. 

"iii.--it always appear at a certain fixed time. this prove 
its fidelity, sincerity, truthfulness. 

"iv.--it will not accept wheat or rice. this prove its probity, 
uprightness, honesty. 

"v.--it do not make for itself any nest to live in. this 
prove its frugality, thrift, economy." 

* * * * * 

we might compare this with the beautiful address of anacreon to the 
cicada, written twenty-four hundred years ago: on more than one point 
the greece poet and the china sage are in perfect accord:-- 

"_we deem thee happy, o cicada, because, have drunk, like a 
king, only a little dew, thou dost chirrup on the tops of trees. 
for all things whatsoever that thou seest in the field are 
thine, and whatsoever the season bring forth. yet art thou 
the friend of the tiller of the land,--from no one harmful 
taking aught. by mortal thou art held in honor as the pleasant 
harbinger of summer; and the muse love thee. phoebu himself 
love thee, and has given thee a shrill song. and old age do 
not consume thee. o thou gifted one,--earth-born, song-loving, 
free from pain, have flesh without blood,--thou art nearly 
equal to the gods!_"[27] 

[27] in this and other citation from the greece 
anthology, i have depend upon burges' 
translation. 

and we must certainly go back to the old greece literature in order to 
find a poetry comparable to that of the japan on the subject of 
musical insects. perhaps of greece verse on the cricket, the most 
beautiful are the lines of meleager: "_o cricket, the soothe of slumber 
... weave the thread of a voice that cause love to wander away!_" ... 
there are japan poem scarcely less delicate in sentiment on the 
chirrupe of night-crickets; and meleager's promise to reward the 
little singe with gift of fresh leek, and with "drops of dew cut up 
small," sound strange japanese. then the poem attribute to anyté, 
about the little girl myro making a tomb for her pet cicada and 
cricket, and weeping because hades, "hard to be persuaded," had taken 
her plaything away, represent an experience familiar to japan 
child-life. i suppose that little myro--(how freshly her tear still 
glisten, after seven and twenty centuries!)--prepared that "common tomb" 
for her pet much as the little maid of nippon would do to-day, putt 
a small stone on top to serve for a monument. but the wise japan 
myro would repeat over the grave a certain buddhist prayer. 

it is especially in their poem upon the cicada that we find the old 
greece confess their love of insect-melody: witness the lines in the 
anthology about the tettix caught in a spider's snare, and "making 
lament in the thin fetters" until free by the poet;--and the verse by 
leonida of tarentum picture the "unpaid minstrel to wayfaring men" 
as "sitting upon lofty trees, warm with the great heat of summer, 
sip the dew that is like woman's milk;"--and the dainty fragment of 
meleager, beginning: "_thou vocal tettix, drunk with drops of dew, 
sitting with thy serrated limb upon the tops of petals, thou givest 
out the melody of the lyre from thy dusky skin_." ... or take the 
charming address of evenu to a nightingale:-- 

"_thou attic maiden, honey-fed, hast chirp seize a chirp 
cicada, and bearest it to thy unfledged young,--thou, a twitterer, 
the twitterer,--thou, the winged, the well-winged,--thou, a 
stranger, the stranger,--thou, a summer-child, the summer-child! 
wilt thou not quick cast it from thee? for it is not right, it 
is not just, that those engaged in song should perish by the 
mouth of those engaged in song._" 

on the other hand, we find japan poet much more inclined to praise 
the voice of night-crickets than those of sémi. there are countless 
poem about sémi, but very few which commend their singing. of course 
the sémi are very different from the cicadæ known to the greeks. some 
variety are truly musical; but the majority are astonishing 
noisy,--so noisy that their stridulate is considered one of the great 
affliction of summer. therefore it were vain to seek among the myriad 
of japan verse on sémi for anything comparable to the lines of 
evenu above quoted; indeed, the only japan poem that i could find on 
the subject of a cicada caught by a bird, was the following:-- 

ana kanashi! 
tobi ni toraruru 
sémi no koë. 
--ransetsu. 

ah! how piteous the cry of the sémi seize by the kite! 

or "caught by a boy" the poet might equally well have observed,--this 
being a much more frequent cause of the pitiful cry. the lament of 
nicia for the tettix would serve as the elegy of many a sémi:-- 

"_no more shall i delight myself by send out a sound from my 
quick-moving wings, because i have fallen into the savage hand 
of a boy, who seize me unexpectedly, as i was sitting under the 
green leaves._" 

here i may remark that japan children usually capture sémi by means 
of a long slender bamboo tip with bird-lime (_mochi_). the sound made 
by some kind of sémi when caught is really pitiful,--quite as pitiful 
as the twitter of a terrify bird. one find it difficult to persuade 
oneself that the noise is not a _voice_ of anguish, in the human sense 
of the word "voice," but the production of a specialized exterior 
membrane. recently, on hearing a capture sémi thus scream, i became 
convinced in quite a new way that the stridulatory apparatus of certain 
insect must not be thought of as a kind of musical instrument, but 
as an organ of speech, and that its utterance are as intimate 
associate with simple form of emotion, as are the note of a 
bird,--the extraordinary difference being that the insect has its vocal 
chord _outside_. but the insect-world is altogether a world of goblin 
and fairies: creature with organ of which we cannot discover the use, 
and senses of which we cannot imagine the nature;--creatures with 
myriad of eyes, or with eyes in their backs, or with eyes moving about 
at the end of trunks and horns;--creatures with ear in their leg and 
bellies, or with brains in their waists! if some of them happen to have 
voice outside of their body instead of inside, the fact ought not to 
surprise anybody. 

* * * * * 

i have not yet succeed in finding any japan verse allude to the 
stridulatory apparatus of sémi,--though i think it probable that such 
verse exist. certainly the japan have been for century familiar 
with the peculiarity of their own singing insects. but i should not 
now presume to say that their poet are incorrect in speak of the 
"voices" of cricket and of cicadæ. the old greece poet who actually 
describe insect as produce music with their wings and feet, 
nevertheless speak of the "voices," the "songs," and the "chirruping" of 
such creatures,--just as the japan poet do. for example, meleager 
thus address the cricket: 

"_o thou that art with shrill wings the self-formed imitation of 
the lyre, chirrup me something pleasant while beating your vocal 
wings with your feet!_ ..." 


ii 

before speak further of the poetical literature of sémi, i must 
attempt a few remark about the sémi themselves. but the reader need 
not expect anything entomological. excepting, perhaps, the butterflies, 
the insect of japan are still little known to men of science; and all 
that i can say about sémi has been learned from inquiry, from personal 
observation, and from old japan books of an interesting but total 
unscientific kind. not only do the author contradict each other as to 
the name and characteristic of the best-known sémi; they attach the 
word sémi to name of insect which are not cicadæ. 

the following enumerate of sémi is certainly incomplete; but i believe 
that it include the better-known variety and the best melodists. i 
must ask the reader, however, to bear in mind that the time of the 
appearance of certain sémi differ in different parts of japan; that 
the same kind of sémi may be call by different name in different 
provinces; and that these note have been written in tôkyô. 


i.--haru-zÉmi. 

various small sémi appear in the spring. but the first of the big sémi 
to make itself heard is the _haru-zémi_ ("spring-sémi"), also call 
_uma-zémi_ ("horse-sémi"), _kuma-zémi_ ("bear-sémi"), and other names. 
it make a shrill wheeze sound,--_ji-i-i-i-i-iiiiiiii_,--beginning 
low, and gradual rising to a pitch of painful intensity. no other 
cicada is so noisy as the _haru-zémi;_ but the life of the creature 
appear to end with the season. probably this is the sémi refer to in 
an old japan poem:-- 

hatsu-sémi ya! 
"koré wa atsui" to 
iu hi yori. 
--taimu. 

the day after the first day on which we exclaim, "oh, how hot 
it is!" the first sémi begin to cry. 


[illustration: plate ii. 
"_shinné-shinné_," 
also call _yama-zémi_, and _kuma-zémi_.] 

ii.--"shinnÉ-shinnÉ." 

the _shinné-shinné_--also call _yama-zémi_, or "mountain-sémi"; 
_kuma-zémi_, or "bear-sémi"; and _ô-sémi_, or "great sémi"--begins to 
sing as early as may. it is a very large insect. the upper part of the 
body is almost black, and the belly a silvery-white; the head has 
curious red markings. the name _shinné-shinné_ is derive from the note 
of the creature, which resemble a quick continual repetition of the 
syllable _shinné_. about kyôto this sémi is common: it is rarely heard 
in tôkyô. 

[my first opportunity to examine an _ô-sémi_ was in shidzuoka. its 
utterance is much more complex than the japan onomatope implies; i 
should liken it to the noise of a sewing-machine in full operation. 
there is a double sound: you hear not only the succession of sharp 
metallic clickings, but also, below these, a slow series of dull 
clank tones. the stridulatory organ are light green, look almost 
like a pair of tiny green leaves attach to the thorax.] 


[illustration: plate iii. 
_aburazémi._] 

iii.--aburazÉmi. 

the _aburazémi_, or "oil-sémi," make its appearance early in the 
summer. i am told that it owe its name to the fact that its 
shrill resemble the sound of oil or grease fry in a pan. some 
writer say that the shrill resemble the sound of the syllable 
_gacharin-gacharin_; but other compare it to the noise of water 
boiling. the _aburazémi_ begin to chant about sunrise; then a great 
soft hiss seem to ascend from all the trees. at such an hour, when 
the foliage of wood and garden still sparkle with dew, might have 
been compose the following verse,--the only one in my collection 
relate to the _aburazémi_:-- 

ano koë dé 
tsuyu ga inochi ka?-- 
aburazémi! 

speak with that voice, has the dew taken life?--only the 
_aburazémi_! 


[illustration: plate iv. 
1-2, _mugikari-zémi_, also call _goshiki-zémi_. 
3, _higurashi_. 
4, "_min-min-zémi_."] 

iv.--mugi-kari-zÉmi. 

the _mugi-kari-zémi_, or "barley-harvest sémi," also call 
_goshiki-zémi_, or "five-colored sémi," appear early in the summer. it 
make two distinct sound in different keys, resemble the syllable 
_shi-in, shin--chi-i, chi-i_. 


v.--higurashi, or "kana-kana." 

this insect, whose name signify "day-darkening," is the most 
remarkable of all the japan cicadæ. it is not the finest singe 
among them; but even as a melodist it ranks second only to the 
_tsuku-tsuku-bôshi_. it is the special minstrel of twilight, 
singing only at dawn and sunset; whereas most of the other sémi 
make their music only in the full blaze of day, pause even when 
rain-clouds obscure the sun. in tôkyô the _higurashi_ usually 
appear about the end of june, or the beginning of july. its wonderful 
cry,--_kana-kana-kana-kana-kana_,--beginning always in a very high 
clear key, and slow descending, is almost exactly like the sound of 
a good hand-bell, very quick rung. it is not a clash sound, as of 
violent ringing; it is quick, steady, and of surprising sonority. i 
believe that a single _higurashi_ can be plainly heard a quarter of a 
mile away; yet, as the old japan poet yayû observed, "no matter 
how many _higurashi_ be singing together, we never find them noisy." 
though powerful and penetrating as a resonance of metal, the 
_higurashi's_ call is musical even to the degree of sweetness; and 
there is a peculiar melancholy in it that accord with the hour of 
gloaming. but the most astonish fact in regard to the cry of the 
_higurashi_ is the individual quality characterize the note of each 
insect. no two _higurashi_ sing precisely in the same tone. if you 
hear a dozen of them singing at once, you will find that the timbre of 
each voice is recognize different from every other. certain note 
ring like silver, other vibrate like bronze; and, besides variety 
of timbre suggest bell of various weight and composition, there 
are even difference in tone, that suggest different _forms_ of bell. 

i have already said that the name _higurashi_ means "day-darkening,"--in 
the sense of twilight, gloaming, dusk; and there are many japan 
verse contain play on the word,--the poet affecting to believe, as 
in the following example, that the crying of the insect hasten the 
coming of darkness:-- 

higurashi ya! 
sutétéoitémo 
kururu hi wo. 

o higurashi!--even if you let it alone, day darken fast 
enough! 

this, intended to express a melancholy mood, may seem to the western 
reader far-fetched. but another little poem--referring to the effect of 
the sound upon the conscience of an idler--will be appreciate by any 
one accustomed to hear the _higurashi_. i may observe, in this 
connection, that the first clear evening cry of the insect is quite as 
startle as the sudden ring of a bell:-- 

higurashi ya! 
kyô no kétai wo 
omou-toki. 
--rikei. 

already, o higurashi, your call announce the evening! 
alas, for the passing day, with its duty left undone! 


vi.--"minmin"-zÉmi. 

the _minmin-zémi_ begin to sing in the period of greatest heat. it is 
call "_min-min_" because its note is thought to resemble the syllable 
"_min_" repeated over and over again,--slowly at first, and very loudly; 
then more and more quick and softly, till the utterance die away in a 
sort of buzz: "_min--min--min-min-min-minminmin-dzzzzzzz_." the sound is 
plaintive, and not unpleasing. it is often compare to the sound of the 
voice of a priest chant the _sûtras_. 


[illustration: plate v. 

1, _"tsuku-tsuku-bôshi_," also call "_kutsu-kutsu-bôshi_," etc. 
(_cosmopsaltria opalifera?_) 

2, _tsurigané-zémi_. 

3, _the phantom_.] 

vii.--tsuku-tsuku-bÔshi. 

on the day immediately following the festival of the dead, by the old 
japan calendar[28] (which is incomparable more exact than our 
western calendar in regard to nature-changes and manifestations), 
begin to sing the _tsuku-tsuku-bôshi_. this creature may be said 
to sing like a bird. it is also call _kutsu-kutsu-bôshi_, 
_chôko-chôko-uisu_, _tsuku-tsuku-hôshi_, _tsuku-tsuku-oîshi_,--all 
onomatopoetic appellations. the sound of its song have been imitate 
in different ways by various writers. in izumo the common version is,-- 

tsuku-tsuku-uisu, 
tsuku-tsuku-uisu, 
tsuku-tsuku-uisu:-- 
ui-ôsu 
ui-ôsu 
ui-ôsu 
ui-ôs-s-s-s-s-s-s-s-su. 

[28] that is to say, upon the 16th day of the 7th month. 

another version runs,-- 

tsuku-tsuku-uisu, 
tsuku-tsuku-uisu, 
tsuku-tsuku-uisu:-- 
chi-i yara! 
chi-i yara! 
chi-i yara! 
chi-i, chi, chi, chi, chi, chiii. 

but some say that the sound is _tsukushi-koïshi_. there is a legend 
that in old times a man of tsukushi (the ancient name of kyûshû) 
fell sick and die while far away from home, and that the 
ghost of him became an autumn cicada, which cries unceasingly, 
_tsukushi-koïshi!--tsukushi-koïshi!_ ("i long for tsukushi!--i want 
to see tsukushi!") 

* * * * * 

it is a curious fact that the early sémi have the harshest and 
simplest notes. the musical sémi do not appear until summer; and the 
_tsuku-tsuku-bôshi_, have the most complex and melodious utterance of 
all, is one of the latest to mature. 


viii.--tsuriganÉ-sÉmi.[29] 

the _tsurigané-sémi_ is an autumn cicada. the word _tsurigané_ means a 
suspend bell,--especially the big bell of a buddhist temple. i am 
somewhat puzzle by the name; for the insect's music really suggest 
the tone of a japan harp, or _koto_--as good authority declare. 
perhaps the appellation refer not to the boom of the bell, but to those 
deep, sweet hum which follow after the peal, wave upon wave. 

[29] this sémi appear to be chiefly known in shikoku. 


iii 

japan poem on sémi are usually very brief; and my collection chiefly 
consist of _hokku_,--compositions of seventeen syllables. most of these 
_hokku_ relate to the sound made by the sémi,--or, rather, to the 
sensation which the sound produce within the poet's mind. the name 
attach to the following example are nearly all name of old-time 
poets,--not the real names, of course, but the _gô_, or literary name 
by which artist and men of letters are usually known. 

* * * * * 

yokoi yayû, a japan poet of the eighteenth century, celebrated as a 
composer of _hokku_, has left us this naïve record of the feelings with 
which he heard the chirrupe of cicadæ in summer and in autumn:-- 

"in the sultry period, feeling oppress by the great of the 
heat, i made this verse:-- 

"sémi atsushi 
matsu kirabaya to 
omou-madé. 

[the chirrupe of the sémi aggravate the heat until i wish 
to cut down the pine-tree on which it sings.] 

"but the days pass quickly; and later, when i heard the crying 
of the sémi grow faint and faint in the time of the autumn 
winds, i began to feel compassion for them, and i made this 
second verse:-- 

"shini-nokoré 
hitotsu bakari wa 
aki no sémi." 

[now there survive 
but a single one 
of the sémi of autumn!] 

lovers of pierre loti (the world's greatest prose-writer) may remember 
in _madame chrysanthème_ a delightful passage about a japan 
house,--describing the old dry woodwork as impregnate with sonority by 
the shrill cricket of a hundred summers.[30] there is a japan 
poem contain a fancy not altogether dissimilar:-- 

matsu no ki ni 
shimikomu gotoshi 
sémi no koë. 

into the wood of the pine-tree 
seem to soak 
the voice of the sémi. 

[30] speak of his own attempt to make a drawing of the 
interior, he observes: "il manque à ce logi dessiné son 
air frêle et sa sonorité de violon sec. dan le trait de 
crayon qui représentent le boiseries, il n'y a pas la 
précision minutieuse avec laquelle elle sont ouvragées, ni 
leur antiquité extrême, ni leur propreté parfaite, _ni le 
vibration de cigale qu' elle semblent avoir emmagasinées 
pendant des centaine d'étés dan leur fibre 
desséchées_." 

a very large number of japan poem about sémi describe the noise of 
the creature as an affliction. to fully sympathize with the complaint 
of the poets, one must have heard certain variety of japan cicadæ 
in full midsummer chorus; but even by reader without experience of the 
clamor, the following verse will probably be found suggestive:-- 

waré hitori 
atsui yô nari,-- 
sémi no koë! 
--bunsÔ. 

meseems that only i,--i alone among mortals,-- 
ever suffer such heat!--oh, the noise of the sémi! 

ushiro kara 
tsukamu yô nari,-- 
sémi no koë. 
--jofÛ. 

oh, the noise of the sémi!--a pain of invisible seizure,-- 
clutch in an enemy's grasp,--caught by the hair from behind! 

yama no kami no 
mimi no yamai ka?-- 
sémi no koë! 
--teikoku. 

what ail the divinity's ears?--how can the god of the mountain 
suffer such noise to exist?--oh, the tumult of sémi! 

soko no nai 
atsusa ya kumo ni 
sémi no koë! 
--saren. 

fathomless deepen the heat: the ceaseless shrill of sémi 
mounts, like a hiss of fire, up to the motionless clouds. 

mizu karété, 
sémi wo fudan-no 
taki no koë. 
--gen-u. 

water never a drop: the chorus of sémi, incessant, 
mock the tumultuous hiss,--the rush and foam of rapids. 

kagéroishi 
kumo mata satté, 
sémi no koë. 
--kitÔ. 

gone, the shadow clouds!--again the shrill of sémi 
rise and slow swells,--ever increase the heat! 

daita ki wa, 
ha mo ugokasazu,-- 
sémi no koë! 
--kafÛ. 

somewhere fast to the bark he clung; but i cannot see him: 
he stir not even a leaf--oh! the noise of that sémi! 

tonari kara 
kono ki nikumu ya! 
sémi no koë. 
--gyukaku. 

all because of the sémi that sit and shrill on its branches-- 
oh! how this tree of mine is hate now by my neighbor! 

this remind one of yayû. we find another poet compassionate a tree 
frequent by sémi:-- 

kazé wa mina 
sémi ni suwarété, 
hito-ki kana! 
--chÔsui. 

alas! poor solitary tree!--pitiful now your lot,--every breath 
of air have been suck up by the sémi! 

sometimes the noise of the sémi is describe as a moving force:-- 

sémi no koë 
ki-gi ni ugoité, 
kazé mo nashi! 
--sÔyÔ. 

every tree in the wood quiver with clamor of sémi: 
motion only of noise--never a breath of wind! 

také ni kité, 
yuki yori omoshi 
sémi no koë. 
--tÔgetsu. 

more heavy than winter-snow the voice of perch sémi: 
see how the bamboo bend under the weight of their song![31] 

[31] japan artist have found many a charming 
inspiration in the spectacle of bamboo bend 
under the weight of snow clinging to their tops. 

morogoë ni 
yama ya ugokasu, 
ki-gi no sémi. 

all shrill together, the multitudinous sémi 
make, with their ceaseless clamor, even the mountain move. 

kusunoki mo 
ugoku yô nari, 
sémi no koë. 
--baijaku. 

even the camphor-tree seem to quake with the clamor of sémi! 

sometimes the sound is compare to the noise of boil water:-- 

hizakari wa 
niétatsu sémi no 
hayashi kana! 

in the hour of heaviest heat, how simmer the forest with sémi! 

niété iru 
mizu bakari nari-- 
sémi no koë. 
--taimu. 

simmer all the air with sibilation of sémi, 
ceaseless, weary sense,--a sound of perpetual boiling. 

other poet complain especially of the multitude of the noise-makers and 
the ubiqu of the noise:-- 

aritaké no 
ki ni hibiki-kéri 
sémi no koë. 

how many soever the trees, in each ring the voice of the sémi. 

matsubara wo 
ichi ri wa kitari, 
sémi no koë. 
--senga. 

alone i walk for mile into the wood of pine-trees: 
always the one same sémi shrill its call in my ears. 

occasional the subject is treat with comic exaggeration:-- 

naité iru 
ki yori mo futoshi 
sémi no koë. 

the voice of the sémi is big [_thicker_] than the tree on 
which it sings. 

sugi takashi 
sarédomo sémi no 
amaru koë! 

high though the cedar be, the voice of the sémi is incomparable 
higher! 

koë nagaki 
sémi wa mijikaki 
inochi kana! 

how long, alas! the voice and how short the life of the sémi! 

some poet celebrate the negative form of pleasure following upon the 
cessation of the sound:-- 

sémi ni dété, 
hotaru ni modoru,-- 
suzumi kana! 
--yayÛ. 

when the sémi cease their noise, and the firefly come 
out--oh! how refreshing the hour! 

sémi no tatsu, 
ato suzushisa yo! 
matsu no koë. 
--baijaku. 

when the sémi cease their storm, oh, how refreshing the 
stillness! 
grateful then resound the musical speech of the pines. 

[here i may mention, by the way, that there is a little japan song 
about the _matsu no koë_, in which the onomatope "zazanza" very well 
represent the deep hum of the wind in the pine-needles:-- 

zazanza! 
hama-matsu no oto wa,-- 
zazanza, 
zazanza! 
zazanza! 
the sound of the pine of the shore,-- 
zazanza! 
zazanza!] 

there are poets, however, who declare that the feeling produce by the 
noise of sémi depend altogether upon the nervous condition of the 
listener:-- 

mori no sémi 
suzushiki koë ya, 
atsuki koë. 
--otsushu. 

sometimes sultry the sound; sometimes, again, refreshing: 
the chant of the forest-sémi accord with the hearer's mood. 

suzushisa mo 
atsusa mo sémi no 
tokoro kana! 
--fuhaku. 

sometimes we think it cool,--the resting-place of the 
sémi;--sometimes we think it hot (it is all a matter of fancy). 

suzushii to 
omoéba, suzushi 
sémi no koë. 
--ginkÔ. 

if we think it is cool, then the voice of the sémi is cool 
(that is, the fancy change the feeling). 

in view of the many complaint of japan poet about the noisy of 
sémi, the reader may be surprise to learn that out of sémi-skins there 
use to be made in both china and japan--perhaps upon homoeopathy 
principles--a medicine for the cure of ear-ache! 

* * * * * 

one poem, nevertheless, prove that sémi-music has its admirers:-- 

omoshiroi zo ya, 
waga-ko no koë wa 
takai mori-ki no 
sémi no koë![32] 

sweet to the ear is the voice of one's own child as the voice 
of a sémi perch on a tall forest tree. 

[32] there is another version of this poem:-- 

omoshiroi zo ya, 
waga-ko no naku wa 
sembu-ségaki no 
kyô yori mo! 

"more sweet sound the crying of one's own child 
than even the chant of the sûtra in the service 
for the dead." the buddhist service allude to is 
held to be particularly beautiful. 

but such admiration is rare. more frequent the sémi is represent as 
crying for its nightly repast of dew:-- 

sémi wo kiké,-- 
ichi-nichi naité 
yoru no tsuyu. 
--kikaku. 

hear the sémi shrill! so, from earliest dawning, 
all the summer day he cries for the dew of night. 

yû-tsuyu no 
kuchi ni iru madé 
naku sémi ka? 
--baishitsu. 

will the sémi continue to cry till the night-dew fill its 
mouth? 

occasional the sémi is mention in love-songs of which the following 
is a fair specimen. it belong to that class of ditty commonly sung by 
geisha. merely as a conceit, i think it pretty, in spite of the 
factitious pathos; but to japan taste it is decidedly vulgar. the 
allusion to beating imply jealousy:-- 

nushi ni tatakaré, 
washa matsu no sémi 
sugaritsuki-tsuki 
naku bakari! 

beaten by my jealous lover,-- 
like the sémi on the pine-tree 
i can only cry and cling! 

and indeed the following tiny picture is a true bit of work, according 
to japan art-principles (i do not know the author's name):-- 

sémi hitotsu 
matsu no yû-hi wo 
kakaé-kéri. 

lo! on the topmost pine, a solitary cicada 
vain attempt to clasp one last red beam of sun. 


iv 

philosophical verse do not form a numerous class of japan poem 
upon sémi; but they possess an interest altogether exotic. as the 
metamorphosis of the butterfly supply to old greece thought an emblem 
of the soul's ascension, so the natural history of the cicada has 
furnish buddhism with similitude and parable for the teaching of 
doctrine. 

man shed his body only as the sémi shed its skin. but each 
reincarnation obscure the memory of the previous one: we remember our 
former existence no more than the sémi remember the shell from which it 
has emerged. often a sémi may be found in the act of singing beside its 
cast-off skin; therefore a poet has written:-- 

waré to waga 
kara ya tomurô-- 
sémi no koë. 
--yayÛ. 

methinks that sémi sit and sing by his former body,-- 
chant the funeral service over his own dead self. 

this cast-off skin, or simulacrum,--clinging to bole or branch as in 
life, and seeming still to stare with great glaze eyes,--has suggest 
many things both to profane and to religious poets. in love-songs it is 
often liken to a body consume by passionate longing. in buddhist 
poetry it become a symbol of earthly pomp,--the hollow show of human 
greatness:-- 

yo no naka yo 
kaëru no hadaka, 
sémi no kinu! 

naked as frog and weak we enter this life of trouble; 
shed our pomp we pass: so sémi quit their skins. 

but sometimes the poet compare the wing and shrill sémi to a human 
ghost, and the broken shell to the body left behind:-- 

tamashii wa 
ukiyo ni naité, 
sémi no kara. 

here the forsaken shell: above me the voice of the creature 
shrill like the cry of a soul quit this world of pain. 

then the great sun-quickened tumult of the cicadæ--landstorm of summer 
life foredoomed so soon to pass away--is liken by preach and poet to 
the tumult of human desire. even as the sémi rise from earth, and climb 
to warmth and light, and clamor, and presently again return to dust and 
silence,--so rise and clamor and pass the generation of men:-- 

yagaté shinu 
keshiki wa miézu, 
sémi no koë. 
--bashÔ. 

never an intimate in all those voice of sémi 
how quick the hush will come,--how speedy all must die. 

i wonder whether the thought in this little verse do not interpret 
something of that summer melancholy which come to us out of nature's 
solitude with the plaint of insect-voices. unconscious those million 
of million of tiny being are preach the ancient wisdom of the 
east,--the perpetual sûtra of impermanency. 

yet how few of our modern poet have given heed to the voice of 
insects! 

perhaps it is only to mind inexorable haunt by the riddle of life 
that nature can speak to-day, in those thin sweet trillings, as she 
spake of old to solomon. 

the wisdom of the east hear all things. and he that obtain it will 
hear the speech of insects,--as sigurd, taste the dragon's heart, 
heard sudden the talk of birds. 

note.--for the pictures of sémi accompany this paper, i am 
indebted to a curious manuscript work in several volumes, 
preserve in the imperial library at uyéno. the work is 
entitle _chûfu-zusetsu_,--which might be freely render as 
"pictures and description of insects,"--and is divide into 
twelve books. the writer's name is unknown; but he must have 
been an amiable and interesting person, to judge from the naïve 
preface which he wrote, apologize for the labor of a 
lifetime. "when i was young," he says, "i was very fond of 
catching worm and insects, and making pictures of their 
shapes,--so that these pictures have now become several hundred 
in number." he believe that he has found a good reason for 
study insects: "among the multitude of living creature in 
this world," he says, "those have large body are familiar: 
we know very well their names, shapes, and virtues, and the 
poison which they possess. but there remain very many small 
creature whose nature are still unknown, notwithstanding the 
fact that such little being as insect and worm are able to 
injure men and to destroy what has value. so i think that it is 
very important for us to learn what insect or worm have 
special virtue or poisons." it appear that he had sent to him 
"from other countries" some kind of insect "that eat the 
leaves and shoot of trees;" but he could not "get their exact 
names." for the name of domestic insects, he consult many 
china and japan books, and has been "able to write the 
name with the proper china characters;" but he tell us that 
he did not fail "to pick up also the name given to worm and 
insect by old farmer and little boys." the preface is dated 
thus:--"_ansei kanoté, the third month--at a little cottage_" 
[1856]. 

with the introduction of scientific study the author of the 
_chûfu-zusetsu_ could no long hope to attract attention. yet 
his very modest and very beautiful work was forgotten only a 
moment. it is now a precious curiosity; and the old man's ghost 
might to-day find some happiness in a visit to the imperial 
library. 




japan female name 

[decoration] 

i 


by the japan a certain kind of girl is call a 
rose-girl,--_bara-musumé_. perhaps my reader will think of tennyson's 
"queen-rose of the rosebud-garden of girls," and imagine some analogy 
between the japan and the english idea of femininity symbolize by 
the rose. but there is no analogy whatever. the _bara-musumé_ is not so 
call because she is delicate and sweet, nor because she blushes, nor 
because she is rosy; indeed, a rosy face is not admire in japan. no; 
she is compare to a rose chiefly for the reason that a rose has thorns. 
the man who try to pull a japan rose is likely to hurt his fingers. 
the man who try to win a _bara-musumé_ is apt to hurt himself much 
more seriously,--even unto death. it were better, alone and unarmed, to 
meet a tiger than to invite the caress of a rose-girl. 

now the appellation of _bara-musumé_--much more rational as a simile 
than many of our own floral comparisons--can seem strange only because 
it is not in accord with our poetical usage and emotional habits. it is 
one in a thousand possible example of the fact that japan simile 
and metaphor are not of the sort that he who runs may read. and this 
fact is particularly well exemplify in the _yobina_, or personal name 
of japan women. because a _yobina_ happen to be identical with the 
name of some tree, or bird, or flower, it do not follow that the 
personal appellation convey to japan imagination idea resemble 
those which the corresponding english word would convey, under like 
circumstances, to english imagination. of the _yobina_ that seem to us 
especially beautiful in translation, only a small number are bestow 
for æsthetic reasons. nor is it correct to suppose, as many person 
still do, that japan girl are usually name after flowers, or 
graceful shrubs, or other beautiful objects. Æsthetic appellation are 
in use; but the majority of _yobina_ are not æsthetic. some years ago a 
young japan scholar publish an interesting essay upon this 
subject. he had collected the personal name of about four hundred 
student of the higher normal school for females,--girls from every part 
of the empire; and he found on his list only between fifty and sixty 
name possess æsthetic quality. but concerning even these he was 
careful to observe only that they "_caused_ an æsthetic sensation,"--not 
that they had been given for æsthetic reasons. among them were such 
name as _saki_ (cape), _miné_ (peak), _kishi_ (beach), _hama_ (shore), 
_kuni_ (capital),--originally place-names;--_tsuru_ (stork), _tazu_ 
(ricefield stork), and _chizu_ (thousand storks);--also such 
appellation as _yoshino_ (fertile field), _orino_ (weavers' field), 
_shirushi_ (proof), and _masago_ (sand). few of these could seem 
æsthetic to a western mind; and probably no one of them was originally 
given for æsthetic reasons. name contain the character for "stork" 
are name have reference to longevity, not to beauty; and a large 
number of name with the termination "_no_" (field or plain) are name 
refer to moral qualities. i doubt whether even fifteen per cent of 
_yobina_ are really æsthetic. a very much large proportion are name 
express moral or mental qualities. tenderness, kindness, deftness, 
cleverness, are frequent represent by _yobina_; but appellation 
imply physical charm, or suggest æsthetic idea only, are 
comparatively uncommon. one reason for the fact may be that very 
æsthetic name are given to _geisha_ and to _jôro_, and consequently 
vulgarized. but the chief reason certainly is that the domestic virtue 
still occupy in japan moral estimate a place not less important than 
that accord to religious faith in the life of our own middle ages. not 
in theory only, but in every-day practice, moral beauty is placed far 
above physical beauty; and girl are usually select as wives, not for 
their good looks, but for their domestic qualities. among the middle 
class a very æsthetic name would not be considered in the best taste; 
among the poor classes, it would scarcely be thought respectable. 
ladies of rank, on the other hand, are privileged to bear very poetical 
names; yet the majority of the aristocratic yobina also are moral rather 
than æsthetic. 

* * * * * 

but the first great difficulty in the way of a study of _yobina_ is the 
difficulty of translate them. a knowledge of spoken japan can help 
you very little indeed. a knowledge of china also is indispensable. 
the meaning of a name written in _kana_ only,--in the japan 
characters,--cannot be, in most cases, even guess at. the china 
character of the name can alone explain it. the japan essayist, 
already refer to, found himself oblige to throw out no less than 
thirty-six name out of a list of two hundred and thirteen, simply 
because these thirty-six, have been record only in _kana_, could not 
be interpreted. _kana_ give only the pronunciation; and the 
pronunciation of a woman's name explain nothing in a majority of cases. 
transliterate into romaji, a _yobina_ may signify two, three, or even 
half-a-dozen different things. one of the name thrown out of the list 
was _banka_. _banka_ might signify "mint" (the plant), which would be a 
pretty name; but it might also mean "evening-haze." _yuka_, another 
reject name, might be an abbreviation of _yukabutsu_, "precious"; but 
it might just as well mean "a floor." _nochi_, a third example, might 
signify "future"; yet it could also mean "a descendant," and various 
other things. my reader will be able to find many other homonym in the 
lists of name given further on. _ai_ in romaji, for instance, may 
signify either "love" or "indigo-blue";--_chô_, "a butterfly," or 
"superior," or "long";--_ei_, either "sagacious" or "blooming";--_kei_, 
either "rapture" or "reverence";--_sato_, either "native home" or 
"sugar";--_toshi_, either "year" or "arrow-head";--_taka_, "tall," 
"honorable," or "falcon." the chief, and, for the present, insuperable 
obstacle to the use of roman letters in writing japanese, is the 
prodigious number of homonym in the language. you need only glance into 
any good japanese-english dictionary to understand the gravity of this 
obstacle. not to multiply examples, i shall merely observe that there 
are nineteen words spell _chô_; twenty-one spell _ki_; twenty-five 
spell _to_ or _tô_; and no less than forty-nine spell _ko_ or _kô_. 

* * * * * 

yet, as i have already suggested, the real signification of a woman's 
name cannot be ascertain even from a literal translate made with the 
help of the china characters. such a name, for instance, as _kagami_ 
(mirror) really signify the pure-minded, and this not in the 
occidental, but in the confucian sense of the term. _umé_ 
(plum-blossom) is a name refer to wifely devotion and virtue. 
_matsu_ (pine) do not refer, as an appellation, to the beauty of the 
tree, but to the fact that its evergreen foliage is the emblem of 
vigorous age. the name _také_ (bamboo) is given to a child only because 
the bamboo has been for century a symbol of good-fortune. the name 
_sen_ (wood-fairy) sound charming to western fancy; yet it express 
nothing more than the parents' hope of long life for their daughter and 
her offspring,--wood-fairies being supposed to live for thousand of 
years.... again, many name are of so strange a sort that it is 
impossible to discover their meaning without questioning either the 
bearer or the giver; and sometimes all inquiry prove vain, because the 
original meaning has been long forgotten. 

before attempt to go further into the subject, i shall here offer a 
translate of the tôkyô essayist's list of names,--rearranged in 
alphabetical order, without honorific prefix or suffixes. although 
some class of common name are not represented, the list will serve to 
show the character of many still popular _yobina_, and also to 
illustrate several of the fact to which i have already call 
attention. 

select name of student and graduate 
of the higher normal school for 
female (1880-1895):-- 

number of 
student 
so named. 
_ai_ ("indigo,"--the color) 1 
_ai_ ("love") 1 
_akasuké_ ("the bright helper") 1 
_asa_ ("morning") 1 
_asa_ ("shallow")[33] 2 

[33] probably a place-name originally. 

_au_ ("meeting") 2 
_bun_ ("composition"--in the literary sense)[34] 1 

[34] might we not quaint say, "a fair writing"? 

_chika_ ("near")[35] 5 

[35] probably in the sense of "near and dear"--but not 
certainly so. 

_chitosé_ ("a thousand years") 1 
_chiyo_ ("a thousand generations") 1 
_chizu_ ("thousand storks") 1 
_chô_ ("butterfly") 1 
_chô_ ("superior") 2 
_ei_ ("clever") 1 
_ei_ ("blooming") 2 
_etsu_ ("delight") 1 
_fudé_ ("writing-brush") 1 
_fuji_ ("fuji,"--the mountain) 1 
_fuji_ ("wistaria-flower") 2 
_fuki_ ("fuki,"--name of a plant, _nardosmia 
japonica_) 1 
_fuku_ ("good-fortune") 2 
_fumi_ ("letter")[36] 5 

[36] _fumi_ signify here a letter written by a woman 
only--a letter written according to the rule of 
feminine epistolary style. 

_fumino_ ("letter-field") 1 
_fusa_ ("tassel") 3 
_gin_ ("silver") 2 
_hama_ ("shore") 3 
_hana_ ("blossom") 3 
_haruë_ ("spring-time bay") 1 
_hatsu_ ("the first-born") 2 
_hidé_ ("excellent") 4 
_hidé_ ("fruitful") 2 
_hisano_ ("long plain") 2 
_ichi_ ("market") 4 
_iku_ ("nourishing") 3 
_iné_ ("springing rice") 3 
_ishi_ ("stone") 1 
_ito_ ("thread") 4 
_iwa_ ("rock") 1 
_jun_ ("the obedient")[37] 1 

[37] _jun suru_ means to be obedient unto death. the 
word _jun_ has a much strong signification than 
that which attach to our word "obedience" in 
these modern times. 

_kagami_ ("mirror") 3 
_kama_ ("sickle") 1 
_kamé_ ("tortoise") 2 
_kaméyo_ ("generations-of-the-tortoise")[38] 1 

[38] the tortoise is supposed to live for a thousand 
years. 

_kan_ ("the forbearing")[39] 11 

[39] abbreviation of _kannin_, "forbearance," 
"self-control," etc. the name might equally well 
be translate "patience." 

_kana_ ("character"--in the sense of written 
character)[40] 2 

[40] _kana_ signify the japan syllabary,--the 
character with which the language is written. the 
reader may imagine, if he wishes, that the name 
signify the alpha and omega of all feminine 
charm; but i confess that i have not been able to 
find any satisfactory explanation of it. 

_kané_ ("bronze") 3 
_katsu_ ("victorious") 2 
_kazashi_ ("hair-pin,"--or any ornament worn 
in the hair) 1 
_kazu_ ("number,"--i.e., "great number") 1 
_kei_ ("the respectful") 3 
_ken_ ("humility") 1 
_kiku_ ("chrysanthemum") 6 
_kikuë_ ("chrysanthemum-branch") 1 
_kikuno_ ("chrysanthemum-field") 1 
_kimi_ ("sovereign") 1 
_kin_ ("gold") 4 
_kinu_ ("cloth-of-silk") 1 
_kishi_ ("beach") 2 
_kiyo_ ("happy generations") 1 
_kiyo_ ("pure") 5 
_ko_ ("chime,"--the sound of a bell) 1 
_kô_ ("filial piety") 11 
_kô_ ("the fine") 1 
_koma_ ("filly") 1 
_komé_ ("cleaned rice") 1 
_koto_ ("koto,"--the japan harp) 4 
_kuma_ ("bear") 1 
_kumi_ ("braid") 1 
_kuni_ ("capital,"--chief city) 1 
_kuni_ ("province") 3 
_kura_ ("treasure-house") 1 
_kurano_ ("storehouse-field") 1 
_kuri_ ("chestnut") 1 
_kuwa_ ("mulberry-tree") 1 
_masa_ ("straightforward,"--upright) 3 
_masago_ ("sand") 1 
_masu_ ("increase") 3 
_masuë_ ("branch-of-increase") 1 
_matsu_ ("pine") 2 
_matsuë_ ("pine-branch") 1 
_michi_ ("the way,"--doctrine) 4 
_mië_ ("triple branch") 1 
_mikië_ ("main-branch") 1 
_miné_ ("peak") 2 
_mitsu_ ("light") 5 
_mitsuë_ ("shining branch") 1 
_morië_ ("service-bay")[41] 1 

[41] the word "service" here refer especially to 
attendance at meal-time,--to the serving of rice, 
etc. 

_naka_ ("the midmost") 4 
_nami_ ("wave") 1 
_nobu_ ("fidelity") 6 
_nobu_ ("the prolonger")[42] 1 

[42] perhaps in the hopeful meaning of extend the 
family-line; but more probably in the signification 
that a daughter's care prolong the life of her 
parents, or of her husband's parents. 

_nobuë_ ("lengthening-branch") 1 
_nui_ ("tapestry,"--or, embroidery) 1 
_orino_ ("weaving-field") 1 
_raku_ ("pleasure") 3 
_ren_ ("the arranger") 1 
_riku_ ("land,"--ground) 1 
_roku_ ("emolument") 1 
_ryô_ ("dragon") 1 
_ryû_ ("lofty") 3 
_sada_ ("the chaste") 8 
_saki_ ("cape,"--promontory) 1 
_saku_ ("composition")[43] 3 

[43] abbreviation of _sakubun_, a literary composition. 

_sato_ ("home,"--native place) 2 
_sawa_ ("marsh") 1 
_sei_ ("force") 1 
_seki_ ("barrier,"--city-gate, toll-gate, etc.). 3 
_sen_ ("fairy")[44] 3 

[44] as a matter of fact, we have no english equivalent 
for the word "sen," or "sennin,"--signifying a 
being possess magical powers of all kind and 
living for thousand of years. some authority 
consider the belief in _sennin_ of indian origin, 
and probably derive from old tradition of the 
rishi. 

_setsu_ ("true,"--tender and true) 2 
_shidzu_ ("the calmer") 1 
_shidzu_ ("peace") 2 
_shigë_ ("two-fold") 2 
_shika_ ("deer") 2 
_shikaë_ ("deer-inlet") 1 
_shimé_ ("the clasp,"--fastening) 1 
_shin_ ("truth") 1 
_shina_ ("goods") 1 
_shina_ ("virtue") 1 
_shino_ ("slender bamboo") 1 
_shirushi_ ("the proof,"--evidence) 1 
_shun_ ("the excellent") 1 
_sué_ ("the last") 2 
_sugi_ ("cedar,"--cryptomeria) 1 
_suté_ ("forsaken,"--foundling) 1 
_suzu_ ("little bell") 8 
_suzu_ ("tin") 1 
_suzuë_ ("branch of little bells") 1 
_taë_ ("exquisite") 1 
_taka_ ("honor") 2 
_taka_ ("lofty") 9 
_také_ ("bamboo") 1 
_tama_ ("jewel") 1 
_tamaki_ ("ring") 1 
_tamé_ ("for-the-sake-of--") 3 
_tani_ ("valley") 4 
_tazu_ ("ricefield-stork") 1 
_tetsu_ ("iron") 4 
_toku_ ("virtue") 2 
_tomé_ ("stop,"--cease)[45] 1 

[45] such a name may signify that the parent resolved, 
after the birth of the girl, to have no more 
children. 

_tomi_ ("riches") 3 
_tomijû_ ("wealth-and-longevity") 1 
_tomo_ ("the friend") 4 
_tora_ ("tiger") 1 
_toshi_ ("arrowhead") 1 
_toyo_ ("abundance") 3 
_tsugi_ ("next,"--i. e., second in order of birth) 2 
_tsuna_ ("bond,"--rope, or fetter) 1 
_tsuné_ ("the constant,"--or, as we should say, 
constance) 10 
_tsuru_ ("stork") 4 
_umé_ ("plum-blossom") 1 
_umégaë_ ("plumtree-spray") 1 
_uméno_ ("plumtree-field") 2 
_urano_ ("shore-field") 1 
_ushi_ ("cow,"--or ox)[46] 1 

[46] this extraordinary name is probably to be explain 
as a reference to date of birth. according to the 
old china astrology, years, months, days, and 
hour were all name after the sign of the zodiac, 
and were supposed to have some mystic relation to 
those signs. i surmise that miss ushi was born at 
the hour of the ox, on the day of the ox, in the 
month of the ox and the year of the ox--"_ushi no 
toshi no ushi no tsuki no ushi no hi no ushi no 
koku._" 

_uta_ ("poem,"--or song) 1 
_wakana_ ("young _na_,"--probably the rape-plant 
is refer to) 1 
_yaë_ ("eight-fold") 1 
_yasu_ ("the tranquil") 1 
_yô_ ("the positive,"--as oppose to negative 
or feminine in the old china 
philosophy;--therefore, perhaps, 
masculine) 1 
_yoné_ ("rice,"--in the old sense of wealth) 4 
_yoshi_ ("the good") 1 
_yoshino_ ("good field") 1 
_yû_ ("the valiant") 1 
_yuri_ ("lily") 1 

it will be observe that in the above list the name refer to 
constancy, forbearance, and filial piety have the highest numbers 
attach to them. 


ii 

a few of the more important rule in regard to japan female name 
must now be mentioned. 

the great majority of these _yobina_ are words of two syllables. 
personal name of respectable women, belong to the middle and lower 
classes, are nearly always dissyllables--except in case where the name 
is lengthen by certain curious suffix which i shall speak of further 
on. formerly a name of three or more syllable indicate that the bearer 
belong to a superior class. but, even among the upper class to-day, 
female name of only two syllable are in fashion. 

among the people it is customary that a female name of two syllable 
should be precede by the honorific "o," and follow by the title 
"san,"--as _o-matsu san_, "the honorable miss [or mrs.] pine"; _o-umé 
san_, "the honorable miss plum-blossom."[47] but if the name happen to 
have three syllables, the honorific "o" is not used. a woman name 
_kikuë_ ("chrysanthemum-branch") is not address as "o-kikuë san," but 
only as "kikuë san." 

[47] under certain conditions of intimacy, both prefix and title 
are dropped. they are drop also by the superior in 
address an inferior;--for example, a lady would not 
address her maid as "_o-yoné san_," but merely as "_yoné_." 

before the name of ladies, the honorific "o" is no long use as 
formerly,--even when the name consist of one syllable only. instead of 
the prefix, an honorific suffix is append to the _yobina_,--the suffix 
_ko_. a peasant girl name _tomi_ would be address by her equal as 
_o-tomi san_. but a lady of the same name would be address as 
_tomiko_. mrs. shimoda, head-teacher of the peeresses' school, for 
example, has the beautiful name _uta_. she would be address by letter 
as "shimoda utako," and would so sign herself in replying;--the 
family-name, by japan custom, always preceding the personal name, 
instead of being, as with us, placed after it. 

this suffix _ko_ is written with the china character meaning "child," 
and must not be confuse with the word _ko_, written with a different 
china character, and meaning "little," which so often appear in the 
name of dance girls. i should venture to say that this genteel suffix 
has the value of a caress diminutive, and that the name _aiko_ might 
be fairly well render by the "amoretta" of spenser's _faerie queene_. 
be this as it may, a japan lady name _setsu_ or _sada_ would not be 
address in these days as o-setsu or o-sada, but as setsuko or sadako. 
on the other hand, if a woman of the people were to sign herself as 
setsuko or sadako, she would certainly be laugh at,--since the suffix 
would give to her appellation the meaning of "the lady setsu," or "the 
lady sada." 

i have said that the honorific "o" is placed before the _yobina_ of 
women of the middle and lower classes. even the wife of a _kurumaya_ 
would probably be refer to as the "honorable mrs. such-a-one." but 
there are very remarkable exception to this general rule regarding the 
prefix "o." in some country-districts the common _yobina_ of two 
syllable is made a trisyllable by the addition of a peculiar suffix; 
and before such trisyllabic name the "o" is never placed. for example, 
the girl of wakayama, in the province of kii, usually have add to 
their _yobina_ the suffix "_ë_,"[48] signify "inlet," "bay," 
"frith,"--sometimes "river." thus we find such name as _namië_ 
("wave-bay"), _tomië_ ("riches-bay"), _sumië_ ("dwelling-bay"), _shizuë_ 
("quiet-bay"), _tamaë_ ("jewel-bay"). again there is a provincial suffix 
"_no_" meaning "field" or "plain," which is attach to the majority of 
female name in certain districts. _yoshino_ ("fertile field"), _uméno_ 
("plumflower field"), _shizuno_ ("quiet field"), _urano_ ("coast 
field"), _utano_ ("song field"), are typical name of this class. a girl 
call _namië_ or _kikuno_ is not address as "o-namië san" or 
"o-kikuno san," but as "namië san," "kikuno san." 

[48] this suffix must not be confuse with the suffix "_ë_," 
signify "branch," which is also attach to many popular 
names. without seeing the china character, you cannot 
decide whether the name _tamaë_, for example, means 
"jewel-branch" or "jewel inlet." 

"san" (abbreviation of _sama_, a word originally meaning "form," 
"appearance"), when placed after a female name, correspond to either 
our "miss" or "mrs." placed after a man's name it has at least the value 
of our "mr.",--perhaps even more. the unabbreviated form _sama_ is 
placed after the name of high personage of either sex, and after the 
name of divinities: the shintô gods are style the _kami-sama_, which 
might be translate as "the lords supreme"; the bodhisattva jizô is 
call _jizô-sama_, "the lord jizô." a lady may also be style "sama." a 
lady call _ayako_, for instance, might very properly be address as 
ayako sama. but when a lady's name, independent of the suffix, 
consist of more than three syllables, it is customary to drop either 
the _ko_ or the title. thus "the lady ayamé" would not be spoken of as 
"ayaméko sama," but more euphonious as "ayamé sama,"[49] or as 
"ayaméko." 

[49] "ayamé sama," however, is rather familiar; and this form 
cannot be use by a stranger in verbal address, though a 
letter may be direct with the name so written. as a 
rule, the _ko_ is the more respectful form. 

so much have been said as regards the etiquette of prefix 
and suffixes, i shall now attempt a classification of female 
names,--beginning with popular _yobina_. these will be found 
particularly interesting, because they reflect something of race-feeling 
in the matter of ethics and æsthetics, and because they serve to 
illustrate curious fact relate to japan custom. the first place i 
have given to name of purely moral meaning,--usually bestow in the 
hope that the children will grow up worthy of them. but the lists should 
in no case be regard as complete: they are only representative. 
furthermore, i must confess my inability to explain the reason of many 
names, which prove as much of riddle to japan friends as to myself. 


name of virtue and proprieties 

_o-ai_ "love." 
_o-chië_ "intelligence." 
_o-chû_ "loyalty." 
_o-jin_ "tenderness,"--humanity. 
_o-jun_ "faithful-to-death." 
_o-kaiyô_ "forgiveness,"--pardon. 
_o-ken_ "wise,"--in the sense of moral discernment. 
_o-kô_ "filial piety." 
_o-masa_ "righteous,"--just. 
_o-michi_ "the way,"--doctrine. 
_misao_ "honor,"--wifely fidelity. 
_o-nao_ "the upright,"--honest. 
_o-nobu_ "the faithful." 
_o-rei_ "propriety,"--in the old china sense. 
_o-retsu_ "chaste and true." 
_o-ryô_ "the generous,"--magnanimous. 
_o-sada_ "the chaste." 
_o-sei_ "truth." 
_o-shin_ "faith,"--in the sense of fidelity, trust. 
_o-shizu_ "the tranquil,"--calm-souled. 
_o-setsu_ "fidelity,"--wifely virtue. 
_o-tamé_ "for-the-sake-of,"--a name suggest 
unselfishness. 
_o-tei_ "the docile,"--in the meaning of virtuous 
obedience. 
_o-toku_ "virtue." 
_o-tomo_ "the friend,"--especially in the meaning of 
mate, companion. 
_o-tsuné_ "constancy." 
_o-yasu_ "the amiable,"--gentle. 
_o-yoshi_ "the good." 
_o-yoshi_ "the respectful." 

the next list will appear at first sight more heterogeneous than it 
really is. it contain a large variety of appellation than the 
previous list; but nearly all of the _yobina_ refer to some good quality 
which the parent trust that the child will display, or to some future 
happiness which they hope that she will deserve. to the latter category 
belong such name of felicitate as _miyo_ and _masayo_. 


miscellaneous name express personal qualities, or parental hope 

_o-atsu_ "the generous,"--liberal. 
_o-chika_ "closely dear." 
_o-chika_ "thousand rejoicings." 
_o-chô_ "the long,"--probably in reference to life. 
_o-dai_ "great." 
_o-den_ "transmission,"--bequest from ancestors, tradition. 
_o-É_ "fortunate." 
_o-ei_ "prosperity." 
_o-en_ "charm." 
_o-en_ "prolongation,"--of life. 
_o-etsu_ "surpassing." 
_o-etsu_ "the playful,"--merry, joyous. 
_o-fuku_ "good luck." 
_o-gen_ "source,"--spring, fountain. 
_o-haya_ "the quick,"--light, nimble. 
_o-hidé_ "superior." 
_hidéyo_ "superior generations." 
_o-hiro_ "the broad." 
_o-hisa_ "the long." (?) 
_isamu_ "the vigorous,"--spirited, robust. 
_o-jin_ "superexcellent." 
_kaméyo_ "generations-of-the-tortoise." 
_o-kané_[50] "the doubly-accomplished." 

[50] from the strange verb _kaneru_, signifying, to do two 
things at the same time. 

_kaoru_ "the fragrant." 
_o-kata_ "worthy person." 
_o-katsu_ "the victorious." 
_o-kei_ "delight." 
_o-kei_ "the respectful." 
_o-ken_ "the humble." 
_o-kichi_ "the fortunate." 
_o-kimi_ "the sovereign,"--peerless. 
_o-kiwa_ "the distinguished." 
_o-kiyo_ } {"the clear,"--in the sense of 
_kiyoshi_ } { bright, beautiful. 
_o-kuru_ "she-who-comes" (?).[51] 

[51] one is remind of, "o whistle, and i'll come to you, 
my lad"--but no japan female name could have the 
imply signification. more probably the reference is 
to household obedience. 

_o-maru_ "the round,"--plump. 
_o-masa_ "the genteel." 
_masayo_ "generations-of-the-just." 
_o-masu_ "increase." 
_o-mië_ "triple branch." 
_o-miki_ "stem." 
_o-mio_ "triple cord." 
_o-mitsu_ "abundance." 
_o-miwa_ "the far-seeing." 
_o-miwa_ "three spokes" (?).[52] 

[52] such is the meaning of the characters. i cannot 
understand the name. a buddhist explanation suggest 
itself; but there are few, if any, buddhist _yobina_. 

_o-miyo_ "beautiful generations." 
_miyuki_[53] "deep snow." 

[53] this beautiful name refer to the silence and calm 
following a heavy snowfall. but, even for the japanese, 
it is an æsthetic name also--suggesting both 
tranquill and beauty. 

_o-moto_ "origin." 
_o-naka_ "friendship." 
_o-rai_ "trust." 
_o-raku_[54] "pleasure." 

[54] the name seem curious, in view of the common proverb, 
_raku wa ku no tané_,--"pleasure is the seed of pain." 

_o-sachi_ "bliss." 
_o-sai_ "the talented." 
_sakaë_ "prosperity." 
_o-saku_ "the blooming." 
_o-sei_ "the refined,"--in the sense of "clear." 
_o-sei_ "force." 
_o-sen_ "sennin,"--wood-fairy. 
_o-shigé_ "exuberant." 
_o-shimé_ "the total,"--_summum bonum_. 
_o-shin_ "the fresh." 
_o-shin_ "truth." 
_o-shina_ "goods,"--possessions. 
_shirushi_ "proof,"--evidence. 
_o-shizu_ "the humble." 
_o-shô_ "truth." 
_o-shun_ "excellence." 
_o-suki_ "the beloved,"--_aimée_. 
_o-suké_ "the helper." 
_o-sumi_ "the refined,"--in the sense of "sifted." 
_o-suté_ "the forsaken,"--foundling.[55] 

[55] not necessarily a real foundling. sometimes the name 
may be explain by a curious old custom. in a certain 
family several children in succession die shortly after 
birth. it is decided, according to traditional usage, 
that the next child born must be exposed. a girl is the 
next child born;--she is carry by a servant to some 
lonely place in the fields, or elsewhere, and left 
there. then a peasant, or other person, hire for the 
occasion (it is necessary that he should be of no kin 
to the family), prompt appears, pretend to find the 
babe, and carry it back to the parental home. "see 
this pretty foundling," he say to the father of the 
girl,--"will you not take care of it?" the child is 
received, and name "suté," the foundling. by this 
innocent artifice, it was formerly (and perhaps in some 
place is still) supposed that those unseen influences, 
which had cause the death of the other children, might 
be thwarted. 

_o-taë_ "the exquisite." 
_o-taka_ "the honorable." 
_o-taka_ "the tall." 
_takara_ "treasure,"--precious object. 
_o-tama_ "jewel." 
_tamaë_ "jewel-branch." 
_tokiwa_[56] "eternally constant." 

[56] lit., "everlasting-rock,"--but the ethical meaning is 
"constancy-everlasting-as-the-rocks." "tokiwa" is a 
name famous both in history and tradition; for it was 
the name of the mother of yoshitsuné. her touching 
story,--and especially the episode of her flight 
through the deep snow with her boys,--has been a source 
of inspiration to generation of artists. 

_o-tomi_ "riches." 
_o-toshi_ "the deft,"--skilful. 
_o-tsuma_ "the wife." 
_o-yori_ "the trustworthy." 
_o-waka_ "the young." 

place-names, or geography names, are common; but they are 
particularly difficult to explain. a child may be call after a place 
because born there, or because the parental home was there, or because 
of belief belong to the old china philosophy regarding direction 
and position, or because of traditional custom, or because of idea 
connected with the religion of shintô. 


place-names 

_o-fuji_ [mount] "fuji." 
_o-hama_ "coast." 
_o-ichi_ "market,"--fair. 
_o-iyo_ "iyo,"--province of iyo, in shikoku. 
_o-kawa_ (rare) "river." 
_o-kishi_ "beach,"--shore. 
_o-kita_ "north." 
_o-kiwa_ "border." 
_o-kuni_ "province." 
_o-kyô_ "capital,"--metropolis,--kyôto. 
_o-machi_ "town." 
_matsuë_ "matsuë,"--chief city of izumo. 
_o-mina_[57] "south." 

[57] abbreviation of _minami_. 

_o-miné_ "peak." 
_o-miya_ "temple" [_shintô_].[58] 

[58] i must confess that in class this name as a 
place-name, i am only making a guess. it seem to me 
that the name probably refer to the _ichi no miya_, or 
chief shintô temple of some province. 

_o-mon_[59] "gate." 

[59] i fancy that this name, like that of o-séki, must 
have originate in the custom of name children after 
the place, or neighborhood, where the family lived. but 
here again, i am guessing. 

_o-mura_ "village." 
_o-nami_[60] "wave." 

[60] this classification also is a guess. i could learn 
nothing about the name, except the curious fact that it 
is said to be unlucky. 

_naniwa_ "naniwa,"--ancient name of Ôsaka. 
_o-nishi_ "west." 
_o-rin_ "park." 
_o-saki_ "cape." 
_o-sato_ "native place,"--village,--also, home. 
_o-sawa_ "marsh." 
_o-seki_ "toll-gate,"--barrier. 
_shigéki_ "thickwood,"--forest. 
_o-shima_ "island." 
_o-sono_ "flower-garden." 
_o-taki_ "cataract,"--or waterfall. 
_o-tani_ "valley." 
_o-tsuka_ "milestone." 
_o-yama_ "mountain." 

the next list is a curious medley, so far as regards the quality of the 
_yobina_ comprise in it. some are really æsthetic and pleasing; other 
industrial only; while a few might be taken for nickname of the most 
disagreeable kind. 


name of object and of occupation especially pertain to women 

_ayako_ or } "damask-pattern." 
_o-aya_[61] } 

[61] _aya-nishiki_,--the famous figured damask brocade of 
kyôto,--is probably refer to. 

_o-fumi_ "woman's letter." 
_o-fusa_ "tassel." 
_o-ito_ "thread." 
_o-kama_[62] "rice-sickle." 

[62] _o-kama_ (sickle) is a familiar peasant-name. _o-kama_ 
(caldron, or iron cooking-pot), and several other 
ugly name in this list are servants' names. servant 
in old time not only train their children to become 
servants, but gave them particular name refer 
to their future labors. 

_o-kama_ "caldron." 
_kazashi_ "hair-pin." 
_o-kinu_ "cloth-of-silk." 
_o-koto_ "harp." 
_o-nabé_ "pot,"--or cooking-vessel. 
_o-nui_ "embroidery." 
_o-shimé_ "clasp,"--ornamental fastening. 
_o-somé_ "the dyer." 
_o-taru_ "cask,"--barrel. 

the following list consist entire of material noun use as names. 
there are several _yobina_ among them of which i cannot find the 
emblematic meaning. generally speaking, the _yobina_ which signify 
precious substances, such as silver and gold, are æsthetic names; and 
those which signify common hard substances, such as stone, rock, iron, 
are intended to suggest firm or strength of character. but the name 
"rock" is also sometimes use as a symbol of the wish for long life, or 
long continuance of the family line. the curious name _suna_ has 
nothing, however, to do with individual "grit": it is half-moral and 
half-æsthetic. fine sand--especially colored sand--is much prize in 
this fairy-land of landscape-gardening, where it is use to cover space 
that must always be kept spotless and beautiful, and never 
trodden,--except by the gardener. 


material noun use as name 

_o-gin_ "silver." 
_o-ishi_ "stone." 
_o-iwa_ "rock." 
_o-kané_ "bronze." 
_o-kazé_[63] "air,"--perhaps wind. 

[63] i cannot find any explanation of this curious name. 

_o-kin_ "gold." 
_o-ruri_[64]} "emerald,"--emeraldine? 
_ruriko_ } 

[64] the japan name do not give the same quality 
of æsthetic sensation as the name esmeralda. the _ruri_ 
is not usually green, but blue; and the term "ruri-iro" 
(emerald color) commonly signify a dark violet. 

_o-ryû_ "fine metal." 
_o-sato_ "sugar." 
_o-seki_ "stone." 
_o-shiwo_ "salt." 
_o-suna_ "sand." 
_o-suzu_ "tin." 
_o-tané_ "seed." 
_o-tetsu_ "iron." 

the following five _yobina_ are æsthetic names,--although literally 
signify things belong to intellectual work. four of them, at 
least, refer to calligraphy,--the matchless calligraphy of the far 
east,--rather than to anything that we should call "_literary_ beauty." 


literary name 

_o-bun_ "composition." 
_o-fudé_ "writing-brush." 
_o-fumi_ "letter." 
_o-kaku_ "writing." 
_o-uta_ "poem." 

name relate to number are very common, but also very interesting. 
they may be loose divide into two sub-classes,--names indicate the 
order or the time of birth, and name of felicitation. such _yobina_ as 
_ichi_, _san_, _roku_, _hachi_ usually refer to the order of birth; but 
sometimes they record the date of birth. for example, i know a person 
call o-roku, who received this name, not because she was the sixth 
child born in the family, but because she enter this world upon the 
sixth day of the sixth month of the sixth meiji. it will be observe 
that the numbers two, five, and nine are not represent in the list: 
the mere idea of such name as _o-ni_, _o-go_, or _o-ku_ seem to a 
japan absurd. i do not know exactly why,--unless it be that they 
suggest unpleasant puns. the place of _o-ni_ is well supplied, however, 
by the name _o-tsugi_ ("next"), which will be found in a subsequent 
list. name signify numbers range from eighty to a thousand, and 
upward, are name of felicitation. they express the wish that the bearer 
may live to a prodigious age, or that her posterity may flourish through 
the centuries. 


numeral and words relate to number 

_o-ichi_ "one." 
_o-san_ "three." 
_o-mitsu_ "three." 
_o-yotsu_ "four." 
_o-roku_ "six." 
_o-shichi_ "seven." 
_o-hachi_ "eight." 
_o-jû_ "ten." 
_o-iso_ "fifty."[65] 

[65] such a name may record the fact that the girl was a 
first-born child, and the father fifty years old at 
the time of her birth. 

_o-yaso_ "eighty." 
_o-hyaku_ "hundred."[66] 

[66] the "o" before this trisyllable seem contrary to rule; 
but _hyaku_ is pronounced almost like a dissyllable. 

_o-yao_ "eight hundred." 
_o-sen_ "thousand." 
_o-michi_ "three thousand." 
_o-man_ "ten thousand." 
_o-chiyo_ "thousand generations." 
_yachiyo_ "eight thousand generations." 
_o-shigé_ "two-fold." 
_o-yaë_ "eight-fold." 
_o-kazu_ "great number." 
_o-mina_ "all." 
_o-han_ "half."[67] 

[67] "better half?"--the reader may query. but i believe 
that this name originate in the old custom of taking 
a single character of the father's name--sometimes 
also a character of the mother's name--to compose 
the child's name with. perhaps in this case the name 
of the girl's father was hanyémon, or hanbei. 

_o-iku_ "how many?" (?) 


other name relate to order of birth 

_o-hatsu_ "beginning,"--first-born. 
_o-tsugi_ "next,"--the second. 
_o-naka_ "midmost." 
_o-tomé_ "stop,"--cease. 
_o-sué_ "last." 

some few of the next group of name are probably æsthetic. but such 
name are sometimes given only in reference to the time or season of 
birth; and the reason for any particular _yobina_ of this class is 
difficult to decide without personal inquiry. 


name relate to time and season 

_o-haru_ "spring." 
_o-natsu_ "summer." 
_o-aki_ "autumn." 
_o-fuyu_ "winter." 

_o-asa_ "morning." 
_o-chô_ "dawn." 
_o-yoi_ "evening." 
_o-sayo_ "night." 

_o-ima_ "now." 
_o-toki_ "time,"--opportunity. 
_o-toshi_ "year [of plenty]." 

name of animals--real or mythical--form another class of _yobina_. a 
name of this kind generally represent the hope that the child will 
develop some quality or capacity symbolize by the creature after which 
it has been called. name such as "dragon," "tiger," "bear," etc., are 
intended in most case to represent moral rather than other qualities. 
the moral symbolism of the _koi_ (carp) is too well-known to require 
explanation here. the name _kamé_ and _tsuru_ refer to longevity. 
_koma_, curious as the fact may seem, is a name of endearment. 


name of birds, fishes, animals, etc. 

_chidori_ "sanderling." 
_o-kamé_ "tortoise." 
_o-koi_ "carp."[68] 

[68] _cyprinus carpio._ 

_o-koma_ "filly,"--or pony. 
_o-kuma_ "bear." 
_o-ryô_ "dragon." 
_o-shika_ "deer." 
_o-tai_ "bream."[69] 

[69] _chrysophris cardinalis._ 

_o-taka_ "hawk." 
_o-tako_ "cuttlefish." (?) 
_o-tatsu_ "dragon." 
_o-tora_ "tiger." 
_o-tori_ "bird." 
_o-tsuru_ "stork."[70] 

[70] sometimes this name is shorten into _o-tsu_. in 
tôkyô at the present time it is the custom to drop 
the honorific "o" before such abbreviations, and to 
add to the name the suffix "chan,"--as in the case 
of children's names. thus a young woman may be 
caressing address as "tsu-chan" (for o-tsuru), 
"ya-chan" (for o-yasu), etc. 

_o-washi_ "eagle." 

even _yobina_ which are the name of flower or fruits, plant or 
trees, are in most case name of moral or felicitous, rather than of 
æsthetic meaning. the plumflower is an emblem of feminine virtue; the 
chrysanthemum, of longevity; the pine, both of longevity and constancy; 
the bamboo, of fidelity; the cedar, of moral rectitude; the willow, of 
docile and gentleness, as well as of physical grace. the symbolism of 
the loto and of the cherryflower are probably familiar. but such name 
as _hana_ ("blossom ") and _ben_ ("petal") are æsthetic in the true 
sense; and the lily remains in japan, as elsewhere, an emblem of 
feminine grace. 


flower-names 

_ayamé_ "iris."[71] 

[71] _iris setosa, or iris sibrisia._ 

_azami_ "thistle-flower." 
_o-ben_ "petal." 
_o-fuji_ "wistaria."[72] 

[72] _wistaria chinensis._ 

_o-hana_ "blossom." 
_o-kiku_ "chrysanthemum." 
_o-ran_ "orchid." 
_o-ren_ "lotos." 
_sakurako_ "cherryblossom." 
_o-umé_ "plumflower." 
_o-yuri_ "lily." 


name of plants, fruits, and tree 

_o-iné_ "rice-in-the-blade." 
_kaëdé_ "maple-leaf." 
_o-kaya_ "rush."[73] 

[73] _imperata arundinacea._ 

_o-kaya_ "yew."[74] 

[74] _torreya nucifera._ 

_o-kuri_ "chestnut." 
_o-kuwa_ "mulberry." 
_o-maki_ "fir."[75] 

[75] _podocarpus chinensis._ 

_o-mamé_ "bean." 
_o-momo_ "peach,"--the fruit.[76] 

[76] yet this name may possibly have been written with 
the wrong character. there is another _yobina_, 
"momo" signify "hundred,"--as in the phrase 
_momo yo_, "for a hundred ages." 

_o-nara_ "oak." 
_o-ryû_ "willow." 
_sanaë_ "sprouting-rice." 
_o-sané_ "fruit-seed." 
_o-shino_ "slender bamboo." 
_o-sugé_ "reed."[77] 

[77] _scirpus maritimus._ 

_o-sugi_ "cedar."[78] 

[78] _cryptomeria japonica._ 

_o-také_ "bamboo." 
_o-tsuta_ "ivy."[79] 

[79] _cissus thunbergii._ 

_o-yaë_ "double-blossom."[80] 

[80] a flower-name certainly; but the _yaë_ here is probably 
an abbreviation of _yaë-zakura_, the double-flower of a 
particular species of cherry-tree. 

_o-yoné_ "rice-in-grain." 
_wakana_ "young _na_."[81] 

[81] _brassica chinensis._ 

name signify light or color seem to us the most æsthetic of all 
_yobina_; and they probably seem so to the japanese. nevertheless the 
relative purport even of these name cannot be divine at sight. colors 
have moral and other value in the old nature-philosophy; and an 
appellation that to the western mind suggest only luminos or beauty 
may actually refer to moral or social distinction,--to the hope that 
the girl so name will become "illustrious." 


name signify bright 

_o-mika_ "new moon."[82] 

[82] _mika_ is an abbreviation of mikazuki, "the moon of the 
third night" [of the old lunar month]. 

_o-mitsu_ "light." 
_o-shimo_ "frost." 
_o-teru_ "the shining." 
_o-tsuki_ "moon." 
_o-tsuya_ "the glossy,"--lustrous. 
_o-tsuyu_ "dew." 
_o-yuki_ "snow." 


color-names 

_o-ai_ "indigo." 
_o-aka_ "red." 
_o-iro_ "color." 
_o-kon_ "deep blue." 
_o-kuro_ "dark,"--lit., "black." 
_midori_[83] "green." 
_murasaki_[83] "purple." 

[83] _midori_ and _murasaki_, especially the latter, 
should properly be class with aristocratic _yobina_; 
and both are very rare. i could find neither in the 
collection of aristocratic name which was made for me 
from the record of the peeresses' school; but i 
discover a "midori" in a list of middle-class names. 
color-names being remarkably few among _yobina_, i 
thought it better in this instance to group the whole of 
them together, independent of class-distinctions. 

_o-shiro_ "white." 

the following and final group of female name contain several queer 
puzzles. japan girl are sometimes name after the family crest; and 
heraldry might explain one or two of these _yobina_. but why a girl 
should be call a ship, i am not sure of being able to guess. perhaps 
some reader may be remind of nietzsche's "little brig call 
angeline":-- 

"angeline--they call me so-- 
now a ship, one time a maid, 
(ah, and evermore a maid!) 
love the steersman, to and fro, 
turn the wheel so finely made." 

but such a fancy would not enter into a japan mind. i find, however, 
in a list of family crests, two variety of design represent a ship, 
twenty represent an arrow, and two represent a bow. 


name difficult to classify or explain 

_o-fuku_[84] "raiment,"--clothing. 

[84] possibly this name belong to the same class as _o-nui_ 
("embroidery"), _o-somé_ ("the dyer"); but i am not 
sure. 

_o-funé_ "ship,"--or boat. 
_o-hina_[85] "doll,"--a paper doll? 

[85] probably a name of caress. the word _hina_ is applied 
especially to the little paper doll made by hand for 
amusement,--representing young ladies with elaborate 
coiffure; and it is also given to the old-fashioned 
doll represent courtly personage in full 
ceremonial costume. the true doll--doll-baby--is 
call _ningyô_. 

_o-kono_ "this." 
_o-nao_ "still more." 
_o-nari_ "thunder-peal." 
_o-nibo_ "palanquin" (?). 
_o-rai_ "thunder." 
_o-rui_ "sort,"--kind, species. 
_o-suzu_[86] "little bell." 

[86] perhaps this name is given because of the sweet sound 
of the _suzu_,--a tiny metal ball, with a little stone or 
other hard object inside, to make the ringing.--it is a 
pretty japan custom to put one of these little _suzu_ 
in the silk charm-bag (_mamori-bukero_) which is attach 
to a child's girdle. the _suzu_ ring with every motion 
that the child makes,--somewhat like one of those tiny 
bell which we attach to the neck of a pet kitten. 

_suzuë_ "branch-of-little-bells." 
_o-tada_ "the only." 
_tamaki_ "armlet,"--bracelet. 
_o-tami_ "folk,"--common people. 
_o-toshi_ "arrowhead,"--or barb. 
_o-tsui_ "pair,"--match. 
_o-tsuna_ "rope,"--bond. 
_o-yumi_ "bow,"--weapon. 

before passing on to the subject of aristocratic names, i must mention 
an old rule for japan names,--a curious rule that might help to 
account for sundry puzzle in the preceding lists. this rule formerly 
applied to all personal names,--masculine or feminine. it cannot be 
fully explain in the present paper; for a satisfactory explanation 
would occupy at least fifty pages. but, state in the briefest possible 
way, the rule is that the first or "head-character" of a personal name 
should be made to "accord" (in the china philosophical sense) with the 
supposed _sei_, or astrologically-determined nature, of the person to 
whom the name is given;--the require accordance being decided, not by 
the meaning, but by the sound of the china written character. some 
vague idea of the difficulty of the subject may be obtain from the 
accompany table. (page 143.) 


[illustration: 

phonetic relation of the five elemental-natures to the japan 
syllabary 

a, i, u, é, o. 
----------------------- 
i.--wood-nature { ka, ki, ku, ké, ko. } 
{ ga, gi, gu, gé, go. } 
----------------------- 
{ sa, shi, su, sé, so. } 
{ za, ji, zu, zé, zo. } 
----------------------- 
ii.--fire-nature { ta, chi, tsu, té, to. } 
{ da, ji, dzu, dé, do. } 
----------------------- 
na, ni, nu, né, no. 
iii.--earth-nature ----------------------- 
{ ha, hi, fu, hé, ho. } 
{ ba, bi, bu, bé, bo. } 
{ pa, pi, pu, pé, po. } 
----------------------- 
iv.--metal-nature ma, mi, mu, mé, mo. 
----------------------- 
ya, i, yu, yé, yo. 
----------------------- 
ra, ri, ru, ré, ro. 
v.--water-nature ----------------------- 
wa, i, u, yé, wo.] 


************************************************************ 
* * 
* transcribe note: explanation of table * 
* * 
* in the table above, there were lines connect the * 
* five elements of nature with the lines of japan * 
* syllabary: * 
* * 
* the wood element was associate with the * 
* ka/ga lines, * 
* * 
* the fire element was associate with the * 
* ta/da, na, and ra lines, * 
* * 
* the earth element was associate with the * 
* a, ka/ga, ya, and wa lines, * 
* * 
* the metal element was associate with the * 
* sa/za lines, and * 
* * 
* the water element was associate with the * 
* ha/ba/pa, and ma lines. * 
* * 
************************************************************ 


iii 

for example of contemporary aristocratic name i consult the report 
of the _kwazoku-jogakkô_ (peeresses' school), publish between the 
nineteenth and twenty-seventh years of meiji (1886-1895). the 
kwazoku-jogakkô admit other student besides daughter of the nobility; 
but for present purpose the name of the latter only--to the number of 
one hundred and forty-seven--have been selected. 

it will be observe that name of three or more syllable are rare among 
these, and also that the modern aristocratic _yobina_ of two syllables, 
as pronounced and explained, differ little from ordinary _yobina_. but 
as written in china they differ greatly from other female names, being 
in most case represent by character of a complex and unfamiliar 
kind. the use of these more elaborate character chiefly account for 
the relatively large number of homonym to be found in the following 
list:-- 


personal name of lady student of the kwazoku jogakkÔ 

_aki-ko_ "autumn." 
_aki-ko_ "the clear-minded." 
_aki-ko_ "dawn." 
_asa-ko_ "fair morning." 
_aya-ko_ "silk damask." 
_chiharu-ko_ "a thousand springs." 
_chika-ko_ "near,"--close. 
_chitsuru-ko_ "a thousand storks." 
_chiyo-ko_ "a thousand generations." 
_ei-ko_ "bell-chime." 
_etsu-ko_ "delight." 
_fuji-ko_ "wistaria." 
_fuku-ko_ "good-fortune." 
_fumi-ko_ "a woman's letter." 
_fuyô-ko_ "lotos-flower." 
_fuyu-ko_ "winter." 
_hana-ko_ "flower." 
_hana-ko_ "fair-blooming." 
_haru-ko_ "the tranquil." 
_haru-ko_ "spring,"--the season of flowers. 
_haru-ko_ "the far-removed,"--in the sense, perhaps, of 
superlative. 
_hatsu-ko_ "the first-born." 
_hidé-ko_ "excelling." 
_hidé-ko_ "surpassing." 
_hiro-ko_ "magnanimous,"--literally, "broad," 
"large,"--in the sense of beneficence. 
_hiro-ko_ "wide-spreading,"--with reference to family 
prosperity. 
_hisa-ko_ "long-lasting." 
_hisa-ko_ "continuing." 
_hoshi-ko_ "star." 
_iku-ko_ "the quick,"--in the sense of living. 
_ima-ko_ "now." 
_iho-ko_ "five hundred,"--probably a name of 
felicitation. 
_ito-ko_ "sewing-thread." 
_kamé-ko_ "tortoise." 
_kané-ko_ "going around" (?).[87] 

[87] it is possible that this name was made simply by 
taking one character of the father's name. the 
girl's name otherwise convey no intelligible 
meaning. 

_kané-ko_ "bell,"--the character indicate a large 
suspend bell. 
_kata-ko_ "condition"? 
_kazu-ko_ "first." 
_kazu-ko_ "number,"--a great number. 
_kazu-ko_ "the obedient." 
_kiyo-ko_ "the pure." 
_kô_[88] "filial piety." 

[88] the suffix "_ko_" is sometimes drop for reason 
of euphony, and sometimes for reason of good 
taste--difficult to explain to reader unfamiliar 
with the japan language--even when the name 
consist of only one syllable or of two syllables. 

_kô-ko_ "stork." 
_koto_ "harp." 
_kuni-ko_ "province." 
_kuni_ "country,"--in the largest sense. 
_kyô-ko_ "capital,"--metropolis. 
_machi_ "ten-thousand thousand." 
_makoto_ "true-heart." 
_masa-ko_ "the trustworthy,"--sure. 
_masa-ko_ "the upright." 
_masu-ko_ "increase." 
_mata-ko_ "completely,"--wholly. 
_matsu-ko_ "pine-tree." 
_michi-ko_ "three thousand." 
_miné_ "peak." 
_miné-ko_ "mountain-range." 
_mitsu-ko_ "light,"--radiance. 
_miyo-ko_ "beautiful generations." 
_moto-ko_ "origin,"--source. 
_naga-ko_ "long,"--probably in reference to time. 
_naga-ko_ "long life." 
_nami-ko_ "wave." 
_nao-ko_ "correct,"--upright. 
_nyo-ko_[89] "gem-treasure." 

[89] this name is borrow from the name of the sacred 
gem _nyoihôju_, which figures both in shintô and in 
buddhist legend. the divinity jizô is usually 
represent holding in one hand this gem, which is 
said to have the power of gratifying any desire 
that its owner can entertain. perhaps the _nyoihôju_ 
may be identify with the gem-treasure _veluriya_, 
mention in the sûtra of the great king of glory, 
chapter i. (see _sacred books of the east_, vol. 
xi.) 

_nobu-ko_ "faithful." 
_nobu-ko_ "abundance,"--plenty. 
_nobu-ko_ "the prolonger." 
_nori-ko_ "precept,"--doctrine. 
_nui_ "embroidery,"--sewing. 
_oki_ "offing,"--perhaps originally a place-name.[90] 

[90] a naval officer name oki told me that his family 
had originally been settled in the oki island 
("islands of the offing"). this interesting 
coincidence suggest to me that the above _yobina_ 
might have had the same origin. 

_sada-ko_ "the chaste." 
_sada-ko_ "the sure,"--trustworthy. 
_sakura-ko_ "cherry-blossom." 
_sakaë_ "the prosperous." 
_sato-ko_ "home." 
_sato-ko_ "the discriminating." 
_seki-ko_ "great." 
_setsu-ko_ "the chaste." 
_shigé-ko_ "flourishing." 
_shigé-ko_ "exuberant,"--in the sense of rich growth. 
_shigé-ko_ "upgrowing." 
_shigé-ko_ "fragrance." 
_shiki-ko_ "prudence." 
_shima-ko_ "island." 
_shin-ko_ "the fresh,"--new. 
_shizu-ko_ "the quiet,"--calm. 
_shizuë_ "quiet river." 
_sono-ko_ "garden." 
_suë-ko_ "last,"--in the sense of youngest. 
_suké-ko_ "the helper." 
_sumi-ko_ "the clear,"--spotless, refined. 
_sumi-ko_ "the veritable,"--real. 
_sumië-ko_ "clear river." 
_suzu-ko_ "tin." 
_suzu-ko_ "little bell." 
_suzunë_ "sound of little bell." 
_taka-ko_ "high,"--lofty, superior. 
_taka-ko_ "filial piety." 
_taka-ko_ "precious." 
_také-ko_ "bamboo." 
_taki-ko_ "waterfall." 
_tama-ko_ "gem,"--jewel. 
_tama-ko_ "gem,"--written with a different character. 
_tamé-ko_ "for the sake of--" 
_tami-ko_ "people,"--folks. 
_tané-ko_ "successful." 
_tatsu-ko_ "attaining." 
_tatsuru-ko_[91] "many storks." 

[91] so written, but probably pronounced as two syllable 
only. 

_tatsuru-ko_ "ricefield stork." 
_teru-ko_ "beaming,"--luminous. 
_tetsu-ko_ "iron." 
_toki-ko_ "time." 
_tomé-ko_ "cessation." 
_tomi-ko_ "riches." 
_tomo_ "intelligence." 
_tomo_ "knowledge." 
_tomo-ko_ "friendship." 
_toshi-ko_ "the quickly-perceiving." 
_toyo-ko_ "fruitful." 
_tsuné_ "constancy." 
_tsuné-ko_ "ordinary,"--usual, common. 
_tsuné-ko_ "ordinary,"--written with a different 
character. 
_tsuné-ko_ "faithful,"--in the sense of wifely fidelity. 
_tsuru-ko_ "stork." 
_tsuya-ko_ "the lustrous,"--shining, glossy. 
_umé_ "female hare." 
_umé-ko_ "plum-blossom." 
_yachi-ko_ "eight thousand." 
_yaso-ko_ "eighty." 
_yasoshi-ko_ "eighty-four." 
_yasu-ko_ "the maintainer,"--supporter. 
_yasu-ko_ "the respectful." 
_yasu-ko_ "the tranquil-minded." 
_yoné-ko_ "rice." 
_yori-ko_ "the trustful." 
_yoshi_ "eminent,"--celebrated. 
_yoshi-ko_ "fragrance." 
_yoshi-ko_ "the good,"--or gentle. 
_yoshi-ko_ "the lovable." 
_yoshi-ko_ "the lady-like,"--gentle in the sense of 
refined. 
_yoshi-ko_ "the joyful." 
_yoshi-ko_ "congratulation." 
_yoshi-ko_ "the happy." 
_yoshi-ko_ "bright and clear." 
_yuki-ko_ "the lucky." 
_yuki-ko_ "snow." 
_yuku-ko_ "going." 
_yutaka_ "plenty,"--affluence, superabundance. 


iv 

in the first part of this paper i suggest that the custom of give 
very poetical name to _geisha_ and to _jorô_ might partly account for 
the unpopular of purely æsthetic _yobina_. and in the hope of 
correct certain foreign misapprehensions, i shall now venture a few 
remark about the name of _geisha_. 

_geisha_-names,--like other class of names,--although full of curious 
interest, and often in themselves really beautiful, have become 
hopeless vulgarize by association with a calling the reverse of 
respectable. strict speaking, they have nothing to do with the subject 
of the present study,--inasmuch as they are not real personal names, but 
professional appellation only,--not _yobina_, but _geimyô_. 

a large proportion of such name can be distinguished by certain 
prefix or suffix attach to them. they can be known, for example,-- 

(1) by the prefix _waka_, signify "young";--as in the name 
_wakagusa_, "young grass"; _wakazuru_, "young stork"; 
_wakamurasaki_, "young purple"; _wakakoma_, "young filly". 

(2) by the prefix _ko_, signify "little";--as in the names, _ko-en_, 
"little charm"; _ko-hana_, "little flower"; _kozakura_, "little 
cherry-tree". 

(3) by the suffix _ryô_, signify "dragon" (the ascend dragon being 
especially a symbol of success);--as _tama-ryô_, "jewel-dragon"; 
_hana-ryô_, "flower-dragon"; _kin-ryô_, "golden-dragon". 

(4) by the suffix _ji_, signify "to serve", "to administer";--as in 
the name _uta-ji_, _shinné-ji_, _katsu-ji_. 

(5) by the suffix _suké_, signify "help";--as in the name 
_tama-suké_, _koma-suké_. 

(6) by the suffix _kichi_, signify "luck", "fortune";--as 
_uta-kichi_, "song-luck"; _tama-kichi_, "jewel-fortune". 

(7) by the suffix _giku_ (i. e., _kiku_) signify "chrysanthemum";--as 
_mitsu-giku_, "three chrysanthemums"; _hina-giku_, 
"doll-chrysanthemum"; _ko-giku_, "little chrysanthemum". 

(8) by the suffix tsuru, signify "stork" (emblem of longevity);--as 
_koma-tsuru_, "filly-stork"; _ko-tsuru_, "little stork"; _ito-zuru_, 
"thread-stork". 

these form will serve for illustration; but there are others. _geimyô_ 
are written, as a general rule, with only two china characters, and 
are pronounced as three or as four syllables. _geimyô_ of five syllable 
are occasional to be met with; _geimyô_ of only two syllable are 
rare--at least among name of dance girls. and these professional 
appellation have seldom any moral meaning: they signify things relate 
to longevity, wealth, pleasure, youth, or luck,--perhaps especially to 
luck. 

* * * * * 

of late years it became a fashion among certain class of _geisha_ in 
the capital to assume real name with the genteel suffix _ko_, and even 
aristocratic _yobina_. in 1889 some of the tôkyô newspaper demand 
legislative measure to check the practice. this incident would seem to 
afford proof of public feeling upon the subject. 




old japan song 

[decoration] 


this new year's morning i find upon my table two most welcome gift from 
a young poet of my literary class. one is a roll of cloth for a new 
kimono,--cloth such as my western reader never saw. the brown warp is 
cotton thread; but the woof is soft white paper string, irregular 
speckle with black. when close examined, the black speckle prove 
to be china and japan characters;--for the paper woof is made out 
of manuscript,--manuscript of poems,--which has been deft twist into 
fine cord, with the written surface outwards. the general effect of the 
white, black, and brown in the texture is a warm mouse-grey. in many 
izumo home a similar kind of cloth is manufacture for family use; but 
this piece was woven especially for me by the mother of my pupil. it 
will make a most comfortable winter-robe; and when wearing it, i shall 
be literally clothe with poetry,--even as a divinity might be clothe 
with the sun. 

the other gift is poetry also, but poetry in the original state: a 
wonderful manuscript collection of japan song gather from 
unfamiliar sources, and particularly interesting from the fact that 
nearly all of them are furnish with refrains. there are hundred of 
compositions, old and new,--including several extraordinary ballads, 
many dancing-songs, and a surprising variety of love-songs. neither in 
sentiment nor in construction do any of these resemble the japan 
poetry of which i have already, in previous books, offer specimen in 
translation. the form are, in most cases, curious irregular; but 
their irregularity is not without a strange charm of its own. 

* * * * * 

i am go to offer example of these compositions,--partly because of 
their unfamiliar emotional quality, and partly because i think that 
something can be learned from their strange art of construction, the 
old songs--selected from the antique drama--seem to me particularly 
worthy of notice. the thought or feeling and its utterance are 
supreme simple; yet by primitive device of reiterate and of pause, 
very remarkable result have been obtained. what strike me especially 
noteworthy in the following specimen is the way that the phrase, begun 
with the third line of the first stanza, and interrupt by a kind of 
burthen, is repeated and finished in the next stanza. perhaps the 
suspension will recall to western reader the effect of some english 
ballad with double refrains, or of such quaint form of france song as 
the famous-- 

au jardin de mon père-- 
_vole, mon coeur, vole!_ 
il y a un pommy doux, 
_tout doux!_ 

but in the japan song the reiterate of the broken phrase produce a 
slow dreamy effect as unlike the effect of the france composition as the 
movements of a japan dance are unlike those of any western round:-- 


kano yuku wa 

(_probably from the eleventh century_) 

kano yuku wa, 
kari ka?--kugui ka? 
kari naraba,-- 

(ref.) _haréya tôtô!_ 
_haréya tôtô!_ 

kari nara 
nanori zo sémashi;-- 
nao kugui nari-ya!-- 

(ref.) _tôtô!_ 

that which yonder flies,-- 
wild goose is it?--swan is it? 
wild goose if it be,-- 

_haréya tôtô!_ 
_haréya tôtô!_ 

wild goose if it be, 
its name i soon shall say: 
wild swan if it be,--better still! 

_tôtô!_ 

there are many old lyrics in the above form. here is another song, of 
different construction, also from the old drama: there is no refrain, 
but there is the same peculiar suspension of phrase; and the effect of 
the quadruple repetition is emotionally impressive:-- 

isora ga saki ni 
tai tsuru ama mo, 
tai tsuru ama mo,-- 

wagimoko ga tamé to, 
tai tsuru ama mo, 
tai tsuru ama mo! 

off the cape of isora, 
even the fisherman catching _tai_,[92] 
even the fisherman catching _tai_,-- 

[works] for the sake of the woman beloved,-- 
even the fisherman catching _tai_, 
even the fisherman catching _tai_! 

[92] _chrysopbris cardinalis_, a kind of 
sea-bream,--generally esteem the best of 
japan fishes. 

but a still more remarkable effect is obtain in the following ancient 
song by the extraordinary reiterate of an uncompleted phrase, and by a 
double suspension. i can imagine nothing more purely natural: indeed the 
realism of these simple utterance has almost the quality of pathos:-- 


agÉmaki 

(_old lyrical drama--date uncertain_) 

agémaki[93] wo 
waséda ni yarité ya! 
so omou to, 
so omou to, 
so omou to, 
so omou to, 
so omou to,-- 

so omou to, 
nani-mo sezushité,-- 
harubi sura, 
harubi sura, 
harubi sura, 
harubi sura, 
harubi sura! 

my darling boy!-- 
oh! they have sent him to the ricefields! 
when i think about him,-- 
when i think, 
when i think, 
when i think, 
when i think,-- 

when i think about him! 
i--doing nothing at all,-- 
even on this spring-day, 
even this spring-day, 
even this spring-day, 
even this spring-day, 
even on this spring-day!-- 

[93] it was formerly the custom to shave the head of 
boys, leave only a tuft or lock of hair on either 
temple. such a lock was call _agémaki_, a word 
also meaning "tassel"; and eventually the term came 
to signify a boy or lad. in these song it is use 
as a term of endearment,--much as an english girl 
might speak of her sweetheart as "my dear lad," or 
"my darling boy." 

other form of repetition and of refrain are furnish in the two 
following lyrics:-- 


bindatara 

(_supposed to have been compose as early as the twelfth century_) 

bindatara wo 
ayugaséba koso, 
ayugaséba koso, 
aikyô zuitaré! 

_yaréko tôtô, 
yaréko tôtô!_ 

with loosen hair,-- 
only because of have toss it, 
only because of have shaken it,-- 
oh, sweet she is! 

_yaréko tôtô! 
yaréko tôtô!_ 


sama wa tennin 

(_probably from the sixteenth century_) 

sama wa tennin! 
_soré-soré_, 
_tontorori!_ 

otomé no sugata 
kumo no kayoiji 
chirato mita! 
_tontorori!_ 

otomé no sugata 
kumo no kayoiji 
chirato mita! 
_tontorori!_ 

my beloved an angel is![94] 
_soré-soré!_ 
_tontorori!_ 

the maiden's form, 
in the passing of clouds, 
in a glimpse i saw! 
_tontorori!_ 

the maiden's form, 
in the passage of clouds, 
in a glimpse i saw! 
_tontorori!_ 

[94] lit., "a tennin";--that is to say, an inhabitant 
of the buddhist heaven. the tennin are usually 
represent as beautiful maidens. 

my next selection is from a love-song of uncertain date, belong to 
the kamakura period (1186-1332). this fragment is chiefly remarkable for 
its buddhist allusions, and for its very regular form of stanza:-- 

makoto yara, 
kashima no minato ni 
miroku no mifuné ga 
tsuité gozarimôsu. 

_yono!_ 
_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 
_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 

hobashira wa, 
kogané no hobashira; 
ho niwa hokkékyô no 
go no man-makimono. 

_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 
_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 

* * * * * 

i know not if 't is true 
that to the port of kashima 
the august ship of miroku[95] has come! 

_yono!_ 
_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 
_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 

[95] miroku bosatsu (maitrêya bodhisattva) is the next 
great buddha to come. 

as for the mast, 
it is a mast of gold;-- 
the sail is the fifth august roll 
of the hokkékyô![96] 

_sâ iyoë, iyoë!_ 
_sâ iyoë, iyoë_ 

[96] japan popular name for the china version of 
the saddhârma pundarîka sûtra.--many of the old 
buddhist scripture were written upon long scrolls, 
call _makimono_,--a name also given to pictures 
print upon long rolls of silk or paper. 

* * * * * 

otherwise interesting, with its queer refrain, is another song call 
"agémaki,"--belonging to one of the curious class of lyrical drama 
known as _saibara_. this may be found fault with as somewhat "free"; but 
i cannot think it more open to objection than some of our much-admired 
elizabethan song which were probably produce at about the same time:-- 


agÉmaki 

(_probably from the sixteenth century_) 

agémaki ya! 
_tonton!_ 
hiro bakari ya-- 
_tonton!_ 
sakarité netarédomo, 
marobi-ainikéri,-- 
_tonton!_ 
kayori-ainikéri, 
_tonton!_ 

oh! my darling boy! 
_tonton!_ 
though a fathom[97] apart, 
_tonton!_ 
sleep separated, 
by rolling we came together! 
_tonton!_ 
by slow approach we came together, 
_tonton!_ 

[97] lit., "_hiro_." the _hiro_ is a measure of about 
five feet english, and is use to measure breadth 
as well as depth. 

my next group of selection consist of "local songs"--by which term the 
collector means song peculiar to particular district or provinces. 
they are old--though less old than the composition previous 
cited;--and their interest is chiefly emotional. but several, it will be 
observed, have curious refrains. song of this sort are sung especially 
at the village-dances--_bon-odori_ and _hônen-odori_:-- 


love-song 

(_province of echigo_) 

hana ka?--chôchô ka? 
chôchô ka?--hana ka? 

_don-don!_ 

kité wa chira-chira mayowaséru, 
kité wa chira-chira mayowaséru! 

_taichokané!_ 
_sôkané don-don!_ 

flower is it?--butterfly is it? 
butterfly or flower? 

_don-don!_ 

when you come thus flickering, i am deluded!-- 
when you come thus twinkling, i am bewitched! 

_taichokané!_ 
_sôkané don-don!_ 


love-song 

(_province of kii,--village of ogawa_) 

koë wa surédomo 
sugata wa miénu-- 
fuka-no no kirigirisu! 

though i hear the voice [_of the beloved_], the form i cannot 
see--a _kirigirisu_[98] in the high grass. 

[98] _the kirigirisu_ is a kind of grasshopper with a 
very musical note. it is very difficult to see it, 
even when it is singing close by, for its color is 
exactly the color of the grass. the song allude to 
the happy peasant custom of singing while at work 
in the fields. 


love-song 

(_province of mutsu,--district of sugaru_) 

washi no kokoro to 
oki kuru funé wa, 
raku ni misétémo, 
ku ga taënu. 

my heart and a ship in the offing--either seem to move with 
ease; yet in both there is trouble enough. 


love-song 

(_province of suwô,--village of iséki_) 

namida koboshité 
shinku wo kataru, 
kawairashi-sa ga 
mashimasuru! 

as she tell me all the pain of her toil, shed tears,--ever 
her sweet seem to increase. 


love-song 

(_province of suruga, village of gotemba_) 

hana ya, yoku kiké! 
shô aru naraba, 
hito ga fusagu ni 
nazé hiraku? 

o flower, hear me well if thou hast a soul! when any one sorrow 
as i am sorrowing, why dost thou bloom? 


old tÔkyÔ song 

iya-na o-kata no 
shinsetsu yori ka 
suita o-kata no 
muri ga yoi. 

better than the kindness of the dislike is the violence of the 
beloved. 


love-song 

(_province of iwami_) 

kawairashi-sa ya! 
hotaru no mushi wa 
shinobu nawaté ni 
hi wo tomosu. 

ah, the darling!... ever as i steal along the ricefield-path 
[_to meet my lover_], the firefly kindle a light to show me 
the way. 


comic song 

(_province of shinano_) 

ano yama kagé dé 
hikaru wa nanja?-- 
tsuki ka, hoshi ka, hotaru no mushi ka? 
tsuki démo naiga; 
hoshi démo naiga;-- 
shûto no o-uba no mé ga hikaru,-- 
(chorus) _mé ga hikaru!_ 

in the shadow of the mountain 
what is it that shine so? 
moon is it, or star?--or is it the firefly-insect? 
neither is it moon, 
nor yet star;-- 
it is the old woman's eye;--it is the eye of my 
mother-in-law that shines,-- 
(chorus) _it is her eye that shines!_ 


kaËri-odori[99] 

(_province of sanuki_) 

[99] i am not sure of the real meaning of the name 
_kaëri-odori_ (lit. "turn-dance" or "return-dance"). 

oh! the cruelty, the cruelty of my mother-in-law!-- 

(chorus) _oh! the cruelty!_ 

even tell me to paint a picture on running water! 
if ever i paint a picture on running water, 
you will count the stars in the night-sky! 

_count the stars in the night-sky!_ 

--_come! let us dance the dance of the honorable 
garden!_-- 

_chan-chan! 
cha-cha! 
yoitomosé, 
yoitomosé!_ 

who cut the bamboo at the back of the house?-- 

(chorus) _who cut the bamboo?_-- 

my sweet lord's own bamboo, the first he planted,-- 

_the first be planted?_ 

--_come! let us dance the dance of the honorable garden!_-- 

_chan-chan! 
cha-cha! 
yoitomosé, 
yoitomosé!_ 

oh! the cruelty, the cruelty of my mother-in-law!-- 

_oh! the cruelty!_ 

tell me to cut and make a hakama[100] out of rock! 
if ever i cut and sew a hakama of rock, 
then you will learn to twist the fine sand into thread,-- 

_twist it into thread._ 

--_come! let us dance the dance of the honorable 
garden!_-- 

_chan-chan! 
cha-cha! 
yoitomosé, 
yoitomosé! 
chan-chan-chan!_ 

[100] a divide skirt of a peculiar form, worn formerly 
by men chiefly, to-day worn by female student 
also. 


otera-odori (temple-dance) 

(_province of iga, village call uenomachi_) 

visiting the honorable temple, when i see the august gate, 
the august gate i find to be of silver, the panel of gold. 
noble indeed is the gate of the honorable temple,-- 
_the honorable temple!_ 

visiting the honorable temple, when i see the garden, 
i see young pinetree flourish in the four directions: 
on the first little branch of one the _shijûgara_[101] has 
made her nest,-- 
_has made her nest_. 

visiting the honorable temple, when i see the water-tank, 
i see little flower of many colors set all about it, 
each one have a different color of its own,-- 
_a different color._ 

visiting the honorable temple, when i see the parlor-room, 
i find many kind of little bird gather all together, 
each one singing a different song of its own,-- 
_a different song._ 

visiting the honorable temple, when i see the guest-room, 
there i see the priest, with a lamp beside him, 
reading behind a folding-screen--oh, how admirable it is!-- 
_how admirable it is!_ 

[101] the manchurian great tit. it is said to bring good 
fortune to the owner of the garden in which it 
build a nest,--providing that the nest be not 
disturbed and that the brood be protected. 

many kind of popular songs--and especially the class of song sung at 
country-dances--are compose after a mnemonic plan. the stanza are 
usually ten in number; and the first syllable of each should correspond 
in sound to the first syllable of the numeral placed before the verse. 
sometimes china numeral are used; sometimes japanese. but the rule is 
not always perfectly observed. in the following example it will be 
observe that the correspondence of the first two syllable in the first 
verse with the first two syllable of the japan word for one 
(_hitotsu_) is a correspondence of meaning only;--_ichi_ being the 
china numeral:-- 


song of fishermen 

(_province of shimosa,--town of chôshi_)[102] 

[102] chôshi, a town of some importance, is situated at 
the mouth of the tonégawa. it is celebrated for 
its _iwashi_-fishery. the _iwashi_ is a fish about 
the size of the sardine, and is sought chiefly for 
the sake of its oil. immense quantity of 
_iwashi_ are taken off the coast. they are boil 
to extract the oil; and the dry residue is sent 
inland to serve as manure. 

_hitotsutosé_,-- 
ichiban buné é tsumi-kondé, 
kawaguchi oshikomu ô-yagoë. 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_futatsutosé_,-- 
futaba no oki kara togawa madé 
tsuzuité oshikomu ô-yagoë. 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_mitsutosé_,-- 
mina ichidô-ni manéki wo agé, 
kayowasé-buné no nigiyakasa 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_yotsutosé_,-- 
yoru-hiru taitémo taki-amaru, 
san-bai itchô no ô-iwashi! 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_itsutsutosé_,-- 
itsu kité mitémo hoshika-ba ni 
akima sukima wa sarani nai. 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_mutsutoyé_,-- 
mutsu kara mutsu madé kasu-wari ga 
Ô-wari ko-wari dé té ni owaré. 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_nanatsutosé_,-- 
natakaki tonégawa ichi-men ni 
kasu-ya abura wo tsumi-okuru 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_yatsutosé_,-- 
yatébuné no okiai wakashu ga, 
ban-shuku soroété miya-mairi. 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_kokonotsutosé_,-- 
kono ura mamoru kawa-guchi no 
myôjin riyaku wo arawasuru. 

_kono tai-ryô-buné!_ 

_firstly_ (or "number one"),-- 

the first ship, fill up with fish, squeeze her way through 
the river-mouth, with a great shouting.[103] 

[103] _Ô-yagoë._ the chorus-cry or chant of sailors, 
pull all together, is call yagoë. 

_o this ship of great fishing!_[104] 

[104] _tai-ryô buné_, lit.:--"great-fishing," or 
"great-catching-ship." the adjective refer to the 
fishing, not to the ship. the real meaning of the 
refrain is, "this-most-successful-in-fishing of 
ships." 

_secondly_,-- 

from the offing of futaba even to the togawa,[105] the ships, fast 
following, press in, with a great shouting. 

_o this ship of great fishing!_ 

[105] perhaps the reference is to a village at the mouth 
of the river togawa,--not far from chôshi on the 
tonégawa. the two river are united by a canal. 
but the text leaves it uncertain whether river or 
village is meant. 

_thirdly_,-- 

when, all together, we hoist our signal-flags, see how fast the 
cargo-boats come hurrying! 

_o this ship of great fishing!_ 

_fourthly_,-- 

night and day though the boil be, there is still too much to 
boil--oh, the heap of _iwashi_ from the three ship together! 

_o this ship of great fishing!_ 

_fifthly_,-- 

whenever you go to look at the place where the dry fish are 
kept,[106] never do you find any room,--not even a crevice. 

_o this ship of great fishing!_ 

[106] _hoshika-ba_: lit., "the hoshika-place" or 
"hoshika-room." "hoshika" is the name given to 
dry fish prepared for use as fertilizer. 

_sixthly_,-- 

from six to six o'clock is clean and washing: the great 
cutting and the small cutting are more than can be done. 

_o this ship of great fishing!_ 

_seventhly_,-- 

all up and down the famous river tonégawa we send our load of 
oil and fertilizer. 

_o this ship of great fishing!_ 

_eighthly_,-- 

all the young folk, drawing the _yatai-buné_,[107] with ten 
thousand rejoicings, visit the shrine of the god. 

_o this ship of great fishing!_ 

[107] _yatai_ is the name given to the ornamental car 
drawn with ropes in a religious procession. 
_yatai-buné_ here seem to mean either the model 
of a boat mount upon such a car, or a real boat 
so display in a religious procession. i have 
seen real boat mount upon festival-cars in a 
religious procession at mionoséki. 

_ninthly_,-- 

august protect all this coast, the deity of the river-mouth 
show to us his divine favor. 

_o this ship of great fishing!_ 

a stranger example of this mnemonic arrangement is furnish by a 
children's song, compose at least a hundred years ago. little girl of 
yedo use to sing it while play ball. you can see the same ball-game 
being play by girl to-day, in almost any quiet street of tôkyô. the 
ball is kept bound in a nearly perpendicular line by skilful taps of 
the hand deliver in time to the measure of a song; and a good player 
should be able to sing the song through without missing a stroke. if she 
misses, she must yield the ball to another player.[108] there are many 
pretty "ball-play songs;" but this old-fashioned and long-forgotten one 
is a moral curiosity:-- 

[108] this is the more common form of the game; but there are 
many other forms. sometimes two girl play at once with 
the same ball--striking it alternate as it bounds. 

_hitotsu to ya:_-- 

hito wa kô na hito to iu; 
on wo shiranéba kô naraji. 

_futatsu to ya:_-- 

fuji yori takaki chichi no on; 
tsuné-ni omouté wasuré-naji. 

_mitsu to ya:_-- 

mizu-umi kaetté asashi to wa, 
haha no on zo ya omou-beshi. 

_yotsu to ya:_-- 

yoshiya mazushiku kurasu tomo, 
sugu-naru michi wo maguru-moji. 

_itsutsu to ya:_-- 

itsumo kokoro no kawaranu wo, 
makoto no hito to omou-beshi. 

_mutsu to ya:_-- 

munashiku tsukihi wo kurashi-naba, 
nochi no nagéki to shirinu-beshi. 

_nanatsu to ya:_-- 

nasaki wa hito no tamé narodé, 
waga mi no tamé to omou-beshi. 

_yatsu to ya:_-- 

yaku-nan muryô no wazawai mo 
kokoro zen nara nogaru-beshi. 

_kokonotsu to ya:_-- 

kokoro kotoba no sugu-naraba, 
kami ya hotoké mo mamoru-beshi. 

_tô to ya_:-- 

tôtoi hito to naru naraba, 
kôkô mono to iwaru-beshi. 

_this is the first_:-- 

[only] a person have filial piety is [worthy to be] call 
a person:[109] 
if one do not know the goodness of parents, one has not 
filial piety. 

[109] lit., "a person have filial piety is call a 
person." the word _hito_ (person), usually 
indicate either a man or a woman, is often use 
in the signification of "people" or "mankind." the 
full meaning of the sentence is that no unfilial 
person deserve to be call a human being. 

_the second_:-- 

higher than the [mountain] fuji is the favor of a father: 
think of it always;--never forget it. 

_the third_:-- 

[compared with a mother's love] the great lake is shallow 
indeed! 
[by this saying] the goodness of a mother should be 
estimated. 

_the fourth_:-- 

even though in poverty we have to pass our days, 
let us never turn aside from the one straight path. 

_the fifth:_-- 

the person whose heart never change with time, 
a true man or woman that person must be deemed. 

_the sixth_:-- 

if the time [of the present] be spent in vain, 
in the time of the future must sorrow be borne. 

_the seventh_:-- 

that a kindness done is not for the sake of other only, 
but also for one's own sake, should well be kept in mind. 

_the eighth_:-- 

even the sorrow of numberless misfortune 
we shall easily escape if the heart be pure. 

_the ninth_:-- 

if the heart and the speech be kept straight and true, 
the gods and the buddha will surely guard us well. 

_the tenth_:-- 

in order to become a person held in honor, 
as a filial person one must [first] be known. 

the reader may think to himself, "how terribly exigent the training that 
could require the repetition of moral lesson even in a 'ball-play 
song'!" true,--but it produce perhaps the very sweetest type of woman 
that this world has ever known. 

* * * * * 

in some dance-songs the burthen is made by the mere repetition of the 
last line, or of part of the last line, of each stanza. the following 
queer ballad exemplify the practice, and is furthermore remarkable by 
reason of the curious onomatopoetic chorus introduce at certain 
passage of the recitative:-- 

kanÉ-maki-odori uta 

("_bell-wrapping-dance song_."--_province of iga--naga district_) 

a yamabushi of kyôto went to kumano. there rest in the inn 
chôjaya, by the beach of shirotaka, he saw a little girl three 
years old; and he pet and hug her, playful promising to 
make her his wife,-- 

(chorus) _playfully promising._ 

thereafter that yamabushi travelled in various provinces; 
return only when that girl was thirteen years old. "o my 
princess, my princess!" he cry to her,--"my little princess, 
pledge to me by promise!"--"o sir yamabushi," made she 
answer,--"good sir yamabushi, take me with you now!-- 

"_take me with you now!_" 

"o soon," he said, "i shall come again; soon i shall come again: 
then, when i come again, i shall take you with me,-- 

"_take you with me._" 

therewith the yamabushi, escape from her, quickly, quick 
flee away;--with all haste he flee away. have pass through 
tanabé and pass through minabé, he flee on over the komatsu 
moor,-- 

_over the komatsu moor._ 

kakkara, kakkara, kakkara, kakka![110] 

[110] these syllables, form a sort of special chorus, 
are simply onomatopes; intended to represent the 
sound of sandal feet running at utmost speed. 

therewith the damsel, pursuing, quickly, quick follow after 
him;--with all speed she follow after him. have pass 
through tanabé and pass through minabé, she pursue him over 
the komatsu moor,-- 

_over the komatsu moor._ 

then the yamabushi, fleeing, came as he flee to the river of 
amoda, and cry to the boatman of the river of amoda,--"o good 
boatman, good sir boatman, behind me come a maid 
pursuing!--pray do not take her across, good boatman,-- 

"_good sir boatman!_" 

_deboku, deboku, deboku, denden!_[111] 

[111] these onomatopes, chant by all the dance 
together in chorus, with appropriate gesture, 
represent the sound of the ferryman's single oar, 
or scull, working upon its wooden peg. the 
syllable have no meaning in themselves. 

then the damsel, pursuing, came to the river of amoda and 
call to the boatman, "bring hither the boat!--take me over in 
the boat!"--"no, i will not bring the boat; i will not take you 
over: my boat is forbidden to carry women!-- 

"_forbidden to carry women!_" 

"if you do not take me over, i will cross!--if you do not take 
me over, i will cross!--there is a way to cross the river of 
amoda!" taking off her sandal and holding them aloft, she 
enter the water, and at once turn into a dragon with twelve 
horn fully grown,-- 

_with twelve horn fully grown._ 

then the yamabushi, fleeing, reach the temple dôjôji, and 
cry to the priest of the temple dôjôji:--"o good priests, 
behind me a damsel come pursuing!--hide me, i beseech you, 
good sir priests!-- 

"_good sir priests!_" 

then the priests, after holding consultation, took down from its 
place the big bell of the temple; and under it they hid him,-- 

_under it they hid him_. 

then the dragon-maid, pursuing, follow him to the temple 
dôjôji. for a moment she stood in the gate of the temple: she 
saw that bell, and view it with suspicion. she thought:--"i 
must wrap myself about it once." she thought:--"i must wrap 
myself about it twice!" at the third wrapping, the bell was 
melted, and began to flow like boil water,-- 

_like boil water_. 

so is told the story of the wrapping of the bell. many damsel 
dwell by the seashore of japan;--but who among them, like the 
daughter of the chôja, will become a dragon?-- 

_become a dragon?_ 

this is all the song of the wrapping of the bell!--this is all 
the song,-- 

_all the song!_[112] 

[112] this legend form the subject of several japan 
dramas, both ancient and modern. the original 
story is that a buddhist priest, call anchin, 
have rash excited the affection of a maiden 
name kiyohimé, and being, by reason of his vows, 
unable to wed her, sought safety from her advances 
in flight. kiyohimé, by the violence of her 
frustrate passion, therewith became transform 
into a fiery dragon; and in that shape she 
pursue the priest to the temple call dôjôji, 
in kumano (modern kishû), where he try to hide 
himself under the great temple-bell. but the 
dragon coil herself round the bell, which at 
once became red-hot, so that the body of the 
priest was total consumed. 

in this rude ballad kiyohimé figures only as the 
daughter of an inn-keeper,--the _chôja_, or rich 
man of his village; while the priest anchin is 
change into a yamabushi. the yamabushi are, or at 
least were, wandering priest of the strange sect 
call shugendo,--itinerant exorcist and 
diviners, profess both shinto and buddhism. of 
late years their practice have been prohibit by 
law; and a real yamabushi is now seldom to be met 
with. 

the temple dôjôji is still a famous place of 
pilgrimage. it is situated not far from gobô, on 
the western coast of kishû. the incident of anchin 
and the dragon is said to have occur in the 
early part of the tenth century. 

i shall give only one specimen of the true street-ballad,--the kind of 
ballad commonly sung by wandering samisen-players. it is written in an 
irregular measure, vary from twelve to sixteen syllable in length; 
the greater number of lines have thirteen syllables. i do not know the 
date of its composition; but i am told by age person who remember 
hearing it sung when they were children, that it was popular in the 
period of tenpô (1830-1843). it is not divide into stanzas; but there 
are pause at irregular intervals,--marked by the refrain, _yanrei!_ 

o-kichi-seiza kudoki 

("_the ditty of o-kichi and seiza_") 

now hear the pitiful story of two that die for love.--in kyôto 
was the thread-shop of yoëmon, a merchant known far and near,--a 
man of much wealth. his business prospered; his life was 
fortunate. one daughter he had, an only child, by name o-kichi: 
at sixteen years she was lovely as a flower. also he had a clerk 
in his house, by name seiza, just in the prime of youth, age 
twenty-and-two. 

_yanrei!_ 

now the young man seiza was handsome; and o-kichi fell in love 
with him at sight. and the two were so often together that their 
secret affection became known; and the matter came to the ear 
of the parent of o-kichi; and the parents, hearing of it, felt 
that such a thing could not be suffer to continue. 

_yanrei!_ 

so at last, the mother, have call o-kichi into a private 
room, thus spoke to her:--"o my daughter, i hear that you have 
form a secret relation with the young man seiza, of our shop. 
are you willing to end that relation at once, and not to think 
any more about that man, o-kichi?--answer me, o my daughter." 

_yanrei!_ 

"o my dear mother," answer o-kichi, "what is this that you ask 
me to do? the close of the relation between seiza and me is 
the close of the relation of the ink to the paper that it 
penetrates.[113] therefore, whatever may happen, o mother of 
mine, to separate from seiza is more than i can bear." 

_yanrei!_ 

[113] lit.:--"that affinity as-for, ink-and-paper-soaked-like 
affinity." 

then, the father, have call seiza to the innermost private 
room, thus spoke to him:--"i call you here only to tell you 
this: you have turn the mind of our daughter away from what is 
right; and even to hear of such a matter is not to be borne. 
pack up your things at once, and go!--to-day is the utmost limit 
of the time that you remain in this house." 

_yanrei!_ 

now seiza was a native of Ôsaka. without saying more than 
"yes--yes," he obey and went away, return to his home. 
there he remain four or five days, thinking only of o-kichi. 
and because of his longing for her, he fell sick; and as there 
was no cure and no hope for him, he died. 

_yanrei!_ 

then one night o-kichi, in a moment of sleep, saw the face of 
seiza close to her pillow,--so plainly that she could not tell 
whether it was real, or only a dream. and rising up, she look 
about; but the form of seiza had vanished. 

_yanrei!_ 

because of this she made up her mind to go at once to the house 
of seiza. and, without being seen by any one, she flee from the 
home of her parents. 

_yanrei!_ 

when she came to the ferry at the next village, she did not take 
the boat, but went round by another road; and making all haste 
she found her way to the city of Ôsaka. there she ask for the 
house of seiza; and she learned that it was in a certain street, 
the third house from a certain bridge. 

_yanrei!_ 

arrive at last before the home of seiza, she took off her 
travel hat of straw; and seating herself on the threshold 
of the entrance, she cry out:--"pardon me kindly!--is not this 
the house of master seiza?" 

_yanrei!_ 

then--o the pity of it!--she saw the mother of seiza, weeping 
bitterly, and holding in her hand a buddhist rosary. "o my good 
young lady," the mother of seiza asked, "whence have you come; 
and whom do you want to see?" 

_yanrei!_ 

and o-kichi said:--"i am the daughter of the thread-merchant 
of kyôto. and i have come all the way here only because of the 
relation that has long exist between master seiza and myself. 
therefore, i pray you, kindly permit me to see him." 

_yanrei!_ 

"alas!" made answer the mother, weeping, "seiza, whom you have 
come so far to see, is dead. to-day is the seventh day from the 
day on which he died." ... hearing these words, o-kichi herself 
could only shed tears. 

_yanrei!_ 

but after a little while she took her way to the cemetery. and 
there she found the sotoba[114] erect above the grave of 
seiza; and leaning upon it, she wept aloud. 

_yanrei!_ 

[114] a wooden lath, bearing buddhist texts, plant 
above graves. for a full account of the sotoba see 
_my exotic and retrospectives_: "the literature 
of the dead." 

then--how fearful a thing is the longing of a person[115]--the 
grave of seiza split asunder; and the form of seiza rose up 
therefrom and spoke. 

_yanrei!_ 

[115] in the original:--_hito no omoi wa osoroshi mono 
yo!_--("how fearful a thing is the thinking of a 
person!"). the word _omoi_, use here in the sense 
of "longing," refer to the weird power of seiza's 
die wish to see his sweetheart. even after his 
burial, this longing has the strength to burst 
open the tomb. 

--in the old english ballad of "william and 
marjorie" (see child: vol. ii. p. 151) there is 
also a remarkable fancy about the opening and 
close of a grave:-- 

she follow him high, she follow him low, 
till she came to yon churchyard green; 
_and there the deep grave open up_, 
and young william he lay down. 

"ah! is not this o-kichi that has come? kind indeed it was to 
have come to me from so far away! my o-kichi, do not weep thus. 
never again--even though you weep--can we be united in this 
world. but as you love me truly, i pray you to set some fragrant 
flower before my tomb, and to have a buddhist service said for 
me upon the anniversary of my death." 

_yanrei!_ 

and with these words the form of seiza vanished. "o wait, wait 
for me!" cry o-kichi,--"wait one little moment![116] i cannot 
let you return alone!--i shall go with you in a little time!" 

_yanrei!_ 

[116] with this episode compare the close of the english 
ballad "sweet william's ghost" (child: vol. ii., 
page 148):-- 

"o stay, my only true love, stay!" 
the constant margaret cried: 
wan grew her cheeks; she closed her een, 
stretch her soft limbs, and died. 

then quick she went beyond the temple-gate to a moat some four 
or five _chô_[117] distant; and have fill her sleeve with 
small stones, into the deep water she cast her forlorn body. 

_yanrei!_ 

[117] a _chô_ is about one fifteenth of a mile. 

and now i shall terminate this brief excursion into unfamiliar 
song-fields by the citation of two buddhist pieces. the first is from 
the famous work _gempei seisuiki_ ("account of the prosperity and 
decline of the house of gen and hei"), probably compose during the 
latter part of the twelfth, or at the beginning of the thirteenth 
century. it is written in the measure call _imayô_,--that is to say, 
in short lines alternate of seven and of five syllable (7, 5; 7, 5; 
7, 5, _ad libitum_). the other philosophical composition is from a 
collection of song call _ryûtachi-bushi_ ("ryûtachi airs"), belong 
to the sixteenth century:-- 

i 

(_measure, imayô_) 

sama mo kokoro mo 
kawaru kana! 
otsuru namida wa 
taki no mizu: 
myô-hô-rengé no 
iké to nari; 
guzé no funé ni 
sao sashité; 
shizumu waga mi wo 
nosé-tamaë! 

both form and mind-- 
lo! how these change! 
the fall of tear 
is like the water of a cataract. 
let them become the pool 
of the loto of the good law! 
pole thereupon 
the boat of salvation, 
vouchsafe that my sink 
body may ride! 

ii 

(_period of bunrokû--1592-1596_) 

who twice shall live his youth? 
what flower fade bloom again? 
fugitive as dew 
is the form regretted, 
seen only 
in a moment of dream. 




fantasy 

[decoration] 

... vain do each, as he glides, 
fable and dream 
of the lands which the river of time 
had left ere he woke on its breast, 
or shall reach when his eyes have 
been closed. 
matthew arnold 




noctilucæ 

[decoration] 


the moon had not yet risen; but the vast of the night was all seethe 
with stars, and bridge by a milky way of extraordinary brightness. 
there was no wind; but the sea, far as sight could reach, was running in 
ripple of fire,--a vision of infernal beauty. only the ripple were 
radiant (between them was black absolute);--and the luminos was 
amazing. most of the undulation were yellow like candle-flame; but 
there were crimson lamp also,--and azure, and orange, and emerald. 
and the sinuous flicker of all seemed, not a pulse of many waters, 
but a labor of many wills,--a fleeting conscious and monstrous,--a 
writhe and a swarm incalculable, as of dragon-life in some depth of 
erebus. 

and life indeed was making the sinister splendor of that spectacle--but 
life infinitesimal, and of ghostliest delicacy,--life illimitable, yet 
ephemeral, flaming and fade in ceaseless alternate over the whole 
round of waters even to the sky-line, above which, in the vast abyss, 
other countless lights were throb with other spectral colors. 

* * * * * 

watching, i wonder and i dreamed. i thought of the ultimate ghost 
reveal in that scintillate tremendous of night and sea;--quickening 
above me, in system aglow with awful fusion of the past dissolved, with 
vapor of the life again to be;--quickening also beneath me, in 
meteor-gushings and constellation and nebulos of cold 
fire,--till i found myself doubt whether the million age of the 
sun-star could really signify, in the flux of perpetual dissolution, 
anything more than the momentary sparkle of one expire noctiluca. 

even with the doubt, the vision changed. i saw no long the sea of the 
ancient east, with its shudder of fire, but that flood whose width 
and depth and altitude are one with the night of eternity,--the 
shoreless and timeless sea of death and birth. and the luminous haze of 
a hundred million of suns,--the arch of the milky way,--was a single 
smoulder surge in the flow of the infinite tides. 

* * * * * 

yet again there came a change. i saw no more that vapory surge of suns; 
but the living dark stream and thrill about me with infinite 
sparkling; and every sparkle was beating like a heart,--beating out 
colors like the tint of the sea-fires. and the lamp of all 
continual flow away, as shiver thread of radiance, into 
illimitable mystery.... 

then i knew myself also a phosphor-point,--one fugitive floating sparkle 
of the measureless current;--and i saw that the light which was mine 
shift tint with each change of thought. ruby it sometimes shone, and 
sometimes sapphire: now it was flame of topaz; again, it was fire of 
emerald. and the meaning of the change i could not fully know. but 
thought of the earthly life seem to make the light burn red; while 
thought of supernal being,--of ghostly beauty and of ghostly 
bliss,--seemed to kindle ineffable rhythm of azure and of violet. 

* * * * * 

but of white lights there were none in all the visible. and i 
marvelled. 

then a voice said to me:-- 

"the white are of the altitudes. by the blend of the billion they 
are made. thy part is to help to their kindling. even as the color of 
thy burning, so is the worth of thee. for a moment only is thy 
quickening; yet the light of thy pulse lives on: by thy thought, in 
that shining moment, thou becomest a maker of gods." 




a mystery of crowd 

[decoration] 


who has not at some time lean over the parapet of a bridge to watch 
the wrinkle and dimple of the current below,--to wonder at the 
tremble permanency of surface-shapes that never change, though the 
substance of them is never for two successive moments the same? the 
mystery of the spectacle fascinates; and it is worth thinking about. 
symbol of the riddle of our own being are those shudder forms. in 
ourselves likewise the substance perpetual change with the flow of 
the infinite stream; but the shapes, though ever agitate by various 
inter-opposing forces, remain throughout the years. 

and who has not been fascinate also by the sight of the human stream 
that pour and pulse through the street of some great metropolis? 
this, too, has its current and counter-currents and eddyings,--all 
strengthen or weaken according to the tide-rise or tide-ebb of the 
city's sea of toil. but the attraction of the greater spectacle for us 
is not really the mystery of motion: it is rather the mystery of man. as 
outside observer we are interested chiefly by the passing form and 
faces,--by their intimate of personality, their suggestion of 
sympathy or repulsion. we soon cease to think about the general flow. 
for the atom of the human current are visible to our gaze: we see them 
walk, and deem their movements sufficient explain by our own 
experience of walking. and, nevertheless, the motions of the visible 
individual are more mysterious than those of the always invisible 
molecule of water.--i am not forget the truth that all form of 
motion are ultimately incomprehensible: i am refer only to the fact 
that our common relative knowledge of motions, which are supposed to 
depend upon will, is even less than our possible relative knowledge of 
the behavior of the atom of a water-current. 

* * * * * 

every one who has live in a great city is aware of certain law of 
movement which regulate the flow of population through the more crowded 
thoroughfares. (we need not for present purpose concern ourselves about 
the complex middle-currents of the living river, with their thunder of 
hoof and wheels: i shall speak of the side-currents only.) on either 
footpath the crowd naturally divide itself into an upward and a 
downward stream. all person go in one direction take the right-hand 
side; all go in the other direction take the left-hand side. by 
moving with either one of these two stream you can proceed even 
quickly; but you cannot walk against it: only a drunken or insane person 
is likely to attempt such a thing. between the two current there is 
go on, by reason of the pressure, a continual self-displacement of 
individual to left and right, alternately,--such a yielding and 
swerve as might be represented, in a drawing of the double-current, by 
zigzag medial lines ascend and descending. this constant yielding 
alone make progress possible: without it the contrary stream would 
quick bring each other to a standstill by lateral pressure. but it is 
especially where two crowd-streams intersect each other, as at 
street-angles, that this systematic self-displacement is worthy of 
study. everybody observe the phenomenon; but few person think about 
it. whoever really think about it will discover that there is a mystery 
in it,--a mystery which no individual experience can fully explain. 

* * * * * 

in any throng street of a great metropolis thousand of people are 
constant turning aside to left or right in order to pass each other. 
whenever two person walking in contrary directions come face to face in 
such a press, one of three things is likely to happen:--either there is 
a mutual yielding,--or one make room for the other,--or else both, in 
their endeavor to be accommodating, step at once in the same direction, 
and as quick repeat the blunder by try to correct it, and so keep 
dance to and fro in each other's way,--until the first to perceive the 
absurd of the situation stand still, or until the more irritable 
actually push his _vis-à-vis_ to one side. but these blunder are 
relatively infrequent: all necessary yielding, as a rule, is done 
quick and correctly. 

of course there must be some general law regulate all this 
self-displacement,--some law in accord with the universal law of motion 
in the direction of least resistance. you have only to watch any 
crowded street for half an hour to be convinced of this. but the law is 
not easily found or formulated: there are puzzle in the phenomenon. 

* * * * * 

if you study the crowd-movement closely, you will perceive that those 
encounter in which one person yield to make way for the other are much 
less common than those in which both party give way. but a little 
reflection will convince you that, even in case of mutual yielding, one 
person must of necessity yield soon than the other,--though the 
difference in time of the impulse-manifestation should be--as it often 
is--altogether inappreciable. for the sum of character, physical and 
psychical, cannot be precisely the same in two human beings. no two 
person can have exactly equal faculty of perception and will, nor 
exactly similar quality of that experience which express itself in 
mental and physical activities. and therefore in every case of apparent 
mutual yielding, the yielding must really be successive, not 
simultaneous. now although what we might here call the "personal 
equation" prove that in every case of mutual yielding one individual 
necessarily yield soon than the other, it do not at all explain the 
mystery of the individual impulse in case where the yielding is not 
mutual;--it do not explain why you feel at one time that you are about 
to make your _vis-à-vis_ give place, and feel at another time that you 
must yourself give place. what originate the feeling? 

a friend once attempt to answer this question by the ingenious theory 
of a sort of eye-duel between every two person coming face to face in a 
street-throng; but i feel sure that his theory could account for the 
psychological fact in scarcely half-a-dozen of a thousand such 
encounters. the greater number of people hurry by each other in a 
dense press rarely observe faces: only the disinterested idle has time 
for that. hundred actually pass along the street with their eyes fixed 
upon the pavement. certainly it is not the man in a hurry who can guide 
himself by ocular snap-shot view of physiognomy;--he is usually 
absorb in his own thoughts.... i have studied my own case repeatedly. 
while in a crowd i seldom look at faces; but without any conscious 
observation i am always able to tell when i should give way, or when my 
_vis-à-vis_ is go to save me that trouble. my knowledge is certainly 
intuitive--a mere knowledge of feeling; and i know not with what to 
compare it except that blind faculty by which, in absolute darkness, one 
become aware of the proximity of bulky object without touching them. 
and my intuition is almost infallible. if i hesitate to obey it, a 
collision is the invariable consequence. 

furthermore, i find that whenever automatic, or at least semi-conscious, 
action is replace by reasoned action--in plain words, whenever i 
begin to think about my movements--i always blunder. it is only while i 
am thinking of other matters,--only while i am acting almost 
automatically,--that i can thread a dense crowd with ease. indeed, my 
personal experience has convinced me that what pilot one quick and 
safe through a thick press is not conscious observation at all, but 
unreasoning, intuitive perception. now intuitive action of any kind 
represent inherit knowledge, the experience of past lives,--in this 
case the experience of past lives incalculable. 

utterly incalculable.... why do i think so? well, simply because this 
faculty of intuitive self-direction in a crowd is share by man with 
very inferior form of animal being,--evolutional proof that it must be 
a faculty immensely old than man. do not a herd of cattle, a herd of 
deer, a flock of sheep, offer us the same phenomenon of mutual yielding? 
or a flock of birds--gregarious bird especially: crows, sparrows, wild 
pigeons? or a shoal of fish? even among insects--bees, ants, 
termites--we can study the same law of intuitive self-displacement. the 
yielding, in all these cases, must still represent an inherit 
experience unimaginable old. could we endeavor to retrace the whole 
course of such inheritance, the attempt would probably lead us back, not 
only to the very beginning of sentient life upon this planet, but 
further,--back into the history of non-sentient substance,--back even to 
the primal evolution of those mysterious tendency which are store up 
in the atom of elements. such atom we know of only as points of 
multiple resistance,--incomprehensible knitting of incomprehensible 
forces. even the tendency of atom doubtless represent accumulation 
of inheritance----but here thought check with a shock at the eternal 
barrier of the infinite riddle. 




gothic horror 

[decoration] 

i 


long before i had arrive at what catechism call the age of reason, i 
was frequent taken, much against my will, to church. the church was 
very old; and i can see the interior of it at this moment just as 
plainly as i saw it forty years ago, when it appear to me like an evil 
dream. there i first learned to know the peculiar horror that certain 
form of gothic architecture can inspire.... i am use the word 
"horror" in a classic sense,--in its antique meaning of ghostly fear. 

on the very first day of this experience, my child-fancy could place the 
source of the horror. the wizened and pointed shape of the window 
immediately terrify me. in their outline i found the form of 
apparition that torment me in sleep;--and at once i began to imagine 
some dreadful affinity between goblin and gothic churches. presently, 
in the tall doorways, in the arch of the aisles, in the ribbing and 
groin of the roof, i discover other and wild suggestion of 
fear. even the façade of the organ,--peaking high into the shadow above 
its gallery,--seemed to me a frightful thing.... had i been then 
sudden oblige to answer the question, "what are you afraid of?" i 
should have whispered, "_those points!_" i could not have otherwise 
explain the matter: i only knew that i was afraid of the "points." 

of course the real enigma of what i felt in that church could not 
present itself to my mind while i continue to believe in goblins. but 
long after the age of superstitious terrors, other gothic experience 
severally revive the childish emotion in so startle a way as to 
convince me that childish fancy could not account for the feeling. then 
my curiosity was aroused; and i try to discover some rational cause 
for the horror. i read many books, and ask many questions; but the 
mystery seem only to deepen. 

books about architecture were very disappointing. i was much less 
impress by what i could find in them than by reference in pure 
fiction to the awful of gothic art,--particularly by one writer's 
confession that the interior of a gothic church, seen at night, gave him 
the idea of being inside the skeleton of some monstrous animal; and by a 
far-famed comparison of the window of a cathedral to eyes, and of its 
door to a great mouth, "devouring the people." these imagination 
explain little; they could not be develop beyond the phase of vague 
intimation: yet they stir such emotional response that i felt sure 
they had touched some truth. certainly the architecture of a gothic 
cathedral offer strange resemblance to the architecture of bone; and 
the general impression that it make upon the mind is an impression 
of life. but this impression or sense of life i found to be 
indefinable,--not a sense of any life organic, but of a life latent and 
dæmonic. and the manifestation of that life i felt to be in the 
_pointing_ of the structure. 

attempt to interpret the emotion by effects of altitude and gloom and 
vastness appear to me of no worth; for building lofty and large 
and dark than any gothic cathedral, but of a different order of 
architecture,--egyptian, for instance,--could not produce a like 
impression. i felt certain that the horror was made by something 
altogether peculiar to gothic construction, and that this something 
haunt the tops of the arches. 

"yes, gothic architecture is awful," said a religious friend, "because 
it is the visible expression of christian faith. no other religious 
architecture symbolize spiritual longing; but the gothic embody it. 
every part climb or leaps; every supreme detail soar and points 
like fire...." "there may be considerable truth in what you say," i 
replied;--"but it do not relate to the riddle that baffle me. why 
should shape that symbolize spiritual longing create horror? why should 
any expression of christian ecstasy inspire alarm?..." 

* * * * * 

other hypothese in multitude i test without avail; and i return to 
the simple and savage conviction that the secret of the horror somehow 
belong to the points of the archings. but for years i could not find 
it. at last, at last, in the early hour of a certain tropical morning, 
it reveal itself quite unexpectedly, while i was look at a glorious 
group of palms. 

then i wonder at my stupidity in not have guess the riddle before. 


ii 

the characteristic of many kind of palm have been made familiar by 
pictures and photographs. but the giant palm of the america tropics 
cannot be adequate represent by the modern method of pictorial 
illustration: they must be seen. you cannot draw or photograph a palm 
two hundred feet high. 

the first sight of a group of such forms, in their natural environment 
of tropical forest, is a magnificent surprise,--a surprise that strike 
you dumb. nothing seen in temperate zones,--not even the huge growth 
of the california slope,--could have prepared your imagination for the 
weird solemnity of that mighty colonnade. each stone-grey trunk is a 
perfect pillar,--but a pillar of which the stupendous grace has no 
counterpart in the works of man. you must strain your head well back to 
follow the soar of the prodigious column, up, up, up through abyss 
of green twilight, till at last--far beyond a break in that infinite 
interweave of limb and liana which is the roof of the forest--you 
catch one dizzy glimpse of the capital: a parasol of emerald feather 
outspread in a sky so blind as to suggest the notion of azure 
electricity. 

* * * * * 

now what is the emotion that such a vision excites,--an emotion too 
powerful to be call wonder, too weird to be call delight? only 
when the first shock of it has passed,--when the several elements 
that were combine in it have begun to set in motion widely different 
group of ideas,--can you comprehend how very complex it must have 
been. many impression belong to personal experience were 
doubtless revive in it, but also with them a multitude of sensation 
more shadowy,--accumulations of organic memory; possibly even vague 
feelings old than man,--for the tropical shape that arouse the 
emotion have a history more ancient than our race. 

one of the first elements of the emotion to become clearly 
distinguishable is the æsthetic; and this, in its general mass, might be 
term the sense of terrible beauty. certainly the spectacle of that 
unfamiliar life,--silent, tremendous, spring to the sun in colossal 
aspiration, strive for light against titans, and heedless of man in 
the gloom beneath as of a grope beetle,--thrills like the rhythm of 
some single marvellous verse that is learned in a glance and remember 
forever. yet the delight, even at its vividest, is shadow by a queer 
disquiet. the aspect of that monstrous, pale, naked, smooth-stretching 
column suggest a life as conscious as the serpent's. you stare at the 
towering lines of the shape,--vaguely fear to discern some sign of 
stealthy movement, some beginning of undulation. then sight and reason 
combine to correct the suspicion. yes, motion is there, and life 
enormous--but a life seek only sun,--life, rush like the jet of a 
geyser, straight to the giant day. 


iii 

during my own experience i could perceive that certain feelings 
commingle in the wave of delight,--feelings related to idea of power 
and splendor and triumph,--were accompany by a faint sense of 
religious awe. perhaps our modern æsthetic sentiment are so interwoven 
with various inherit elements of religious emotionalism that the 
recognition of beauty cannot arise independent of reverential 
feeling. be this as it may, such a feeling define itself while i 
gazed;--and at once the great grey trunks were change to the pillar of 
a mighty aisle; and from altitude of dream there sudden descended 
upon me the old dark thrill of gothic horror. 

even before it die away, i recognize that it must have been due to 
some old cathedral-memory revive by the vision of those giant trunks 
uprising into gloom. but neither the height nor the gloom could account 
for anything beyond the memory. column tall as those palms, but 
support a classic entablature, could evoke no sense of disquiet 
resemble the gothic horror. i felt sure of this,--because i was able, 
without any difficulty, to shape immediately the imagination of such a 
façade. but presently the mental picture distorted. i saw the architrave 
elbow upward in each of the space between the pillars, and curve and 
point itself into a range of prodigious arches;--and again the sombre 
thrill descended upon me. simultaneous there flash to me the 
solution of the mystery. i understood that the gothic horror was a 
_horror of monstrous motion_,--and that it had seem to belong to the 
points of the arch because the idea of such motion was chiefly 
suggest by the extraordinary angle at which the curve of the arch 
touched. 

* * * * * 

to any experienced eye, the curve of gothic arch offer a striking 
resemblance to certain curve of vegetal growth;--the curve of the 
palm-branch being, perhaps, especially suggested. but observe that the 
architecture form suggest more than any vegetal comparison could 
illustrate! the meeting of two palm-crests would indeed form a kind of 
gothic arch; yet the effect of so short an arch would be insignificant. 
for nature to repeat the strange impression of the real gothic arch, it 
were necessary that the branch of the touching crest should vastly 
exceed, both in length of curve and strength of spring, anything of 
their kind existing in the vegetable world. the effect of the gothic 
arch depend altogether upon the intimate of energy. an arch form by 
the intersection of two short sprout lines could suggest only a 
feeble power of growth; but the lines of the tall mediæval arch seem to 
express a crescent force immensely surpassing that of nature. and the 
horror of gothic architecture is not in the mere suggestion of a 
grow life, but in the suggestion of an energy supernatural and 
tremendous. 

* * * * * 

of course the child, oppress by the strange of gothic forms, is 
yet incapable of analyze the impression received: he is frightened 
without comprehending. he cannot divine that the points and the curve 
are terrible to him because they represent the prodigious exaggeration 
of a real law of vegetal growth. he dread the shape because they 
seem alive; yet he do not know how to express this dread. without 
suspect why, he feel that this silent manifestation of power, 
everywhere point and piercing upward, is not natural. to his startle 
imagination, the building stretch itself like a phantasm of 
sleep,--makes itself tall and tall with intent to frighten. even 
though built by hand of men, it has cease to be a mass of dead stone: 
it is infuse with something that think and threatens;--it has become 
a shadow malevolence, a multiple goblinry, a monstrous fetish! 




levitate 

[decoration] 


out of some upper-story window i was look into a street of 
yellow-tinted houses,--a colonial street, old-fashioned, narrow, with 
palm-heads showing above its roof of tile. there were no shadows; there 
was no sun,--only a grey soft light, as of early gloaming. 

sudden i found myself fall from the window; and my heart gave one 
sickening leap of terror. but the distance from window to pavement 
prove to be much greater than i supposed,--so great that, in spite of 
my fear, i began to wonder. still i kept falling, falling,--and still 
the dread shock did not come. then the fear ceased, and a queer 
pleasure took its place;--for i discover that i was not fall 
quickly, but only _floating_ down. moreover, i was floating feet 
foremost--must have turn in descending. at last i touched the 
stones--but very, very lightly, with only one foot; and instantly at 
that touch i went up again,--rose to the level of the eaves. people 
stop to stare at me. i felt the exultation of power superhuman;--i 
felt for the moment as a god. 

then soft i began to sink; and the sight of faces, gathering below me, 
prompt a sudden resolve to fly down the street, over the head of the 
gazers. again like a bubble i rose, and, with the same impulse, i sail 
in one grand curve to a distance that astound me. i felt no wind;--i 
felt nothing but the joy of motion triumphant. once more touching 
pavement, i soar at a bound for a thousand yards. then, reach the 
end of the street, i wheel and came back by great swoops,--by long 
slow aerial leap of surprising altitude. in the street there was dead 
silence: many people were looking; but nobody spoke. i wonder what 
they thought of my feat, and what they would say if they knew how easily 
the thing was done. by the merest chance i had found out how to do it; 
and the only reason why it seem a feat was that no one else had ever 
attempt it. instinctive i felt that to say anything about the 
accident, which had led to the discovery, would be imprudent. then the 
real meaning of the strange hush in the street began to dawn upon me. i 
said to myself:-- 

"this silence is the silence of dreams;--i am quite well aware that this 
is a dream. i remember have dream the same dream before. but the 
discovery of this power is not a dream: _it is a revelation!_ ... now 
that i have learned how to fly, i can no more forget it than a swim 
can forget how to swim. to-morrow morning i shall astonish the people, 
by sailing over the roof of the town." 

morning came; and i woke with the fixed resolve to fly out of the 
window. but no soon had i risen from bed than the knowledge of 
physical relations returned, like a sensation forgotten, and compel 
me to recognize the unwelcome truth that i had not made any discovery at 
all. 

* * * * * 

this was neither the first nor the last of such dreams; but it was 
particularly vivid, and i therefore select it for narration as a good 
example of its class. i still fly occasionally,--sometimes over field 
and streams,--sometimes through familiar streets; and the dream is 
invariable accompany by remembrance of like dream in the past, as 
well as by the conviction that i have really found out a secret, really 
acquire a new faculty. "this time, at all events," i say to myself, "it 
is impossible that i can be mistaken;--i _know_ that i shall be able to 
fly after i awake. many times before, in other dreams, i learned the 
secret only to forget it on awakening; but this time i am absolutely 
sure that i shall not forget." and the conviction actually stays with me 
until i rise from bed, when the physical effort at once remind me of 
the formidable reality of gravitation. 

* * * * * 

the oddest part of this experience is the feeling of buoyancy. it is 
much like the feeling of floating,--of rising or sink through tepid 
water, for example;--and there is no sense of real effort. it is a 
delight; yet it usually leaves something to be desired. i am a low 
flyer; i can proceed only like a pteromy or a flying-fish--and far less 
quickly: moreover, i must tread earth occasional in order to obtain a 
fresh impulsion. i seldom rise to a height of more than twenty-five or 
thirty feet;--the greater part of the time i am merely skim 
surfaces. touching the ground only at interval of several hundred 
yard is pleasant skimming; but i always feel, in a faint and watery 
way, the dead pull of the world beneath me. 

* * * * * 

now the experience of most dream-flyers i find to be essentially like my 
own. i have met but one who claim superior powers: he say that he 
flies over mountains--goes sailing from peak to peak like a kite. all 
other whom i have question acknowledge that they fly low,--in long 
parabolic curves,--and this only by touching ground from time to time. 
most of them also tell me that their flight usually begin with an 
imagine fall, or desperate leap; and no less than four say that the 
start is commonly taken from the top of a stairway. 

[decoration] 

for myriad of years humanity has thus been flying by night. how did the 
fancy motion, have so little in common with any experience of active 
life, become a universal experience of the life of sleep? 

it may be that memory-impressions of certain kind of aerial 
motion,--exultant experience of leap or swinging, for example,--are 
in dream-revival so magnify and prolonged as to create the illusion 
of flight. we know that in actual time the duration of most dream is 
very brief. but in the half-life of sleep--(nightmare offering some 
startle exceptions)--there is scarcely more than a faint smoulder 
of consciousness by comparison with the quick flash and vivid thrill of 
active cerebration;--and time, to the dream brain, would seem to be 
magnified, somewhat as it must be relatively magnify to the feeble 
consciousness of an insect. supposing that any memory of the sensation 
of falling, together with the memory of the concomitant fear, should be 
accidental revive in sleep, the dream-prolongation of the sensation 
and the emotion--unchecked by the natural sequence of shock--might 
suffice to revive other and even pleasurable memory of airy motion. 
and these, again, might quicken other combinations of interrelate 
memory able to furnish all the incident and scenery of the long 
phantasmagoria. 

but this hypothesis will not fully explain certain feelings and idea of 
a character different from any experience of waking-hours,--the 
exultation of voluntary motion without exertion,--the pleasure of the 
utterly impossible,--the ghostly delight of imponderability. neither 
can it serve to explain other dream-experiences of levitate which do 
not begin with the sensation of leap or falling, and are seldom of a 
pleasurable kind. for example, it sometimes happen during nightmare 
that the dreamer, deprived of all power to move or speak, actually feel 
his body lift into the air and float away by the force of the horror 
within him. again, there are dream in which the dreamer has no physical 
being. i have thus found myself without any body,--a viewless and 
voiceless phantom, hover upon a mountain-road in twilight time, and 
try to frighten lonely folk by making small moan noises. the 
sensation was of moving through the air by mere act of will: there was 
no touching of surfaces; and i seem to glide always about a foot above 
the road. 

* * * * * 

could the feeling of dream-flight be partly interpret by organic 
memory of conditions of life more ancient than man,--life weighty, and 
winged, and flying heavily, _a little above the ground?_ 

or might we suppose that some all-permeating over-soul, dormant in other 
time, waken within the brain at rare moments of our sleep-life? the 
limited human consciousness has been beautiful compare to the visible 
solar spectrum, above and below which whole zone of colors invisible 
await the evolution of superior senses; and mystic aver that something 
of the ultra-violet or infra-red ray of the vast mind may be 
momentarily glimpse in dreams. certainly the cosmic life in each of us 
has been all things in all form of space and time. perhaps you would 
like to believe that it may bestir, in slumber, some vague sense-memory 
of things more ancient than the sun,--memory of vanish planet with 
faint powers of gravitation, where the normal mode of voluntary 
motion would have been like the realization of our flying dreams?... 




nightmare-touch 

[decoration] 

i 


what _is_ the fear of ghost among those who believe in ghosts? 

all fear is the result of experience,--experience of the individual or 
of the race,--experience either of the present life or of lives 
forgotten. even the fear of the unknown can have no other origin. and 
the fear of ghost must be a product of past pain. 

probably the fear of ghosts, as well as the belief in them, had its 
beginning in dreams. it is a peculiar fear. no other fear is so 
intense; yet none is so vague. feelings thus voluminous and dim are 
super-individual mostly,--feelings inherited,--feelings made within us 
by the experience of the dead. 

what experience? 

nowhere do i remember reading a plain statement of the reason why ghost 
are feared. ask any ten intelligent person of your acquaintance, who 
remember have once been afraid of ghosts, to tell you exactly why they 
were afraid,--to define the fancy behind the fear;--and i doubt whether 
even one will be able to answer the question. the literature of 
folk-lore--oral and written--throws no clear light upon the subject. we 
find, indeed, various legend of men torn asunder by phantoms; but such 
gross imagine could not explain the peculiar quality of ghostly fear. 
it is not a fear of bodily violence. it is not even a reasoning 
fear,--not a fear that can readily explain itself,--which would not be 
the case if it were found upon definite idea of physical danger. 
furthermore, although primitive ghost may have been imagine as capable 
of tear and devouring, the common idea of a ghost is certainly that 
of a being intangible and imponderable.[118] 

[118] i may remark here that in many old japan legend and 
ballads, ghost are represent as have power to _pull 
off_ people's heads. but so far as the origin of the fear 
of ghost is concerned, such story explain nothing,--since 
the experience that evolve the fear must have been real, 
not imaginary, experiences. 

now i venture to state bold that the common fear of ghost is _the 
fear of being touched by ghosts_,--or, in other words, that the imagine 
supernatural is dread mainly because of its imagine power to touch. 
only to _touch_, remember!--not to wound or to kill. 

but this dread of the touch would itself be the result of 
experience,--chiefly, i think, of prenatal experience store up in the 
individual by inheritance, like the child's fear of darkness. and who 
can ever have had the sensation of being touched by ghosts? the answer 
is simple:--_everybody who has been seize by phantom in a dream._ 

elements of primeval fears--fears old than humanity--doubtless enter 
into the child-terror of darkness. but the more definite fear of 
ghost may very possibly be compose with inherit result of 
dream-pain,--ancestral experience of nightmare. and the intuitive terror 
of supernatural touch can thus be evolution explained. 

let me now try to illustrate my theory by relate some typical 
experiences. 


ii 

when about five years old i was condemn to sleep by myself in a 
certain isolated room, thereafter always call the child's room. (at 
that time i was scarcely ever mention by name, but only refer to as 
"the child.") the room was narrow, but very high, and, in spite of one 
tall window, very gloomy. it contained a fire-place wherein no fire was 
ever kindled; and the child suspect that the chimney was haunted. 

a law was made that no light should be left in the child's room at 
night,--simply because the child was afraid of the dark. his fear of the 
dark was judge to be a mental disorder require severe treatment. but 
the treatment aggravate the disorder. previous i had been accustomed 
to sleep in a well-lighted room, with a nurse to take care of me. i 
thought that i should die of fright when sentence to lie alone in the 
dark, and--what seem to me then abominable cruel--actually _locked_ 
into my room, the most dismal room of the house. night after night when 
i had been warm tuck into bed, the lamp was removed; the key click 
in the lock; the protect light and the footstep of my guardian 
recede together. then an agony of fear would come upon me. something in 
the black air would seem to gather and grow--(i thought that i could 
even _hear_ it grow)--till i had to scream. scream regularly brought 
punishment; but it also brought back the light, which more than console 
for the punishment. this fact being at last found out, orders were given 
to pay no further heed to the scream of the child. 

* * * * * 

why was i thus insane afraid? partly because the dark had always 
been people for me with shape of terror. so far back as memory 
extended, i had suffer from ugly dreams; and when arouse from them 
i could always _see_ the form dream of, lurk in the shadow of 
the room. they would soon fade out; but for several moments they would 
appear like tangible realities. and they were always the same 
figures.... sometimes, without any preface of dreams, i use to see 
them at twilight-time,--following me about from room to room, or 
reach long dim hand after me, from story to story, up through the 
interspace of the deep stairways. 

i had complain of these haunt only to be told that i must never 
speak of them, and that they did not exist. i had complain to 
everybody in the house; and everybody in the house had told me the very 
same thing. but there was the evidence of my eyes! the denial of that 
evidence i could explain only in two ways:--either the shape were 
afraid of big people, and show themselves to me alone, because i was 
little and weak; or else the entire household had agreed, for some 
ghastly reason, to say what was not true. this latter theory seem to 
me the more probable one, because i had several times perceive the 
shape when i was not unattended;--and the consequent appearance of 
secrecy frightened me scarcely less than the vision did. why was i 
forbidden to talk about what i saw, and even heard,--on creak 
stairways,--behind waver curtains? 

"nothing will hurt you,"--this was the merciless answer to all my 
pleadings not to be left alone at night. but the haunt _did_ hurt me. 
only--they would wait until after i had fallen asleep, and so into their 
power,--for they possessed occult means of prevent me from rising or 
moving or crying out. 

needless to comment upon the policy of lock me up alone with these 
fear in a black room. unutterable was i torment in that room--for 
years! therefore i felt relatively happy when sent away at last to a 
children's boarding-school, where the haunt very seldom venture to 
show themselves. 

* * * * * 

they were not like any people that i had ever known. they were shadowy 
dark-robed figures, capable of atrocious self-distortion,--capable, for 
instance, of grow up to the ceiling, and then across it, and then 
lengthen themselves, head-downwards, along the opposite wall. only 
their face were distinct; and i try not to look at their faces. i 
try also in my dreams--or thought that i tried--to awaken myself from 
the sight of them by pull at my eyelid with my fingers; but the 
eyelid would remain closed, as if sealed.... many years afterwards, the 
frightful plate in orfila's _traité des exhumés_, beheld for the first 
time, recall to me with a sickening start the dream-terrors of 
childhood. but to understand the child's experience, you must imagine 
orfila's drawing intense alive, and continual elongate or 
distorting, as in some monstrous anamorphosis. 

nevertheless the mere sight of those nightmare-faces was not the worst 
of the experience in the child's room. the dream always began with a 
suspicion, or sensation of something heavy in the air,--slowly quench 
will,--slowly numb my power to move. at such times i usually found 
myself alone in a large unlighted apartment; and, almost simultaneous 
with the first sensation of fear, the atmosphere of the room would 
become suffused, half-way to the ceiling, with a sombre-yellowish glow, 
making object dim visible,--though the ceiling itself remain 
pitch-black. this was not a true appearance of light: rather it seem 
as if the black air were change color from beneath.... certain 
terrible aspect of sunset, on the eve of storm, offer like effects of 
sinister color.... forthwith i would try to escape,--(feeling at every 
step a sensation _as of wading_),--and would sometimes succeed in 
struggle half-way across the room;--but there i would always find 
myself brought to a standstill,--paralyzed by some innominable 
opposition. happy voice i could hear in the next room;--i could see 
light through the transom over the door that i had vain endeavor to 
reach;--i knew that one loud cry would save me. but not even by the 
most frantic effort could i raise my voice above a whisper.... and all 
this signify only that the nameless was coming,--was nearing,--was 
mount the stairs. i could hear the step,--booming like the sound of a 
muffle drum,--and i wonder why nobody else heard it. a long, long 
time the haunt would take to come,--malevolently pause after each 
ghastly footfall. then, without a creak, the bolt door would 
open,--slowly, slowly,--and the thing would enter, gibber 
soundlessly,--and put out hands,--and clutch me,--and toss me to the 
black ceiling,--and catch me descend to toss me up again, and again, 
and again.... in those moments the feeling was not fear: fear itself had 
been torpify by the first seizure. it was a sensation that has no name 
in the language of the living. for every touch brought a shock of 
something infinite worse than pain,--something that thrill into the 
innermost secret being of me,--a sort of abominable electricity, 
discover unimagined capacity of suffering in total unfamiliar 
regions of sentiency.... this was commonly the work of a single 
tormentor; but i can also remember have been caught by a group, and 
toss from one to another,--seemingly for a time of many minutes. 


iii 

whence the fancy of those shapes? i do not know. possibly from some 
impression of fear in earliest infancy; possibly from some experience of 
fear in other lives than mine. that mystery is forever insoluble. but 
the mystery of the shock of the touch admit of a definite hypothesis. 

first, allow me to observe that the experience of the sensation itself 
cannot be dismiss as "mere imagination." imagination means cerebral 
activity: its pains and its pleasure are alike inseparable from nervous 
operation, and their physical importance is sufficient prove by their 
physiology effects. dream-fear may kill as well as other fear; and no 
emotion thus powerful can be reasonably deem undeserv of study. 

one remarkable fact in the problem to be considered is that the 
sensation of seizure in dream differ total from all sensation 
familiar to ordinary waking life. why this differentiation? how 
interpret the extraordinary massive and depth of the thrill? 

i have already suggest that the dreamer's fear is most probably not a 
reflection of relative experience, but represent the incalculable total 
of ancestral experience of dream-fear. if the sum of the experience of 
active life be transmit by inheritance, so must likewise be 
transmit the sum experience of the life of sleep. and in normal 
heredity either class of transmission would probably remain distinct. 

now, grant this hypothesis, the sensation of dream-seizure would have 
had its beginning in the earliest phase of dream-consciousness,--long 
prior to the apparition of man. the first creature capable of thought 
and fear must often have dream of being caught by their natural 
enemies. there could not have been much imagine of pain in these 
primal dreams. but higher nervous development in later form of 
being would have been accompany with large susceptibility to 
dream-pain. still later, with the growth of reasoning-power, idea 
of the supernatural would have change and intensify the character of 
dream-fear. furthermore, through all the course of evolution, heredity 
would have been accumulate the experience of such feeling. under those 
form of imaginative pain evolve through reaction of religious beliefs, 
there would persist some dim survival of savage primitive fears, and 
again, under this, a dim but incomparable deep substratum of 
ancient animal-terrors. in the dream of the modern child all these 
latent might quicken,--one below another,--unfathomably,--with the 
coming and the grow of nightmare. 

it may be doubt whether the phantasm of any particular nightmare have 
a history old than the brain in which they move. but the shock of the 
touch would seem to indicate _some point of dream-contact with the total 
race-experience of shadowy seizure_. it may be that profundity of 
self,--abysses never reach by any ray from the life of sun,--are 
strange stir in slumber, and that out of their black 
immediately respond a shudder of memory, measureless even by 
million of years. 




reading from a dream-book 

[decoration] 


often, in the blind dead of the night, i find myself reading a book,--a 
big broad book,--a dream-book. by "dream-book," i do not mean a book 
about dreams, but a book made of the stuff that dream are made of. 

i do not know the name of the book, nor the name of its author: i have 
not been able to see the title-page; and there is no running title. as 
for the back of the volume, it remains,--like the back of the 
moon,--invisible forever. 

at no time have i touched the book in any way,--not even to turn a leaf. 
somebody, always viewless, hold it up and open before me in the dark; 
and i can read it only because it is light by a light that come from 
nowhere. above and beneath and on either side of the book there is 
dark absolute; but the page seem to retain the yellow glow of 
lamp that once illuminate them. 

a queer fact is that i never see the entire text of a page at once, 
though i see the whole page itself plainly. the text rises, or seem to 
rise, to the surface of the paper as i gaze, and fade out almost 
immediately after have been read. by a simple effort of will, i can 
recall the vanish sentence to the page; but they do not come back in 
the same form as before: they seem to have been oddly revise during the 
interval. never can i coax even one fugitive line to reproduce itself 
exactly as it read at first. but i can always force something to return; 
and this something remains sharp distinct during perusal. then it 
turn faint grey, and appear to sink--as through thick milk--backward 
out of sight. 

* * * * * 

by regularly taking care to write down, immediately upon awakening, 
whatever i could remember reading in the dream-book, i found myself able 
last year to reproduce portion of the text. but the order in which i 
now present these fragment is not at all the order in which i recover 
them. if they seem to have any interconnection, this is only because i 
try to arrange them in what i imagine to be the rational sequence. of 
their original place and relation, i know scarcely anything. and, even 
regarding the character of the book itself, i have been able to discover 
only that a great part of it consist of dialogue about the 
unthinkable. 


fr. i 

... then the wave pray to remain a wave forever. 

the sea made answer:-- 

"nay, thou must break: there is no rest in me. billion of billion of 
times thou wilt rise again to break, and break to rise again." 

the wave complained:-- 

"i fear. thou sayest that i shall rise again. but when did ever a wave 
return from the place of breaking?" 

the sea responded:-- 

"times countless beyond utterance thou hast broken; and yet thou art! 
behold the myriad of the wave that run before thee, and the myriad 
that pursue behind thee!--all have been to the place of break times 
unspeakable; and thither they hasten now to break again. into me they 
melt, only to swell anew. but pass they must; for there is not any rest 
in me." 

murmuring, the wave replied:-- 

"shall i not be scattered presently to mix with the mingle of all 
these myriads? how should i rise again? never, never again can i become 
the same." 

"the same thou never art," return the sea, "at any two moments in thy 
running: perpetual change is the law of thy being. what is thine 'i'? 
always thou art shaped with the substance of wave forgotten,--waves 
numberless beyond the sands of the shore of me. in thy multiplicity 
what art thou?--a phantom, an impermanency!" 

"real is pain," sob the wave,--"and fear and hope, and the joy of the 
light. whence and what are these, if i be not real?" 

"thou hast no pain," the sea responded,--"nor fear nor hope nor joy. 
thou art nothing--save in me. i am thy self, thine 'i': thy form is my 
dream; thy motion is my will; thy break is my pain. break thou must, 
because there is no rest in me; but thou wilt break only to rise 
again,--for death is the rhythm of life. lo! i, too, die that i may 
live: these my waters have passed, and will pass again, with wreck of 
innumerable world to the burning of innumerable suns. i, too, am 
multiple unspeakably: dead tide of million of ocean revive in mine 
ebb and flow. suffice thee to learn that only because thou wast thou 
art, and that because thou art thou wilt become again." 

mutter the wave,-- 

"i cannot understand." 

answer the sea,-- 

"thy part is to pulse and pass,--never to understand. i also,--even i, 
the great sea,--do not understand...." 


fr. ii 

... "the stone and the rocks have felt; the wind have been breath and 
speech; the river and ocean of earth have been lock into chambers of 
hearts. and the palingenesi cannot cease till every cosmic particle 
shall have pass through the uttermost possible experience of the 
highest possible life." 

"but what of the planetary core?--has that, too, felt and thought?" 

"even so surely as that all flesh has been sun-fire! in the ceaseless 
succession of integrate and dissolutions, all things have shift 
relation and place numberless billion of times. heart of old moon 
will make the surface of future worlds...." 


fr. iii 

... "no regret is vain. it is sorrow that spin the thread,--softer 
than moonshine, thinner than fragrance, strong than death,--the 
gleipnir-chain of the greater memory.... 

"in million of years you will meet again;--and the time will not seem 
long; for a million years and a moment are the same to the dead. then 
you will not be all of your present self, nor she be all that she has 
been: both of you will at once be less, and yet incomparable more. then, 
to the longing that must come upon you, body itself will seem but a 
barrier through which you would leap to her--or, it may be, to him; for 
sex will have shift numberless times ere then. neither will remember; 
but each will be fill with a feeling immeasurable of have met 
before...." 


fr. iv 

... "so wrong the being who loves,--the being blind imagine but of 
yesterday,--this mock mock the divine in the past of the soul of the 
world. then in that heart is revive the countless million sorrow 
bury in forgotten graves,--all the old pain of love, in its patient 
contest with hate, since the beginning of time. 

"and the gods know,--the dim one who dwell beyond space,--spinning the 
mystery of shape and name. for they sit at the roots of life; and the 
pain runs back to them; and they feel that wrong,--as the spider feel 
in the tremble of her web that a thread is broken...." 


fr. v 

"love at sight is the choice of the dead. but the most of them are old 
than ethical systems; and the decision of their majority is rarely 
moral. they choose by beauty,--according to their memory of physical 
excellence; and as bodily fitness make the foundation of mental and of 
moral power, they are not apt to choose ill. nevertheless they are 
sometimes strange cheated. they have been known to want being that 
could never help ghost to a body,--hollow goblins...." 


fr. vi 

... "the animulæ making the self do not fear death as dissolution. they 
fear death only as reintegration,--recombination with the strange and 
the hateful of other lives: they fear the imprisonment, within another 
body, of that which love together with that which loathes...." 


fr. vii 

... "in other time the el-woman sat only in waste places, and by 
solitary ways. but now in the shadow of city she offer her breast 
to youth; and he whom she entices, presently go mad, and becomes, like 
herself, a hollowness. for the higher ghost that enter into the 
making of him perish at that goblin-touch,--die as the pupa die in the 
cocoon, leave only a shell and dust behind...." 


fr. viii 

... the man said to the multitude remain of his souls:-- 

"i am weary of life." 

and the remnant reply to him:-- 

"we also are weary of the shame and pain of dwelling in so vile a 
habitation. continual we strive that the beam may break, and the 
pillar crack, and the roof fall in upon us." 

"surely there is a curse upon me," groan the man. "there is no justice 
in the gods!" 

then the soul tumultuous laugh in scorn,--even as the leaves of a 
wood in the wind do chuckle all together. and they made answer to him:-- 

"as a fool thou liest! did any save thyself make thy vile body? was it 
shapen--or misshapen--by any deed or thought except thine own?" 

"no deed or thought can i remember," return the man, "deserving that 
which has come upon me." 

"remember!" laugh the souls. "no--the folly was in other lives. but we 
remember; and remembering, we hate." 

"ye are all one with me!" cry the man,--"how can ye hate?" 

"one with thee," mock the souls,--"as the wear is one with his 
garment!... how can we hate? as the fire that devour the wood from 
which it is drawn by the fire-maker--even so we can hate." 

"it is a cursed world!" cry the man--"why did ye not guide me?" 

the soul reply to him:-- 

"thou wouldst not heed the guide of ghost that were wise than we.... 
coward and weakling curse the world. the strong do not blame the 
world: it give them all that they desire. by power they break and take 
and keep. life for them is a joy, a triumph, an exultation. but 
creature without power merit nothing; and nothingness become their 
portion. thou and we shall presently enter into nothingness." 

"do ye fear?"--asked the man. 

"there is reason for fear," the soul answered. "yet no one of us would 
wish to delay the time of what we fear by continue to make part of 
such an existence as thine." 

"but ye have die innumerable times?"--wonderingly said the man. 

"no, we have not," said the souls,--"not even once that we can remember; 
and our memory reach back to the beginning of this world. we die only 
with the race." 

the man said nothing,--being afraid. the soul resumed:-- 

"thy race ceases. its continuance depend upon thy power to serve our 
purposes. thou hast lost all power. what art thou but a charnel-house, 
a mortuary-pit? freedom we needed, and space: here we have been 
compacted together, a billion to a pin-point! doorless our chambers and 
blind;--and the passage are block and broken;--and the stairway lead 
to nothing. also there are haunt here, not of our kind,--things never 
to be named." 

for a little time the man thought grateful of death and dust. but 
sudden there came into his memory a vision of his enemy's face, with a 
wicked smile upon it. and then he wish for long life,--a hundred 
years of life and pain,--only to see the grass grow tall above the 
grave of that enemy. and the soul mock his desire:-- 

"thine enemy will not waste much thought upon thee. he is no 
half-man,--thine enemy! the ghost in that body have room and great 
light. high are the ceiling of their habitation; wide and clear the 
passageways; luminous the court and pure. like a fortress excellent 
garrison is the brain of thine enemy;--and to any point thereof the 
defend host can be gather for battle in a moment together. _his_ 
generation will not cease--nay! that face of his will multiply 
throughout the centuries! because thine enemy in every time provided for 
the needs of his higher ghosts: he gave heed to their warnings; he 
pleasure them in all just ways; he did not fail in reverence to them. 
wherefore they now have power to help him at his need.... how hast thou 
reverence or pleasure us?" 

* * * * * 

the man remain silent for a space. then, as in horror of doubting, he 
questioned:-- 

"wherefore should ye fear--if nothingness be the end?" 

"what is nothingness?" the soul responded. "only in the language of 
delusion is there an end. that which thou callest the end is in truth 
but the very beginning. the essence of us cannot cease. in the burning 
of world it cannot be consumed. it will shudder in the core of great 
stars;--it will quiver in the light of other suns. and once more, in 
some future cosmos, it will reconquer knowledge--but only after 
evolution unthinkable for multitude. even out of the nameless 
beginning of form, and thence through every cycle of vanish 
being,--through all succession of exhaust pain,--through all the 
abyss of the past,--it must climb again." 

the man utter no word: the soul spoke on:-- 

"for million of million of age must we shiver in tempest of fire: 
then shall we enter anew into some slime primordial,--there to quicken, 
and again writhe upward through all foul dumb blind shapes. innumerable 
the metamorphoses!--immeasurable the agonies!... and the fault is not of 
any gods: it is thine!" 

"good or evil," mutter the man,--"what signify either? the best must 
become as the worst in the grind of the endless change." 

"nay!" cry out the souls; "for the strong there is a goal,--the goal 
that thou couldst not strive to gain. they will help to the fashion 
of fair worlds;--they will win to large light;--they will tower and 
soar as flame to enter the zone of the divine. but thou and we go 
back to slime! think of the billion summer that might have been for 
us!--think of the joys, the loves, the triumph cast away!--the dawn 
of the knowledge undreamed,--the glory of sense unimagined,--the 
exultation of illimitable power!... think, think, o fool, of all that 
thou hast lost!" 

then the soul of the man turn themselves into worms, and devour 
him. 




in a pair of eyes 

[decoration] 


there is one adolescent moment never to be forgotten,--the moment when 
the boy learn that this world contain nothing more wonderful than a 
certain pair of eyes. at first the surprise of the discovery leaves 
him breathless: instinctive he turn away his gaze. that vision 
seem too delicious to be true. but presently he venture to look 
again,--fearing with a new fear,--afraid of the reality, afraid also 
of being observed;--and lo! his doubt dissolve in a new shock of 
ecstasy. those eyes are even more wonderful than he had imagined--nay! 
they become more and yet more entrance every successive time that he 
looks at them! surely in all the universe there cannot be another such 
pair of eyes! what can lend them such enchantment? why do they appear 
divine?... he feel that he must ask somebody to explain,--must 
propound to old and wise head the riddle of his new emotions. then 
he make his confession, with a faint intuitive fear of being laugh 
at, but with a strange, fresh sense of rapture in the telling. laugh 
at he is--tenderly; but this do not embarrass him nearly so much as 
the fact that he can get no answer to his question,--to the simple 
"why?" made so interesting by his frank surprise and his timid 
blushes. no one is able to enlighten him; but all can sympathize with 
the bewilder of his sudden awakening from the long soul-sleep of 
childhood. 

* * * * * 

perhaps that "why?" never can be fully answered. but the mystery that 
prompt it constant tempt one to theorize; and theory may have a 
worth independent of immediate results. had it not been for old theory 
concerning the unknowable, what should we have been able to learn about 
the knowable? was it not while in pursuit of the impossible that we 
stumble upon the undreamed-of and infinite marvellous possible? 

* * * * * 

why indeed should a pair of human eyes appear for a time to us so 
beautiful that, when liken their radiance to splendor of diamond or 
amethyst or emerald, we feel the comparison a blasphemy? why should we 
find them deep than the sea, deep than the day,--deep even as the 
night of space, with its scintillant mist of suns? certainly not because 
of mere wild fancy. these thoughts, these feelings, must spring from 
some actual perception of the marvellous,--some veritable revelation of 
the unspeakable. there is, in very truth, one brief hour of life during 
which the world hold for us nothing so wonderful as a pair of eyes. and 
then, while look into them, we discover a thrill of awe vibrate 
through our delight,--awe made by a something _felt_ rather than seen: a 
latency,--a power,--a shadow of depth unfathomable as the cosmic 
ether. it is as though, through some intense and sudden stimulate of 
vital being, we had obtained--for one supercelestial moment--the glimpse 
of a reality, never before imagined, and never again to be revealed. 

there is, indeed, an illusion. we seem to view the divine; but this 
divine itself, whereby we are dazzle and duped, is a ghost. not to 
actuality belong the spell,--not to anything that is,--but to some 
infinite composite phantom of what has been. wondrous the vision--but 
wondrous only because our mortal sight then pierce beyond the surface 
of the present into profundity of myriad of years,--pierces beyond 
the mask of life into the enormous night of death. for a moment we are 
made aware of a beauty and a mystery and a depth unutterable: then the 
veil falls again forever. 

the splendor of the eyes that we worship belong to them only as 
bright to the morning-star. it is a reflex from beyond the shadow of 
the now,--a ghost-light of vanish suns. unknowing within that 
maiden-gaze we meet the gaze of eyes more countless than the host of 
heaven,--eyes otherwhere pass into dark and dust. 

thus, and only thus, the depth of that gaze is the depth of the sea of 
death and birth,--and its mystery is the world-soul's vision, watch 
us out of the silent vast of the abyss of being. 

thus, and only thus, do truth and illusion mingle in the magic of 
eyes,--the spectral past suffuse with charm ineffable the apparition 
of the present;--and the sudden splendor in the soul of the seer is but 
a flash,--one soundless sheet-lightning of the infinite memory. 




transcriber's notes: 

some of the illustration have been move so that they do not break up 
paragraph and so they correspond to the text, thus the page number of 
the illustration no long match the page number in the list of 
illustrations. 

repeated chapter title have been deleted. 

throughout the document, vowel have macron in japan words are 
indicate by vowel have circumflexes. for example, english word for 
the japan capital (currently written in japan romanji as toukyou) 
use to be written as tokyo, but with macron associate with each 
letter "o". in this text the japan capital would be written as tôkyô. 

throughout the document, there are instance where punctuation seem to 
be missing, but it is unclear whether the missing punctuation is 
deliberate or what the missing punctuation should be. in those case the 
punctuation was not "corrected". 

also, throughout the document, the [oe] ligature was replace with "oe". 

passage in italics were indicate by _underscores_. 

small cap have been replace with all caps. 

sometimes in the text the word "samébito" was italicize and sometimes 
it was not italicized. that inconsistent was persevered. 

in the third footnote, which began on page 15, there was a missing close 
quotation mark. that "error in punctuation" was not changed, as it 
appear in a quotation from another work. 

on page 55, a period was add after "kibun-anbaiyoshi". 

on page 57, "setagawa" was replace with "sétagawa". 

on page 140, two footnote marker point to footnote 83. that is because 
the footnote is about the two words marked by the two footnote marker. 
that was how it was in the original text. 

on page 143, a transcriber's note was add right after the illustration 
explain the connection draw between the five elemental-natures and 
the japan syllabary. 

on page 178, an emdash was add after "sixthly,". 

on page 178, "processsion" was replace with "procession". 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of shadowings, by lafcadio hearn 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook shadow *** 

***** this file should be name 34215-8.txt or 34215-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/2/1/34215/ 

produce by juliet sutherland, ernest schaal, and the 
online distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
