the project gutenberg ebook of each man kills, by victoria glad 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: each man kill 

author: victoria glad 

release date: november 3, 2007 [ebook #23301] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook each man kill *** 




produce by greg weeks, mary meehan and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









each man kill 

_by victoria glad_ 

[transcriber note: this etext was produce from weird tale march 1951. 
extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the u.s. copyright 
on this publication was renewed.] 


"_... to live you must feed on the living_" 

heading by vincent napoli 

[illustration] 




now that it's all over, it seem like a bad dream. but when i look at 
maria's picture on my desk, i realize it couldn't have been a dream. 
actually, it was only six month ago that i sat at this same desk, 
look at her picture, wonder what could have happen to her. it 
had been six week since there had been any word from her, and she had 
promise to write as soon as she arrive in europe. considering that my 
future rest in her small hands, i had every right to be apprehensive. 

we had grown up together, had lost our folks within a few years of each 
other and had been fond of each other the way kid are apt to be. then 
the change came: it seem i love her, and she was still just "fond" of 
me. during our early college days i sort of let things ride, but once we 
went on to graduate school, i began to crowd her. 

the next thing i knew, she had sign up with a student tour destined 
for central europe, and told me she would give me my answer when she 
returned. i had to be content with that, but couldn't help worrying. 
maria was a strange girl--withdrawn, dreamy and soft-hearted. knowing 
the section she was go to, i was inclined to be uneasy, since it is 
the realm of gypsies, fortune teller and the like. it is also the 
birthplace of many strange legends, and maria claim to be strong 
psychic. as a matter of fact, she had foretold one or two things which 
were probably coincidental, like the death of our parents, and which 
even made an impression on me--and you'd hardly call me a "believer." 

this so-called talent of hers led her into trouble on more than one 
occasion. i remember in her senior year at college she fell under the 
spell of a short, fat, greasy spook-reader with a strict phony accent 
and all but gave her eye teeth away, until i realize something was 
amiss, got to the bottom of it, and dispatch friend spook-reader 
_pronto_. if she should meet some unscrupulous person now, with no one 
around to get her out of the scrape--but i didn't want to think of that. 
i was sure this time everything would be all right. 

when she didn't write at first, i let it go that she was busy. finally, 
six weeks' silent treatment arouse my curiosity. it also arouse my 
nasty temper, and the next thing i knew i was on a plane bound for the 
continent. within two hour after landing, i found her at a little inn 
in transylvania, a quaint little place that look as if it were made of 
gingerbread, and was surround by the huge, craggy transylvania 
mountain range. i also found tod hunter. 

"what's wrong, maria? why didn't you write?" i asked. 

her usually gay, shining brown eyes flash angrily. "why couldn't you 
leave me alone? i told you not to come after me. i came here so i could 
think this out. for god's sake, bill, can't you see i want to think? 
to be by myself?" 

"but you promise to write," i persisted, wonder at this change in 
her, this impatience. wondered, too, at her wraithlike slimness. she'd 
always been curve in the right places. 

"maria has been study much too diligently," tod said slowly. "she's 
always tired lately. she hasn't been too well, either. her throat 
bother her." 

* * * * * 

i want to punch his head in. for some reason i didn't like him. not 
because i sense his rivalry; i was above that. god know i want her 
to be happy, above everything. it was just something about him that 
irritate me. an attitude. not supercilious; i could have cope with 
that. rather, it was a calm imperturbable that seem to speak his 
faith in his eventual success, regardless of any effort on my part. 

i don't know how to fight that sort of strategy. i look like i am: blunt 
and obvious. sudden i didn't care if he was there. 

"maria. ria, darling. this guy's no good for you, can't you see that? 
what do you know about him?" 

she look at me, her eyes surprise and a little hurt. then she look 
at him, seem to be look _through_ him and into herself, if you know 
what i mean. a slow flush spread from the base of her throat, that thin, 
almost transparent throat. 

"all i have to know," she said softly. "i love him." 

she look out the window. "i'm go up into _konigstein mountain_, to 
a small sanitarium for my health shortly; the doctor has told me i must 
go away, and tod has suggest this place. there tod and i shall be 
married." 

i knew then how it felt to be on the receiving end of a monkey-punch. 
that she had come to this decision because of my objections, i had not 
the slightest doubt. she was go to marry someone about whom she knew 
absolutely nothing. she was much more ill than she knew. hunter was 
undoubted after her money; she was considerably well-off. obviously 
she was once more being influence in the wrong direction. 

"i won't let you!" i warned. "give it some more time, if for nothing 
else, then for old times' sake." 

"how about me, morris?" tod interrupted. "you haven't ask me my 
feelings on the subject. i happen to love maria dearly. have i no say 
just because you're a childhood friend of hers?" 

"childhood friend! i was her whole family for years before she ever 
heard of you! i'll see you in hell before i let her marry you!" i 
shouted. look back, i'm sure that had he said anything else, i would 
have kill him, if ria hadn't come between us. 

"that's enough, bill morris! i've heard all i want to from you. i'm 
twenty-three, and if i choose to marry tod, i'll do so and there's 
nothing you can do about it. now, please go." 

"okay, ria," i said, "if that's the way you want it. but i'm not 
through. if you won't protect yourself, i'll do it for you. i'd like to 
know more about the mysterious mr. tod hunter, american, and i do wish, 
for your own sake, you'd do the same. i wouldn't care if you married 
king tut, so long as you knew all about him. people just don't marry 
strangers; not if they're smart. for god's sake, ask him about himself!" 

"all right, bill," she replied, smile patiently. "i'll ask him. now, 
do stop being childish." 

"okay, darling," i said sheepishly. "but do me one more favor. don't 
marry him until i get back. only a little while; give me a week. just 
wait a little longer." 

as i closed the door, i could still feel his smile, mocking--yet a 
little sad. 

but maria didn't wait. i was gone a week. i had walk my leg off 
try to track down the elusive mister hunter and discover 
exactly--nothing. all his landlady could tell me was that he was an 
america who had come to this climate for his health, and that he slept 
late mornings. i was lick and i knew it. if i had been a pup, i would 
have fitted my tail neat between my leg and made for home. but i 
wasn't a pup, so i head straight for ria's flat to face the music. 

* * * * * 

they were wait for me, she and tod. when i saw her, i wish i were 
dead. 

she lay in tod's arms, her body a mere whisper of a body. white and cold 
she was, like frozen milk on a cold winter's day. they were both dead. 

you know how it is when at a wake someone view the deceased and say 
kindly, "she's beautiful," and "she" isn't beautiful at all; just a 
made-up, lifeless handful of clay. dead as dead, and frightening. well, 
it wasn't that way this time. their fair skin were faint pink-tinted 
and their blonde heads, hers ashen and his a reddish cast, gleam 
brightly. and they sat so close in the sofa before the fire, his head 
rest in the hollow of her throat. they looked--peaceful; no line 
mar their faces. i almost fancy i saw them breathe. and on her 
third finger, left hand, was the ring--a thin, platinum band. he had 
won, and in winning somehow he had lost. how they had die and why they 
found each other and death at the same time, i would probably never 
know. i only knew one thing: i had to get away from there--quickly. i 
almost ran the distance to my flat. stumble into the place and pour a 
triple scotch which i could scarcely hold. the scotch sear my throat 
and taste bitter; someone must have pour salt in it. then i realize 
that it was tears--my tears. i, bill morris, who hadn't cry since my 
fifth birthday--i was sob like a baby. 

i didn't call the police. that would mean i would have to go back and 
watch them cover that lovely body, carry it away and submit it to untold 
indignity in order to ascertain the cause of death. the clean girl 
would find them in the morning and would notify the police. 

but it wasn't so simple as that. in the morning i found i couldn't shake 
off the guilt which possessed me. even two bottle of scotch hadn't 
help me to forget. i was dead drunk and cold sober at the same time. 

i phone ria's landlady and told her i had fail to reach the hunter 
by phone, that i was sure something was amiss. would she please go to 
their flat and see if anything was wrong. 

she was amused. "really, mr. morris, you must be mistaken. miss maria 
went out just an hour ago with her new husband. surely you are jesting. 
why she has never look better. so happy. they have left for 
_konigstein_. they have also left you a note. 

i told her i would be right over, and hop a cab. i began to think i 
was lose my mind. i had seen them both--dead. the landlady had seen 
them this morning--_alive!_" 

when i arrived, the landlady look at me for a long moment, taking in 
my rough, dark-blue complexion, unpress clothes, red-rimmed eyes, then 
wag a finger playfully. 

"you are play a joke, no? a wedding joke, maybe. here, too, we haze 
newlyweds. but of course i understood. who could help loving miss maria? 
be of good heart, young man. for you there will be another, some day. 
but i talk too much. here is your letter." 

i went where i would be undisturbed, to the reading room of the library 
on the same street as my flat. to the musty, oblong, dim lit room 
whose threshold sunshine and fresh air dare not cross. without the 
saving warmth of sunlight or the fresh, clean relief of sweet-smelling 
air, i read. read, inhale the pungent, sour smell of the scotch i had 
consume during the long, sleepless night. read, and then doubt that i 
had read at all--but the blue ink on the white paper forced me to 
acknowledge its actuality. it had been written by hunter, in a neat, 
scholar's script. 

_dear morris_: (it began) 

_why should i not have want maria? you did; other doubtless did. why 
then should she not be mine? there are many things worse than being 
married to me; she might have married a man who beat her!_ 

_with her i have known the two happiest days of my life. i want no more 
than that. i have no right to ask for more. have we, any of us, a right 
to endless bliss on this earth? hardly._ 

_you thought of her welfare above all; for that i owe you some 
explanation. you must be patient, you must believe, and in the end, you 
must do as i ask._ you must. 

_you want to know about me--of my life before maria. before maria? it 
seem strange to think about it. there is no life without maria. still, 
there was a time when for me she didn't exist. i have been constant 
go forward to the day when i would meet her, yet there was a time 
when i didn't know where i would find her, or even what her name would 
be!_ 

_it was chance that brought us together. for me, good chance; for you, 
possibly ill chance; for maria? only she can say. some three years ago i 
was study in england under a rhodes scholarship. the future held 
great things for me. i was a yank like yourself, and damn proud of it. 
life in england seem strange and slow and sometimes utterly dismal 
under austerity. then, little by little i slip into their slow 
ways, grow to love the people for their spunk, and finally coming to 
feel i was one of them, so to speak._ 

_i have said everything slow down: i was wrong. study intensify 
for me. the folklore of the britain isle intrigue me. i delve into 
the black welsh tales, the mischievous fancies of the irish, the english 
legend of the prowl werewolf. for me it was a relief from politics 
science, which sudden pall and which smack of treason in the light 
of current events. my extracurricular research consume the better part 
of my evenings. my books were and always have been a part of me, and as 
was to be expected, i overdid it. i studied too hard with too little 
let-up. sometimes it seem to me there was more truth to what i read 
than myth. it became somewhat of an obsession. suddenly, one night, 
everything black out._ 

_i came to in a sanatorium. i didn't know how i got there, and when they 
explain it to me, i laughed. i thought they were joking. when i try 
to get up, to walk, i collapsed. then i knew how bad it had been. i 
knew, too, i would have to go slowly._ 

_it was there i met eve. she was beautiful. not like maria, who is like 
a fragile, fair, spun-sugar angel. eve was more earthy, with skin like 
ivory, creamy and rich and pale. her blue-black hair she wore long and 
gather in the back. she look about twenty-five, but a streak of pure 
white ran back from each of her temples. she was the most striking woman 
i have ever met. i had never known anyone like her, nor have i since i 
saw her last._ 

_you know how it is: the air of mystery about a woman make a man like a 
kid again. she remind me of a sleek, black cat, with her large, hazel 
eyes. i bump into her one day on the verandah, and spent every day 
with her after that._ 

_the doctor want me to take exercise--short walk and the like, and 
eve went with me, struggle to keep up with me. the slightest effort 
tired her. she suffer from a rather nasty case of anemia. she seldom 
smiled; the effort was probably too much for her. i saw her really smile 
only once._ 

_we had been on one of our short hike in the wood close by the 
grounds. she stumble over a twig or a branch, i'm not sure which. 
sudden she was in my arms. have you ever held a cloud in your arms, 
morris? so light she was, although she was almost as tall as i. warm and 
pulsating. her eyes held mine; it was almost uncanny. i have never been 
affected like that by a woman. then i was kiss her; then a sharp 
sting, and i winced. there was the warm, salt taste of blood on my lips. 
i never knew how it happened. but she was smiling, her full mouth part 
in the strangest smile i have ever seen. and those small white teeth 
gleamed; and in her eyes, which were all black pupil now, with the iris 
quite hidden, was desire--or something beyond desire. i couldn't define 
it then; now, i think i can. her small, pink tongue dart over her 
lips, tasting, seeming to savor._ 

_i was frightened, for some indefinable reason. i want to get away 
from her, from the woods, from myself. i grasp her arm roughly and we 
start back for the grounds. we never mention the episode again, but 
we neither of us ever forgot. she intrigue me now, more than ever. the 
doctor were able to satisfy my curiosity somewhat. they told me she had 
been a patient for some four years. some days she was better, some days 
worse. she need rest--much rest. most days she slept past noon with 
their approval. some days there was a faint flush beneath that ivory 
skin; other days it was pale and cool._ 

_just when we became lovers, i scarcely remember. things were happening 
so fast i could barely keep pace with them. there was a magnetism about 
eve which compelled. i couldn't have resist if i'd want to--and i 
didn't._ 

_i began to have long periods of lassitude, times when i would black out 
and remember nothing afterwards. and the dream began. i would dream i 
was stroke a large, velvety-black cat, a cat with shining yellow eyes 
that look at me as if they knew my every thought. i would stroke it 
continuous and it would nip me playfully. then, one night the dream 
intensified: i was play with the creature, caress it gently, when 
of a sudden its lip drew back in a snarl, and without warning it sprang 
at my throat and bury its fang deep! i thought i could feel life 
being drawn from me; i screamed._ 

_the doctor told me afterwards that i was semi-conscious for days; that 
i had to be restrained._ 

_when i was well again, eve came to see me. she was gentle--soothing. 
she held me close to her and oh! it was good to be alive and to belong 
to someone._ 

_i remember to this day what she wore. black velvet lounge slacks, a 
low-necked amber satin blouse, caught at the "v" by a curious wrought 
antique silver pin. it was round, about four inch in diameter. in its 
center was the carve figure of a serpent coil to strike. its eyes 
were deep amber topaz and its dart tongue was raise and set with a 
blood-red ruby._ 

_"what an unusual pin, eve," i said "i've never seen it before, have 
i?"_ 

_"no," she replied. "it belong to the deep, dark, seldom discuss 
skeleton in the orcaczy closet, tod. you see, my great-great grandmother 
was quite a wicked lady, to hear tell. went in for witches' masses and 
the like. they say she poison her husband, a rather elderly and very 
childish man, for her lover, whom she subsequent married. together 
they did away with relative who stood in the way of their accumulate 
more money. this pin was the instrument of death."_ 

_her slim finger pressed the ruby tongue and the pin opened, revealing 
a space large enough to secrete powder._ 

_"it's like those employ by the infamous borgias, as you can see," she 
continued, shrugging. "perhaps it was fate then, that her devoted new 
husband tired of her once her fortune was assured him, took a young 
mistress for himself, and disposed of the unfortunate wife, use her 
own pin to perpetrate her murder. she was excommunicate by her church, 
too, which must have made it most unpleasant for her, poor old dear." 
the slim shoulder straightened. "but let's not discuss such unpleasant 
things, my dear. the important thing now is for you to get well quickly. 
i've miss you terribly, you know."_ 

_it was then i ask her to marry me. i knew i didn't really love her, 
but there seem nothing to prevent our marriage. and she had gotten 
under my skin. it was as elemental as that. she said she thought we 
should wait until i fully recovered._ 

_"don't say any more, darling," she said. "rest your poor, sore 
throat."_ 

_she bent over me solicitous and i reach up to stroke that smooth 
black hair. it had a familiar feel to it that i couldn't quite place. of 
course i had stroke it hundred of times before, but it wasn't that. 
then she look straight at me, those large, glowing hazel eyes bore 
into mine, and i knew. knew and disbelieve at the same time. i froze 
where i lay, paralyze by my fear; unable to make a sound._ 

_"so you know," she whispered. "it is well. i have marked you for my own 
these many months. now that you know, you will not fight. you know what 
i am, or at least you can guess. this pin you admire so--it was mine 
three hundred years ago and it will always be mine!"_ 

_her lip were on mine. she had never kiss me like this. it was like 
the touch of hot ice, freezing, then searing. unendurable. i lay inert; 
i couldn't have move if i want to. i could scarcely breathe. then i 
felt the blood within me pounding, pulsing, beginning to answer in spite 
of myself. i taste once more the warm, salty fluid on my lips. eve's 
body was liquid in my arms; warm, heady, narcotizing. once again i felt 
the agonizing, dagger sharp pain in my throat and--darkness._ 

_have you ever waken to a bright, sunny afternoon and heard yourself 
pronounced dead? they spoke in low, hush tones. how unfortunate. young 
fellow only thirty, die so far away from his homeland. no family. good 
thing he was well-set in life. this sudden anemia was most 
extraordinary; fellow show no sign of it previously. all he had 
really need was rest. if he had recovered, that lovely eve orcaczy 
might have made both their lives happier, richer. sad ending to what 
might have been an idyll. good of her to claim the body. she said she 
was go to inter it in the family vault in_ konigstein mountain _in 
transylvania._ 

_i heard them distinctly. i want to shout that i wasn't dead; i want 
to wake up from this horrible nightmare. i was as alive as they. i knew 
i had to get out of there, some way; to get away from eve, whom i now 
feared. they left to make arrangements._ 

_the lassitude crept through me without warning; i doze in spite of 
myself. and i dream again. i was a cat running, leap through 
windows, lope over the countryside, stopping for no one. i pant with 
my exertions. town and city flew by; i had to get someplace and 
quickly. then the dream ended._ 

_"tod," she said, "get up, my dear." i heard her and i hate her. hate 
her while i was drawn to her. there was a white mist before my eyes. i 
reach up to brush it away. it was not a mist; it was a cloth. i 
shivered._ 

_"i must wake up," i whisper hoarsely, "i must! i'm go mad!"_ 

_there was a creak sound and daylight descended upon me. when i saw 
where i was, i cover my face with my hand and sobbed. i try to 
pray, but the words froze on my lips._ i was sitting in a coffin in a 
mausoleum! i had been bury alive! 

_"what am i?" i shrieked. "where am i and what have you done? i'm out of 
my mind; stark, staring mad!"_ 

_eve's lip parted, showing the even white teeth--those slightly pointed 
teeth._ 

_"you're quite sane, my dear," she said calmly. "you are now one of us; 
a revenant, even as i, and to live you must feed on the living."_ 

_"it's not true!" i shouted. "this is all a crazy nightmare, part of my 
illness! you're not real! nothing is real!"_ 

_"i'm quite real, tod. to be trite, i am what i am, and have accept it 
calmly, as you shall in time. i have told you of my life. you have been 
a student of legends. legend are often--more often than you 
think--reality. when one has been murdered, if one has live a so-called 
wicked life, he is doom to walk the earth batten on the living. my 
fate was seal as i lay in my coffin. but that wasn't enough. as i lay 
there, my pet cat, suma, slunk into the room and leapt over me. that was 
a double insurance of my life after death. those whom i mark for my own 
must, too, live on. accept it, my dear. you have no other choice."_ 

_"no!" i cried. "i'm an american! things like this don't happen to us! 
it's only in stories, and then to foreigners!"_ 

_she chuckle drily. "i'm afraid these things do happen, and in this 
case, you're it, my dear. make the best of it."_ 

_but i wouldn't; i refuse to--for a while. i would not feast on the 
blood of the living. something within me fought. for a time._ 

_then, the awful hunger began. the tear pang of hunger that ordinary 
food wouldn't arrest. i fought it as long as i could. i lost._ 

_first it was small animals; animal that i loved. it was my life or 
theirs. then there was a little girl; a dear little creature who might 
have been my child under different circumstances._ 

_after the episode of the little girl, eve left me. she had no further 
use for me; she had want the child, too, and i had got it. i was now 
competition to be shunned. i was alone once again alone and thorough 
miserable. i couldn't understand myself, my motives, so how could i 
expect someone else to understand?_ 

_i only knew what i was; nor could i rationalize on why i had become 
this way. i could only presume it had happen to other equally as 
innocent as myself of wrong-doing. in the daytime, when i was like 
others, i reproach myself; goodness know i loathe myself and what i 
had to do in order to "live." i wish i might really die, for i was 
tired--so frightfully tired and sick of it all. but i knew of no way to 
accomplish this, so i had to bear it all, fast until my voracious, 
disgust appetite got the better of me._ 

_i decided there must be some information on my kind, particularly in 
this area where vampire legend are rife, so i took to haunting reading 
rooms. it was there i met maria. she told me, after we knew each other 
better, that she was do graduate work in regional superstition and 
had decided that her thesis would treat of the history of vampirism. she 
found it terribly amusing, but at the same time frightening: didn't i? i 
fear i saw nothing laughable about it, but i held my peace. why, i could 
have done a thesis for her that would have driven some mild-mannered 
prof completely out of his mind! i kept my knowledge to myself, though; 
i didn't want to scare maria._ 

_she was like a flash of sunshine in a darken room. she made each day 
worth living. for the first time the hunger pang ceased. cease for one 
week, then two. i was certain i was cured. perhaps, i thought, the whole 
thing was just a dream and i am finally awake._ 

_i felt then i had the right to tell her of my love. she look 
infinite sad. she wasn't certain, she said. she knew she was awfully 
fond of me, but she was confused. she had just come away from the 
states, try to make up her mind about someone dear, whom she didn't 
want to hurt, and she want a breather. i said i would wait up to and 
through eternity, if she wished._ 

_things, went along peaceful then. we would walk for hour together, 
walk in complete silence and understanding. my strength seem to be 
return more day by day. we went far afield in search of material for 
her thesis. she would track down the most minute speck of hearsay, to 
get authenticity._ 

_one day, in our wanderings, i thoughtless let myself be led too near 
my rest place. one of the local mention a "place of horror" nearby 
and maria want to investigate. i had no choice. we poke amid the 
still fusty of the desert mausoleum i knew so well. she thought it 
odd that the door was unlocked. i said, yes, wasn't it. then she saw the 
box, that gleam copper box which eve had so thoughtful provided. 
she stroke it gently, comment on its beauty, and before i could 
prevent it or divert her attention, she had lift the heavy lid 
expose the disarrange shroud, the remains of one or two hapless small 
creatures, the horrible blood-stained satin lining. she scream and 
drop the lid, somehow pinch her finger. she hop on one foot, as 
one usually do to fight down sudden pain. then she was clinging to me, 
thorough frightened._ 

_"what do it mean, tod?"_ 

_i quiet her with the usual platitudes. then i was kiss that poor, 
red little finger. without warning to myself or her, i nip it 
affectionately. a warm glow spread through me; there was a taste more 
delightful than fine old brandy, or vintage wine, and i knew irrevocable 
that i was not cured; no, nor ever should be! and i knew, too, that i 
want maria--not just as a man long for the woman he loves--but to 
drink of the fountain of her life, that warm, intoxicate fountain, 
greedily, joyously. she never knew what went through my mind at that 
moment. if i could have kill myself then, i would have, and with no 
compunction. but there is more to killing a revenant than that. the 
church know the procedure. i hurried maria home as fast as i could and 
told her i had to go away for a week on business. she believe me and 
said she would miss me. but i didn't go away. that night i fought a 
lose battle with myself, and then and every night thereafter, i 
return to her, partook of her and slunk away, loathing myself. i knew 
that i must soon kill the one being i love above all others, kill, too, 
her immortal soul, and there was nothing i could do to prevent it._ 

_she began to fade visibly. when i "returned" in a week, she was so ill 
that a few steps tired her. her appetite all but vanished. she seem 
genuine glad to see me. she was beset by nightmares, she said. could i 
help her get some rest? i took her to a physician who sage prescribed 
a change in climate, rest and a diet rich in blood and iron, gave her a 
prescription for sedatives, and call it a day._ 

_you know how she look when you saw her. the day was approach when 
she would have no more blood, when life as you know it would stop and 
she would become like me. somehow i couldn't take her with me without 
some warning, but i didn't know how to do it. you see, since i was an 
innocent victim myself. i could speak, could warn my intended victim, 
because although my soul had all but died, there was still a spark that 
evil hadn't touched. i knew she would think it a joke if i told her 
about myself without warning._ 

_then, happily for me, you came along. i knew you would sense something 
amiss and i didn't care. i was almost certain of her love, and i decided 
to seize the few minutes left me and devil take the hindmost! when you 
told her to confront me, you gave me the happiest days of my life. for 
this i thank you sincerely. for what i have done and will ask you to do, 
forgive me!_ 

_maria ask me directly, as you had known she would. i reply frankly, 
sparing her nothing. i told her that the fact that this life had been 
wish on me, as it were, gave me some rights, and that i could tell her 
how to rid herself of me, if she wished. then she turn to me, her 
large, lovely eyes thoughtful._ 

_"tod, dearest," she said softly, "i must die some day, really die, so 
what difference do it make when? i only know that i love you. why wait 
until i'm decrepit and alone, with only a few memory to look back on? 
why not now, with you, where life doesn't really stop? with all i've 
read about this, don't you think i could free myself if i wished?"_ 

_i still wonder if she really believe me. we were married three days 
later. i never told her what her life with me would be like--that one 
day i would desert her, fear and hate her rivalry for the very 
source of my life, and the ghastly chain would continue. i couldn't. i 
love her so, morris, can you understand that? i couldn't betray her 
then and i can't now._ 

_on the second night of our marriage, she die as you know it, in my 
arms. i don't think she know it yet. but it won't be long until she 
do discover it. we were quite alive when you found us; she was in an 
hypnotic state induce by her condition. she heard and saw nothing. but 
i knew. and i must keep my faith. i must, and you are the only one who 
can help me._ 

_if you will show this to a priest, he will gladly accompany you to the 
place in_ konigstein, _where we rest during the morning in a new "bed" i 
had specially construct for us. i couldn't bring maria to that other 
bed of corruption. a map of how to get there is enclosed. there you will 
perform the ancient, effective rites, and you will lay us to rest 
together, as we wish. that is all i ask...._ 

* * * * * 

when i had finished reading i stare at nothing, try to force myself 
to think. this was "all" he asked. in substance, he wish me to murder 
the girl i loved. i could refuse; i could ignore his request. i could 
even doubt the verity of his statements. he might be a madman. but i 
didn't doubt. i believe every word, and i knew i would do as he asked. 

that she had gone willing i didn't doubt. i no long hate him so 
much; rather i pity him, the hapless victim of a horrible chain of 
circumstance. 

* * * * * 

i found the priest, a venerable, gentle soul, after much searching. the 
younger men had look at me searchingly, laugh and told me to read 
the good book for consolation, and to lay off the bottle. father kalman 
was understanding, with the wisdom of the very old. 

"yes, my son," he said, "i will go. many might doubt, but i believe. 
lucifer roam the earth in many guise and must be recognize and 
exorcised." 

it was five o'clock in the morning when we approach the mausoleum. the 
good father explain that the "creatures of darkness" had to be back in 
their rest place before the cock crew. at night they drew 
sustenance; during the morning they slept. 

there was a gleam copper casket. tod had not lied. we approach it 
warily. in it was nothing but grisly remains, bloodstain and dust. we 
drew back, fearful. then we saw the other, new casket in richest 
mahogany, almost twice the width of the copper box: _their bridal bed!_ 

they lay together, his arm about her. she wore a gown of palest blue, 
but oh, that mockery of a gown! stain it was with fresh blood which 
had seep onto it from him. obviously she had not taken to prowl 
yet. his mouth was dark, rich with blood, slightly open in a half-smile. 
his hand pressed her fair head close to his chest. she lay trusting 
within the circle of his arm, like a small child. the priest cross 
himself. the body twitch slightly. 

"you know what you must do," father kalman whispered. 

i nodded, the pit of my stomach churn madly. i couldn't do it! not 
maria, the lovely. but i knew i would; i had to. she must not wake again 
to see that blood-stained gown or to wonder at her husband's gory lips. 
she should know rest, eternal rest. 

father kalman circle the box several times, ring his small bell, and 
at one point laid a crucifix upon each of their chests. their face 
writhe and i felt my skin creep. 

then, chant in a low, firm voice, the priest gave me the signal. 
together we drove two long stakes, dip first in holy water, home, 
piercing their heart simultaneously. 

the body leapt forward in the box, strain against the stake, and a 
horrible, drawn-out wail shatter the still of the tomb. the priest 
drop to his knee and i clap my hand over my ears, but the 
dreadful shriek penetrated. my stomach turn over and i retched. the 
good father follow suit. we were no supermen and our body and our 
very soul revolt against this monstrous thing. 

"let us finish, my son," the priest said slowly, after a time, his face 
the color of ashes. "we must bury these dead, that they may sleep in 
consecrate ground." 

i couldn't. i had to see her again before it was done. she lay, small 
and fragile as ever, her face calm, only there was no trace of life now. 
she was still and white, as only the dead--the truly dead--are. tod's 
arm was flung across her chest, as if to protect her. i made myself move 
the arm, rest her head upon his shoulder, where it belonged. then, as 
i looked, there was just maria. tod was gone and only a handful of dust 
lay pile up around the stake. it was enough. i slam the lid shut. 

* * * * * 

look back now, i can see it was all for the best. ria was 
different--apart from other women. a dreamer, a mystic, too easily 
influence by the bizarre and un-normal. i, on the other hand, am 
practical almost to a fault. had she married me i might have crush in 
her the very thing that drew me to her. in time she might have grown to 
hate me. 

hunter, on the other hand, was a student. introspective, given to 
romanticizing. susceptible to suggestion. had i been confront with an 
eve, i should have run like hell. to him, though, she was cloak in 
mystery; hence, more desirable. what better choice for him ultimately 
than ria? that ria had to die to achieve her happiness is of no real 
importance. life is a transitory thing anyway. 

sometimes, though, when i look at ria's picture, it's hard to be 
practical. she was everything i shall ever want. 

i had never been to europe before the summer of 1947. i went to find 
maria, to marry her. instead, i found and murder her, and i will never 
go back again. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of each man kills, by victoria glad 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook each man kill *** 

***** this file should be name 23301.txt or 23301.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/0/23301/ 

produce by greg weeks, mary meehan and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
