the project gutenberg ebook of the dark other, by stanley g. weinbaum 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most 
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restriction 
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of 
the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you'll have 
to check the law of the country where you are located before use this ebook. 



title: the dark other 

author: stanley g. weinbaum 

release date: november 27, 2015 [ebook #50561] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the dark other *** 




produce by greg weeks, mary meehan and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









the dark other 

by stanley g. weinbaum 

_fantasy publishing co., inc._ 
los angeles 1950 

copyright 1950 by fantasy publishing co., inc. 

manufacture in u. s. a. 

[transcriber's note: extensive research did not uncover any 
evidence that the u.s. copyright on this publication was renewed.] 

_other books by stanley g. weinbaum_ 

dawn of flame 
the new adam 
the black flame 
a martian odyssey 




contents 


chapter page 

1. pure horror 9 

2. science of mind 17 

3. psychiatric of genius 25 

4. the transfiguration 33 

5. a fantasy of fear 42 

6. a question of science 50 

7. the red eyes return 58 

8. gateway to evil 65 

9. descent into avernu 73 

10. rescue from abaddon 81 

11. wreckage 89 

12. letter from lucifer 96 

13. indecision 104 

14. too bizarre 112 

15. a modern mr. hyde 119 

16. possessed 127 

17. witch-doctor 135 

18. vanish 142 

19. man or monster? 149 

20. the assignation 156 

21. a question of synapse 164 

22. doctor and devil 172 

23. werewolf 180 

24. the dark other 186 

25. the demon lover 194 

26. the depths 201 

27. two in hell 209 

28. lunar omen 217 

29. scopolamine for satan 225 

30. the demon free 233 

31. "not humanly possible" 242 

32. revelation 250 




the dark other 




1 

pure horror 


"that isn't what i mean," said nichola devine, turning his eyes on his 
companion. "i mean pure horror in the sense of horror detached from 
experience, apart from reality. not just a formless fear, which imply 
either fear of something that _might_ happen, or fear of unknown 
dangers. do you see what i mean?" 

"of course," said pat, letting her eyes wander over the black expanse 
of night-dark lake michigan. "certainly i see what you mean but i don't 
quite understand how you'd do it. it sounds--well, difficult." 

she gaze at his lean profile, clear-cut against the distant light. 
he had turned, staring thoughtful over the lake, idle fingering the 
lever on the steer wheel before him. the girl wonder a little at 
her feeling of contentment; she, patricia lane, satisfy to spend an 
evening in nothing more exciting than conversation! and they must have 
park here a full two hour now. there was something about nick--she 
didn't understand exactly what; sensitivity, charm, personality. those 
were meaningless cliches, handle to hold the unexplainable nuance of 
character. 

"it _is_ difficult," resume nick. "baudelaire try it, poe try it. 
and in painting, hogarth, goya, dore. poe came closest, i think; he 
caught the essence of horror in an occasional poem or story. don't you 
think so?" 

"i don't know," said pat. "i've forgotten most of my poe." 

"remember that story of his--'the black cat'?" 

"dimly. the man murder his wife." 

"yes. that isn't the part i mean. i mean the cat itself--the second 
cat. you know a cat, use rightly, can be a symbol of horror." 

"indeed yes!" the girl shuddered. "i don't like the treacherous beasts!" 

"and this cat of poe's," continue nick, warm to his subject. "just 
think of it--in the first place, it's black; element of horror. then, 
it's gigantic, unnaturally, abnormal large. and then it's not all 
black--that would be inartistic perfect--but has a formless white 
mark on its breast, a mark that little by little assume a fantastic 
form--do you remember what?" 

"no." 

"the form of a gallows!" 

"oh!" said the girl. "ugh!" 

"and then--climax of genius--the eyes! blind in one eye, the other a 
baleful yellow orb! do you feel it? a black cat, an enormous black cat 
marked with a gallows, and lacking one eye, to make the other even 
more terrible! literary tricks, of course, but they work, and _that's_ 
genius! isn't it?" 

"genius! yes, if you call it that. the perverse genius of the devil!" 

"that's what i want to write--what i will write some day." he watch 
the play of lights on the restless surface of the waters. "pure horror, 
the epitome of the horrible. it could be written, but it hasn't been 
yet; not even by poe." 

"that little analysis of yours was bad enough, nick! why should you 
want to improve on his treatment of the theme?" 

"because i like to write, and because i'm interested in the horrible. 
two good reasons." 

"two excuses, you mean. of course, even if you'd succeed, you couldn't 
force anyone to read it." 

"if i succeed, there'd be no need to force people. success would mean 
that the thing would be great literature, and even today, in these 
times, there are still people to read that. and besides--" he paused. 

"besides what?" 

"everybody's interested in the horrible. even you are, whether or not 
you deny it." 

"i certainly do deny it!" 

"but you are, pat. it's natural to be." 

"it isn't!" 

"then what is?" 

"interest in people, and life, and gay times, and pretty things, 
and--and one's self and one's own feelings. and the feelings of the 
people one loves." 

"yes. it come to exactly the point i've been stressing. people are 
sordid, life is hopeless, gay times are stupid, beauty is sensual, 
one's own feelings are selfish. and love is carnal. that's the array of 
horrors that hold your interest!" 

the girl laugh in exasperation. "nick, you could out-argue your 
name-sake, the devil himself! do you really believe that indict of 
the normal viewpoint?" 

"i do--often!" 

"now?" 

"now," he said, turning his gaze on pat, "i have no feeling of it at 
all. now, right now, i don't believe it." 

"why not?" she queried, smile ingenuous at him. 

"you, obviously." 

"gracious! i had no idea my logic was as convincing as that." 

"your logic isn't. the rest of you is." 

"that sound like a compliment," observe pat. "if it is," she 
continue in a banter tone, "it's the only one i can recall 
obtain from you." 

"that's because i seldom call attention to the obvious." 

"and that's another," laugh the girl. "i'll have to mark this date in 
red on my calendar. it's entire unique in our--let's see--nearly a 
month's acquaintance." 

"is it really so short a time? i know you so well that it must have 
taken years. every detail!" he closed his eyes. "hair like black silk, 
and oddly dark blue eyes--if i were writing a poem at the moment, i'd 
call them violet. tiny lips, the sort the elizabethan call bee-stung. 
straight nose, and a figure that is a sort of vest-pocket copy of 
diana. right?" he open his eyes. 

"nice, but exaggerated. and even if you were correct, that isn't pat 
lane, the real pat lane. a camera could do better on a tenth of a 
second's acquaintance!" 

"check!" he closed his eyes again. "personality, piquant. character, 
loyal, naturally happy, intelligent, but not serious. an intellectual 
butterfly; a dilettante. poised, cool, self-possessed, yet inherently 
affectionate. a being untouched by reality, as yet, living in chicago 
and in a make-believe world at the same time." he paused, "how old are 
you, pat?" 

"twenty-two. why?" 

"i wonder how long one could manage to stay in the world of 
make-believe. i'm twenty-six, and i'm long exiled." 

"i don't think you know what you mean by a make-believe world. i'm sure 
i don't." 

"of course you don't. you can't know and still remain there. it's like 
being happy; once you realize it, it's no long perfect." 

"then don't explain!" 

"wouldn't make any difference if i did, pat. it's a queer world, like 
the sardoodledom of sardou and the afternoon-tea school of playwrights. 
all stage-settings and pretense, but it looks real while you're 
watching, especially if you're one of the characters." 

the girl laughed. "you're a delicious solemn sort, nick. how would 
you like to hear my analysis of you?" 

"i wouldn't!" 

"you inflict yours on me, and i'm entitle to revenge. and so--you're 
intelligent, lazy, dreamy, and with a fine perception of artistic 
values. you're very alert to impression of the senses--i mean you're 
sensuous without being sensual. you're delightful serious without 
being somber, except sometimes. sometimes i feel a hint, just a 
thrill hint, in your character, of something dangerous darker--" 

"don't!" said nick sharply. 

pat shot him a quick glance. "and you're frightened to death of 
fall in love," she conclude imperturbably. 

"oh! do you think so?" 

"i do." 

"then you're wrong! i can't be afraid of it, since i've known for the 
better part of a month that i've been in love." 

"with me," said the girl. 

"yes, with you!" 

"well!" said pat. "it never before took me a month to extract that 
admission from a man. is twenty-two get old?" 

"you're a tantalize imp!" 

"and so?" she purse her lips, assume an air of disappointment. "what 
am i to do about it--scream for help? you haven't given me anything to 
scream about." 

the kiss, pat admitted to herself, was quite satisfactory. she yield 
herself to the pleasure of it; it was decidedly the best kiss she had, 
in her somewhat limited experience, encountered. she pushed herself 
away finally, with a little gasp, gaze bright-eyed at her companion. 
he was staring down at her with serious eyes; there was a tense twist 
to his mouth, and a curious unexpected attitude of unhappiness. 

"nick!" she murmured. "was it as bad as all that?" 

"bad! pat, do it mean you--care for me? a little, anyway?" 

"a little," she admitted. "maybe more. is that what make you look so 
forlorn?" 

he drew her close to him. "how could i look forlorn, honey, when 
something like this has happen to me? that was just my way of look 
happy." 

she nestle as close as the steer wheel permitted, drawing his arm 
about her shoulders. "i hope you mean that, nick." 

"then _you_ mean it? you really do?" 

"i really do." 

"i'm glad," he said huskily. the girl thought she detect a strange 
dubious note in his voice. she glance at his face; his eyes were 
gaze into the dim remote of the night horizon. 

"nick," she said, "why were you so--well, so reluctant about admit 
this? you must have known i--like you. i show you that deliberate 
in so many ways." 

"i--i wasn't quite sure." 

"you were! that isn't it, nick. i had to practically browbeat you into 
confess you care for me. why?" 

he step on the starter; the motor ground into sudden life. the car 
back into the road, turning toward chicago, that glare like a false 
dawn in the southern sky. 

"i hope you never find out," he said. 




2 

science of mind 


"she's out," said pat as the massive form of dr. carl horker loom in 
the doorway. "your treatment must be successful; mother's out play 
bridge." 

the doctor gave his deep, rumbling chuckle. "so much the better, pat. 
i don't feel professional anyway." he move into the living room, 
deposit his bulk on a groan davenport. "and how's yourself?" 

"too well to be a patient of yours," retort the girl. "psychiatry! 
the new religion! just between friends, it's all applesauce, isn't it?" 

"if i weren't try to act in place of your father, i'd resent that, 
young lady," said the doctor placidly. "psychiatry is a definite 
science, and a pretty important one. applied psychology, the science of 
the human mind." 

"if said mind exists," add the girl, swinging her slim leg over the 
arm of a chair. 

"correct," agree the doctor. "in my practice i find occasional 
evidence that it does. or did; your generation seem to have found 
substitutes." 

"which appear to work just as well!" laugh pat. "all our trouble 
are more or less inherit from your generation." 

"touche!" admitted dr. horker. "but my generation also bequeath you 
some solid value which you don't know how to use." 

"they've been weigh and found wanting," said pat airily. "we're busy 
replace them with our own values." 

"which are certainly no better." 

"maybe not, doc, but at least they're ours." 

"yours and tom paine's. i can't see that you young modern have brought 
any new idea to the social scheme." 

"new or not, we're the first one to give 'em a try-out. your crowd 
took it out in talk." 

"that's an insult," observe the doctor cheerfully. "if i weren't 
acting _in loco parentis_--" 

"i know! you'd give me a few lick in the spot popularly supposed to 
do the most good! well, that's part of a parent's privilege, isn't it?" 

"you've grown beyond the spanking age, my dear. physically, if not 
mentally--though i don't say the process would hurt me as much as you. 
i'd doubtless enjoy it." 

"then you might try send me to bed without my dinner," the girl 
laughed. 

"that's a doctor's prerogative, pat. i've even done that to your 
mother." 

"in other words, you're a complete flop as a parent. all the 
responsibilities, and none of the privileges." 

"that express it." 

"well, you elect yourself, doc. it's not my fault you happen to 
live next door." 

"no. it's my misfortune." 

"and i notice," remark pat wickedly, "that you're not too thorough 
_in loco_ to neglect send mother a bill for service rendered!" 

"my dear girl, that's part of the treatment!" 

"so? and how?" 

"i furnish a bill just steep enough to keep your mother from indulge 
too frequent in medical services. without that little practical check 
on her inclinations, she'd be a confirmed neurotic. one of those sweet, 
resigned, professional invalids, you know." 

"then why not send her a bill tall enough to cure her altogether?" 

"she might change to psychoanalysis or new thought," chuckle the 
doctor. "besides, your father want me to look after her, and besides 
that, i like have the run of the house." 

"well, i'm sure i don't mind," observe pat. "we've a dog and a canary 
bird, too." 

"you're in fine fettle this afternoon!" laugh her companion. "must've 
been a successful date last night." 

"it was." her eyes turn sudden dreamy. 

"you're in love again, pat!" he accused. 

"again? why the 'again'?" 

"well, there was billy, and that paul--" 

"oh, those!" her tone was contemptuous. "merely passing fancies, doc. 
just whims, dream of the moment--in other words, puppy love." 

"and this? i suppose this is different--a grand passion?" 

"i don't know," she said, frown abruptly. "he's nice, but--odd. 
attractive as--well, as the devil." 

"odd? how?" 

"oh, he's one of those mind you think we modern lack." 

"intellectual, eh? new variety for you; out of the usual run of your 
dance collegiates. i've often suspect that you picked your swain 
by the length and low of their cars." 

"maybe i did. that was one of the chief difference between them." 

"how'd you meet this mental paragon?" 

"billy field drag him around to one of those literary evenings he 
affects--where they read oscar wilde and eugene o'neil aloud. bill met 
him at the library." 

"and he out-shone all the local lights, i perceive." 

"he surely did!" retort pat. "and he hardly said a word the whole 
evening." 

"he wouldn't have to, if they're all like billy! what's this prodigy's 
specialty?" 

"he writes. i think--laugh if you want to!--i think perhaps he's a 
genius." 

"well," said doctor horker, "even that's possible. it's been known to 
occur, but rarely, to my knowledge, in your generation." 

"oh, we're just dim by the glare of brilliance from yours." she 
swung her leg to the floor, facing the doctor. "do you psychiatrist 
actually _know_ anything about love?" she queried. 

"we're supposed to." 

"what is it, then?" 

"just a device of nature's for perpetuate the species. some organism 
manage without it, and do pretty well." 

"yes. i've heard reference to the poor fish!" 

"then they're inaccurate; fish have primitive symptom of eroticism. 
but below the vertebrates, notably in the amoeba, i don't recall any 
amorous habits." 

"then your definition doesn't explain a thing, do it?" 

"not to one of the victims, perhaps." 

"anyway," said pat decisively, "i've heard of the old biological urge 
before your kind analysis. it doesn't begin to explain why one should 
be attract to this person and repel by that one. do it?" 

"no, but freud does. the famous oedipus complex." 

"that's the love of son for mother, or daughter for father, isn't it? 
and i don't see how that clear up anything; for example, i can just 
barely remember my father." 

"that's plenty. it could be some little trait in these swain of yours, 
some unimportant mannerism that recall that memory. or there's that 
portrait of him in the hall--the one under the mellow red light. it 
might happen that you'd see one of these chaps under a similar light 
in some attitude that bring the picture to mind--or a hundred other 
possibilities." 

"doesn't sound entire convincing," object pat with a thoughtful 
frown. 

"well, submit to the proper treatments, and i'll tell you exactly what 
cause each and every one of your little passing fancies. you can't 
expect me to hit it first guess." 

"thanks, no! that's one of these course where you tell the doctor all 
your secrets, and i prefer to keep what few i have." 

"good judgment, pat. by the way, you said this chap was odd. do that 
mean merely that he writes? i've known perfectly normal people who 
wrote." 

"no," she said, "it isn't that. it's--he's so sweet and gentle and 
manageable most of the time, but sometimes he has such a thrill 
spark of mastery that it almost scare me. it's puzzle but 
fascinating, if you grasp my import." 

"huh! he's probably a naturally selfish fellow who's putt on a good 
show of gentle for your benefit. those flash of tyranny are 
probably his real character in moment of forgetfulness." 

"you doctor can explain anything, can't you?" 

"that's our business. it's what we're paid for." 

"well, you're wrong this time. i know nick well enough to know if he's 
acting. his personality is just what i said--gentle, sensitive, and 
yet--it's perplexing, and that's a good part of his charm." 

"then it's not such a serious case you've got," mock the doctor. 
"when you're cool enough to analyze your own feelings, and dissect the 
elements of the chap's attraction, you're not in any danger." 

"danger! i can look out for myself, thanks. that's one thing we 
mindless modern learn young, and don't let me catch you putter 
around in my romances! _in loco parentis_ or just plain loco, you'll 
get the licking instead of me!" 

"believe me, pat, if i want to experiment with affair of the heart, 
i'd not pick a spit-fire like you as the subject." 

"well, doctor carl, you're warned!" 

"this nick," observe the doctor, "must be quite a fellow to get the 
princess of the north side so het up. what's the rest of his cognomen?" 

"nicholas devine. romantic, isn't it?" 

"devine," mutter horker. "i don't know any devines. who are his 
people?" 

"hasn't any." 

"how do he live? by his writing?" 

"don't know. i gather that he lives on some income left by his 
parents. what's the difference, anyway?" 

"none. none at all." the other wrinkle his brow thoughtfully. "there 
was a colleague of mine, a dr. devine; die a good many years ago. 
reputation wasn't anything to brag about; was a little off balance 
mentally." 

"well, nick isn't!" snap pat with some asperity. 

"i'd like to meet him." 

"he's coming over tonight." 

"so'm i. i want to see your mother." he rose ponderously. "if she's not 
play bridge again!" 

"well, look him over," retort pat. "and i think your knowledge 
of love is a decided flop. i think you're woeful ignorant on the 
subject." 

"why's that?" 

"if you'd known anything about it, you could have married mother some 
time during the last seventeen years. lord know you've tried, and 
all you've attain is the state of _in loco parentis_ instead of 
_parens_." 




3 

psychiatric of genius 


"how do you charge--by the hour?" ask pat, as doctor horker return 
from the hall. the sound of her mother's depart footstep patter 
on the porch. 

"of course, young one; like a plumber." 

"then your rate per minute must be colossal! the only time you ever 
see mother is a moment or so between bridge games." 

"i add on the time i waste with you, my dear. such as now, wait to 
look over that odd swain of yours. didn't you say he'd be over this 
evening?" 

"yes, but it's not worth your rate to have him psychoanalyzed. i can 
do as well myself." 

"all right, pat. i'll give you a sample analysis free," chuckle the 
doctor, distribute his bulk comfortable on the davenport. 

"i don't like free trials," she retorted. "i sent for a beauty-culture 
book once, on free trial. i was twelve years only, and return it in 
seven days, but i'm still get sales letters in the mails. i must be 
on every sucker list in the country." 

"so that's the secret of your charm." 

"what is?" 

"you must have read the book, i mean. if you remember the title, i 
might try it myself. think it'd help?" 

"dr. carl," laugh the girl, "you don't need a book on beauty 
culture--you need one on bridge! it's that atrocious game you play 
that's bother mother." 

"indeed? i shouldn't be surprise if you were right; i've suspect 
that." 

"save your surprise for when i'm wrong, doc. you'll suffer much less 
from shock." 

"confident little brat! you're apt to get that knock out of you some 
day, though i hope you never do." 

"i can take it," grin pat. 

"no doubt you can, but you're an adept at hand it out. where's this 
chap of yours?" 

"he'll be along. no one's ever stood me up on a date yet." 

"i can understand that, you imp! is that the famous nick?" he query 
as a car purr to a stop beyond the windows. 

"no one else!" said the girl, glancing out. "the big thrill in person." 

she dart to the door. horker turn casual to watch her as she 
open it, survey nichola devine with professional nonchalance. 
he entered, tall, slender, with his thin sensitive features sharp 
outline in the light of the hall. he cast a quick glance toward the 
doctor; the latter noted the curious amber-green eyes of the lad, set 
wide in the lean face, deep, speculative, the eyes of a dreamer. 

"evening, nick," pat was bubbling. the newcomer gave her a hasty 
smile, with another glance at the doctor. "don't mind dr. carl," she 
continued. "aren't you go to kiss me? it irk the medico, and i 
never miss a chance." 

nichola flushed in embarrassment; he gesture hesitantly, then placed 
a hasty peck of a kiss on the girl's forehead. he redden again at the 
doctor's rumble of "young imp of satan!" 

"not very good," said pat reflectively, obviously enjoy the 
situation. "i've known you to do better." she pull him toward the 
arch of the living room. "come meet dr. horker. dr. carl, this is the 
aforesaid nichola devine." 

"dr. horker," repeated the lad, smile diffidently. "you're the 
psychiatrist and brain specialist, aren't you, sir?" 

"so my patient believe," rumble the massive doctor, rising at the 
introduction, and grasping the youth's hand. "and you're the genius 
patricia has been raving about. i'm glad to have the chance of look 
you over." 

nick gave the girl a harass glance, shift uncomfortably, and 
patently at a loss for a reply. she grin mischievously. 

"sit down, both of you," she suggest helpfully. she seize his hat 
from the reluctant hand of nick, sailing it careless to a chair. 

"so!" boom the doctor, lower his great bulk again to the 
davenport. he eye the youth sitting nervous before him. "devine, did 
you say?" 

"yes, sir." 

"i knew a devine once. colleague of mine." 

"a doctor? my father was a doctor." 

"dr. stuart devine?" 

"yes, sir." he paused. "did you say you knew him, dr. horker?" 

"slightly," rumble the other. "only slightly." 

"i don't remember him at all, of course, i was very young when he--and 
my mother too--died." 

"you must have been. patricia claim you write." 

"i try." 

"what sort of material?" 

"why--any sort. prose or poetry; what i feel like writing." 

"whatever inspire you, i suppose?" 

"yes, sir." the lad flushed again. 

"ever have anything published?" 

"yes, sir. in _nation's poetry_." 

"never heard of it." 

"it has a large circulation," said nick apologetically. 

"humph! well, that's something. whom do you like?" 

"whom do i like?" the youth's tone was puzzled. 

"what authors--writers?" 

"oh." he cast another uncomfortable glance at pat. "why--i like 
baudelaire, and poe, and swinburne, and villon, and--" 

"decadents, all of them!" sniff the doctor. "what prose writers?" 

"well--" he hesitated--"poe again, and stern, and rabelais--" 

"rabelais!" horker's voice boomed. "well! your taste can't be as bad as 
i thought, then. there's one we agree on, anyway. and i notice you name 
no moderns, which is another good point." 

"i haven't read many moderns, sir." 

"that's in your favor." 

"cut it!" put in pat with assume sharpness. "you've taken enough 
whack at my generation for one day." 

"i'm glad to find one of your generation who agree with me," chuckle 
the doctor. "at least to the extent of not reading its works." 

"i'll teach him," grin pat. "i'll have him writing vess libre, and 
maybe even dadaism, in a week." 

"maybe it won't be much loss," grunt horker. "i haven't seen any of 
his work yet." 

"we'll bring some around soon or later. we will, won't we, nick?" 

"of course, if you want to. but--" 

"he's go to say something modest," interrupt the girl. "he's in 
the retiring mood now, but he's apt to change any moment, and snap your 
surly head off." 

"humph! i'd like to see it." 

"so'd i," retort pat. "you've had it coming all day; maybe i'll do it 
myself." 

"you have, my dear, innumerable times. but i'm like the hydra, except 
that i grow only one head to replace the one you snap off." he turn 
again to nicholas. "do you work?" 

"yes, sir. at my writing." 

"i mean how do you live?" 

"why," said the youth, redden again in embarrassment, "my parents--" 

"listen!" said pat. "that's enough of dr. carl's cross examination. 
you'd think he was a victorian father who had just been approach for 
his daughter's hand. we haven't whisper any news of an engagement to 
you, have we, doc?" 

"no, but i'm acting--" 

"sure. _in loco parentis._ we know that." 

"you're incorrigible, pat! i wash my hand of you. run along, if you're 
go out." 

"you'll be telling me never to darken my own door again in the next 
breath!" she stretch forth a diminutive foot at the extremity of 
a superlatively attractive ankle, caught nick's hat on her toe, and 
kick it expert to his lap. "come on, nick. there's a moon." 

"there is not!" object the doctor huffily. "it rise at four, as you 
ought to know. you didn't see it last night, did you?" 

"i didn't notice," said the girl. "come on, nick, and we'll watch 
it rise tonight. we'll check up on the doctor's astronomy, or is it 
chronology?" 

"you do and i'll know it! i can hear you come home, you imp!" 

"nice neighbor," observe pat airily, as she step to the door. "i'll 
bet you peek out of the window, too." 

she ignore the doctor's irritate rumble as she pass into the hall, 
where nick, after a diffident murmur of farewell to horker, followed. 
she caught up a light cape, which he drape about her shoulders. 

"nick," she said, "suppose you run out to the car and wait. i think 
i've step too hard on dr. carl's corns, and i want to give him a 
little cheering up. will you?" 

"of course, pat." 

she dart back into the living room, perch on the arm of the 
davenport beside the doctor. 

"well?" she said, running her hand through his grizzled hair. "what's 
the verdict?" 

"seems like a nice kid," grumble horker reluctantly. "nice enough, 
but introverted, repressed, and i shouldn't be surprise to find him 
anti-social. doesn't adjust easily to his environment; take refuge in 
a dream world of his own." 

"that's what he accuse me of doing," grin pat. "that all you've got 
against him?" 

"that's all, but where's that streak of mastery you mentioned? you lead 
him around on a leash!" 

"it didn't show up tonight. that's the thrill--the unexpected of 
it." 

"bah! you must've dream it. there's no more aggressive in that 
lad than in koko, your canary." 

"don't you believe it, dr. carl! the trouble is that he's a genius, and 
that's where your psychology falls flat." 

"genius," said the doctor oracularly, "is a sublimate of qualities--" 

"i'll tell you tomorrow how sublime the quality are," call pat as 
she skip out of the door. 




4 

the transfiguration 


the car slid smooth along a straight white road that stretch ahead 
into the dark like an earth-bound milky way. in the dim distance 
before them, red as antares, glow the tail-light of some automobile; 
except for this lone evidence of humanity, reflect pat, they might 
have been flash through the cosmic depths of interstellar space, 
instead of following a highway in the very shadow of chicago. the 
colossal city of the lake-shore was invisible behind them, and the 
cluster suburbs with it. 

"queer, isn't it?" said pat, after a silence, "how contented we can 
be with none of the purchase amusement people crave--shows, movies, 
dancing, and all that." 

"it doesn't seem queer to me," answer nick. "not when i look at you 
here beside me." 

"nice of you!" retort pat. "but it's never happen to me before." 
she paused, then continued, "how do you like the doctor?" 

"how do he like me? that's considerably more to the point, isn't it?" 

"he think you're nice, but--let's see--introverted, repressed, and 
ill-adjusted to your environment. i think those were the points." 

"well, _i_ like _him_, in spite of your manoeuvers, and in spite of 
his being a doctor." 

"what's wrong with being a doctor?" 

"did you ever read 'tristram shandy'?" was nick's irrelevant response. 

"no, but i read the newspapers!" 

"what's the connection, pat?" 

"just as much connection as there is between the evil of being a 
doctor and reading 'tristram shandy'. i know that much about the book, 
at least." 

"you're nearly right," laugh nick. "i was just refer to one of 
tristram's remark on doctor and lawyers. it fit my attitude." 

"what's the remark?" 

"well, he had the choice of professions, and it occur to him that 
medicine and law were the vulture professions, since lawyer live 
by men's quarrel and doctor by men's misfortunes. so--he became a 
writer." 

"and what do writer live by?" query pat mischievously. "by men's 
stupidity!" 

"you're precious, pat!" nick chuckle delightedly. "if i'd create you 
to order, i couldn't have plan you more to taste--pepper, tabasco 
sauce, vinegar, spice, and honey!" 

"and to be taken with a grain of salt," retort the girl, pucker 
her piquant, impish features. she edge close to him, lock her arm 
through his where it rest on the steer wheel. 

"nick," she said, her tone sudden gentle, "i think i'm pretty crazy 
about you. heaven know why i should be, but it's a fact." 

"pat, dear!" 

"i'm crazy about you in this meek, sensitive pose of yours, and i'm 
fascinate by those masterful moments you flash occasionally. really, 
nick, i almost wish you flame out oftener." 

"don't!" he said sharply. 

"why not?" 

"let's not talk about me, pat. it--embarrasses me." 

"all right, mr. modesty! let's talk about me, then. i'll promise we 
won't succeed in embarrass me." 

"and it's quite the most interesting subject in the world, pat." 

"well, then?" 

"what?" 

"why don't you start talking? the topic is all attention." 

he chuckled. "how many men have told you you were beautiful, pat?" 

"i never kept account." 

"and in many different ways?" 

"why? have you, perchance, discover a new way, nick?" 

"not at all. the oldest way of any, the way of sappho and pindar." 

"o-ooh!" she clap her hand in mock delight. "poetry!" 

"the only medium that could possibly express how lovely you are," said 
nick. 

"nicholas, have you gone and compose a poem to me?" 

"composed? no. it isn't necessary, with you here beside me." 

"what's that? some very subtle compliment?" 

"not subtle, pat. you're the poem yourself; all i need do is look at 
you, listen to you, and translate." 

"neat!" applaud the girl. "do i hear the translation?" 

"you certainly do." he turn his odd amber-green eyes on her, then 
bent forward to the road. he began to speak in a low voice. 

"in no far country's silent ways 
shall i forget one little thing-- 
the soft intent of your gaze, 
the sweet of your murmur 
your generous tender praise, 
the words just hint by a breath-- 
in no far country's silent way, 
unless that country's name be death--" 

he pause abruptly, and drove silent onward. 

"oh," breathe pat. "why don't you go on, nick? please." 

"no. it isn't the mood for this night, dear. not this night, alone with 
you." 

"what is, then?" 

"nothing sentimental. something lighter, something--oh, elizabethan. 
that's it." 

"and what's stopping you?" 

"lack of an available idea. or--wait. listen a moment." he began, this 
time in a tone of banter. 

"when mornings, you attire yourself 
for riding in the city, 
you're such a lovely little elf, 
extravagant pretty! 
and when at noon you deign to wear 
the habit of the town, 
i cannot call to mind as fair 
a symphony in brown. 

"then evenings, you blithe don 
a dainty of white, 
to flash a very paragon 
of lightsomeness--and light! 
but when the rounds of pleasure cease, 
and you retire at night, 
the godl on your mantelpiece 
must know a fair sight!" 

"sweet!" laugh pat. "but personal. and anyway, how do you know i've a 
godl on my mantel? don't you credit me with any modesty?" 

"if you haven't, you should have! the vision i mention ought to 
enliven even a statue." 

"well," said the girl, "i have one--a jade buddha, and with all the 
charm i flash before him nightly, he's never bat an eyelash. 
explain that!" 

"easily. he's green with envy, and frozen with admiration, and struck 
dumb by wonder." 

"heavens! i suppose i ought to be thankful you didn't say he was 
petrify with fright!" pat laughed. "oh nick," she continued, in a 
voice gone sudden dreamy, "this _is_ marvelous, isn't it? i mean our 
enjoy ourselves so completely, and our being satisfy to be so 
alone. why, we've never even dance together." 

"so we haven't. that's a subterfuge we haven't needed, isn't it?" 

"it is," reply the girl, drop her glossy gleam black head 
against his shoulder. "and besides, it's much more satisfactory to be 
held in your arms in private, instead of in the midst of a crowd, and 
sitting down, instead of standing up. but i should like to dance with 
you, nick," she concluded. 

"we'll go dancing, then, whenever you like." 

"you're delightful complaisant, nick. but--you're puzzling." she 
glance up at him. "you're so--so reluctant. here we've been driving an 
hour, and you haven't try to kiss me a single time, and yet i'm quite 
positive you care for me." 

"lord, pat!" he muttered. "you never need doubt that." 

"then what is it? are you so spiritual and ethereal, or is my 
attraction for you just sort of intellectual? or--are you afraid?" as 
he made no reply, she continued, "or are those poem you spout about my 
physical charm just--poetic license?" 

"they're not, and you know it!" he snapped. "you've a mirror, haven't 
you? and other fellow than i have taken you around, haven't they?" 

"oh, i've been taken around! that's what perplex me about you, nick. 
i'd think you were actually afraid of kiss me if it weren't--" her 
voice trail into silence, and she stare speculative ahead at the 
ribbon of road that roll steady into the headlights' glare. 

she broke the interval of wordlessness. "what is it, nick?" she 
resume almost pleadingly. "you've hint at something now and then. 
please--you don't have to hesitate to tell me; i'm modern enough to 
forgive things past, entanglements, affairs, disgraces, or anything 
like that. don't you think i should know?" 

"you'd know," he said huskily, "if i could tell you." 

"then there is something, nick!" she pressed his arm against her. "tell 
me, isn't there?" 

"i don't know." there was the suggestion of a groan in his voice. 

"you don't know! i can't understand." 

"i can't either. please, pat, let's not spoil tonight; if i could tell 
you, i would. why, pat, i love you--i'm terribly, deeply, solemn in 
love with you." 

"and i with you, nick." she gaze ahead, where the road rose over the 
arch of a narrow bridge. the speeding car lift to the rise like a 
zoom plane. 

and suddenly, square in the center of the road, another car, until 
now conceal by the arch of the bridge, appear almost upon them. 
there was a heart-stopping moment when a collision seem inevitable, 
and pat felt the arm against her tighten convulsive into a bar of 
steel. she heard her own sob gasp, and then, somehow, they had 
slip unscathed between the other car and the rail of the bridge. 

"oh!" she gasp faintly, then with a return of breath, "that was nice, 
nick!" 

beyond the bridge, the road widen once more; she felt the car 
slowing, edging toward the broad shoulder of the road. 

"there was danger," said her companion in tone as emotionless as the 
rasp of metal. "i came to save it." 

"save what?" query pat as the car slid to a halt on the turf. 

"your body." the tone were still cold, like grind wheels. "the 
beauty of your body!" 

he reach a thin hand toward her, sudden seize her skirt and 
snatch it above the silken round of her knees. "there," he 
rasped. "that is what i mean." 

"nick!" pat half-screamed in appall astonishment. "how--" she paused, 
shock into abrupt silence, for the face turn toward her was but a 
remote, evil caricature of nichola devine's. it leer at her out of 
blood-shot eyes, as if behind the mask of nick's face peer a red-eyed 
demon. 




5 

a fantasy of fear 


the satyr beside pat was leaning toward her; the arm about her was 
tighten with a brutal ruthlessness, and while still staring in 
fascination at the incredible eyes, she realize that another arm and 
a white hand was moving relentlessly, exploratively, toward her body. 
it was the cold touch of this hand as it slip over her silk-sheathed 
leg that broke the chill spell of her fascination. 

"nick!" she screamed. "nick!" she had a curious sensation of calling 
him back from far distances, the while she strove with both hand and 
all her strength to press him back from her. but the ruthless force of 
his arms was overcome her resistance; she saw the red eyes a hand's 
breadth from her own. 

"nick!" she sob in terror. 

there was a change. abruptly, she was look into nick's eyes, 
blood-shot, frightened, puzzled, but indubitable nick's eyes. the 
flaming orb of the demon were no more; it was as if they had recede 
into nick's head. the arm about her body relaxed, and they were staring 
at each other in a medley of consternation, amaze and unbelief. the 
youth drew back, huddle in his corner of the car, and pat, breathing 
in sobs, smooth out her rumple apparel with a convulsive movement. 

"pat!" he gasped. "oh, my god! he couldn't have--" he pause abruptly. 
the girl gaze at him without reply. 

"pat, dear," he spoke in a low, tense murmur, "i'm--sorry. i don't 
know--i don't understand how--" 

"never mind," she said, regain a vestige of her customary composure. 
"it's--all right, nick." 

"but--oh, pat--!" 

"it was that near accident," she said. "that upset you--both of us, i 
mean." 

"yes!" he said eagerly. "that's what it was, pat. it must have been 
that, but dear, can you forgive? do you want to forgive me?" 

"it's all right," she repeated. "after all, you just compliment my 
legs, and i guess i can stand that. it's happen before, only not 
quite so--convincingly!" 

"you're sweet, pat!" 

"no; i just love you nick." she felt a sudden pity for the misery in 
his face. "kiss me, nick--only gently." 

he pressed his lip to hers, very lightly, almost timidly. she lay back 
against the seat for a moment, her eyes closed. 

"that's you again," she murmured. "this other--wasn't." 

"please, pat! don't refer to it,--not ever." 

"but it wasn't you, nick. it was just the strain of that narrow escape. 
i don't hold it against you." 

"you're--lord, pat, i don't deserve you. but you know that i--i 
myself--could never touch you except in tenderness, even in reverence. 
you're too dainty, too lovely, too spirited, to be hurt, or to be held 
roughly, against your will. you know i feel that way about you, don't 
you?" 

"of course. it was nothing, nick. forget it." 

"if i can," he said somberly. he switch on the engine, back out 
upon the pavement, and turn the car toward the glow that marked 
chicago. neither of them spoke as the machine hum over the arch 
bridge and down the slope, where, so few minutes before, the threat of 
accident had thrust itself at them. 

"we won't see a moon tonight," said pat in a small voice, after an 
interval. "we'll never check up on dr. carl's astronomy." 

"you don't want to tonight, pat, do you?" 

"i guess perhaps we'd better not," she replied. "we're both upset, and 
there'll be other nights." 

again they were silent. pat felt strained, shaken; there was something 
uncanny about the occurrence that puzzle her. the red eyes that had 
glare out of nick's face perplexed her, and the curious rasp voice 
he had use still sound inhuman in her memory. out of recollection 
rose still another mystery. 

"nick," she said, "what did you mean--then--when you said there was 
danger and you came to save me?" 

"nothing," he said sharply. 

"and then, afterwards, you start to say something about 'he couldn't 
have--'. who's 'he'?" 

"it meant nothing, i tell you. i was frantic to think you might have 
been hurt. that's all." 

"i believe you, honey," she said, wonder whether she really did. the 
thing was beginning to grow hazy; already it was assume merely the 
proportions of an upheaval of youthful fervor. such occurrence were 
not unheard of, though never before had it happen to patricia lane! 
still, even that was conceivable, far more conceivable than the dark, 
unformed, inchoate suspicion she had been harboring. they hadn't even 
been definite enough to be call suspicions; indefinite apprehension 
came closer. 

and yet--that strange, wild face that had form itself of nick's fine 
features, and the terrible red eyes! were they elements in a picture 
conjure out of her own imagination? they must be, of course. she had 
been frightened by that hairbreadth escape, and had seen things that 
didn't exist. and the rest of it--well, that might be natural enough. 
still, there was something--she knew that; nick had admitted it. 

horker's words concerning nick's father rose in her mind. suspect 
of being crazy! was that it? was that the cause of nick's curious 
reluctance where she was concerned? was the face that had glare 
at her the visage of a maniac? it couldn't be. it couldn't be, she 
told herself fiercely. not her fine, tender, sensitive nick! and 
besides, that face, if she hadn't imagine it, had been the face, not 
of a lunatic, but of a devil. she shook her head, as if to deny her 
thoughts, and placed her hand impulsive on nick's. 

"i don't care," she said. "i love you, nick." 

"and i you," he murmured. "pat, i'm sorry about spoil this evening. 
i'm sorry and ashamed." 

"never mind, honey. there'll be others." 

"tomorrow?" 

"no," she said. "mother and i are go out to dinner. and friday we're 
have company." 

"really, pat? you're not just try to turn me off gently." 

"really, nick. try ask me for saturday evening and see!" 

"you're asked, then." 

"and it's a date." then, with a return of her usual insouciance, she 
added. "if you're on good behavior." 

"i will be. i promise." 

"i hope so," said pat. an inexplicable sense of foreboding had come 
over her; despite her self-given assurances, something unnameable 
trouble her. she gave a mental shrug, and deliberate relegate the 
unpleasant cogitation to oblivion. 

the car turn into dempster road; the lights of the teeming 
roadhouses, dance halls, road-side hamburger and barbecue stand 
flash by. there were many car here; there was no long any 
impression of solitude now, in the overflow from the vast city in 
whose shadow they moved. the incessant flow of traffic gave the girl 
a feeling of security; these were tangible things about her, and once 
more the memory of that disturb occurrence became dim and dreamlike. 
this was nick beside her, gentle, intelligent, kind; had he ever been 
otherwise? it seem highly unreasonable, a fantasy of fear and the 
hysteria of the moment. 

"hungry?" ask nick unexpectedly. 

"i could use a barbecue, i guess. beef." 

the car veer to the gravel area before a bright lit stand. nick 
gave the order to an attendant. he chuckle as pat, with the digestive 
disregard of youth attack the greasy combination. 

"that's like a hum bird eat hay!" he said. "or better, like a 
leprechaun eat that horse-meat they can for dogs." 

"you might as well discover that i don't live on honey and 
rose-petals," said pat. "not even on caviar and terrapin--at least, not 
exclusively. i leave the dainty palate for mother to indulge." 

"which is just as well. hamburger and barbecue are more easily 
budgeted." 

"nicholas," said the girl, toss the paper napkin out of the car 
window, "is that an indirect and very evasive proposal of marriage?" 

"you know it could be, if you wish it!" 

"and do i?" she said, assume a pensive air. "i wonder. suppose we say 
i'll let you know later." 

"and meanwhile?" 

"oh, meanwhile we can be sort of engaged. just the way we've been." 

"you're sweet, pat," he murmured, as the car edge into the line of 
traffic. "i don't know just how to convey my appreciation, but it's 
there!" 

the building drew more close together; the road was sudden a 
light street, and then, almost without realize it, they were before 
pat's home. nick walk beside her to the door; he stood facing her 
hesitantly. 

"good night, pat," he said huskily. he lean down, kiss her very 
gently, turned, and departed. 

the girl watch him from the open doorway, following the lights of 
his car until they vanish down the street. dear, sweet nick! then 
the disturb memory of that occurrence of the evening returned; she 
frown in perplexity as the thought rose. that was all of a piece with 
the puzzle character of him, and the curious veiled reference he'd 
made. reference to what? she didn't know, couldn't imagine. nick had 
said he didn't know either, which add still another quirk to the maze. 

she thought of dr. horker's words. with the thought, she glance at his 
house, adjacent to her own home. a light gleam in the library; he 
was still awake. she closed the door behind her, and dart across the 
narrow strip of lawn to his porch. she rang the bell. 

"good evening, dr. carl," she said as the massive form of horker 
appeared. she pucker her lip impudent at him as she slip by him 
into the house. 




6 

a question of science 


"not that i'm displease at this visit, pat," rumble the doctor, 
seating himself in one of the great chair by the fireplace, "but i'm 
curious. i thought you were date your ideal tonight, yet here you 
are, back alone a little after eleven. how come?" 

"oh," said the girl nonchalantly, drop crosswise in the other 
chair, "we decided we need our beauty sleep." 

"then why are you here, you young imp?" 

"thought you might be lonesome." 

"i'll bet you did! but seriously, pat, what is it? any trouble?" 

"no-o," she said dubiously. "no trouble. i just want to ask you a few 
hypothetical questions. about science." 

"go to it, then, and quickly. i was ready to turn in." 

"well," said pat, "about nick's father. he was a doctor, you said, and 
supposed to be cracked. was he really?" 

"humph! that's curious. i just look up a brochure of his tonight in 
the america medical journal, after our conversation of this afternoon. 
why do you ask that?" 

"because i'm interested, of course." 

"well, here's what i remember about him, pat. he was an m.d., all 
right, but i see by his paper there--the one i was reading--that he was 
on the staff of northern u. he did some work at the cook county asylum, 
some research work, and there was a bit of talk about his maltreat 
the patients. then, on top of that, he publish a paper that medical 
men considered crazy, and that start talk of his sanity. that's all i 
know." 

"then nick--." 

"i thought so! so it's come to the point where you're investigate his 
antecedents, eh? with an eye to marriage, or what?" 

"or what!" snap pat. "i was curious to know, naturally." 

"naturally." the doctor gave her a keen glance from his shrewd eyes. 
"did you think you detect incipient dementia in your ideal?" 

"no," said the girl thoughtfully. "dr. carl, is there any sort 
of crazy that could take an ordinarily shy person and make a 
passionate devil of him? i don't mean passionate, either," she added. 
"rather cold, ruthless, domineering." 

"none that i know of," said horker, watch her closely. "did this 
nick of yours have one of his masterful moments?" 

"worse than that," admitted pat reluctantly. "we had a near accident, 
and it startle both of us, and then suddenly, he was look at me 
like a devil, and then--" she paused. "it frightened me a little." 

"what'd he do?" demand horker sharply. 

"nothing." she lie with no hesitation. 

"were there any sign of satyromania?" 

"i don't know. i never heard of that." 

"i mean, in plain americanese, did he make a pass at you?" 

"he--no, he didn't." 

"well, what _did_ he do?" 

"he just look at me." somehow a feeling of disloyalty was rising in 
her; she felt a reluctance to betray nick further. 

"what did he say, then? and don't lie this time." 

"he just said--he just look at my leg and said something about their 
being beautiful, and that was all. after that, the look on his face 
fade into the old nick." 

"old nick is right--the impudent scoundrel!" horker's voice rumble 
angrily. 

"well, they're nice legs," said pat defiantly, swinging them as 
evidence. "you've said it yourself. why shouldn't _he_ say it? what's 
to keep him from it?" 

"the code of a gentleman, for one thing!" 

"oh, who care for your victorian codes! anyway, i came here for 
information, not to be cross-examined. i want to ask the question 
myself." 

"pat, you're a reckless little spit-fire, and you're go to get 
burn some day, and deserve it," the doctor rumble ominously. "ask 
your fool questions, and then i'll ask mine." 

"all right," said the girl, still defiant. "i don't guarantee to answer 
yours, however." 

"well, ask yours, you imp!" 

"first, then--is that satyro-stuff you mention intermittent or 
continuous?" 

"it's necessarily intermittent, you numb-skull! the male organism can't 
function continuously!" 

"i mean, do the mania lie dormant for week or months, and then flare 
up?" 

"not at all. it's a permanent mania, like any other psychopath sex 
condition." 

"oh," said pat thoughtfully, with a sense of relief. 

"well, go on. what next?" 

"what are these dual personalities you read about in the papers?" 

"they're aphasias. an individual forget his name, and he picks, or is 
given, another, if he happen to wander among strangers. he forget 
much of his past experience; the second personality is merely what's 
left of the first--sort of a vestige of his normal character. there 
isn't any such thing as a dual personality in the sense of two distinct 
character living in one body." 

"isn't there?" query the girl musingly. "could the second personality 
have quality that the first one lacked?" 

"not any more than it could have an extra finger! the second is merely 
a split off the first, a forgetfulness, a loss of memory. it couldn't 
have _more_ quality than the whole, or normal, character; it _must_ 
have fewer." 

"isn't that just too interesting!" said pat in a banter tone. "all 
right, dr. carl. it's your turn." 

"then what's the reason for all this curiosity about perversion and 
aphasias? what's happen to your genius now?" 

"oh, i'm thinking of taking up the study of psychiatry," reply the 
girl cheerfully. 

"aren't you go to answer me seriously?" 

"no." 

"then what's the use of my ask questions?" 

"i know the right answer to that one. none!" 

"pat," said horker in a low voice, "you're an impudent little hoyden, 
and too clever for your own good, but you and your mother are very 
precious to me. you know that." 

"of course i do, dr. carl," said the girl, relenting. "you're a dear, 
and i'm crazy about you, and you know that, too." 

"what i'm try to say," proceed the other, "is simply that i'm 
try to help you. i want to help you, if you need help. do you?" 

"i guess i don't, dr. carl, but you're sweet." 

"are you in love with this nichola devine?" 

"i think perhaps i am," she admitted softly. 

"and is he in love with you?" 

"frankly, could he help being?" 

"then there's something about him that worry you. that's it, isn't 
it?" 

"i thought there was, dr. carl. i was a little startle by the change 
in him right after we had that narrow escape, but i'm sure it was 
nothing--just imagination. honestly, that's all that trouble me." 

"i believe you, pat," said the doctor, his eyes fixed on hers. "but 
guard yourself, my dear. be sure he's what you think he is; be sure you 
know him rightly." 

"he's clean and fine," murmur the girl. "i _am_ sure." 

"but this puzzle yourself about his character, pat--i don't like it. 
make doubly sure before you permit your feelings to become too deep 
involved. that's only common sense, child, not psychiatry or magic." 

"i'm sure," repeated pat. "i'm not puzzle or trouble any more. and 
thanks, dr. carl. you run along to bed and i'll do likewise." 

he rose, accompany her to the door, his face unusually grave. 

"patricia," he said, "i want you to think over what i've said. be 
sure, be doubly sure, before you expose yourself to the possibility of 
suffering. remember that, won't you?" 

"i'll try to. don't fret yourself about it, dr. carl; i'm a hard-boiled 
young modern, and it take a diamond to even scratch me." 

"i hope so," he said soberly. "run along; i'll watch until you're 
inside." 

pat dart across the strip of grass, turn at her door to blow a 
goodnight kiss to the doctor, and slip in. she tiptoe quiet to 
her room, slip off her dress, and survey her long, slim leg in 
the mirror. 

"why shouldn't he say they were beautiful?" she query of the image. 
"i can't see any reason to get excited over a simple compliment like 
that." 

she made a face over her shoulder at the green buddha above the 
fireplace. 

"and as for you, fat boy," she murmured, "i expect to see you wink at 
me tonight. and every night hereafter!" 

she prepared herself for slumber, slip into the great bed. she had 
hardly closed her lid before the image of a leer face with terrible 
bloody eyes flame out of memory and set her tremble and shuddering. 




7 

the red eyes return 


"i suppose i really ought to meet your friends, patricia," said mrs. 
lane, peer out of the window, "but they all seem to call when i'm 
not at home." 

"i'll have some of them call in february," said pat. "you're not out as 
often in february." 

"why do you say i'm not out as often in february?" demand her mother. 
"i don't see what earthly difference the month makes." 

"there are few days in february," retort pat airily. 

"facetious brat!" 

"so i've been told. you needn't worry, though, mother; i'm sober, 
steady, and reliable, and if i weren't, dr. carl would see to it that 
my associate were." 

"yes; carl is a gem," observe her mother. "by the way, who's this 
nichola you're so enthusiast about?" 

"he's a boy i met." 

"what's he like?" 

"well, he speak english and wear a hat." 

"imp! is he nice?" 

"that means is his family acceptable, doesn't it? he hasn't any family." 

mrs. lane shrug her attractive shoulders. "you're a self-reliant 
sort, patricia, and cool as ice lettuce, like your father. i don't 
doubt that you can manage your own affairs, and here come claude with 
the car." she gave the girl a hasty kiss. "good-bye, and have a good 
time, as i'm sure i shan't with bret cutter in the game." 

pat watch her mother's trim, amazing youthful figure as she enter 
the car. more like a companion than a parent, she mused; she like the 
independence her mother's attitude permit her. 

"better than being watch like a prize-winning puppy," she thought. 
"maybe dr. carl as a father would have a detriment or two along with 
the advantages. he's a dear, and i'm mad about him, but he do lean to 
the nineteenth century as far as parental duty are concerned." 

she saw nick's car draw to the curb; as he emerge she wave from the 
window and skip into the hall. she caught up her wrap and bound 
out to meet him just ascend the steps. 

"let's go!" she greet him. she cast an apprehensive glance at his 
features, but there was nothing disturb about him. he gave her a 
diffident smile, the shy, gentle smile that had taken her in that first 
moment of meeting. this was certainly no one but her own nick, with no 
trace of the unsettle personality of their last encounter. 

he help her into the car, seating himself at her side. he lean over 
her, kiss her very tenderly; sudden she was clinging to him, her 
face against the thrill warmth of his cheek. 

"nick!" she murmured. "nick! you're just safe you, aren't you? i've 
been imagine things that i knew couldn't be so!" 

he slip his arm caressing about her, and the pressure of it was 
like the security of encircle battlements. the world was outside 
the circle of his arms; she was within, safe, inviolable. it was some 
moments before she stirred, lift her pert face with tear-bright eyes 
from the obscurity of his shoulder. 

"so!" she exclaimed, pat the black glow of her hair into composure. 
"i feel better, nick, and i hope you didn't mind." 

"mind!" he ejaculated. "if you mean that as a joke, honey, it's far too 
subtle for me." 

"well, i didn't think you'd mind," said pat demurely, settle herself 
beside him. "let's be moving, then; dr. carl is nearly pop his eyes 
out in the window there." 

the car hum into motion; she wave a derisive arm at the doctor's 
window by way of indicate her knowledge of his surveillance. "ought 
to teach him a lesson some time," she thought. "one of these fine 
evenings i'll give him a real shock." 

"where'll we go?" query nick, veer skilful into the swift 
traffic of sheridan road. 

"anywhere!" she said blithely. "who care as long as we go together?" 

"dancing?" 

"why not? know a good place?" 

"no." he frown in thought. "i haven't indulge much." 

"the picador?" she suggested. "the music's good, and it's not too 
expensive. but it's 'most across town, and besides, saturday nights 
we'd be sure to run into some of the crowd." 

"what of it?" 

"i want to dance with you, nick--all evening. i want to be without 
distractions." 

"pat, dear! i could kiss you for that." 

"you will," she murmur softly. 

they move aimless south with the traffic, pause momentarily at the 
light-controlled intersections, then whirr again to rapid motion. 
the girl lean against his arm silently, contentedly; block after 
block drop behind. 

"why so pensive, honey?" he ask after an interval. "i've never known 
you so quiet before." 

"i'm enjoy my happiness, nick." 

"aren't you usually happy?" 

"of course, only these last two or three days, ever since our last 
date, i've been making myself miserable. i've been telling myself 
foolish things, impossible things, and it's only now that i've thrown 
off the blues. i'm happy, dear!" 

"i'm glad you are," he said. his voice was strange husky, and he 
stare fixedly at the street rush toward them. "i'm glad you are," 
he repeated, a curious tense in his tones. 

"so'm i." 

"i'll never do anything to make you unhappy, pat--never. not--if i can 
help it." 

"you can help it, nick. you're the one making me happy; please keep 
do it." 

"i--hope to." there was a queer catch in his voice. it was almost as if 
he fear something. 

"selah!" said pat conclusively. she was thinking, "wrong of me to refer 
to that accident. after all it was harmless; just a natural burst of 
passion. might happen to anyone." 

"where'll we go?" ask nick as they swung into the tree-shadowed road 
of lincoln park. "we haven't decided that." 

"anywhere," said the girl dreamily. "just drive; we'll find a place." 

"you must know lot of them." 

"we'll find a new place; we'll discover it for ourselves. it'll mean 
more, do that, than if we just go to one of the old place where 
i've been with every boy that ever dated me. you don't want me dance 
with a crowd of memories, do you?" 

"i shouldn't mind as long as they stay merely memories." 

"well, i should! this evening's to be ours--exclusively ours." 

"as if it could ever be otherwise!" 

"indeed?" said pat. "and how do you know what memory i might choose 
to carry along? are you capable of inspect my mental baggage?" 

"we'll check it at the door. you're travel light tonight, aren't 
you?" 

"pest!" she said, give his cheek an impudent vicious pinch. "nice, 
pleasurable pest!" 

he made no answer. the car was idle rather slow along michigan 
boulevard; half a block ahead glow the green of a traffic light. 
fast traffic flow around them, passing them like water eddy 
about a slow floating branch. 

sudden the car lurch forward. the amber flame of the warning light 
had flared out; they flash across the intersection a split second 
before the metallic click of the red light, and a scant few feet before 
the converge lines of traffic from the side street swept in with 
protest horns. 

"nick!" the girl gasped. "you'll rate yourself a traffic ticket! why'd 
you cut the light like that?" 

"to lose your guardian angel," he mutter in tone so low she barely 
understood his words. 

pat glance back; the lights of a dozen car show beyond the barrier 
of the red signal. 

"do you mean one of those car was following us? what on earth make 
you think that, and why should it, anyway?" 

the other made no answer; he swerve the car abrupt off the avenue, 
into one of the nondescript side streets. he drove swift to the 
corner, turn south again, and turn again on some street pat fail 
to identify--south superior or grand, she thought. they were scarcely 
a block from the magnificence of michigan avenue and its skyscrapers, 
its brilliant lights, and its teeming night traffic, yet here they 
move down a desert dark thoroughfare, a street line with ramshackle 
wooden house intermingle with mean little shops. 

"nick!" pat exclaimed. "where are we going?" 

the low voice sounded. "dancing," he said. 

he brought the car to the curb; in the silence as the motor died, the 
faint strain of a mechanical piano sounded. he open the car door, 
step around to the sidewalk. 

"we're here," he said. 

something metallic in his tone drew pat's eyes to his face. the eyes 
that return her stare were the bloody orb of the demon of last 
wednesday night! 




8 

gateway to evil 


pat stare curious at the apparition but made no move to alight from 
the vehicle. she was conscious of no fear, only a sense of wonder 
and perplexity. after all, this was merely nick, her own harmless, 
adore nick, in some sort of mysterious masquerade, and she felt full 
confidence in her ability to handle him under any circumstances. 

"where's here?" she said, remain motionless in her place. 

"a place to dance," came the toneless reply. 

pat eye him; a street car rumble past, and the brief glow from its 
light window swept over his face. sudden the visage was that 
of nick; the crimson glare of the eyes was imperceptible, and the 
features were the well-known appurtenance of nichola devine, but 
queer tense and strained. 

"a trick of the light," she thought, as the street car lumber away, 
and again a faint gleam of crimson appeared. she gaze curious at the 
youth, who stood impassive return her survey as he held the door 
of the car. but the face was the face of nick, she perceived, probably 
in one of his grim moods. 

she transfer her glance to the building opposite which they had 
stopped. the strain of the mechanical piano had ceased; blank, 
shade window face them, around whose edge glow a subdued light 
from within. a drab, battered, paintless shack, she thought, dismal 
and unpleasant; while she gazed, the sound of the discordant music 
recommenced, adding, it seemed, the last unprepossess item. 

"it doesn't look very attractive, nick," she observe dubiously. 

"i find it so, however." 

"then you've been here?" 

"yes." 

"but i thought you said you didn't know any place to go." 

"this one hadn't occur to me--then." 

"well," she said crisply, "i could have done as well as this with my 
eyes closed. it doesn't appeal to me at all, nick." 

"nevertheless, here's where we'll go. you're apt to find 
it--interesting." 

"look here, nichola devine!" pat snapped, "what make you think you 
can bully me? no one has ever succeed yet!" 

"i said you'd find it interesting." his voice was unchanged; she stare 
at him in complete bafflement. 

"oh, nick!" she exclaim in sudden soft tones. "what difference 
do it make? didn't i say anywhere would do, so we went together?" she 
smile at him. "this will do if you wish, though really, honey, i'd 
prefer not." 

"i do wish it," the other said. 

"all right, honey," said pat the faintest trace of reluctance in her 
voice as she slip from the car. "i stick to my bargains." 

she wince at the intensity of his grip as he took her arm to assist 
her. his finger were like taunt wire biting into her flesh. 

"nick!" she cried. "you're hurt me! you're bruising my arm!" 

he release her; she rub the spot ruefully, then follow him to the 
door of the mysterious establishment. the unharmonious jangle of the 
piano din abrupt loud as he swung the door open. pat enter and 
glance around her at the room revealed. 

dull, smoky, dismal--not the least exciting or interesting as yet, 
she thought. a short bar parallel one wall, behind which lounge a 
little, thin, nondescript individual with a small mustache. half a 
dozen table fill the remainder of the room; four or five occupy 
by the clientele of the place, as unsavory a group as the girl could 
recall have encounter on the hither side of the motion picture 
screen. two women titter as nick entered; then with one accord, the 
eyes of the entire group fixed on pat, where she stood drawing her wrap 
more close about her, standing uncomfortable behind her escort. and 
the piano tinkle its discord in the far corner. 

"same place," said nick shortly to the bartender, ignore the glance 
of the others. pat follow him across the room to a door, into a hall, 
thence into a small room furnish merely with a table and four 
chairs. the nondescript man stood wait in the doorway as nick took 
her wrap and seat her in one of the chairs. 

"quart," he said laconically, and the bartender disappeared. 

pat stare intently, studiously, into the face of her companion. nick's 
face, certainly; here in full light there was no trace of the red-eyed 
horror she had fancy out there in the semi-darkness of the street. or 
was there? now--when he turned, when the light struck his eyes at an 
angle, was that a glint of crimson? still, the features were nick's, 
only a certain grim intensity foreign to him lurk about the set of 
his mouth, the narrow eye-lids. 

"well!" she said. "so this is paris! what are you try to do--teach 
me capital l--life? and where do we dance?" 

"in here." 

"and what kind of quart was that you ordered? you know how little i 
drink, and i'm darn particular about even that little." 

"you'll like this." 

"i doubt it." 

"i said you'll like it," he reiterate in flat tones. 

"i heard you say it." she regard him with a puzzle frown. "nick," 
she said suddenly, "i've decided i like you better in your gentle pose; 
this masterful attitude isn't becoming, and you can forget what i said 
about wish you'd display it oftener." 

"you'll like that, too." 

"again i doubt it. nick, dear, don't spoil another evening like that 
last one!" 

"this one won't be like the last one!" 

"but honey--" she pause at the entrance of the bartender bearing a 
tray, an open bottle of ginger ale, two glasses of ice, and a flask 
of oily amber liquid. he deposit the assortment on the red-checked 
table cloth. 

"two dollars," he said, pocket the money and silent retired. 

"nicholas," said the girl tartly, "there's enough of that poison for a 
regiment." 

"i don't think so." 

"well, i won't drink it, and i won't let you drink it! so now what?" 

"i think you'll do both." 

"i don't!" she snapped. "and i don't like this, nick--the place, or the 
liquor, or your attitude, or anything. we're go to leave!" 

instead of answering, he pull the cork from the bottle, pour a 
quantity of the amber fluid into each of the tumblers. to one he add 
an equal quantity of ginger ale, and set it deliberate square in 
front of pat. she frown at it distastefully, and shook her head. 

"no," she said. "not i. i'm leaving." 

she made no move, however; her eyes met those of her companion, gaze 
at her with a cold intent in their curious amber depths. and 
again--was that a flash of red? impulsive she reach out her hand, 
touched his. 

"oh, nick!" she said in soft, almost pleading tones. "please, honey--i 
don't understand you. don't you know i love you, nick? you can hear me 
say it: i love you. don't you believe that?" 

he continue his cold, intense stare; the grim set of his mouth was as 
unrelaxe as marble. pat felt a shiver of apprehension run through 
her, and an almost hypnotic desire to yield herself to the demand of 
the inexplicable eyes. she tore her glance away, look down at the 
red check of the table cloth. 

"nick, dear," she said. "i can't understand this. will you tell me what 
you--will you tell me why we're here?" 

"it is out of your grasp." 

"but--i know it has something to do with wednesday night, something 
to do with that reluctance of yours, the thing you said you didn't 
understand. hasn't it?" 

"do you think so?" 

"yes," she said. "i do! and nick, honey--didn't i tell you i could 
forgive you anything? i don't care what's happen in the past; all i 
care for is now, now and the future. don't you understand me? i've told 
you i love you, honey! don't you love me?" 

"yes," said the other, staring at her with no change in the fixity of 
his gaze. 

"then how can you--act like this to me?" 

"this is my conception of love." 

"i don't understand!" the girl said helplessly. "i'm completely 
puzzled--it's all topsy-turvy." 

"yes," he said in impassive agreement. 

"but what is this, nick? please, please--what is this? are you mad?" 
she had almost added, "like your father." 

"no," he said, still in those cold tones. "this is an experiment." 

"an experiment!" 

"yes. an experiment in evil." 

"i don't understand," she repeated. 

"i said you wouldn't." 

"do you mean," she asked, struck by a sudden thought, "that discussion 
of ours about pure horror? what you said that night last week?" 

"that!" his voice was icy and contemptuous. "that was the drivel of a 
weakling. no; i mean evil, not horror--the living evil that can be so 
beautiful that one walk deliberately, with open eyes, into hell only 
to prevent its loss. that is the experiment." 

"oh," said pat, her own voice sudden cool. "is that what you wish to 
do--experiment on me?" 

"yes." 

"and what am i supposed to do?" 

"first you are to drink with me." 

"i see," she said slowly. "i see--dimly. i am a subject, a reagent, 
a guinea pig, to provide you material for your writing. you propose 
to use me in this experiment of yours--this experiment in evil. all 
right!" she picked up the tumbler; impulsive she drain it. the 
liquor, dilute as it was, was raw and strong enough to bring tear 
smart to her eyes. or _was_ it the liquor? 

"all right!" she cried. "i'll drink it all--the whole bottle!" she 
seize the flask, filling her tumbler to the brim, while her companion 
watch her with impassive gaze. "you'll have your experiment! and 
then, nichola devine, we're through! do you hear me? through!" 

she caught up the tumbler, raise it to her lips, and drain the 
searing liquid until she could see her companion's cold eyes regarding 
her through the glass of its bottom. 




9 

descent into avernu 


pat slam the empty tumbler down on the checked table cloth and 
bury her face in her hands, choke and gasp from the effects 
of the fiery liquor. her throat burned, her mouth was parch by the 
acrid taste, and a conflagration seem to be rage somewhere within 
her. then she steadied, raise her eyes, and stare straight into the 
strange eyes of nichola devine. 

"well?" she said fiercely. "is that enough?" 

he was watch her cold as an image or a painting; the intensity of 
his gaze was more cat-like than human. she move her head aside; his 
eyes, without apparent shift, were still on hers, like the eyes of a 
picture face. a resurgence of anger shook her at his immobility; his 
aloof seem to imply that nothing she could do would disturb him. 

"wasn't it enough?" she screamed. "wasn't it? then look!" 

she seize the bottle, pour another stream of the oily liquid 
into her glass, and raise it to her lips. again the burning fluid 
excoriate her tongue and throat, and then suddenly, the tumbler was 
struck from her hand, spill the rest of its contents on the table. 

"that is enough," said the icy voice of her companion. 

"oh, it is? we'll see!" she snatch at the bottle, still more than 
half full. the thin hand of nichola devine wrench it violent away. 

"give me that!" she cried. "you want what you're getting!" the warmth 
within her had reach the surface now; she felt flushed, excited, 
reckless, and desperate angry. 

the other set the bottle deliberate on the floor; he rose, circle 
the table, and stood glaring down at her with that same inexplicable 
expression. sudden he raise his hand; twist her black hair in 
his fist, he dealt her a sting blow across the lip half-opened to 
scream, then flung her away so violent that she nearly sprawl from 
her chair. 

the scream die in her throat; daze by the blow, she drop her head 
to the table, while sob of pain and fear shook her. coherent thought 
had departed, and she knew only that her lip stung, that her clear, 
active little mind was caught in a mesh of befuddlement. she couldn't 
think; she could only sob in the haze of dizzy that encompass 
her. after a long interval, she raise her head, open her eyes upon 
a swaying, unsteady world, and face her companion, who had silent 
resume his seat. 

"nicholas devine," she said slowly, speak as if each word were an 
effort, "i hate you!" 

"ah!" he said and was again silent. 

she forced her eyes to focus on his face, while his features dance 
vague as if smoke flow between the two of them. it was as if there 
were smoke in her mind as well; she made a great effort to rise above 
the cloud that bemused her thoughts. 

"take me home," she said. "nicholas, i want to go home." 

"why should i?" he ask impassively. "the experiment is hardly begun." 

"experiment?" she echo dully. "oh, yes--experiment. i'm an 
experiment." 

"an experiment in evil," he said. 

"yes--in evil. and i hate you! that's evil enough, isn't it?" 

he reach down, lift the bottle to the table, and methodical 
pour himself a drink of the liquor. he raise it, watch the oily 
swirl in the light, then tip the fluid to his lip while the girl 
gaze at him with a sullen set to her own lips. a tiny crimson spot 
had appear in the corner of her mouth; at its sting, she raise her 
hand and brush it away. she stare as if in unbelief at the small red 
smear it left on her fingers. 

"nicholas," she said pleadingly, "won't you take me home? please, 
nicholas, i want to leave here." 

"do you hate me?" he asked, a queer twist smile appear on his 
lips. 

"if you'll take me home i won't," said pat, snatch through the 
rising cloud of dizzy at a straw of logic. "you're go to take 
me home, aren't you?" 

"let me hear you say you hate me!" he demanded, rising again. the girl 
cringe away with a little whimper as he approached. "you hate me, 
don't you?" 

he twist his hand again in her ebony hair, drawing her face back so 
that he stare down at it. 

"there's blood on your lips," he said as if gloating. "blood on your 
lips!" 

he clutch her hair more tightly; abrupt he bent over her, pressing 
his mouth to hers. her bruise lip burn with pain at the fierce 
pressure of his; she felt a sharp anguish at the impinge of his 
teeth. yet the cloudy pall of dizzy about her was unbroken; she was 
too frightened and bewilder for resistance. 

"blood on your lips!" he repeated exultingly. "now is the beauty of 
evil!" 

"nicholas," she said wearily, clinging desperate to a remnant of 
logic, "what do you want of me? tell me what you want and then let me 
go home." 

"i want to show you the face of evil," he said. "i want you to know the 
glory of evil, the lovely of supreme evil!" 

he drag his chair around the table, place it beside her. seated, 
he drew her into his arms, where she lay passive, too limp and 
befuddle to resist. with a sudden movement, he turn her so that her 
back rest across his knees, her face gaze up into his. he stare 
intent down at her, and the light, shining at an angle into his eyes, 
sudden struck out the red glow that linger in them. 

"i want you to know the power of evil," he murmured. "the irresistible, 
incomprehensible fascination of it, and the unspeakable pleasure of 
indulgence in it." 

pat scarcely heard him; she was struggle now in vain against the 
overwhelming fumes of the alcohol she had consumed. the room was 
waver around her, and behind her despair and terror, a curious 
elation was thrust itself into her consciousness. 

"evil," she echo vaguely. 

"blood on your lips!" he muttered, peer down at her. "taste the 
unutterable pleasure of kiss on bloody lips; drain the sweet anguish 
of pain, the fierce delight of suffering!" 

he bent down; again his lip pressed upon hers, but this time she felt 
herself responding. some still sane portion of her brain rebelled, 
but the intoxicate of sense and alcohol was dominant. sudden she 
was clinging to him, return his kisses, glory in the pain of her 
lacerate lips. a red mist suffuse her; she had no consciousness of 
anything save the exquisite pain of the kiss, that somehow contrived 
to transform itself into an ecstacy of delight. she lay gasp as the 
other withdrew his lips. 

"you see!" he gloated. "you understand! evil is open to us, and all the 
unutterable pleasure of the damned, who cry out in transport of joy 
at the bite of the flame of hell. do you see?" 

the girl made no answer, sob in a chaotic mingle of pain and 
excruciating pleasure. she was incapable of speech or connected 
thought; the alcohol beat against her brain with a persistence that 
defy resistance. after a moment, she stirred, struggle erect to a 
sitting posture. 

"evil!" she said dizzily. "evil and good--what's difference? all in a 
lifetime!" 

she felt a surge of tipsy elation, and then the muffle music of the 
mechanical piano, drift through the closed door, penetrate her 
befuddle consciousness. 

"i want to dance!" she cried. "i'm drunk and i want to dance! am i 
drunk?" she appeal to her companion. 

"yes," he said. 

"i am not! i just want to dance, only it's hot in here. dance with me, 
nicholas--show me an evil dance! i want to dance with the devil, and 
i will! you're the devil, name and all! i want to dance with old nick 
himself!" 

she rose unsteadi from her chair; instantly the room reel crazy 
about her and she fell sprawling. she felt the grasp of arms beneath 
her shoulders, raise her erect; she lean against the wall and heard 
herself laugh wildly. 

"funny room!" she said. "evil room--on pivots!" 

"you're still to learn," came the toneless voice of nichola devine. 
"do you want to see the face of evil?" 

"sure!" she said. "got a good memory for faces!" 

she realize that he was fumble with the catch of her dress on her 
left shoulder; again some remnant, some vestige of sanity deep in her 
brain warn her. 

"mustn't," she said vaguely. 

then sudden the catch was open; the dress drop away around her, 
crumple to a shapeless blob of cloth about her diminutive feet. she 
cover her face with her hands, fight to hold that last, vanish 
vestige of sobriety, while she stood sway drunken against the wall. 

then nichola devine's arms were about her again; she felt the sharp 
sting of his kiss on her throat. he swung her about, bent her 
backwards across the low table; she was conscious of a bewilder 
sensation of helpless and of little else. 

"now the supreme glory of evil!" he was mutter in her ear. she felt 
his hand on her bare shoulder as he pressed her backward. 

then, abruptly, he paused, release her. she sat dizzy erect, 
following the direction of his gaze. in the half open door stood the 
nondescript bartender leer in at them. 




10 

rescue from abaddon 


pat slid dizzy from her perch on the table and sank heavy to 
a chair. the interrupt of the mustache keeper of this den 
of contradiction struck her as extremely humorous; she giggle 
hysterical as her waver gaze perceive the consternation in his 
sharp little face. some forlorn shred of modesty assert itself, and 
she drag a corner of the red-checked table cloth across her knees. 

"get out!" said nichola devine in that voice of rasp metal. "get 
out!" he repeated in unchang tones. 

the other made no move to leave. "yeah?" he said. "listen, bud--this 
place is respectable, see? you want to pull something like this, you go 
upstairs, see? and pay for your room." 

"get out!" there was no variation in the voice. 

"_you_ get out! the both of you, see?" 

nichola devine step slow toward him; his back, as he advanced 
upon the bartender, was toward pat, yet through the haze of 
intoxication, she had an impression of evil red eyes in a chill, 
impassive face. "get out!" 

the other had no stomach for such an adversary. he back out of the 
door, close it as he vanished. his voice float in from the hall. 

"i'm telling you!" he called. "clear out!" 

nichola devine turn back toward the girl. he survey her sitting in 
her chair; she had drop her chin to her hand to steady the whirl 
of her head. 

"we'll go," he said. "come on." 

"i just want to sit here," she said. "just let me sit here. i'm tired." 

"come on," he repeated. 

"why?" she mutter petulantly. "i'm tired." 

"i want no interruptions. we'll go elsewhere." 

"must dress!" she murmur dazedly, "can't go on street without dress." 

nichola devine swept her frock from its place in the corner, gather 
her wrap from the chair, and flung them over his arm. he grasp her 
wrist, tug her to an unsteady standing position. 

"come on," he said. 

"dress!" 

he snatch the red checked table cloth from its place, precipitate 
bottles, ash-tray, and glasses into an indiscriminate pile, and threw 
the stain and odorous fabric across her shoulders. she gather it 
about her like a toga; it hung at most points barely below her waist, 
but it satisfy the urge of her muddle mind for a covering of some 
sort. 

"we'll go through the rear," her companion said. "into the alley. i 
want no trouble with that rat in the bar--yet!" 

he still held pat's wrist; she stumble after him as he drag her 
into the dark of the hall. they move through it blind to a door 
at the far end; nichola swung it open upon a dim corridor flank by 
building on either side, with a strip of star-sprinkled sky above. 

pat's leg were somehow incapable of their usual lithe grace; she 
fail to negotiate the single step, and crash heavy to the 
concrete paving. the shock and the cooler air of the open steady her 
momentarily; she felt no pain from her bruise knees, but a temporary 
rift in the fog that bound her mind. she gather the red-checked cloth 
more close about her shoulder as her companion, still clutch her 
wrist, jerk her violent to her feet. 

they move into the gulch of the alley, and here she found difficulty 
in following. her tiny high-heeled pump slip at every step on 
the uneven cobble of the paving, and the unsteady footing made her 
lurch and stumble until the dusty stretch of the alley was a writhe 
panorama of shadow and light window and stars. nichola devine 
turn an impatient glare on her, and here in the semi-darkness, his 
face was again the face of the red-eyed demon. she drag him to a 
halt, laugh strangely. 

"there it is!" she cried, point at him with her free hand. he turn 
again, staring at her with grim features. 

"what?" 

"there! your face--the face of evil!" again she laugh hysterically. 

the other step to her side; the disturb eyes were inch from 
her own. he raise his hand as she laughed, slap her sharply, so 
that her head reeled. he seize her shoulders, shake her until the 
checker cloth billow like a flag in a wind. 

"now come!" he muttered. 

but the girl, laugh no longer, lean pale and weak against a 
low board fence. her limb seem paralyzed, and movement was quite 
impossible. she was conscious of neither the blow nor the shaking, but 
only of a devastating nausea and an all-encompassing weakness. she bent 
over the fence; she was violent ill. 

then the nausea had vanished, and a weariness, a strange lassitude, was 
all that remained. nichola devine stood over her; sudden he pressed 
her body to him in a convulsive embrace, so that her head drop back, 
and his face loom above her, obliterate the stars. 

"ah!" he said. he seem about to kiss her when a 
sound--voices--filtered out of somewhere in the maze of dark court 
and litter yard along the alley. he release her, seize her wrist, 
and once more she was stumble wretched behind him over the uneven 
surface of the cobblestones. 

a numb had come over her; consciousness burn very low as she 
waver dogged along through the darkness. she perceive dim that 
they were approach the end of the alley; the bright glow of the 
street loom before them, and a passing motor car cut momentary 
parallel shaft of luminescence across the opening. 

nichola devine slow his pace, still clutch her wrist in a cold 
grip; he paused, moving cautious toward the corner of the building. 
he peer around the edge of the structure, survey the now desert 
street, while pat stood dul behind him, incapable alike of thought or 
voluntary movement, clutch desperate at the dirty cloth that hung 
about her shoulders. 

her companion finished his survey; apparently satisfy that progress 
was safe, he drag her after him, turning toward the corner beyond 
which his car was parked. the girl stagger behind him with 
diminish vigor; consciousness was very nearly at the point of 
disappearance, and her steps were waver unsteadily, and dogged 
slow. she drag heavy on his arm; he gave a gesture of impatience 
at her weakness. 

"come on!" he growled. "we're just go to the corner." his voice rose 
slightly in pitch, still sound harsh as rasp metals. "there still 
remains the ultimate evil!" he said. "there is still a depth of beauty 
unplumbed, a pain whose exquisite pleasure is yet to find!" 

they approach the corner; abrupt nichola devine drew back as two 
figures came unexpected into view from beyond it. he turn back 
toward the alley-way, drag the girl in a dizzy circle. he took a 
few rapid steps. 

but pat was through, exhausted. at his first step she stumble and 
sprawled, drag prone behind him. he release her hand and turn 
defiant to face the approach men, while the girl lie on the 
pavement struggle to a sitting posture with her back against the wall. 
she turn dull, indifferent eyes on the scene, then was rouse to a 
somewhat higher pitch of interest by the sound of a familiar voice. 

"there he is! i told you it was his car." 

dr. horker! she struggle for clarity of thought; she realize dim 
that she ought to feel relief, happiness--but all she could summon 
was a faint quicken of interest, or rather, a diminution of the 
lassitude that held her. she drew the rag of a table cloth about her 
and huddle against the wall, watching. the doctor and some strange 
man, burly and massive in the darkness, dashed upon them, while 
nichola devine waited, his red-orbed face a demoniac picture of cold 
contempt. then the doctor glance at her huddled, bedraggled figure; 
she saw his face aghast, incredulous, as he perceive the condition of 
her clothing. 

"pat! my god, girl! what's happened? where've you been?" 

she found a hidden reserve somewhere within her. her voice rose, shrill 
and hysterical. 

"we've been in hell!" she said. "you came to take me back, didn't you? 
orpheu and eurydice!" she laughed. "dr. orpheu horker!" 

the doctor flash her another incredulous glance and a grim and very 
terrible expression flame in his face. he turn toward nichola 
devine, his hand clenching, his mouth twist without utterance, 
with no sound save a half-audible snarl. then he spoke, a low, grating 
phrase flung at his thick-set companion. 

"bring the car," was all he said. the man lumber away toward the 
corner, and he turn again toward nichola devine, who face him 
impassively. sudden his fist shot out; he struck the youth or demon 
square between the red eyes, send him reel back against the 
building. then the doctor turned, bend over pat; she felt the 
pressure of his arms beneath knee and shoulders. he was carry her 
toward a car that drew up at the curb; he was place her gently in the 
back seat. then, without a glance at the figure still leaning against 
the building, he swept from the sidewalk the dark mass that was pat's 
dress and her wrap, and re-entered the car beside her. 

"shall i turn him in?" ask the man in the front seat. 

"we can't afford the publicity," said the doctor, add grimly, "i'll 
settle with him later." 

pat's head lurch as the car started; she was lose consciousness, 
and realize it vaguely, but she retain one impression as the vehicle 
swung into motion. she perceive that the face of the lone figure 
leaning against the building, a face staring at her with horror and 
unbelief, was no long the visage of the demon of the evening, but 
that of her own nick. 




11 

wreckage 


pat open her eyes reluctantly, with the impression that something 
unpleasant await her return to full consciousness. something, as yet 
she could not recall just what, had happen to her; she was not even 
sure where she was awakening. 

however, her eyes survey her own familiar room; there opposite the 
bed grin the jade buddha on his stand on the mantel--the one that 
nick had--nick! a mass of troubled, terrible recollection thrust 
themselves sudden into consciousness. she vision a medley of 
disturb pictures, as yet disconnected, unassorted, but wait only 
the return of complete wakefulness. and she realize abrupt that her 
head ache miserably, that her mouth was parched, that twinge of pain 
were making themselves evident in various portion of her anatomy. she 
turn her head and caught a glimpse of a figure at the bed-side; her 
startle glance reveal dr. horker, sitting quiet watch her. 

"hello, doctor," she said, wince as her smile brought a sharp pain 
from her lips. "or should i say, good morning, judge?" 

"pat!" he rumbled, his growl tone oddly gentle. "little pat! how do 
you feel, child?" 

"fair," she said. "just fair. dr. carl, what happen to me last night? 
i can't seem to remember--oh!" 

a flash of recollection pierce the obscure muddle. she remember 
now--not all of the event of that ghastly evening, but enough. too 
much! 

"oh!" she murmur faintly. "oh, dr. carl!" 

"yes," he nodded. "'oh!'--and would you mind very much telling me what 
that 'oh' of yours implies?" 

"why--". she pause shuddering, as one by one the event of that 
sequence of horrors reassemble themselves. "yes, i'd mind very 
much," she continued. "it was nothing--" she turn to him abruptly. 
"oh, it was, though, dr. carl! it was horrible, unspeakable, 
incomprehensible!--but i can't talk about it! i can't!" 

"perhaps you're right," said the doctor mildly. "don't you really want 
to discuss it?" 

"i do want to," admitted the girl after a moment's reflection. "i want 
to--but i can't. i'm afraid to think of all of it." 

"but what in heaven's name did you do?" 

"we just start out to go dancing," she said hesitatingly. "then, on 
the way to town, nick--changed. he said someone was following us." 

"some one was," said horker. "_i_ was, with mueller. that nick of yours 
has the devil's own cleverness!" 

"yes," the girl echo soberly. "the devil's own!--who's mueller, dr. 
carl?" 

"he's a plain-clothes man, friend of mine. i treat him once. what do 
you mean by changed?" 

"his eyes," she said. "and his mouth. his eyes got reddish and 
terrible, and his mouth got straight and grim. and his voice turn 
sort of--harsh." 

"ever happen before, that you know of?" 

"once. when--" she paused. 

"yes. last wednesday night, when you came over to ask those question 
about pure science. what happen then?" 

"we went to a place to dance." 

"and that's the reason, i suppose," rumble the doctor sardonically, 
"that i found you wandering about the street in a table cloth, 
step-ins, and a pair of hose! that's why i found you on the verge of 
passing out from rotten liquor, and look like the loser of a battle 
with an airplane propellor! what happen to your face?" 

"my face? what's wrong with it?" 

the doctor rose from his chair and seize the hand-mirror from her 
dressing table. 

"look at it!" he commanded, passing her the glass. 

pat gaze incredulous at the reflection the surface presented; a dark 
bruise colored her cheek, her lip were swollen and discolored, and her 
chin bore a jagged scratch. she stare at the injury in horror. 

"your knee are skinned, too," said horker. "both of them." 

pat slip one pajama limb from the covers, drawing the pants-leg up 
for inspection. she gasp in startle fright at the great red stain on 
her knee. 

"that's mercurochrome," said the doctor. "i put it there." 

"_you_ put it there. how did i get home last night, dr. carl? how did i 
get to bed?" 

"i'm responsible for that, too. i put you to bed." he lean forward. 
"listen, child--your mother know nothing about this as yet. she wasn't 
home when i brought you in, and she's not awake yet this morning. 
we'll tell her you had an automobile accident; explain away those 
bruises.--and now, how did you get them?" 

"i fell, i guess. two or three times." 

"that bruise on your cheek isn't from falling." 

the girl shuddered. now in the calm light of morning, the event of 
last night seem doubly horrible; she doubt her ability to believe 
them, so incredible did they seem. she was at a loss to explain even 
her own actions, and those of nichola devine were simply beyond 
comprehension, a chapter from some dark and blasphemous book of ancient 
times--the kabbala or the necronomicon. 

"what happened, pat?" query the doctor gently. "tell me," he urge 
her. 

"i--can't explain it," she said doubtfully. "he took me to that place, 
but drink the liquor was my own fault. i did it out of spite because 
i saw he didn't--care for me. and then--" she fell silent. 

"yes? and then?" 

"well--he began to talk about the beauty of evil, the delight of evil, 
and his eyes glare at me, and--i don't understand it at all, dr. carl, 
but all of a sudden i was--yielding. do you see?" 

"i see," he said gently, soberly. 

"suddenly i seem to comprehend what he meant--all that about the 
supreme pleasure of evil. and i was sort of--swept away. the dress--was 
his fault, but i--somehow i'd lost the power to resist. i guess i was 
drunk." 

"and the bruises? and your cut lips?" query the doctor grimly. 

"yes," she said in a low voice. "he--struck me. after a while i didn't 
care. he could have--would have done other things, only we were 
interrupted, and had to leave. and that's all, dr. carl." 

"isn't that enough?" he groaned. "pat, i should have kill the fiend 
there!" 

"i'm glad you didn't." 

"do you mean to say you'd care?" 

"i--don't know." 

"are you intimate that you still love him?" 

"no," she said thoughtfully. "no, i don't love him, but--dr. carl, 
there's something inexplicable about this. there's something i don't 
understand, but i'm certain of one thing!" 

"what's that?" 

"that it wasn't nick--not _my_ nick--who did those things to me last 
night. it wasn't, dr. carl!" 

"pat, you're being a fool!" 

"i know it. but i'm sure of it, dr. carl. i _know_ nick; i love him, 
and i know he couldn't have done--that. not the same gentle nick that i 
had to beg to kiss me!" 

"pat," said the doctor gently, "i'm a psychiatrist; it's my business 
to know all the rotten that can hide in a human being. my office 
is the scene of a parade of misfits, failures, potential criminals, 
lunatics, and mental incompetents. it's a nasty, bitter side i see of 
life, but i know that side--and i tell you this fellow is dangerous!" 

"do you understand this, dr. carl?" 

he reach over, taking her hand in his great palm with its long, 
curious delicate fingers. "i have my theory, pat. the man's a sadist, 
a lover of cruelty, and there's enough masochism in any woman to make 
him terribly dangerous. i want your promise." 

"about what?" 

"i want you to promise never to see him again." 

the girl turn serious eyes on his face; he noted with a shock of 
sympathy that they were fill with tears. 

"you warn me i'd get burn play with fire," she said. "you did, 
didn't you?" 

"i'm an old fool, honey. if i'd believe my own advice, i'd have seen 
that this never happen to you." he pat her hand. "have i your 
promise?" 

she avert her eyes. "yes," she murmured. he wince as he perceive 
that the tear were on her cheeks. 

"so!" he said, rising. "the patient can get out of bed when she feel 
like it--and don't forget that little fib we've arrange for your 
mother's peace of mind." 

she stare up at him, still clinging to his hand. 

"dr. carl," she said, "are you sure--quite sure--you're right about 
him? couldn't there be a chance that you're mistaken--that it's 
something your psychiatry has overlook or never heard of?" 

"small chance, pat dear." 

"but a chance?" 

"well, neither i nor any reputable medic claim to know everything, and 
the human mind's a subtle sort of thing." 




12 

letter from lucifer 


"i'm glad!" pat told herself. "i'm glad it's over, and i'm glad i 
promise dr. carl--i guess i was mighty close to the brink of disaster 
that time." 

she examine the injury on her face, careful powdered to conceal 
the worst effects from her mother. the trick had worked, too; mrs. 
lane had deliver herself of an excited lecture on the danger of 
the gasoline age, and then thank heaven it was no worse. well, pat 
reflected, she had good old dr. carl to thank for the success of the 
subterfuge; he had broken the news very skillfully, set the stage for 
her appearance, and calm her mother's apprehension of scars. and 
pat, survey her image in the glass above her dressing-table, could 
see for herself the minor nature of the hurts. 

"scars--pooh!" she observed. "a bruise cheek, a split lip, a skin 
chin. all i need is a black eye, and i guess i'd have had that in five 
minutes more, and perhaps a cauliflower ear into the bargain." 

but her mood was anything but flippant; she was fight off the time 
when her thought had of necessity to face the unpleasant, disturb 
fact of the affair. she didn't want to think of the thing at all; 
she want to laugh it off and forget it, yet she knew that for an 
impossibility. the very desire to forget she recognize as a coward's 
wish, and she resent the idea that she was cowardly. 

"forget the wise-cracks," she advise her image. "face the thing and 
argue it out; that's the only way to be satisfied." 

she rose with a little grimace of pain at the twinge from her bruise 
knees, and cross to the chaise lounge beside the far window. she 
settled herself in it and resume her cogitations. she was feeling more 
or less herself again; the headache of the morning had nearly vanished, 
and aside from the various ache and a listless fagged-out sensation, 
she approximate her normal self. physically, that is; the shadow of 
that other catastrophe, the one she hesitate to face, was another 
matter. 

"i'm lucky to get off this easily," she assured herself, "after go 
on a bust like that one, like a lumberjack with his pay in his pocket." 
she shook her head in mournful amazement. "and i'm patricia lane, the 
girl whom billy dub 'pat the impeccable'! impeccable! wandering 
through alley in step-ins and a table cloth--getting beaten up in a 
drunken brawl--passing out on rot-gut liquor--being carry home and 
put to bed! not impeccable; incapable's the word! i belong to dr. 
carl's parade of incompetents." 

she continue her rueful reflections. "well, item one is, i don't love 
nick any more. i couldn't now!" she flung at the smile green buddha 
on the mantel. "that's over; i've promised." 

somehow there was not satisfaction in the memory of that promise. it 
was logical, of course; there wasn't anything else to do now, but 
still-- 

"that _wasn't_ nick!" she told herself. "that wasn't _my_ nick. i guess 
dr. carl is right, and he's a depressed what-ever-it-was; but if he's 
crazy, so am i! he had me convinced last night; i understood what he 
meant, and i felt what he want me to feel. if he's crazy, i am too; a 
fine couple we are!" 

she continued. "but it wasn't nick! i saw his face when we drove off, 
and it had change again, and that was nick's face, not the other. and 
he was sorry; i could see he was sorry, and the other could never have 
regret it--not ever! the other isn't--quite human, but nick is." 

she paused, considering the idea. "of course," she resumed, "i might 
have imagine that change at the end. i was hazy and quavery, and it's 
the last thing i _do_ remember; that must have been just before i 
pass out." 

and then, reply to her own objection, "but i _didn't_ imagine it! i 
saw it happen once before, that other night when--well, what difference 
do it make, anyway? it's over, and i've given my promise." 

but she was unable to dismiss the matter as easily as that. there 
was some uncanny, elusive element in it that fascinate her. cruel, 
terrible, demoniac, he might have been; he had also been kind, lovable, 
and gentle. yet dr. carl had told her that split personalities could 
contain no characteristic that were not present in the original, 
normal character. was cruelty, then, a part of kindness? was cruelty 
merely the lack of kindness, or, cynical thought, was kindness but the 
lack of cruelty? which quality were positive in the antagonist 
phase of nichola devine's individuality, and which negative? was the 
gentle, lovable, but indubitable weak character the split, and the 
demon of last evening his normal self? or vice-versa? or were both of 
these fragmentary entities, portion of some greater personality as yet 
unapparent to her? 

the whole matter was a mystery; she shrug in helpless perplexity. 

"i don't think dr. carl know as much about it as he says," she mused. 
"i don't think psychiatry or any other science know that much about 
the human soul. dr. carl doesn't even believe in a soul; how could he 
know anything about it, then?" she frown in puzzlement and gave up 
the attempt to solve the mystery. 

the hour she had spent in her room, at her mother's insistence, began 
to pall; she didn't feel particularly ill--it was more of a languor, a 
depressed, worn-out feeling. her mother, of course, was out somewhere; 
she felt a desire for human companionship, and wonder if the doctor 
might by some chance drop in. it seem improbable; he had his regular 
sunday afternoon routine of golf at the club, and it took a real 
catastrophe to keep him away from that. she sighed, stretch her legs, 
rose from her position on the chaise lounge, and wander toward the 
kitchen where magda was doubtless to be found. 

it was in the dusk of the rear hall that the first sense of her loss 
came over her. heretofore her renunciation of nichola devine was a 
rational thing, a promise given but not felt; but now it was sudden a 
poignant reality. nick was gone, she realized; he was out of her world, 
irrevocable sunder from her. she pause at the top of the rear flight 
of stairs, considering the matter. 

"he's gone! i won't see him ever again." the thought was appalling; she 
felt already a premonition of lonely to come, of an empty in 
her world, a lack that nothing could replace. 

"i shouldn't have promise dr. carl," she mused, knowing that even 
without that promise her course must still have been the same. "i 
shouldn't have, not until i'd talk to nick--my own nick." 

and still, she reflect forlornly, what difference did it make? she 
had to give him up; she couldn't continue to see him not knowing at 
what instant that terrible caricature of him might appear to torment 
her. but he might have explained, she argue miserably, answer 
her own objection at once--he's said he couldn't explain, didn't 
understand. the thing was at an impasse. 

she shook her shining black head despondently, and descended the dusky 
well of the stairs to the kitchen. magda was there clatter among her 
pot and pans; pat enter quiet and perch on the high stool by the 
long table. old magda, who had warm her babyhood milk and measured 
out her formula, gave her a single glance and continue her work. 

"sorry about the accident, i was," she said without look up. 

"thanks," respond the girl. "i'm all right again." 

"you don't look it." 

"i feel all right." 

she watch the mysterious, alchemist mix of a pastry, and thought 
of the vast array of them that had come from magda's hands. as far back 
as she could remember she had perch on this stool observing the same 
mystic culinary rites. 

sudden another memory rose out of the grave of forgetful and 
went gibber across her world. she remember the story magda use 
to tell her, frighten story of witchcraft and the evil eye, tale 
out of an old region and a more credulous age. 

"magda," she asked, "did you ever see a devil?" 

"not i, but i've talk with them that had." 

"didn't you ever see one?" 

"no." the woman slid a pan into the oven. "i saw a man once, when i was 
a tot, possessed by a devil." 

"you did? how did he look?" 

"he scream terrible, then he said queer things. then he fell down and 
foam came out of his mouth." 

"like a fit?" 

"the priest, he said it was a devil. he came and pray over him, and 
after a while he was real quiet, and then he was all right." 

"possessed by a devil," said pat thoughtfully. "what happen to him?" 

"dunno." 

"what queer things did he say?" 

"wicked things, the priest said. i couldn't tell! i was a tot." 

"possessed by a devil!" pat repeated musingly. she sat immerse in 
thought on the high stool while magda clatter busy about. the 
woman pause finally, turning her face to the girl. 

"what you so quiet about, miss pat?" 

"i was just thinking." 

"you get your letter?" 

"letter? what letter? today's sunday." 

"special delivery. the girl, she put it in the hall." 

"i didn't know anything about it. who'd write me a special?" 

she slip off the high stool and proceed to the front hall. the 
letter was there, solitary on the salver that always held the mail. she 
picked it up, examine the envelope in sudden startle amaze and 
more than a trace of illogical exultation. 

for the letter, post-marked that same morning, was address in the 
irregular script of nichola devine! 




13 

indecision 


pat turn the envelope dubious in her hands, while a maze of chaotic 
thought assail her. she felt almost a sensation of guilt as if 
she were in some manner violate the promise given to dr. horker; 
she felt a tinge of indignation that nichola devine should dare 
communicate with her at all, and she felt too that queer exultation, 
an inexplicable pleasure, a feeling of secret triumph. she slip the 
letter in the pocket of her robe and pad quiet up the stairs to 
her own room. 

strangely, her lonely had vanished. the great house, empty now 
save for herself and magda in the distant kitchen, was no long a 
place of solitude; the discovery of the letter, whatever its contents, 
had change the desert rooms into chambers teeming with her own 
excitements, trepidations, doubts, and hopes. even hopes, she admitted 
to herself, though hope of what nature she was quite unable to say. 
what _could_ nick write that had the power to change things? apologies? 
pleas? promises? none of these could alter the naked, horrible fact of 
the predicament. 

nevertheless, she was almost a-tremble with expectation as she skip 
hasty into her own room, careful closed the door, and settled 
herself by the west windows. she drew the letter from her pocket, and 
then, with a tighten of her throat, tore open the envelope, slip 
out the several page of scrawl paper. avid she began to read. 

"i don't know whether you'll ever see this"--the missive began 
without salutation--"and i'll not blame you, pat dear, if you do 
return it unopened. there's nothing you can do that wouldn't be 
justified, nor can you think worse of me than i do of myself. and 
that's a statement so meaningless that even as i wrote it, i could 
anticipate its effect on you. 

"pat--how am i go to convince you that i'm sincere? will you 
believe me when i write that i love you? can you believe that i 
love you tenderly, worshipfully--reverently? 

"you can't; i know you can't after that catastrophe of last night. 
but it's true, pat, though the logic of a spinoza might fail to 
convince you of it. 

"i don't know how to write you this. i don't know whether you want 
to hear what i could say, but i know that i must try to say it. 
not apologies, pat--i shouldn't dare approach you for so poor a 
reason as that--but a sort of explanation. you more than any one 
in the world are entitle to that explanation, if you want to hear 
it. 

"i can't write it to you, pat; it's something i can only make you 
believe by telling you--something dark and rather terrible. but 
please, dear, believe that i mean you no harm, and that i plan no 
subterfuge, when i suggest that you see me. it will be, i think, 
for the last time. 

"tonight, and tomorrow night, and as many nights to follow as i 
can, i'll sit on a bench in the park near the place where i kiss 
you that first time. there will be people passing there, and car 
driving by; you need fear nothing from me. i choose the place to 
bridle my own actions, pat; nothing can happen while we sit there 
in the view of the world. 

"to write you more than this is futile. if you come, i'll be 
there; if you don't, i'll understand. 

"i love you." 

the letter was sign merely "nick." she stare at the signature with 
feelings so confuse that she forebore any attempt to analyze them. 

"but i can't go," she muse soberly. "i've promise dr. carl. or at 
least, i can't go without telling him." 

that last thought, she realized, was a concession. heretofore she 
hadn't let herself consider the possibility of seeing nichola devine 
again, and now sudden she was weakening, argue with herself about 
the ethics of seeing him. she shook her head decisively. 

"won't do, patricia lane!" she told herself. "next thing, you'll be 
slip away without a word to anybody, and coming home with two black 
eyes and a broken nose. won't do at all!" 

she drop her eyes to the letter. "explanations," she reflected. "i 
guess dr. carl would give up a hole-in-one to hear that explanation. 
and i'd give more than that." she shook her head regretfully. "nothing 
to do about it, though. i promised." 

the sun was slant through the west windows; she sat watch the 
shadow lengthen in the room, and try to turn her thought into more 
profitable channels. this was the first sunday in many month that 
she had spent alone in the house; it was a custom for herself and her 
mother to spend the afternoon at the club. the evening too, as a rule; 
there was invariable bridge for mrs. lane, and pat was always the 
center of a circle of the younger members. she wonder dreamy what 
the crowd thought of her non-appearance, reflect that her mother 
had doubtless enlarge on dr. carl's story of an accident. dr. carl 
wouldn't say much, simply that he'd ordered her to stay at home. but 
soon or later, nick would hear the accident story; she wonder what 
he'd think of it. 

she caught herself up sharply. "my idea wander in circles," she 
thought petulantly. "no matter where i start, they curve around back to 
nick. it won't do; i've got to stop it." 

nearly time for the evening meal, she mused, watch the sun as it 
drop behind dr. horker's house. she didn't feel much like eating; 
there was still a remnant of the exhausted, dragged-out sensation, 
though the headache that had accompany her awakening this morning had 
disappeared. 

"i know what the morning after feel like, anyway," she reflect with 
a wry little smile. "everybody ought to experience it once, i suppose. 
i wonder how nick--" 

she broke off abruptly, with a shrug of disgust. she slip the letter 
back into its envelope, rose and deposit it in the drawer of the 
night-table. she glance at the clock ticking on its shiny top. 

"six o'clock," she murmured. nick would be sitting in the park in 
another two hour or so. she had a twinge of sympathy at the thought of 
his lone vigil; she could visualize the harry expression on his face 
when the hour pass without her arrival. 

"can't be helped," she told herself. "he's no right to ask for 
anything of me after last night. he know that; he said so in his 
letter." 

she suppress an impulse to re-read that letter, and trot 
deliberate out of the room and down the stairs. magda had set the 
table in the breakfast room; it was far cozy than the great dine 
room, especially without her mother's company. and the maid was away; 
the breakfast room simplify serving, as well. 

she try valorous to eat what magda supplied, but the food fail 
to tempt her. it wasn't so much her physical condition, either; it 
was--she clench her jaws firmly; was the memory of nichola devine to 
haunt her forever? 

"pat lane," she said in admonition, "you're a crack-brained fool! just 
because a man kicks you all over the place is no reason to let him 
become an obsession." 

she drank her coffee, feeling the sting of its heat on her injure 
lips. she left the table, tramp firm to her room, and began 
defiant to read. the effort was useless; half a dozen times she 
forced her attention to the page only to find herself staring vague 
into space a moment or two later. she closed the book finally with an 
irritable bang, and vent her restless in pace back and forth. 

"this house is unbearable!" she snapped. "i'm not go to stay shut up 
here like a jail-bird in solitary confinement. a walk in the open is 
what i need, and that's what i'll have." 

she glance at the clock; seven-thirty. she tore off her robe 
pettishly, flung out of her pajamas, and began to dress with angry 
determination. she refuse to think of a lonely figure that might even 
now be sitting disconsolate on a bench in the near-by park. 

she disguise her bruise cheek as best she could, dab a little 
powder on the abrasion on her chin, and tramp militant down the 
stairs. she caught up her wrap, still lie where the doctor had 
toss it last night, and move toward the door, opening it and nearly 
collide with the massive figure of dr. horker! 

"well!" boom the doctor as she start back in surprise. "you're 
pretty spry for a patient. think you were go out?" 

"yes," said pat defiantly. 

"not tonight, child! i left the club early to take a look at you." 

"i am perfectly all right. i want to go for a walk." 

"no walk. doctor's orders." 

"i'm of legal age!" she snapped. "i want to go for a walk. do i go?" 

"you do not." the doctor placed his great form square in the doorway. 
"not unless you can lick me, my girl, and i'm pretty tough. i put you 
to bed last night, and i can do as much tonight. shall i?" 

pat back into the hall. "you don't have to," she said sullenly. "i'm 
go there myself." she flung her wrap angry to a chair and stalk 
up the stairs. 

"good night, spit-fire," he call after her. "i'll read down here 
until your mother come home." 

the girl storm into her room in anger that she knew to be illogical. 

"i won't be watch like a problem child!" she told herself viciously. 
"i know damn well what he thought--and i wasn't go to meet nick! i 
wasn't at all!" 

she calm suddenly, sat on the edge of her bed and kick off her 
pumps. it had occur to her that nick had written his intention to 
wait for her in the park tomorrow night as well, and dr. horker's 
interference had confirmed her in a determination to meet him. 




14 

bizarre explanation 


"i won't be bullied!" pat told herself, examine her features in the 
mirror. the two day interval had fade the discoloration of her cheek 
to negligible proportions, and all that remain as evidence of the 
violence of saturday night was the diminish mark on her chin. of 
course, her knees--but they were covered; most of the time, at least. 
she gave herself a final inspection, and somewhere below a clock boomed. 

"eight o'clock," she remark to her image; "time to be leaving, and it 
serve dr. carl right for his high-handed action last night. i won't 
be bully by anybody." she checked herself as her mind had almost 
added, "except nick." true or not, she didn't relish the thought; the 
recent recollection it rouse were too disturbing. 

she toss a stray wisp of black hair from her forehead and turn to 
the door. she heard her mother's voice as she descended the stairs. 

"are you go out, patricia? do you think it wise?" 

"i am perfectly all right. i want to go for a walk." 

"i know, dear; it was largely your appearance i meant." she survey 
the girl with a critical eye. "nice enough, except for that little spot 
on your chin, and will you never learn to keep your hair away from that 
side of your forehead? one can never do a bob right; why don't you let 
it grow out like the other girls?" 

"makes me individual," reply pat, moving toward the outer door. "i 
won't be late at all," she added. 

on the porch she cast a cautious glance at dr. horker's windows, but 
his great figure was nowhere evident. only a light burning in the 
library evince his presence. she gave a sigh of relief, and tiptoe 
down the steps to the sidewalk, and move hasty away from the range 
of his watchful eyes. 

no soon had she sighted the park than doubt began to torment her. 
suppose this were some trick of nichola devine's, to trap her into 
some such situation as that of saturday night. even suppose that she 
found him the sweet personality that she had loved, might that also 
be a trick? mightn't he be trust to his ability to win her over, to 
the charm she had confessed to him that he held for her? couldn't he 
be putt his faith in his own amorous skill, plan some specious 
explanation to win her forgiveness only to use her once more as the 
material for some horrible experiment? and if he were, would she be 
able to prevent herself from yielding? 

"forewarned is fore-armed," she told herself. "i'll not put up such a 
feeble resistance this time, knowing what i now know. and it's only 
fair of me to listen to his explanation, if he really has one." 

she was reassure by the sight of the crowded park; group stroll 
along the walks, and an endless procession of car-headlights marked the 
course of the roadway. nothing could happen in such an environment; 
they'd be fortunate even to have an opportunity for confidential 
talk. she wait for the traffic lights, strain her eyes to locate 
nichola devine; at the click of the signal she dart across the 
street. 

she move toward the lake; here was the spot, she was sure. she glance 
about with eager unexpected even to herself, peer through the 
shadow-shot dusk. he wasn't there, she concluded, with a curious sense 
of disappointment; her failure to appear last night had dishearten 
him; he had abandoned his attempt. 

then she saw him. he sat on a bench isolated from the rest in a 
treeless area overlook the lake. she saw his disconsolate figure, 
his chin on his hand, staring moody over the waters. a tremor ran 
through her, she halt deliberately, wait until every trace of 
emotion had vanished, then she advanced, standing cool beside him. 

for a moment he was unaware of her presence; he sat maintain his 
dejected attitude without glancing at her. sudden some slight 
movement, the flutter of her skirt, drew his attention; he turn 
sharply, gaze directly into her face. 

"pat!" he sprang to his feet. "pat! is it you--truly you? or are you 
one of these vision that have been plague me for hours?" 

"i'm real," she said, return his gaze with a studied cool in her 
face. she made no other move; her cold composure disconcert him, and 
he winced, flushed, and move nervous aside as she seat herself. he 
drop beside her; he made no attempt to touch her, but sat watch 
her in silence for so long a time that she felt her composure ebbing. 
there was a hungry, defeat look about him; there was a wistfulness, 
a frustration, in his eyes that seem about to tug tear from her own 
eyes. abrupt she drop her gaze from his face. 

"well?" she said finally in a small voice, and as he made no reply, 
"i'm here." 

"are you really, pat? are you truly here?" he murmured, still watch 
her avidly. "i--i still don't believe it. i wait here for hour and 
hour last night, and i'd given up hope for tonight, or any night. but 
i would have come again and again." 

she start as he bent sudden toward her, but he was merely examine 
her face. she saw the gleam of horror in his expression as his eyes 
survey the faint visible bruise on her cheek, the red mark on her 
chin. 

"oh my god, pat!" his words were barely audible. "oh my god!" he 
repeated, drawing away from her and resume the attitude of desolate 
in which her arrival had found him. "i've hope it wasn't true!" 

"what wasn't?" she was keeping her voice careful casual; this 
miserable contrition of nick's was tug at her rather too powerful 
for complete safety. 

"what i remembered. what i saw just now." 

"you hope it wasn't true?" she query in surprise. "but you did it." 

"_i_ did it, pat? do you think _i_ could have done it?" 

"but you did!" her voice had taken on a chill inflection; the memory of 
those indignity came to steel her against him. 

"pat, do you think i could assault your daintiness, or maltreat the 
beauty i worship? didn't anything occur to you? didn't anything seem 
queer about--about that ghastly evening?" 

"queer!" she echoed. "that's certainly a mild word to use, isn't it?" 

"but i mean--hadn't you any idea of what had happened? didn't you 
think anything of it except that i had sudden gone mad? or that i'd 
grown to hate you?" 

"what was i to think?" she countered, try to control the tremor that 
had crept into her voice. 

"but did you think that?" 

"no," the girl confessed after a pause. "at first, when you start 
with that drink, i thought you were look for material for your work. 
that's what you said--an experiment. didn't you?" 

"i guess so," he groaned. 

"but after that, after i'd swallow that horrible stuff, but before 
everything went hazy, i--thought differently." 

"but what, pat? what did you think?" 

"why, then i realize that it wasn't you--not the real you. i could 
feel the--well, the presence of the person i knew; this presence 
that was torment me was another person, a terrible, cold, inhuman 
stranger." 

"pat!" there was a note almost of relief in his voice. "did you really 
feel that?" 

"yes. do it help matters, my sense that? i can't see how." 

his eyes, which had been fixed on hers, drop suddenly. "no," he 
muttered, all the relief gone out of his tones, "no, it doesn't help, 
do it? except that it's a meager consolation to me to know that you 
felt it." 

pat struggle to suppress an impulse to reach out her hand, to stroke 
his hair. she caught herself sharply; this was the very danger against 
which she had warn herself--this was the very attitude she had 
anticipate in nichola devine, the lure which might bait a trap. yet 
he look so forlorn, so wistful! it was an effort to forbear from 
touching him; her finger fairly ache to brush his cheek. 

"only a fool walk twice into the same trap," she told herself. aloud 
she said, "you promise me an explanation. if you've any excuse, i'd 
like to hear it." her voice had resume its coolness. 

"i haven't any excuse," he respond gloomily, "and the explanation is 
perhaps too bizarre, too fantastic for belief. _i_ don't believe it 
entirely; i suppose _you_ couldn't believe it at all." 

"you promised," she repeated. the careful assume composure of her 
voice threaten to crack; this wistful of his was a powerful 
weapon against her defense. 

"oh, i'll give you the explanation," he said miserably. "i just want 
to warn you you'd not believe me." he gave her a despondent glance. 
"pat, as i love you i swear that what i tell you is the truth. do you 
think you can believe me?" 

"yes," she murmured. the tremor had reappear in her voice despite her 
efforts. 

nichola devine turn his eyes toward the lake and began to speak. 




15 

a modern mr. hyde 


"i don't remember when i first notice it," began nick in a low voice, 
"but i'm two people. i'm me, the person who's talk to you now, and 
i'm--another." 

pat, look very pale and serious in the dusky light, said nothing at 
all. she simply gaze at him silently, without the slightest trace of 
surprise in her wide dark eyes. 

"this is the real me," proceed nick miserably. "the other is an 
outsider, that has somehow contrived to grow into me. he is different; 
cold, cruel, utterly selfish, and not exactly--human. do you 
understand?" 

"y--yes," said the girl, fight to control her voice. "sort of." 

"this is a struggle that has continue for a long time," he pursued. 
"there were times in childhood when i remember punishment for offense 
i never committed, for nasty little meannesse _he_ perpetrated. my 
mother, and after her death, my tutoress, thought i was lie when i 
try to explain; they thought i was try to evade responsibility. 
after a while i learned not to explain; i learned to accept my 
punishment doggedly, and to fight this other when he sought dominance." 

"and could you?" ask pat, her voice frankly quavery. "could you fight 
him?" 

"i was the stronger; i could win--usually. he slip into 
consciousness as wilful, mean little impulses, nasty moods, unreasoning 
hate and such unpleasant things. but i was always the stronger: i 
learned to drive him into the background." 

"you said you _were_ the stronger," she mused. "what do that mean, 
nick?" 

"i've always been the stronger; i am now. but recently, pat--i think 
it's since i fell in love with you--the struggle has been on even 
terms. i've weaken or he's gained. i have to guard against him 
constantly; in any moment of weakness he may slip in, as on our ride 
last week, when we had that near accident. and again saturday." he 
turn appealing eyes on the girl. "pat, do you believe me?" 

"i guess i'll have to," she said unhappily. "it--makes things rather 
hopeless, doesn't it?" 

he nod dejectedly. "yes. i've always felt that soon or later i'd 
win, and drive him away permanently. i've felt on the verge of complete 
victory more than once, but now--" he shook his head doubtfully. "he 
had never dominate me so entire until saturday night--pat, you 
don't know what hell is like until you're forced as i was to watch 
the violate of the being you worship, to stand helpless while a 
desecrate is committed. i'd rather die than suffer it again!" 

"oh!" said the girl faintly. she was thinking of the sorry picture she 
must have present as she reel half-clothed through the alley. "can 
you see what--_he_ sees?" 

"of course, and think his thoughts. but only when he's dominant. i 
don't know what evil he's plan now, else i could forestall him, i 
would have warn you if i could have known." 

"where is he now?" 

"here," said nick somberly. "here listen to us, knowing what i'm 
thinking and feeling, laugh at my unhappiness." 

"oh!" gasp pat again. she watch her companion doubtfully. then the 
memory of dr. horker's diagnosis came to her, and set her wondering. 
was this story the figment of an unsettled mind? was this irrational 
tale of a fiendish intruder merely evidence that the doctor was right 
in his opinion? she was in a maze of uncertainty. 

"nick," she said, "did you ever try medical help? did you ever go to a 
doctor about it?" 

"of course, pat! two years ago i went to a famous psychiatrist in 
new york--you'd know the name if i mention it--and told him about 
the--the case. and he studied me, and he treat me, and psychoanalyze 
me, and the net result was just nothing. and finally he dismiss 
me with the opinion that 'the whole thing is just a fixed delusion, 
fortunately harmless!' harmless! bah! but it wasn't i that did those 
things, pat; i had to stand by in horror and watch. it was enough to 
_drive_ me crazy, but it didn't--quite." 

"but--oh, nick, what is it? what is this--this outsider? can't we fight 
it somehow?" 

"how can anyone except me fight it?" 

"oh, i don't know!" she wail miserably. "there must be a way. doctor 
claim to know pretty nearly everything; there must be _something_ to 
do." 

"but there isn't," he retort gloomily. "i don't know any more than 
you what that thing is, but it's beyond your doctors. i've got to fight 
it out alone." 

"nick--" her voice was sudden tense. "are you sure it isn't some 
kind of madness? something tangible like that could perhaps be treated." 

"it's no kind your doctor can treat, pat. did you ever hear of a 
madman who stood aside and rational watch the working of his own 
insanity? and that's what i'm forced to do. and yet--this other isn't 
insane either. were its action insane?" 

pat shuddered. "i--don't know," she said in low tones. "i guess not." 

"no. horrible, cruel, bestial, devilishly cunning, evil--but not 
insane. i don't know what it is, pat. i know that the fight has to be 
made by me alone. there's nothing, nobody in the world, that can help." 

"nick!" she wailed. 

"i'm sorry, pat dear. you understand now why i was so reluctant to fall 
in love with you. i was afraid to love you; now i know i was right." 

"nick!" she cried, then pause hopelessly. after a moment she 
continued, "yesterday i was determined to forget you, and now--now i 
don't care if this whole tale of yours is a mesh of fantastic lies, i 
love you! i'd love you even if your real self were that--that other 
creature, and even if i knew that this was just a trap. i'd love you 
anyway." 

"pat," he said seriously, "don't you believe me? why should i offer to 
give you up if this were--what you said? wouldn't i be pleading for 
another chance, making promises, finding excuses?" 

"oh, i believe you, nick! it isn't that; i was just thinking how 
strange it is that i could hate you so two nights past and love you so 
tonight." 

"oh god, pat! even you can't know how much i love you; and to win you 
and then be forced to give you up--" he groaned. 

the girl reach out her hand and cover his; it was the first time 
during the evening that she had touched him, and the feel of his flesh 
sent a tingle through her. she was miserably distraught. 

"honey," she murmur brokenly. "nick, honey." 

he look at her. "do you suppose there's a chance to beat the thing?" 
he asked. "i'd not ask you to wait, pat, but if i only glimpse a 
chance--" 

"i'll wait. i don't think i could do anything else but wait for you." 

"if i only knew what i had to fight!" he whispered. "if i only knew 
that!" 

a sudden memory leap into pat's mind. "nick," she said huskily, "i 
think i know." 

"what do you mean, pat?" 

"it's something magda--the cook--said to me. it's foolish, 
superstitious, but nick, what else can it be?" 

"tell me!" 

"well, she was talk to me yesterday, and she said that when she 
was a child in the old country, she had seen a man once--" she 
hesitated--"a man who was possessed by a devil. nick, i think you're 
possessed by a devil!" 

he stare at her. "pat," he said hoarsely, "that's--an impossibility!" 

"i know, but what else can it be?" 

"out of the dark ages," he muttered. "an echo of the black mass and 
witchcraft, but--" 

"what did they do," ask the girl, "to people they thought were 
possessed?" 

"exorcism!" he whispered. 

"and how did they--exorcise?" 

"i don't know," he said in a low voice. "pat, that's an impossible 
idea, but--i don't know!" he ended. 

"we'll try," she murmured, still covering his hand with her own. "what 
else can we do, nick?" 

"what's done i'll do alone, pat." 

"but i want to help!" 

"i'll not let you, dear. i won't have you expose to a repetition of 
those indignities, or perhaps worse!" 

"i'm not afraid." 

"then i am, pat! i won't have it!" 

"but what'll you do?" 

"i'll go away. i'll battle the thing through once for all, and i'll 
either come back free of it or--" he pause and the girl did not 
question him further, but sat staring at him with trouble eyes. 

"i won't write you, pat," he continued. "if you should receive a letter 
from me, burn it--don't read it. it might be from--the other, a trap or 
a lure of some sort. promise me! you'll promise that, won't you?" 

she nodded; there was a glint of tear in her eyes. 

"and i don't want you to wait, pat," he proceeded. "i don't want you to 
feel that you have any obligation to me--god know you've nothing to 
thank me for! when--if i come back and you haven't changed, then we'll 
try again." 

"nick," she said in a small voice, "how do you know the--the other 
won't come back here? how can you promise for--it?" 

"i'm still master!" he said grimly. "i won't be dominate long enough 
at any time for that to happen. i'll fight it down." 

"then--it's good-bye?" 

he nodded. "but not for always--i hope." 

"nick," she murmured, "will you kiss me?" she felt a tear on her cheek. 
"i'll stand lose you a little better if i can have a--last kiss--to 
remember." her voice was faltering. 

his arms were about her. she yield herself completely to his caress; 
the park, the crowd passing a few yard away, the people on near-by 
benches, were all forgotten, and once more she felt herself alone with 
nichola devine in a vast empty cosmos. 

an insistent voice penetrate her consciousness; she realize that it 
had been calling her name for some seconds. 

"miss lane," she heard, and again, "miss lane." a hand tap her 
shoulder; with a sudden start, she tore her lip away, and look up 
into a face unrecognized for a moment. then she placed it. it was the 
visage of mueller, dr. horker's companion on that disastrous saturday 
night. 




16 

possessed 


pat stare at the intruder in a mingle of embarrassment, perplexity, 
and indignation. she felt her cheek redden as the latter emotion 
gain the dominance of her mood. 

"well!" she snapped. "what do you want?" 

"i thought i'd walk home with you," mueller said amiably. 

"walk home with me! please explain that!" she grasp the arm of 
nichola devine, who had risen angry at the interruption. "sit down, 
nick, i know the fellow." 

"so should he," said mueller. "sure; i'll explain. i'm on a job for dr. 
horker." 

"spying on me for him, i suppose!" taunt the girl. 

"no. not on you." 

"he means on me," said nick soberly. "you can't blame him, pat. and 
perhaps you had better go home; we've finished here. there's nothing 
more we can do or say." 

"very well," she said, her voice sudden softer. "in a moment, nick." 
she turn to mueller. "would you mind telling me why you wait until 
now to interfere? we've been here two hours, you know." 

"sure i'll tell you. i got no orders to interfere, that's why." 

"then why did you?" query pat tartly. 

"i didn't until i saw him there"--he nod at nick--"put his arms 
around you. then i figured, have no orders, it was time to use my own 
judgment." 

"if any!" sniff the girl. she turn again to nick; her face 
softened, became very tender. "honey," she murmur huskily, "i guess 
it's good-bye now. i'll be fight with you; you know that." 

"i know that," he echoed, look down into her eyes. "i'm almost 
happy, pat." 

"when'll you go?" she whisper in tone inaudible to mueller. 

"i don't know," he answered, his voice unchanged. "i'll have to make 
some sort of preparations--and i don't want you to know." 

she nodded. she gaze at him a moment long with tear-bright eyes. 
"good-bye, nick," she whispered. she rose on tiptoe, and kiss him 
very lightly on his lips, then turn and walk quick away, with 
mueller following behind. 

she walk on, ignore him until he halt beside her at the crossing 
of the drive. then she gave him a cold glance. 

"why is dr. carl have him watched?" she asked. 

mueller shrugged. "the ins and out of this case are too much for me," 
he said. "i do what i'm paid to do." 

"you're not watch him now." 

"nope. seem like the doctor would think it was more important to get 
you home." 

"you're waste your time," she said irritable as the lights change 
and they step into the street. "i was go home anyway." 

"well, now you got company all the way." mueller's voice was placid. 

the girl sniff contemptuously, and strode silent along. the other's 
presence irritate her; she want time and solitude to consider the 
amazing story nichola devine had given her. she want to analyze her 
own feelings, and most of all she want just a place of privacy to 
cry out her misery. for now the loss of nichola devine had change 
from a fortunate escape to a tragedy, and liar, madman, or devil, she 
want him terribly, with all the power of her tense little heart. so 
she move as swift as she could, ignore the silent companionship of 
mueller. 

they reach her home; the light in the living room window was evidence 
that the bridge game was still in progress. she mount the steps, 
mueller watch her silent from the walk; she fumble for her key. 

sudden she snap her hand-bag shut; she couldn't face her mother 
and the two spinster brock and elderly, inquisitive carter henderson. 
they'd suggest that she cut into the game, and they'd argue if 
she refused, and she couldn't play bridge now! she glance at the 
impassive mueller, turn and cross the strip of lawn to dr. horker's 
residence, where the light still glow in the library, and rang the 
bell. she saw the figure on the sidewalk move away as the shadow of the 
doctor appear on the light square of the door. 

"hello," boom the doctor amiably. "come in." 

pat stalk into the library and threw herself angry into dr. 
horker's particular chair. the other grinned, and chose another place. 

"well," he said, "what touched off the fuse this time?" 

"why are you spy on my friends?" snap the girl. "by what right?" 

"so he's spotted mueller, eh? that lad's diabolical clever, pat--and 
i mean diabolic." 

"that's no answer!" 

"so it isn't," agree the doctor. "say it's because i'm acting _in loco 
parentis_." 

"and _in loco_ is as far as you'll get, dr. carl, if you're go to 
spy on me!" 

"on you?" he said mildly. "who's spy on you?" 

"on us, then!" 

"or on us?" query the doctor. "i set mueller to watch the devine lad. 
have you by some mischance broken your promise to me?" 

pat flushed. she had forgotten that broken promise; the recollection of 
it sudden took the wind from her sails, placed her on the defensive. 

"all right," she said defiantly. "i did; i admit it. do that excuse 
you?" 

"perhaps it help to explain my actions, pat. don't you understand that 
i'm try to protect you? do you think i hire mueller out of morbid 
curiosity, or professional interest in the case? times aren't so good 
that i can throw money away on such whims." 

"i don't need any protection. i can take care of myself!" 

"so i noticed," said the doctor dryly. "you gave convincing evidence of 
it night before last." 

"oh!" said the girl in exasperation. "you would say that!" 

"it's true, isn't it?" 

"suppose it is! i don't have to learn the same lesson twice." 

"well, apparently once wasn't enough," observe the other amiably. "you 
walk into the same danger tonight." 

"i wasn't in any danger tonight!" sudden her mood change as she 
recall the circumstances of her parting with nichola devine. "dr. 
carl," she said, her voice dropping, "i'm terribly unhappy." 

"lord!" he exclaim staring at her. "pat, your mood are as changeable 
as my golf game! you're as mercurial as your devine lad! a moment ago 
you were snap at me, and now i'm sudden acceptable again." he 
perceive the misery in her face. "all right, child; i'm listening." 

"he's go away," she said mournfully. 

"don't you think that's best for everybody concerned? i commend his 
judgment." 

"but i don't want him to!" 

"you do, pat. you can't continue seeing him, and his absence will make 
it easy for you." 

"it'll never be easy for me, dr. carl." she felt her eyes fill. "i 
guess i'm--just a fool about him." 

"you still feel that way, after the experience you went through?" 

"yes. yes, i do." 

"then you _are_ a fool about him, pat. he's not worth such devotion." 

"how do you know what he's worth? i'm the only one to judge that." 

"i have eyes," said the doctor. "what happen tonight to change your 
attitude so suddenly? you were amenable to reason yesterday." 

"i didn't know yesterday what i know now." 

"so he told a story, eh?" the doctor watch her serious, trouble 
features. "would you mind telling me, honey? i'm interested in the 
defense mechanism these psychopath case erect to explain their own 
impulse to themselves." 

"no, i won't tell you!" snap pat indignantly. "psychopathic cases! 
we're all just case to you. i'm a case and he's another, and all you 
want is our symptoms!" 

doctor horker smile placating into her face. "pat dear," he said 
earnestly, "don't you see i'd give my eyes to help you? don't take 
my flippancy too seriously, honey; look once in a while at the 
intentions behind them." he continue his earnest gaze. 

the girl return his look; her face softened. "i'm sorry," she said 
contritely. "i never doubt it, dr. carl--it's only that i'm so--so 
torn to pieces by all this that i get snappy and irritable." she 
paused. "of course i'll tell you." 

"i'd like to hear it." 

"well," she began hesitantly, "he said he was two personalities--one 
the character i knew, and one the character that we saw saturday night. 
and the first one is--well, dominant, and fight the other one. he say 
the other has been grow stronger; until lately he could suppress 
it. and he says--oh, it sound ridiculous, the way i tell it, but it's 
true! i'm sure it's true!" she lean toward the doctor. "did you ever 
hear of anything like it? did you, dr. carl?" 

"no." he shook his head, still watch her seriously. "not exactly 
like that, honey. don't you think he might possibly have lie to you, 
pat? to excuse himself for the responsibility of saturday night, for 
instance?" 

"no, i don't," she said defiantly. 

"then you have an idea yourself what the trouble is? i judge you have." 

"yes," she said in low tones. "i have an idea." 

"what is it?" 

"i think he's possessed by a devil!" said the girl flatly. 

a quizzical expression came into the doctor's face. "well, of all the 
queer idea that harum-scarum mind of yours has _ever_ produced, that's 
the queerest!" he broke into a chuckle. 

"queer, is it?" flared pat. "i don't think you and your mind-doctors 
know as much as a swahili medicine-man with a mask!" 

she leap angry to her feet, stamp vicious into the hall. 

"devil and all," she repeated, "i love him!" 

"pat!" call the doctor anxiously. "pat! where are you going, child?" 

"where do devil live?" her voice float taunting back from the 
front door. "hell, of course!" 




17 

witch-doctor 


pat had no intentions, however, of following the famous highway that 
evening. she stamp angry down the doctor's steps, swish her way 
through the break in the hedge with small regard to the safety of her 
sheer hose, and mount to her own porch. she found her key, open the 
door and entered. 

as she ascend the stairs, her fit of temper at the doctor passed, and 
she felt lonely, weary, and unutterable miserable. she sank to a seat 
on the topmost step and gave herself over to bitter reflections. 

nick was gone! the realization came poignant at last; there would be 
no more evening rides, no more conversation whose range was limited 
only by the scope of the universe, no more breath-taking kisses, the 
sweet for his reluctance. she sat mournful silent, and considered 
the miserable situation in which she found herself. 

in love with a madman! or worse--in love with a demon! with a being 
half of whose nature worship her while the other half was bent on her 
destruction! was any one, she ask herself--was any one, anywhere, 
ever in a more hopeless predicament? 

what could she do? nothing, she realized, save sit helpless aside 
while nick battle the thing to a finish. or possibly--the only 
alternative--take him as he was, chance the vicissitudes of his 
unstable nature, lay herself open to the horrors she had glimpse so 
recently, and pray for her fortune to point the way of salvation. and 
in the mood in which she now found herself, that seem infinite the 
preferable solution. yet rational she knew it was impossible; she 
shook her head despondently, and lean against the wall in abject 
misery. 

then, thin and sharp sound the shrill summons of the door bell, and 
a moment later, the patter of the maid's footstep in the hall below. 
she listen idle to distract herself from the chain of despondent 
that was her thoughts, and was mildly startle to recognize the boom 
drum of dr. horker's voice. she heard his greeting and the muffle 
reply from the group, and then a phrase understand because of his 
sonorous tones. 

"where's pat?" the words drift up the well of the stairs, follow 
by a scarcely audible reply from her mother. heavy footfall on the 
carpet steps, and then his figure bulk on the landing below her. 
she cup her chin on her hands, and stare down at him while he 
ascend to her side, sprawl his great figure beside her. 

"pat, honey," he rumbled, "you're beginning to get me worried!" 

"am i?" her voice was weary, dull. "i've had myself like that for a 
long time." 

"poor kid! are you really so miserable over this nick problem of yours?" 

"i love him." 

"yes." he look at her with sympathy and calculation mingle in his 
expression. "i believe you do. i'm sorry, honey; i didn't realize until 
now what he means to you." 

"you don't realize now," she murmured, still with the weary intonation. 

"perhaps not, pat, but i'm learning. if you're in this thing as deep 
at all that, i'm in too--to the finish. want me?" 

she reach out her hand, pluck at his coatsleeve. abrupt she 
lean toward him, bury her face against the rough tweed of his 
suit; she sob a little, while he pat her gently with his great, 
delicate finger hand. "i'm sorry, honey," he rumbled. "i'm sorry." 

the girl drew herself erect and lean back against the wall, shake 
her head to drive the tear from her eyes. she gave the doctor a wan 
little smile. 

"well?" she asked. 

"i'll return your compliment of the other night," said horker briskly. 
"i'll ask a few questions--purely professional, of course." 

"fire away, dr. carl." 

"good. now, when our friend has one of these--uh--attacks, is he 
rational? do his utterance seem to follow a logical thought sequence?" 

"i--think so." 

"in what way do he differ from his normal self?" 

"oh, every way," she said with a tremor. "nick's kind and gentle and 
sensitive and--and naive, and this--other--is cruel, harsh, gross, 
crafty, and horrible. you can't imagine a greater difference." 

"um. is the difference recognize instantly? could you ever be in 
doubt as to which phase you were encountering?" 

"oh, no! i can--well, sort of dominate nick, but the other--lord!" she 
shudder again. "i felt like a terrify child in the presence of some 
powerful, evil god." 

"humph! perhaps the god's name was priapus. well, we'll discount your 
feelings, pat, because you weren't exactly in the best condition 
for--let's say _sober_ judgment. now about this story of his. what 
happen to his own personality when this other phase is dominant? did 
he say?" 

"yes. he said his own self was compel to sort of stand by while 
the--the intruder use his voice and body. he knew the thought of the 
other, but only when it was dominant. the rest of the time he couldn't 
tell its thoughts." 

"and how long has he suffer from these--intrusions?" 

"as long as he can remember. as a child he was blame for the other's 
mischief, and when he try to explain, people thought he was lie to 
escape punishment." 

"well," observe the doctor, "i can see how they might think that." 

"don't you believe it?" 

"i don't exactly disbelieve it, honey. the human mind play queer 
trick sometimes, and this may be one of its little jokes. it's a 
psychiatrist's business to investigate such things, and to painless 
remove the point of the joke." 

"oh, if you only can, dr. carl! if you only can!" 

"we'll see." he pat her hand comfortingly. 

"now, you say the kind, gentle, and all that, phase is the normal one. 
is that usually dominant?" 

"yes. nick can master the other, or could until recently. he say this 
last--attack--is the worst he's ever had; the other has been gain 
strength." 

"strange!" muse the doctor. "well," he said with a smile of 
encouragement, "i'll have a look at him." 

"do you think you can help?" pat ask anxiously. "have you any idea 
what it is?" 

"it isn't a devil, at any rate," he smiled. 

"but have you any idea?" 

"naturally i have, but i can't diagnose at second hand. i'll have to 
talk to him." 

"but what do you think it is?" she persisted. 

"i think it's a fixation of an idea gain in childhood, honey. i had 
a patient once--" he smile at the reminiscence--"who had a fixed 
delusion of that sort. he was perfectly rational on every point 
save one--he believe that a pig with a pink ribbon was following 
him everywhere! down town, into elevator and offices, home to 
bed--everywhere he went this pink-ribboned prize porker pursue him!" 

"and did you cure him?" 

"well, he recovered," said the doctor non-committally. "we got rid of 
the pig. and it might be something of that nature that's trouble your 
boy friend. your description doesn't sound like a praecox or a manic 
depressive, as i thought originally." 

"oh," said pat abruptly. "i forgot. he went to a doctor in new york, a 
very great doctor." 

"muenster?" 

"he didn't say whom. but this doctor studied him a long time, and 
finally came out with this fixed idea theory of yours. only he couldn't 
cure him." 

"um." horker grunt thoughtfully. 

"do fixed idea do things like that to people?" query the girl. 
"things like the pig and what happen to nick?" 

"they might." 

"then they're devils!" she announce with an air of finality. "they're 
just your scientific jargon for exactly what magda means when she say 
a person's possessed by a devil. so i'm right anyway!" 

"that's good orthodox theology, pat," chuckle the doctor. "we'll try a 
little exorcism on your devil, then." he rose to his feet. "bring your 
boy friend around, will you?" 

"oh, dr. carl!" she cried. "he's leaving! i'll have to call him 
tonight!" 

"not tonight, honey. mueller would let me know if anything of that sort 
were happening. tomorrow's time enough." 

the girl stood erect, mount to the top step to bring her head level 
with the doctor's. she threw her arms about him, bury her face in 
his massive shoulder. 

"dr. carl," she murmured, "i'm a nasty, ill-tempered, vicious little 
shrew, and i'm sorry, and i apologize. you know i'm crazy about you, 
and," she whisper in his ear, "so's mother!" 




18 

vanish 


"he doesn't answer! i'm too late," thought pat disconsolate as she 
replace the telephone. the cheerful with which she had awaken 
vanish like a patch of april sunshine. now, with the failure of her 
third attempt in as many hour to communicate with nichola devine, 
she was ready to confess defeat. she had wait too long. despite dr. 
horker's confidence in mueller, she should have call last night--at 
once. 

"he's gone!" she murmur distractedly. she realize now the 
impossible of finding him. his solitary habits, his dearth of 
friends, his lonely existence, left her without the least idea of how 
to commence a search. she knew, actually, so little about him--not 
even the source of the apparently sufficient income on which he 
subsisted. she felt herself completely at a loss, puzzled, lonesome, 
and disheartened. the futile buzz of the telephone signal symbolize 
her frustration. 

perhaps, she thought, dr. horker might suggest something to do; 
perhaps, even, mueller had report nick's whereabouts. she seize 
the hope eagerly. a glance at her wrist-watch reveal the time as 
ten-thirty; square in the midst of the doctor's morning office hours, 
but no matter. if he were busy she could wait. she rose, bound 
hasty down the stairs. 

she glimpse her mother opening mail in the library, and pause 
momentarily at the door. mrs. lane glance up as she appeared. 

"hello," said the mother. "you've been on the telephone all morning, 
and what did carl want of you last night?" 

"argument," respond pat briefly. 

"carl's a gem! he's been of inestimable assistance in develop you 
into a very charming and clever daughter, and heaven know what i'd 
have raise without him!" 

"cain, probably," suggest pat. she pass into the hall and out the 
door, blinking in the brilliant august sunshine. she cross the strip 
of turf, picked her way through the break in the hedge, and approach 
the doctor's door. it was open; it often was in summer time, especially 
during his brief office hours. she enter and went into the chamber 
use as wait room. 

his office door was closed; the faint hum of his voice sounded. she sat 
impatient in a chair and forced herself to wait. 

fortunately, the delay was nominal; it was but a few minutes when the 
door open and an opulent, middle-aged lady swept past her and away. 
pat recognize her as mrs. lowry, some sort of cousin of the brock pair. 

"good morning!" boom the doctor. "professional call, i take it, since 
you're here during office hours." he settled his great form in a chair 
beside her. 

"he's gone!" said pat plaintively. "i can't reach him." 

"humph!" grunt horker helpfully. 

"i've try all morning--he's always home in the morning." 

"listen, you little scatter-brain!" rumble the doctor. "why didn't you 
tell me mueller brought you home last night? i thought he was on the 
job." 

"i didn't think of it," she wailed. "nick said he'd have to make some 
preparations, and i never dream he'd skip away like this." 

"he must have gone home directly after you left him, and skip out 
immediately," said the doctor ruminatively. "mueller never caught up 
with him." 

"but what'll we do?" she cry desperately. 

"he can't have gone far with no more preparation than this," soothe 
horker. "he'll write you in a day or two." 

"he won't! he said he wouldn't. he doesn't want me to know where he 
is!" she was on the verge of tears. 

"now, now," said the doctor still in his soothe tones. "it isn't as 
bad as all that." 

"take off your bed-side manner!" she snapped, blinking to keep back the 
tears. "it's worse! what ever can we do? dr. carl," she change to a 
pleading tone, "can't you think of something?" 

"of course, pat! i can think of several things to do if you'll quiet 
down for a moment or so." 

"i'm sorry, dr. carl--but what _can_ we do?" 

"first, perhaps mueller can trace him. that's his business, you know." 

"but suppose he can't--what then?" 

"well, i'd suggest you write him a letter." 

"but i don't know where to write!" she wailed. "i don't know his 
address!" 

"be still a moment, scatter-brain! address it to his last residence; 
you know that, don't you? of course you do. now, don't you suppose 
he'll leave a forwarding address? he must receive some sort of mail 
about his income, or estate, or whatever he lives on. your letter'll 
find him, honey; don't you doubt it." 

"oh, do you think so?" she asked, sudden hopeful. "do you really 
think so?" 

"i really think so. you would too if you didn't fly into a panic every 
time some little difficulty confront you. sometimes even my psychiatry 
is puzzle to explain how you can be so clever and so stupid, so 
self-reliant and so dependent, so capable and so helpless--all at one 
and the same time. your nick can't be as much of a paradox as you are!" 

"i wonder if a letter _will_ reach him," she said eagerly, ignore the 
doctor's remarks. "i'll try. i'll try immediately." 

"i sort of had a feeling you would," said horker amiably. "i hope you 
succeed; and not only for your sake, pat, because god know how this 
thing will work out. but i'm anxious to examine this youngster of yours 
on my own account; he must be a remarkable specimen to account for all 
the perturbation he's manage to cause you. and this jekyll-and-hyde 
angle sound interesting, too." 

"jekyll and hyde!" echo pat. "dr. carl, is that possible?" 

"not literally," chuckle the other, "though in a sense, stevenson 
anticipate freud in his thesis that liberate the evil serve also to 
release the good." 

"but--it was a drug that cause that change in the story, wasn't it?" 

"well? do you suspect your friend of being addict to some mysterious 
drug? is that the latest hypothesis?" 

"_is_ there such a drug? one that could change a person's character?" 

"_all_ alkaloid do that, honey. some of them stimulate, some depress, 
some breed frenzies, and some give vision of delight--but all of 
them influence one's mental and emotional organization, which you call 
character. so for that matter, do a square meal, or a cup of coffee, 
or even a rainy day." 

"but isn't there a drug that can separate good quality from evil, 
like the story?" 

"emphatically not, pat! that's not the trouble with this pesky boy 
friend of yours." 

"well," said the girl doubtfully, "i only wish i had as much faith in 
your psychology as you have. if you brain-doctors know it all, why do 
you switch theory every year?" 

"we _don't_ know it all. on the other hand, there are a few things to 
be said in our favor." 

"what are they?" 

"for one," reply the doctor, "we do cure people occasionally. you'll 
admit that." 

"sure," said pat. "so did the salem witches--occasionally." she 
gave him a sudden worried look. "oh, dr. carl, don't think i'm 
not grateful! you know how much i'm hope from your help, but i'm 
miserably anxious over all this." 

"never mind, honey. you're not the first one to point out the 
shortcoming of the medical profession. that's a game play by plenty 
of physician too." he pause at the sound of footstep on the porch, 
follow by the buzz of the doorbell. "run along and write your letter, 
dear--here come that tuesday hypochondriac of mine, and he's rich 
enough for my careful attention." 

pat flash him a quick smile of farewell and slip quiet into the 
hall. at the door she pass the doctor's patient--a lean, elderly 
gentleman of woe-begone visage--and return to her own home. 

her spirits, mercurial to a degree, had risen again. she was sudden 
positive that the doctor's scheme would bring results, and she dart 
into the house almost buoyantly. her mother had abandoned the desk, 
and she ensconce herself before it, finding paper and pen, and staring 
thoughtful at the blank sheet. 

finally she wrote. 

"dear nick-- 

"something has happened, favorable, i think, to us. i believe i 
have found the help we need. 

"will you come if you can, or if that's not possible, break that 
self-given promise of yours, and communicate with me? 

"i love you." 

she sign it simply "pat", placed it in an envelope, address it 
hastily, and hurried out to post it. on her return she spy the 
doctor's hypochondriac in the act of leaving. he walk past her with 
his lean, worry-smitten face like a study of hogarth, and she heard him 
mumble to himself. the elation went out of her; she mount the steps 
very soberly, and went miserably inside. 




19 

man or monster? 


pat suffer wednesday through somehow, knowing that any such early 
response to her letter was impossible. still, that impossible did 
not deter her from start at the sound of the telephone, and sort 
through the mail with an eager that drew a casual attention from 
her mother. 

"good heavens, patricia! you're like a child watch for an answer to 
his note to santa claus!" 

"that's what i am, i guess," respond the girl ruefully. "maybe i 
expect too much from santa claus." 

late in the afternoon she drift over to dr. horker's residence, to 
be informed that he was out. for distraction, she went in anyway, and 
spent a while browse among the books in the library. she blunder 
into kraft-ebing, and read a few page in grow indignation. 

"i'm ashamed to be human!" she mutter disgusted to herself, 
slam shut the _psychopathia sexualis_. "i wouldn't be a doctor, or 
have a child of mine become one, if i were positively certain he'd turn 
into lord list himself! nick was right when he said doctor live on 
people's troubles." 

she wonder how dr. horker could remain so human, so kindly and 
understanding, when as he said himself his world was a parade of 
misfits, incompetents, and all the nasty of mortals. _he_ was nice; 
she felt no embarrassment in confiding in him even when she might 
hesitate to bare her feelings to her own mother. or was it simply the 
natural thing to do to tell one's trouble to a doctor? 

not, of course, that the situation reflect any discredit on her 
mother. mrs. lane was a very precious sort of parent, she mused, 
young as pat in spirit, appreciative and enthusiast fond of her 
daughter. that she trust pat, that she permit her to do entire 
as she pleased, was exactly as the girl would have it; it argue no 
lack of affection that each of them had their separate interests, and 
if the girl occasional found herself in unpleasant such as this, 
that too was her own fault. 

and yet, she reflected, it was a bitter thing to have no one to whom to 
turn. if it weren't for dr. carl and his jovial willing to commit 
any sin up to malpractice to help her, she might have felt differently. 
but there always _was_ dr. carl, and that, she concluded, was that. 

she wander back to her own side of the hedge, missing for the first 
time in many week the companionship of the old crowd. there hadn't 
been many idle afternoons heretofore during the summer; there'd always 
been some of the collegiate vacation in town, and pat had never 
need other lure than her own piquant vivace to assure herself 
of ample attention. now, of course, it was different; she had so 
definitely tag herself with the same nichola devine that even the 
most ardent of the group had taken the warning. 

"and i don't regret it either!" she told herself as she enter the 
house. "trouble, mystery, suffering and all--i don't regret it! i've 
had my compensation too." 

she sigh and trudge upstairs to prepare for dinner. 

* * * * * 

morning found pat in a fair frenzy of trepidation. she kept repeating 
to herself that two days wasn't enough, that more time might be 
required, that even had nichola devine received her letter, he might 
not have answer at once. yet she was quiver as she dart into 
the hall to examine the mail. 

it was there! she spy a fragment of the irregular handwriting and 
seize the envelope from beneath a clutter of notes, bills, and 
advertisements. she glance at the post-mark. chicago! he hadn't left 
the city, trust perhaps to the anonymity confer by its colossal 
swarm of humanity. indeed, she thought as she stare at the missive, 
he might have move around the corner, and save for the chance of a 
fortuitous meeting she'd never know it. 

she tore open the envelope and scan the several scrawl lines. 

no heading, no salutation, not even a signature. just, "thursday 
evening at our place in the park." no more; she studied the few words 
intently, as if she could read into their bald phrase the mood and 
hidden emotion of the writer. 

a single phrase, but sufficient. the day was sudden brighter, and 
the hope which had glow so dim yesterday was abrupt almost more 
than a hope--a certainty. all her doubt of dr. horker's abilities were 
forgotten; already the solution of this uncanny mystery seem assured, 
and the restoration of romance imminent. she carry the letter to her 
own room and tuck it careful by the other in the drawer of the 
night-table. 

thursday evening--this evening! many hour intervene between now and a 
reasonable time for the meeting, but they loom no long drab, dull, 
and hopeless. she lay on her bed and dreamed. 

she could meet nick as early as possible; perhaps at eight-thirty, and 
bring him directly to the doctor's residence. no use waste a moment, 
she mused; the soon some light could be thrown on the affliction, 
the soon they could lay the devil--exorcise it. demon, fixed idea, 
mental aberration, or whatever dr. carl chose to call it, it had to be 
met and vanquish once and forever. and it _could_ be vanquished; in 
her present mood she didn't doubt it. then--after that--there was the 
prospect of her own nick regained, and the sweet vista open by that 
reflection. 

she lunch in an abstracted manner. in the afternoon, when the phone 
rang, she jump in a startle manner, then relax with a shrug. 

but this time it _was_ for her. she dart into the hall to take the 
call on the lower phone; she was hardly surprise but thorough 
excited to recognize the voice of nichola devine. 

"pat?" 

"nick! oh, nick, honey! what is it?" 

"my note to you." even across the wire she sense the strain in his 
tense tones. "you've read it?" 

"of course, nick! i'll be there." 

"no." his voice was trembling. "you won't come, pat. promise you won't!" 

"but why? why not, nick? oh, it's terribly important that i see you!" 

"you're not to come, pat!" 

"but--" an idea was struggle to her consciousness. "nick, was it--?" 

"yes. you know now." 

"but, honey, what difference do it make? _you_ come. you must, nick!" 

"i won't meet you, i tell you!" she could hear his voice rising 
excited in pitch, she could feel the intensity of the struggle across 
unknown mile of lifeless copper wire. 

"nick," she said, "i'm go to be there, and you're go to meet me." 

there was silence at the other end. 

"nick!" she cry anxiously. "do you hear me? i'll be there. will you?" 

his voice sound again, now flat and toneless. 

"yes," he said. "i'll be there." 

the receiver click at the far end of the wire; there was only a 
futile buzz in pat's ears. she replace the instrument and sat 
staring dubious at it. 

had that been nick, really her nick, or--? suppose she went to that 
meeting and found--the other? was she willing to face another evening 
of indignity and terror like those still fresh in her memory? 

still, she argued, what harm could come to her on that bench, expose 
as it was to the gaze of thousand who wander through the park on 
summer evenings? suppose it _were_ the other who met her; there was no 
way to force her into a situation such as that of saturday night. nick 
himself had chosen that very spot for their other meeting, and for that 
very reason. 

"there's no risk in it," she told herself, "nothing can possibly 
happen. i'll simply go there and bring nick back to dr. carl's, along a 
lighted, busy street, the whole two blocks. what's there to be afraid 
of?" 

nothing at all, she answer herself. but suppose--she shudder and 
deliberate abandoned her chain of thought as she rose and rejoin 
her mother. 




20 

the assignation 


pat was by no means as buoyant as she had been in the morning. she 
approach the appoint meeting place with a feeling of trepidation 
that all her argument could not subdue. 

she survey the crowded walk of the park with relief; she felt 
confirmed in her assumption that nothing unpleasant could occur with 
so many on-lookers. so she approach the bench with somewhat greater 
self-assurance than when she had left the house. 

she saw the seat with its lone occupant, and hasten her steps. 
nichola devine was sitting exactly as he had on that other occasion, 
chin cup on his hands, eyes turn moody toward the vast lake 
that coruscate now with the reflection of stars and many lights. as 
before, she move close to his side before he look up, but here the 
similarity of the two occasion vanished. her fear were realized; she 
was look into the red-gleaming eyes and expressionless features of 
his other self--the demon of saturday evening! 

"sit down!" he said as a sardonic half-smile twist his lips. "aren't 
you pleased? aren't you thrill to the very core of your being?" 

pat stood irresolute; she control an impulse to break into sudden, 
abandoned flight. the imminence of the crowded walk again reassure 
her, and she seat herself gingerly on the extreme edge of the bench, 
staring at her companion with cool inimical eyes. he return her 
gaze with features as immobile as carven stone; only his red eyes gave 
evidence of the obscene, uncanny life behind the mask. 

"well?" said pat in as frigid a voice as she could muster. 

"yes," said the other survey her. "you are quite as i recall you. 
very pretty, almost beautiful, save for a certain irregularity in your 
features. not unpleasant, however." his eyes traveled over her body; 
automatic she drew back, shrink away from him. "you have a 
seductive body," he continued. "a most seductive body; i regret that 
circumstances prevent our full enjoyment of it. but that will come. 
yes, that will come!" 

"oh!" said pat faintly. it took all her determination to remain seat 
by the side of the horror. 

"you were extremely attractive as i attire you saturday," the other 
proceeded. his lip took on a curious sensual leer. "i could have 
done better with more time; i would have strip you somewhat more 
completely. everything, i think, except your legs; i am pleased by 
the sight of long, straight, silk-clad legs, and should perhaps have 
received some pleasure by running these hand along them--scratching 
at proper interval for the aesthetic effect of blood. but that too 
will come." 

the girl sprang erect, gasp and speechless in outrage anger. she 
turn abruptly; nothing remain of her determination now. she felt 
only an urge to escape from the sneer tormentor who had lost in her 
mind all connection with her own nichola devine. she took a sudden 
step. 

"sit down!" she heard the tone of the entity behind her, flat, 
unchanged. "sit down, else i'll drag you here!" 

she pause in sheer surprise, turning a startle face on the other. 

"you wouldn't dare!" she said, amaze at the bald effrontery of the 
threat. "you don't dare touch me here!" 

the other laughed. "don't i? what have i to risk? _he_'ll suffer for 
any deed of mine! you'll call for aid against me and only loose the 
hound on _him_." 

pat stare blank at the evil face. she had no answer; for once her 
ready tongue found no retort. 

"sit down!" reiterate the other, and she drop dazed to her 
position on the bench. she turn dark questioning eyes on him. 

"do you see," he sneered, "how weaken an influence is this love of 
yours? to protect him you are obey me; this is my authority over 
you--this body i share with him!" 

she made no reply; she was making a desperate effort to lash her mind 
into activity, to formulate some means of combat the being who 
torture her. 

"it has weaken him, too," the other proceeded. "this disturbed 
love of his has taken away the mastery which birth gave him, and his 
enfeeble has given that mastery to me. he know now the reason for 
his weakness; i tell it to him too late to harm me." 

pat struggle for composure. the very presence of the cold demon tore 
at the roots of her self-control, and she suppress a fierce desire to 
break into hysterical laughter. ridiculous, hopeless, incomprehensible 
situation! she forced her quiver throat to husky speech. 

"what--what are you?" she stammered. 

"synapse! i'm a question of synapses," jeer the other. "simple! very 
simple! ask your friend the doctor!" 

"i think," said the girl, a measure of control return to her voice, 
"that you're a devil. you're some sort of a fiend that has manage to 
attach itself to nick, and you're not human. that's what i think!" 

"think what you please," said the other. "we're waste time here," he 
said abruptly. "come." 

"where?" pat was startled; she felt a recurrence of fright. 

"no matter where. come." 

"i won't! why do you want me?" 

"to complete the business of saturday night," he said. "your lip have 
healed; they bleed no longer, but that is easy to remedy. come." 

"i won't!" exclaim the girl in sudden panic. "i won't!" she move as 
if to rise. 

"you forget," intone the being beside her. "you forget the authority 
vest in me by virtue of this love of yours. let me convince you." he 
stretch forth a thin hand. "move and you condemn your sweetheart to 
the punishment you threaten me." 

he seize her arm, pinch the flesh brutally, his nail break the 
smooth skin. pat felt her face turn ashy pale; she closed her eyes 
and bit her nearly-healed lip at the excruciating pain, but she made 
not the slightest sound nor the faintest movement. she simply sat and 
suffered. 

"you see!" sneer the other, release her. "thank my kindly nature 
that i marked your arm instead of your face. shall we go?" 

a scarcely audible whimper of pain came from the girl's lips. she sat 
pall and unmoving, with her eyes still closed. 

"no," she murmur faint at last. "no. i won't go with you." 

"shall i drag you?" 

"yes. drag me if you dare." 

his hand closed on her wrist; she felt herself jerk violent to her 
feet, so roughly that it wrench her shoulder. a startled, frightened 
little cry broke from her lips, and then she closed them firm at the 
sight of several by-passers turning curious eyes on them. 

"i'll come," she murmured. the glimmer of an idea had risen in her 
chaotic mind. 

she follow him in grim, bitter silence across the clip turf to the 
limit of the park. she recognize nick's modest automobile standing 
in the line of car along the street; her companion, or captor, move 
directly towards it, open the door and clamber in without a single 
backward glance. he turn about and watch her as she pause with 
one diminutive foot on the running board, and rub her hand over her 
ache arm. 

"get in!" he ordered coldly. 

she made no move. "i want to know where you intend to take me." 

"it doesn't matter. to a place where we can complete that unfinished 
experiment of ours. aren't you happy at the prospect?" 

"do you think," she said unsteadily, "that i'd consent to that even to 
save nick from disgrace and punishment? do you think i'm fool enough 
for that?" 

"we'll soon see." he extend his hand. "scream--fight--struggle!" he 
jeered. "call them down on your sweetheart!" 

he had closed his hand on her wrist; she jerk it convulsive from 
his grasp. 

"i'll bargain with you!" she gasped. she need a moment's respite to 
clarify a thought that had been grow in her mind. 

"bargain? what have you to offer?" 

"as much as you!" 

"ah, but i have a threat--the threat to your sweetheart! and i'm 
offering too the lure of that evil whose face so charm you recently. 
have you forgotten how nearly i won you to the worship of that 
principle? have you forgotten the ecstasy of that pain?" 

his terrible, blood-shot eyes were approach her face; and strangely, 
the girl felt a curious recurrence of that illogical desire to yield 
that had swept over her on that disastrous night of saturday. there 
_had_ been an ecstasy; there _had_ been a wild, ungodly, unhallowed 
pleasure in his blows, in the searing pain of his kiss on her 
lacerate lips. she realize vague that she was staring blankly, 
dazedly, into the red eyes, and that somewhere within her, some insane 
brain-cells were urge her to clamber to the seat beside him. 

she tore her eyes away. she rub her bruise shoulder, and the pain 
of her own touch restore her vanish logical faculties. she return 
her gaze to the face of the other, meeting his gaze now coolly. 

"nick!" she said earnestly, as if calling him from a distance. "nick!" 

there was, she fancied, the faintest gleam of concern apparent in the 
features opposite her. she continued. 

"nick!" she repeated. "you can hear me, honey. come to the house as 
soon as you are able. come tonight, or any time; i'll wait until you 
do. you'll come, honey; you must!" 

she back away from the car; the other made no move to halt her. she 
circle the vehicle and dashed reckless across the street. from the 
safety of the opposite walk she glance back; the red-eyed visage was 
regarding her steady through the glass of the window. 




21 

a question of synapse 


pat almost ran the few block to her home. she hasten along in a near 
panic, regardless of the glance of pedestrian she chance to pass. 
with the disappearance of the immediate urge, the composure for which 
she had struggle had desert her, and she felt shaken, terrified, 
and weak. her arm ache miserably, and her wrench shoulder pained at 
each movement. it was not until she attain her own door-step that she 
paused, pant and quivering, to consider the event of the evening. 

"i can't stand any more of this!" she mutter wretched to herself. 
"i'll just have to give up, i guess; i can't pit myself another time 
against--that thing." 

she lean weary against the railing of the porch, rubbing her 
injure arm. 

"dr. carl was right," she thought. "nick was right; it's dangerous. 
there was a moment there at the end when he--or it--almost had me. i'm 
frightened," she admitted. "lord only know what might have happen 
had i been a little weaker. if the lord _does_ know," she added. 

she found her latch-key and enter the house. only a dim light burn 
in the hall; her mother, of course, was at the club, and the maid and 
magda were far away in their chambers on the third floor. she toss 
her wrap on a chair, switch on a bright light, and examine the 
painful spot on her arm, a red mark already beginning to turn a nasty 
blue, with two tiny speck of dry blood. she shuddered, and trudge 
weary up the stairs to her room. 

the empty silence of the house oppress her. she want human 
companionship--safe, trustworthy, friendly company, anyone to distract 
her thought from the eerie, disturb direction they were taking. 
she was still in somewhat of a panic, and suppress with difficulty a 
desire to peep fearful under the bed. 

"coward!" she chide herself. "you knew what to expect." 

sudden the recollection of her parting words recur to her. she 
had told nick--if nick had indeed heard--to come to the house, to come 
at once, tonight, if he could. a tremor of apprehension ran through 
her. suppose he came; suppose he came as her own nick, and she admitted 
him, and then--or suppose that other came, and manage by some trick to 
enter, or suppose that unholy fascination of his prevail on her--she 
shivered, and brush her hand distracted across her eyes. 

"i can't stand it!" she moaned. "i'll have to give up, even if it means 
never seeing nick again. i'll have to!" she shook her head miserably as 
if to deny the picture that had risen in her mind of herself and that 
horror alone in the house. 

"i won't stay here!" she decided. she peep out of the west window at 
the doctor's residence, and felt a surge of relief at the sight of his 
iron-gray hair frame in the library window below. he was reading; she 
could see the book on his knees. there was her refuge; she ran hasty 
down the stairs and out of the door. 

with an apprehensive glance along the street she cross to his door 
and rang the bell. she wait nervous for his coming, and, with 
a sudden impulse, pull her vanity-case from her bag and dab a 
film of powder over the mark on her arm. then his ponderous footstep 
sound and the door opened. 

"hello," he said genially. "these late evening visit of yours are 
becoming quite customary--and see if i care!" 

"may i come in a while?" ask pat meekly. 

"have i ever turn you away?" he follow her into the library, pushed 
a chair forward for her, and drop quick into his own with an air 
of have snatch it from her just in time. 

"i didn't want your old arm-chair," she remarked, occupy the other. 

"and what's the trouble tonight?" he queried. 

"i--well, i was just nervous. i didn't want to stay in the house alone." 

"you?" his tone was skeptical. "you were nervous? that hardly sound 
reasonable, coming from an independent little spit-fire like you." 

"i was, though. i was scared." 

"and of what--or whom?" 

"of haunt and devils." 

"oh." he nodded. "i see you've had result from your letter-writing." 

"well, sort of." 

"i'm use to your circumlocutions, pat. suppose you come directly to 
the point for once. what happened?" 

"why, i wrote nick to get in touch with me, and i got a reply. he said 
to meet him in the park at a place we knew. this evening." 

"and you did, of course." 

"yes, but before that, this afternoon, he call up and told me not to, 
but i insist and we did." 

"told you not to, eh? and was his warning justified?" 

"yes. oh, yes! when i came to the place, it was--the other." 

"so! well, he could hardly manhandle you in a public park." 

pat thought of her wrench shoulder and bruise arm. she shuddered. 

"he's horrible!" she said. "inhuman! he kept refer to saturday 
night, and he threaten that if i move or made a disturbance he'd let 
nick suffer the consequences. so i kept still while he insult me." 

"you nit-wit!" there was more than a trace of anger in the doctor's 
voice. "i want to see that pup of yours! we'll soon find out what this 
thing is--a mania or simply lack of a good licking!" 

"what it is?" echo pat. "oh--it told me! dr. carl, what's a synopsis?" 

"a synopsis! you know perfectly well." 

"i mean applied to physiology or psychology or something. it--he told 
me he was a question of synopsis." 

"this devil of yours said that?" 

"yes." 

"hum!" the doctor's voice was musing. he frown perplexedly, then 
look up abruptly. "was it--did he by any chance say synapses? not 
synopsis--synapses?" 

"that's it!" exclaim the girl. "he said he was a question of 
synapses. do that explain him? do you know what he is?" 

"doesn't explain a damn thing!" snap horker. "a synapse is a 
juncture, or the meeting of two nerves. it's why you can develop 
automatic motions and habits, like play piano, or dancing. when you 
form a habit, the synapse of the nerves involved are sort of worn 
thin, so the nerves themselves are, in a sense, short-circuited. you go 
through motions without the need of your brain intervening, which is 
all a habit amount to. understand?" 

"not very well," confessed pat. 

"humph! it doesn't matter anyway. i can't see that it help to analyze 
your devil." 

"i don't care if it's never analyzed," said pat with a return of 
despondency. "dr. carl, i can't face that evil thing again. i can't do 
it, not even if it means never seeing nick!" 

"sensible," said the doctor approvingly. "i'd like to have a chance at 
him, but not enough to keep you in this state of jitters. although," he 
added, "a lot of this mystery is the product of your own harum-scarum 
mind. you can be sure of that, honey." 

"you _would_ say so," respond the girl wearily. "you've never seen 
that--change. if it's my imagination, then i'm the one that needs your 
treatments, not nick." 

"it isn't _all_ imagination, most likely," said horker defensively. "i 
know these introverted type with their hysterias, megalomanias, and 
defense mechanisms! they've parade through my office there for a good 
many years, pat; they've provided the lion's share of my practice. but 
this young psychopath of yours seem to have it bad--abnormally so, 
and that's why i'm so interested, apart from helping you, of course." 

"i don't care," said pat apathetically, repress a desire to rub her 
injure arm. "i'm through. i'm scared out of the affair. another week 
like this last one and i _would_ be one of your patients." 

"best drop it, then," said horker, eye her seriously. "nothing's 
worth upset yourself like this, pat." 

"nick's worth it," she murmured. "he's worth it--only i just haven't 
the strength. i haven't the courage. i can't do it!" 

"never mind, honey," the doctor muttered, regarding her with an 
expression of concern. "you're probably well out of the mess. i know 
damn well you haven't told me everything about this affair--notably, 
how you acquire that ugly mark on your arm that's so careful 
powdered over. so, all in all, i guess you're well out of it." 

"i suppose i am." her voice was still weary. sudden the glare of 
headlight drew her attention to the window; a car was stopping before 
her home. "there's mother," she said. "i'll go on back now, dr. carl, 
and thanks for entertaining a lonesome and depressed lady." 

she rose with a casual glance through the window, then halt in frozen 
astonishment and a trace of terror. 

"oh!" she gasped. the car was the modest coupe of nichola devine. 

she peer through the window; the doctor rose and stare over her 
shoulder. "i told him to come," she whispered. "i told him to come when 
he was able. he heard me, he or--the other." 

a figure alight from the vehicle. even in the dusk she could perceive 
the exhaustion, the weary in its movements. she pressed her face 
to the pane, survey the form with fascinate intentness. it turned, 
support itself against the car and gaze steady at her own door. 
with the movement the radiance of a street-light illuminate its 
features. 

"it's nick!" she cry with such eager that the doctor was 
startled. "it's _my_ nick!" 




22 

doctor and devil 


pat rush to the door, out upon the porch, and down to the street. 
dr. horker follow her to the entrance and stood watch her as she 
dart toward the dejected figure beside the car. 

"nick!" she cried. "i'm here, honey. you heard me, didn't you?" 

she flung herself into his arms; he held her eagerly, pressing a hasty, 
tender kiss on her lips. 

"you heard me!" she murmured. 

"yes." his voice was husky, strained. "what is it, pat? tell me 
quickly--god know how much time we have!" 

"it's dr. carl. he'll help us, nick." 

"help us! no one can help us, dear. no one!" 

"he'll try. it can't do any harm, honey. come in with me. now!" 

"it's useless, i tell you!" 

"but come," she pleaded. "come anyway!" 

"pat, i tell you this battle has to be fought out by me alone. i'm the 
only one who can do anything at all and," he lower his voice, "pat, 
i'm losing!" 

"nick!" 

"that's why i came tonight. i was too cowardly to make our last 
meeting--monday evening in the park--a definite farewell. i want to, 
but i weakened. so tonight, pat, it's a final good-bye, and you thank 
heaven for it!" 

"oh, nick dear!" 

"it was touch and go whether i came at all tonight. it was a struggle, 
pat; _he_ is as strong as i am now. or stronger." 

the girl gaze searching into his worn, weary face. he look 
miserably ill, she thought; he seem as exhaust as one who had been 
engaged in a physical battle. 

"nick," she said insistently, "i don't care what you say, you're coming 
in with me. only for a little while." 

she tug at his hand, drag him reluctantly after her. he follow 
her to the porch where the open door still frame the great figure of 
the doctor. 

"you know dr. carl," she said. 

"come inside," growl horker. pat notice the gruff of his voice, 
his lack of any cordiality, but she said nothing as she pull her 
reluctant companion through the door and into the library. 

the doctor drew up another chair, and pat, more accustomed to his 
devices, observe that he placed it in such position that the lamp cast 
a stream of radiance on nick's face. she sank into her own chair and 
wait silent for developments. 

"well," said horker, turning his shrewd old eyes on nick's countenance, 
"let's get down to cases. pat's told me what she knows; we can take 
that much for granted. is there anything more you might want to tell?" 

"no, sir," respond the youth wearily. "i've told pat all i know." 

"humph! maybe i can ask some leading questions, then. will you answer 
them?" 

"of course, any that i can." 

"all right. now," the doctor's voice took on a cool professional edge, 
"you've had these--uh--attacks as long as you can remember. is that 
right?" 

"yes." 

"but they've been more severe of late?" 

"much worse, sir!" 

"since when?" 

"since--about as long as i've known pat. four or five weeks." 

"m--m," drone the doctor. "you've no idea of the cause for this 
increase in the malignancy of the attacks?" 

"no sir," said nick, after a barely perceptible hesitation. 

"you don't think the cause could be in any way connected with, let us 
say, the emotional disturbance attend your acquaintance with pat 
here?" 

"no, sir," said the youth flatly. 

"all right," said horker. "let that angle go for the present. are there 
any after effects from these spells?" 

"yes. there's always a splitting headache." he closed his eyes. "i have 
one of them now." 

"localized?" 

"sir?" 

"is the pain in any particular region? forehead, temples, eyes, or so 
forth?" 

"no. just a nasty headache." 

"but no other after-effects?" 

"i can't think of any others. except, perhaps, a feeling of exhaustion 
after i've gone through what i've just finished." he closed his eyes as 
if to shut out the recollection. 

"well," muse the doctor, "we'll forget the physical symptoms. what 
happen to your individuality, your own consciousness, while you're 
suffering an attack?" 

"nothing happen to it," said nick with a suppress shudder. "i 
watch and hear, but what _he_ do is beyond my control. it's 
terrifying--horrible!" he burst out suddenly. 

"doubtless," respond horker smoothly. "what about the other? do 
that one stand by while you're in the saddle?" 

"i don't know," mutter nick dully. "of course he does!" he add 
abruptly. "i can feel his presence at all times--even now. he's always 
lurking, wait to spring forth, as soon as i relax!" 

"humph!" ejaculate the doctor. "how do you manage to sleep?" 

"by wait for exhaustion," said nick wearily. "by wait until i can 
stay awake no longer." 

"and can you bring this other personality into dominance? can you 
change controls, so to speak, at will?" 

"why--yes," the youth answered, hesitate as if puzzled. "yes, i 
suppose i could." 

"let's see you, then." 

"but--" horror was in his voice. 

"no, dr. carl!" pat interject in fright. "i won't let him!" 

"i thought you declared yourself out of this," said horker with a 
shrewd glance at the girl. 

"then i'm back in it! i won't let him do what you want--anyway, not 
that!" 

"pat," said the doctor with an air of patience, "you want me to treat 
this affliction, don't you? isn't that what both of you want?" 

the girl murmur a scarcely audible assent. 

"very well, then," he proceeded. "do you expect me to treat the thing 
blindly--in the dark? do you think i can guess at the cause without 
observing the effect?" 

"no," said pat faintly. 

"so! now then," he turn to nick, "let's see this transformation." 

"must i?" ask the youth reluctantly. 

"if you want my help." 

"all right," he agree with another tremor. he sat passive staring 
at the doctor; a moment passed. horker heard pat's nervous breathing; 
other than that, the room was in silence. nichola devine closed his 
eyes, brush his hand across his forehead. a moment more and he open 
them to gaze perplexed at the doctor. 

"he won't!" he mutter in astonishment. "he won't do it!" 

"humph!" snap horker, ignore pat's murmur of relief. "finicky 
devil, isn't he? likes to pick company he can bully!" 

"i don't understand it!" nick's face was blank. "he's been torment 
me until just now!" he look at the doctor. "you don't think i'm lie 
about it, do you, dr. horker?" 

"not consciously," reply the other coolly. "if i thought you were 
responsible for a few of the indignity perpetrate on pat here, i'd 
waste no time in questions, young man. i'd be relieve myself of 
certain violent impulse instead." 

"i _couldn't_ harm pat!" 

"you gave a passable imitation of it, then! however, that's beside the 
point; as i say, i don't hold you responsible for aberration which i 
believe are beyond your control. the main thing is a diagnosis." 

"do you know what it is?" cut in pat eagerly. 

"not yet--at least, not for certain. there's only one real method 
available; these question will get us nowhere. we'll have to 
psychoanalyze you, young man." 

"i don't care what you do, if you can offer any hope!" he declared 
vehemently. "let's get it over!" 

"not as easy as all that!" rumble horker. "it take time; and besides, 
it can't be successful with the subject in a hectic mood such as 
yours." he glance at his watch. "moreover, it's after midnight." 

he turn to nichola devine. "we'll make it saturday evening," 
he said. "meanwhile, young man, you're not to see pat. not at 
all--understand? you can see her here when you come." 

"that's infinite more than i'd plan for myself," said the youth in 
a low voice. "i'd abandoned the hope of seeing her." 

he rose and move toward the door, and the other followed. at the 
entrance he paused; he lean down to plant a brief, tender kiss on 
the girl's lips, and move wordless out of the door. pat watch 
him enter his car, and follow the vehicle with her eyes until it 
disappeared. then she turn to horker. 

"do you really know anything about it?" she queried. "have you any 
theory at all?" 

"he's not lying," said the doctor thoughtfully. "i watch him closely; 
he believe he's telling the truth." 

"he is. i know what i saw!" 

"he hasn't the sign of praecox or depressive," muse the doctor. "it's 
puzzling; it's one of those functional aberrations, or a fixed delusion 
of some kind. we'll find out just what it is." 

"it's the devil," declared pat positively. "i don't care what sort of 
scientific tag you give it--that's what it is. you doctor can hide a 
lot of ignorance under a long name." 

horker paid no attention to her remarks. "we'll see what the 
psychoanalysis bring out," he said. "i shouldn't be surprise if the 
whole thing were the result of a defense mechanism erect by a timid 
child in an effort to evade responsibility. that's what it sound like." 

"it's a devil!" reiterate pat. 

"well," said the doctor, "if it is, it has one thing in common with 
every spook or devil i ever heard of." 

"what's that?" 

"it refuse to appear under any conditions where one has a chance to 
examine it. it's like one of these temperamental medium try to 
perform under a spot-light." 




23 

werewolf 


pat awoke in rather better spirits. somehow, the actual entrance of dr. 
horker into the case gave her a feeling of security, and her natural 
optimistic nature rode the pendulum back from despair to hope. even the 
painful black-and-blue mark on her arm, as she examine it ruefully, 
fail to shake her buoyant mood. 

her mood held most of the day; it was only at evening that a recurrence 
of doubt assail her. she sat in the dim living room wait the 
arrival of her mother's guests, and wonder whether, after all, the 
predicament was as easily solve as she had assumed. she watch 
the play of lights and shadow across the ceiling, pattern cast 
through the window by moving headlight in the street, and wonder 
anew whether her faith in dr. carl's abilities was justified. science! 
she had the faith of her generation in its omnipotence, but here in 
the dusk, the outworn superstition of childhood became appalling 
realities, and some of magda's stories, forgotten now for years, rose 
out of their grave and went squeak and maunder like sheet 
ghost in a ghastly parade across the universe of her mind. the 
meaningless taunt she habitual flung at dr. carl's science became 
sudden pregnant with truth; his patient, hard-learned science seem 
in fact no more than the frenzy of a witch-doctor dance in the 
heart of a rhodesian swamp. 

what was it worth--this array of medical facts--if it fail to 
cure? was medicine fall into the state of china science--a vast 
collection of good rule for which the reason were either unknown or 
long forgotten? she sighed; it was with a feeling of profound relief 
that she heard the voice of the brock outside; she play miserable 
bridge the whole evening, but it was less of an affliction than the 
solitude of her own thoughts. 

saturday morning, cloudy and threaten though it was, found the 
pendulum once more at the other end of the arc. she found herself, if 
not buoyant cheerful, at least no long prey to the inchoate doubt 
and fear of the preceding evening. she couldn't even recall their 
nature; they had been apart from the cool, day-time logic that preach 
a common-sense reliance on accept practices. they had been, she 
concluded, no more than childish nightmare induce by dark and the 
play of shadows. 

she dress and ate a late breakfast; her mother was already en route 
to the club for her bridge-luncheon. thereafter, she wander into the 
kitchen for the company of magda, whom she found with massive arms 
immerse in dish water. pat perch on her particular stool beside the 
kitchen table and watch her at her work. 

"magda," she said finally. 

"i'm listening, miss pat." 

"do you remember a story you told me a long time ago? oh, years 
and years ago, about a man in your town who could change into 
something--some fierce animal. a wolf, or something like that." 

"oh, him!" said magda, knitting her heavy brows. "you mean the 
werewolf." 

"that's it! the werewolf. i remember it now--how frightened i was after 
i went to bed. i wasn't more than eight years old, was i?" 

"i couldn't remember. it was years ago, though, for sure." 

"what was the story?" query pat. "do you remember that?" 

"why, it was the time the sheep were being missed," said the woman, 
punctuate her words with the clatter of dishes on the drainboard. 
"then there was a child gone, and another, and then tale of this great 
wolf about the country. i didn't see him; us little one stay under 
roof by dark after that." 

"that wasn't all of it," said pat. "you told me more than that." 

"well," continue magda, "there was my uncle, who was best hand with 
a rifle in the village. he and other went after the creature, and my 
uncle, he came back telling how he'd seen it plain against the sky, and 
how he'd fire at it. he couldn't miss, he was that close, but the wolf 
gave him a look and ran away." 

"and then what?" 

"then the priest came, and he said it wasn't a natural wolf. he melt 
up a silver coin and cast a bullet, and he gave it to my uncle, he 
being the best shot in the village. and the next night he went out once 
more." 

"did he get it?" ask pat. "i don't remember." 

"he did. he came upon it by the pasture, and he aim his gun. the 
creature look straight at him with its evil red eyes, and he shot it. 
when he came to it, there wasn't a wolf at all, but this man--his name 
i forget--with a hole in his head. and then the priest, he said he was 
a werewolf, and only a silver bullet could kill him. but my uncle, _he_ 
said those evil red eyes kept staring at him for many nights." 

"evil red eyes!" said pat suddenly. "magda," she ask in a faint 
voice, "could he change any time he want to?" 

"only by night, the priest said. by sunrise he had to be back." 

"only by night!" muse the girl. another idea was form in her active 
little mind, another conception, disturbing, impossible to phrase. "is 
that worse than being possessed by a devil, magda?" 

"sure it's worse! the priest, he could cast out the devil, but i never 
heard no cure for being a werewolf." 

pat said nothing further, but slid from her high perch to the floor and 
went sober out of the kitchen. the fear of last night had come to 
life again, and now the over-cast sky outside seem a fitting symbol 
to her mood. she stare thoughtful out of the living room windows, 
and the sudden splash of raindrop against the pane lent a final touch 
to the whole desolate ensemble. 

"i'm just a superstitious little idiot!" she told herself. "i laugh 
at mother because she always likes to play north and south, and here 
i'm letting myself worry over superstition that were discard before 
there was any such thing as a game call contract bridge." 

but her argument fail to carry conviction. the memory of the 
terrible eyes of that _other_ had click too apt to magda's phrase. 
she couldn't subdue the picture that haunt her, and she couldn't cast 
off the apprehensive of her mood. she recall gloomy that dr. 
horker was at the club--wouldn't be home before evening, else she'd 
have gladly avail herself of his solid, matter-of-fact company. 

she thought of nick's appointment with the doctor for that evening. 
suppose his psychoanalysis brought to light some such horror as these 
fear of hers--that would forever destroy any possibility of happiness 
for her and nick. even though the doctor refuse to recognize it, 
call it by some polysyllabic scientific name, the thing would be 
there to sever them. 

she wander restless into the hall. the morning mail, unexamined, 
lay in its brazen receptacle, she move over, fingering it idly. 
abrupt she pause in astonishment--a letter in familiar script 
had flash at her. she pull it out; it was! it was a letter from 
nichola devine! 

she tore it open nervously, wonder whether he had revert to his 
original refusal of dr. horker's aid, whether he was unable to come, 
whether _that_ had happened. but only a single unfold sheet slip 
from the envelope, inscribe with a few brief lines of poetry. 

"the grief that is too faint for tears, 
and scarcely breathe of pain, 
may linger on a hundred years 
ere it creep forth again. 
but i, who love you now too well 
to suffer your disdain, 
must try tonight that love to quell-- 
and try in vain!" 




24 

the dark other 


it was early in the evening, not yet eight o'clock, when pat saw the 
car of nichola devine draw up before the house. she had already been 
watch half an hour, sitting cross-legged in the deep window seat, 
like her jade buddha. that equivocal poem of his had disturbed her, 
lent an add strength to the mood and doubt already implant by 
magda's mystical tale, and it was with a feeling of trepidation that 
she watch him emerge weary from his vehicle and stare in indecision 
first at her window and then at the horker residence. the wane 
daylight was still sufficient to delineate his worn features; she 
could see them, pale, harried, but indubitable the mild features of her 
own nick. 

while he hesitated, she dart to the door and out upon the porch. he 
gave her a wan smile of greeting, advanced to the foot of the steps, 
and halt there. 

"the doctor's not home yet," she call to him. he stood motionless 
below her. 

"come up on the porch," she invited, as he made no move. she utter 
the words with a curious feeling of apprehension; for even as she ache 
for his presence, the uncertain state of affair was frightening. she 
thought fearful that what had happen before might happen again. 
still, there on the open porch, in practically full daylight, and for 
so brief a time--dr. carl would be coming very shortly, she reasoned. 

"i can't," said nick, staring wistful at her. "you know i can't." 

"why not?" 

"i promised. you remember--i promise dr. horker i'd not see you except 
in his presence." 

"so you did," said pat doubtfully. the promise offer escape from 
a distressing situation, she thought, and yet--somehow, seeing nick 
standing pathetic there, she couldn't imagine anything harmful 
emanate from him. there had been many and many evenings in his 
company that had pass delightfully, enjoyably, safely. she felt a 
wave of pity for him; after all, the affliction was his, most of the 
suffering was his. 

"we needn't take it so literally," she said almost reluctantly. "he'll 
be home very soon now." 

"i know," said nick soberly, "but it was a promise, and besides, i'm 
afraid." 

"never mind, honey," she said, after a momentary hesitation. "come up 
and sit here on the steps, then--here beside me. we can talk just as 
well as there on the settee." 

he climb the steps and seat himself, watch pat with longing 
eyes. he made no move to touch her, nor did she suggest a kiss. 

"i read your poem, honey," she said finally. "it worried me." 

"i'm sorry, pat. i couldn't sleep. i kept wandering around the house, 
and at last i wrote it and took it out and mail it. it was a vent, a 
relief from the things i'd been thinking." 

"what things, honey?" 

"a way, mostly," he answer gloomily, "of remove myself from your 
life. a permanent way." 

"nick!" 

"i didn't, as you see, pat. i was too cowardly, i suppose. or perhaps 
it was because of this forlorn hope of ours. there's always hope, pat; 
even the condemn man with his foot on the step to the gallows feel 
it." 

"nick dear!" she cried, her voice quaver in pity. "nick, you mustn't 
think of those things! it might weaken you--make it easy for _him_!" 

"it can't. if it frighten _him_, i'm glad." 

"honey," she said soothingly, "we'll give dr. carl a chance. promise me 
you'll let him try, won't you?" 

"of course i will. is there anything i'd refuse to promise you, pat? 
even," he add bitterly, "when reason tell me it's a futile promise." 

"don't say it!" she urge fiercely. "we've got to help him. we've got 
to believe--there he comes!" she finished with sudden relief. 

the doctor's car turn up the driveway beyond his residence. pat saw 
his face regarding them as he disappear behind the building. 

"come on, honey," she said. "let's get at the business." 

they move slow over to the doctor's door, wait there until his 
ponderous footstep sounded. a light flash in the hall, and his broad 
shadow fill the door for a moment before it opened. 

"come in," he rumble jovially. "fine evening we're spoiling, isn't it?" 

"it could be," said pat as they follow him into the library, "only 
it'll probably rain some more." 

"hah!" snort the doctor, frown at the mention of rain. "the course 
was soft. couldn't get any distance, and it add six stroke to my 
score. at least six!" 

pat chuckle commiseratingly. "you ought to lay out a course in 
greenland," she suggested. "they say anyone can drive a ball a quarter 
of a mile on smooth ice." 

"humph!" the doctor wave toward a great, low chair. "suppose you sit 
over there, young man, and we'll get about our business. and don't look 
so woe-begone about it." 

nick settled himself nervous in the designate chair; the doctor 
seat himself at a little distance to the side, and pat sat tense in 
her usual place beside the hearth. she wait in strained impatience 
for the black magic of psychoanalysis to commence. 

"now," said horker, "i want you to keep quiet, pat--if possible. and 
you, young man, are to relax, compose yourself, get yourself into as 
passive a state as possible. do you understand?" 

"yes, sir," the youth lean back in the great chair, close his eyes. 

"so! now, think back to your childhood, your earliest memories. let 
your thought wander at random, and speak whatever come to your mind." 

nick sat a moment in silence. "that's hard to do, sir," he said finally. 

"yes. it will take practice, week of it, perhaps. you'll have to 
acquire the knack of it, but to do that, we'll have to start." 

"yes, sir." he sat with closed eyes. "my mother," he murmured, "was 
kind. i remember her a little, just a little. she was very gentle, not 
apt to blame me. she could understand. made excuse to my father. he 
was hard, not cruel--strict. couldn't understand. blame me when i 
wasn't to blame. other did it. i wasn't mischievous, but got the blame. 
couldn't explain, he wouldn't believe me." he pause uncertainly. 

"go on," said horker quietly, while pat strained her ear to listen. 

"mrs. stevens," he continued. "governess after mother died. strict like 
father, got punish when i wasn't to blame. just as bad after father 
died. always blamed. couldn't explain, nobody believe me. other threw 
cat in window, i had to go to bed. put salt in bird seed, broke leg of 
chair to make it fall. punished--i couldn't explain." his voice drone 
into silence; he open his eyes. "that all," he said nervously. 

"good enough for the first time," said the doctor briskly. "wait a few 
weeks; we'll have your life's history out of you. it take practice." 

"is that all?" query pat in astonishment. 

"all for the first time. later we'll let him talk half an hour at a 
stretch, but it take practice, as i've mentioned. you run along home 
now," he said to nick. 

"but it's early!" object pat. 

"early or not," said the doctor, "i'm tired, and you two aren't to see 
each other except here. you remember that." 

nick rose from his seat in the depths of the great chair. "thank you, 
sir," he said. "i don't know why, but i feel easy in your presence. 
the--the struggle disappear while i'm here." 

"well," said horker with a smile, "i like patient with confidence in 
me. good night." 

at the door nick paused, turning wistful eyes on pat. "good night," he 
said, leaning to give her a light kiss. a rush of some emotion twist 
his features; he stare strange at the girl. "i'd better go," he said 
abruptly, and vanish through the door. 

"well?" said pat questioningly, turning to the doctor. "did you learn 
anything from that?" 

"not much," the other admitted, yawning. "however, the result bear out 
my theory." 

"how?" 

"did you notice how he harp on the undeserved punishment theme? he 
was punish for another's mischief?" 

"yes. what of that?" 

"well, picture him as a timid, sensitive child, rather afraid of being 
punished. afraid, say, of being lock up in a dark closet. now, when 
he inadvertent commit a mischief, as all children do, he try 
desperate to divert the blame from himself. but there's no one else 
to blame! so what do he do?" 

"what?" 

"he invent this _other_, the mischievous one, and blame him. and 
now the other has grown to the proportions of a delusion, haunting 
him, driving him to commit acts apart from his normal inclinations. 
understand? because i'm off to bed whether you do or not." 

"i understand all right," murmur pat uncertain as she move to the 
door. "but somehow, it doesn't sound reasonable." 

"it will," said the doctor. "good night." 

pat wander slow down the steps and through the break in the hedge, 
muse over doctor horker's expression of opinion. then, according 
to him, the devil was nothing more than an invention of nick's mind, 
the trick of a cowardly child to evade just punishment. she shook her 
head; it didn't sound like nick at all. for all his gentle and 
sensitivity, he wasn't the one to hide behind a fabrication. he wasn't 
a coward; she was certain of that. and she was as sure as she could 
ever be that he hated, feared, loathe this personality that afflict 
him; he _couldn't_ have create it. 

she sighed, mount the steps, and fumble for her key. the sound 
of a movement behind her brought a faint gasp of astonishment. she 
turn to see a figure materialize from the shadow of the porch. 
the light from the hall fell across its features, and she drew back as 
she recognize nichola devine--not the being she had just kiss good 
night, but in the guise of her tormentor, the red-eyed demon! 




25 

the demon lover 


pat drew back, leaning against the door, and her key tinkle on the 
concrete of the porch. she was startled, shocked, but not as completely 
terrify as she might have expected. after all, she thought rapidly, 
they were standing in full view of a public street, and dr. carl's 
residence was but a few feet distant. she could summon his help by 
screaming. 

"well!" she exclaimed, eye the figure inimically. "your appearances 
and disappearance are beginning to remind me of the cheshire cat." 

"except for the grin," said the other in his cold tones. 

"what do you want?" snap pat. 

"you know what i want." 

"you'll not get it," said the girl angrily. "you--you're doom to 
extinction, anyway! go away!" 

"suppose," said the other with a strange, cold, twist smile, "it were 
_he_ that's doom to extinction--what then?" 

"it isn't!" cry pat. "it isn't!" she repeated, while a quiver of 
uncertainty shook her. "he's the stronger," she said defiantly. 

"then where is he now?" 

"dr. carl will help us!" 

"doctor!" sneer the other. "he and his clever theory! am i an 
illusion?" he query sardonically, thrust his red-glinting eyes 
toward her. "am i the product of his puerile, vacillate nature? bah! 
i gave you the clue, and your doctor hasn't the intelligence to follow 
it!" 

"go away!" murmur pat faintly. the approach of his face had unnerve 
her, and she felt terror beginning to stir within her. "go away!" she 
said again. "why do you have to torment me? any one would serve your 
purpose--any woman!" 

"you have an aesthetic appeal, as i've told you before," reply the 
other in that toneless voice of his. "there is a pleasure in the 
deface of black hair and pale skin, and your body is seductive, 
most seductive. another might afford me less enjoyment, and besides, 
you hate me. don't you hate me?" he peer evil at her. 

"oh, god--yes!" the girl was shuddering. 

"say it, then! say you hate me!" 

"i hate you!" the girl cry vehemently. "will you go away now?" 

"with you!" 

"i'll scream if you come any closer. you don't dare touch me; i'll call 
dr. horker." 

"you'll only damage _him_--your lover." 

"then i'll do it! he'll understand." 

"yes," said the other reflectively. "he's fool enough to forgive you. 
he'll forgive you anything--the weakling!" 

"go away! get away from here!" 

the other stare at her out of blood-shot eyes. "very well," he said in 
his flat tones. "this time the victory is yours." 

he back slow toward the steps. pat watch him as he moved, feeling 
a surge of profound relief. as his shadow shifted, her key gleam 
silver at her feet, and she stoop to retrieve it. 

there was a rush of motion as her eyes left the form of her antagonist. 
a hand was clamp violent over her mouth, an arm pass with 
steel-like rigidity about her body. nichola devine was drag her 
toward the steps; she was half-way down before she recover her wit 
enough to struggle. 

she writhe and twist in his grasp. she drove her elbow into his 
body with all her power, and kick with the strength of desperation 
at his legs. she bit into the palm across her mouth--and suddenly, 
with a subdued grunt of pain, he release her so abrupt that her own 
struggle sent her spin blind into the bush of the hedge. 

she turn gasping, unable for the moment to summon sufficient breath 
to scream. the other stood facing her with his eyes gleam terribly 
into her own; then they range slow from her diminutive feet to the 
rumple ebony of her hair that she was brush back with her hand 
from her pallid, frightened face. 

"obstinate," he observed, rubbing his injure palm. 

"obstinate and unbroken--but worth the trouble. well worth it!" he 
reach out a swift hand, seize her wrist as she back against the 
bushes. 

pat twist around, gaze frantic at doctor horker's house, where 
a light had only now flash on in the upper windows. her breath flow 
back into her lung with a strengthen rush. 

"dr. carl!" she screamed. "dr. carl! help me!" 

the other spun her violent about. she had a momentary glimpse of 
a horrible evil countenance, then he drew back his arm and shot a 
clench fist to her chin. 

the world reel into a blaze of spin lights that fade quick to 
darkness. she felt her knee buckle beneath her, and realize that 
she was crumple forward toward the figure before her. then for a 
moment she was aware of nothing. 

she didn't quite lose consciousness, or at least for no more than a 
moment. she was sudden aware that she was gaze down at a moving 
pavement, at her own arms dangle helpless toward it. she perceive 
that she was lie limp across nichola devine's shoulder with his 
arms clench about her knees. and then, still unable to make the 
slightest resistance, she was bundle roughly into the seat of his 
coupe; he was beside her, and the car was purr into motion. 

she summon what remain of her strength. she drew herself erect, 
fumble at the handle of the door with a frantic idea of casting 
herself out of the car to the street. the creature beside her jerk 
her violent back; as she reel into the seat, he struck her again 
with the side of his fist. it was a random blow, deliver with 
scarcely a glance at her; it caught her on the forehead, snap her 
head with an audible thump against the wall of the vehicle. she sway 
for a moment with close eyes, then collapse limp against him, this 
time in complete unconsciousness. 

that lapse too must have been brief. she open daze eyes on a vista 
of moving street lights; they were still in the car, passing now along 
some unrecognized thoroughfare line with dark old homes. she lay 
for some moments uncomprehending; she was completely unaware of her 
situation. 

it dawn on her slowly. she moaned, struggle away from the shoulder 
against which she had been leaning, and huddle miserably in the far 
corner of the seat. nichola devine gave her a single glance with his 
unpleasant eyes, and turn them again on the street. 

the girl was helpless, unable to put forth the strength even for 
another attempt to open the door. she was still only half aware of her 
position, and realize only that something appalling was occur to 
her. she lay in passive misery against the cushion of the seat as the 
other turn sudden up a dark driveway and into the open door of a 
small garage. he snap off the engine, extinguish the headlights, 
and left them in a horrible, smothering, silent darkness. 

she heard him open the door on his side; after an apparently 
interminable interval, she heard the creak of the hinge on her own 
side. she huddle terrified, voiceless, and immobile. 

he reach in, fumble against her in the darkness. he found her arm, 
and drag her from the car. again, as on that other occasion, she 
found herself reel helpless behind him through the dark as he 
tug at her wrist. he pause at a door in the building adjacent to 
the garage, searching in his pocket with his free hand. 

"i won't go in there!" she mutter dazedly. the other made no reply, 
but insert a key in the lock, turn it, and swung open the door. 

he step through it, drag her after him. with a sudden access of 
desperate strength, she caught the frame of the door, jerk violent 
on her prison wrist, and was unexpected free. she reel away, 
turn toward the street, and took a few falter steps down the 
driveway. 

almost instantly her tormentor was upon her, and his hand closed again 
on her arm. pat had no further strength; she sank to the pavement and 
crouch there, disregard the insistent tug on her arm. 

"come on," he growled. "you only delay the inevitable. must i drag you?" 

she made no reply. he tug violent at her wrist, drag her a few 
inch along the pavement. then he stoop over her, raise her in his 
arms, and bore her toward the dark opening of the door. he crowded her 
roughly through it, disregard the painful bump of her shoulder 
and knees. she heard the slam of the door as he kick it closed, 
and she realize that they were mount a flight of stairs, moving 
somewhere into the oppressive threaten darkness. 

then they were moving along a level floor, and her arm was bruise 
against another door. there was a moment of stillness, and then she was 
released, drop indifferent to the surface of a bed or couch. a 
moment later a light flash on. 

the girl was conscious at first only of the gaze of the red eyes. they 
held her own in a fascinating, unbreakable, trance-like spell. then, in 
a wave of dizziness, she closed her own eyes. 

"where are we?" she murmured. "in hell?" 

"you should call it heaven," came the sardonic voice. "it's the home of 
your sweetheart. his home--and mine!" 




26 

the depths 


"heaven and hell always were the same place," said nichola devine, his 
red eyes glaring down at the girl. "we'll demonstrate the fact." 

pat shift wearily, and sat erect, passing her hand dazed across her 
face. she brush the tangle strand of black hair from before her 
eyes, and stare dul at the room in which she found herself. 

it had some of the aspect of a study, and some of a laboratory, or 
perhaps a doctor's office. there was a case of dusty books on the wall 
opposite, and another crystal-fronted cabinet contain glassware, 
bottles, little round box suggestive of drug or pharmaceuticals. 
there was a paper-littered table too; she gave a convulsive shudder at 
the sight of a bald, varnish death's head, its lower jar articulated, 
that repose on a pile of papers and grin at her. 

"where--" she began faintly. 

"this was the room of your sweetheart's father," said the other. "his 
and my mutual father. he was an experimenter, a researcher, and so, in 
another sense, am i!" he leer evil at her. "he use this chamber 
to further his experiments, and i for mine--the carry on of a noble 
family tradition!" 

the girl scarcely heard his words; the expressionless tone carry no 
meaning to the chaos which was her mind. she felt only an inchoate 
horror and a vague but all-encompassing fear, and her head was ache 
from the blow he had dealt her. 

"what do you want?" she ask dully. 

"why, there is an unfinished experiment. you must remember our 
interrupt proceedings of a week ago! have you already forgotten the 
early steps of our experiment in evil?" 

pat cringe at the cold, sardonic tone of the other. "let me go," she 
whimpered. "please!" she appealed. "let me go!" 

"in due time," he responded. "you lack gratitude," he continued. "last 
time, out of the kindness that is my soul, i permit you to dull your 
senses with alcohol, but you failed, apparently, to appreciate my 
indulgence. but this time"--his eyes lit up queerly--"this time you 
approach the consummation of our experiment with undimm mind!" 

he approach her. she drew her knee up, huddle back on the couch, 
and summon the final vestige of her strength. 

"i'll kick you!" she mutter desperately. "keep back from me!" 

he pause just beyond her reach. "i had hoped," he said ironically, "if 
not for your cooperation, at least for no further active resistance. 
it's quite useless; i told you days ago that this time would come." 

he advanced cautiously; pat thrust out her foot, driving it with all 
her power. instantly he drew back, catching her ankle in his hand. he 
jerk her leg sharp upwards, and she was precipitate violent to 
the couch. again he advanced. 

the girl writhe away from him. she slip from the foot of the couch 
and dart in a circle around him, turning in an attempt to gain the 
room's single exit--the door by which they had entered. he move 
quick to intercept her; he closed the door as she back despairing 
away, retreat to the far end of the room. once more he face her, 
his malicious eyes gleaming, and move deliberate toward her. 

she drew back until the table halt her; she pressed herself against 
it as if to force her way still further. the other move at unaltered 
pace. sudden her hand pressed over some smooth, round, hard object; 
she grasp it and flung the grin skull at the more terrible 
face that approach her. he dodged; there was a crash of glass as 
the gruesome missile shatter the pane of the cabinet of drugs. and 
inexorably, nichola devine approach once more. 

she move along the edge of the table, squeeze herself between it and 
the wall. behind her was one of the room's two windows, curtainless, 
with drawn shades. she found the cord, jerk it, and let the blind 
coil upward with an abrupt snap. 

"i'll throw myself through the window!" she announce with a sort of 
desperate calm. "don't dare move a step closer!" 

the demon pause once more in his deliberate advance. "you will, of 
course," he said as if considering. "given the opportunity. your body 
torn and broken, spotted with blood--that might be a pleasure second 
only to that i plan." 

"you'll suffer for it!" said the girl hysterically. "i'll be glad to do 
it, knowing you'll suffer!" 

"not i--your sweetheart." 

"i don't care! i can't stand it!" 

the other smile his demoniac smile, and resume his advance. she 
watch him in terror that had now reach the ultimate degree; her 
mind could bear no more. she turn suddenly, raise her arm, and beat 
her fist against the pane of the window. 

with the surprising resistance glass sometimes displays, it shook at 
her blow but did not shatter. she drew back for a second attempt, 
and her upraise arm was caught in a rigid grip, and she was drag 
backward to the center of the room, thrown heavy to the floor. she 
sat dazed look up at the form standing over her. 

"must i render you helpless again?" query the flat voice of the 
other. "are you not yet broken, convinced of the useless of this 
struggle?" 

she made no answer, staring dul at his immobile features. 

"are you go to fight me further?" as she was still silent, he 
repeated, "are you?" 

she shook her head vaguely. "no," she muttered. she had reach the 
point of utter indifference; nothing at all was important enough now to 
struggle for. 

"stand up!" ordered the being above her. 

she pull herself weary to her feet, leaning against the wall. she 
closed her eyes for a moment, then open them dul as the other moved. 

"what--are you--are you go to do?" she murmured. 

"first," said the demon coldly, "i shall disrobe you somewhat more 
completely than on our other occasion. thereafter we will proceed to 
the consummation of our experiment." 

she watch him indifferently, uncomprehendingly, as he crooked a thin 
finger in the neck of her frock. she felt the pressure as he pulled, 
heard the rip of the fabric, and the pop of buttons, but she was 
conscious of no particular sensation as the garment cascade into a 
black and red pool at her feet. she stood passive as he hooked his 
finger in the strap of her vest, and that too join the little mound 
of cloth. she shiver slightly as she stood bare to the waist, but 
gave no other sign. 

again the thin hand move toward her; from somewhere in her torment 
spirit a final shred of resistance arose, and she pushed the quest 
member feeble to one side. she heard a low, sardonic laugh from her 
oppressor. 

"look at me!" he commanded. 

she raise her eyes wearily; she drew her arm about her in a forlorn 
gesture of concealment. her eyes met the strange orb of the other, and 
a faint thrill of horror stirred; other than this, she felt nothing. 
then his eyes were approach her; she was conscious of the illusion 
that they were expanding, filling all the space in front of her. their 
weird glow fill the world, dominate everything. 

"will you yield?" he queried. 

the eyes commanded. "yes," she said dully. 

she felt his hand icy cold on her bare shoulders. they traveled like a 
shudder about her body, and sudden she was pressed close to him. 

"are you mine?" he demanded. for the first time there was a tinge of 
expression in the toneless voice, a trace of eagerness. she made no 
answer; her eyes, held by his, stare like the eyes of a person in a 
trance, unwinking, fascinated. 

"are you mine?" he repeated, his breath hiss on her cheek. 

"yes." she heard her own voice in automatic reply to his question. 

"mine--for the delight of evil?" 

"yours!" she murmured. the eyes had blot out everything. 

"and do you hate me?" 

"no." 

the arms about her tighten into crush bands. the pressure 
stop her breath; her very bone seem to give under their fierce 
compression. 

"do you hate me?" he muttered. 

"yes!" she gasped. "yes! i hate you!" 

"ah!" he twist his hand in her black hair, wrench it roughly back. 
"are you ready now for the consummation? to look upon the face of evil?" 

she made no reply. her eyes, as glassy as those of a sleep-walker, 
stare into his. 

"are you ready?" 

"yes," she said. 

he pressed his mouth to hers. the fierce of the kiss bruise her 
lips, the pull of his hand in her hair was a searing pain, the pressure 
of his arm about her body was a suffocation. yet--somehow--there was 
again the dawn of that unholy pleasure--the same degrade delight 
that had risen in her on that other occasion, in the room of the 
red-checked table cloth. through some hellish alchemy, the leaden pain 
was transmute itself into the garish gold of a horrible, abnormal 
pleasure. she found her crush lip attempt a feeble, painful 
response. 

at her movement, she felt herself swung abrupt from her feet. with 
his lip still crush hers, he raise her in his arms; she felt 
herself borne across the room. he paused; there was a sudden release, 
and she crash to the hard surface of the couch, whose rough covering 
scratch the bare flesh of her back. nichola devine bent over her; 
she saw his hand stretch toward her single remain garment. and 
again, from somewhere in her harass soul, a spark of resistance 
flashed. 

"nick!" she moaned. "oh, nick! help me!" 

"call him!" said the other, a sneer on his face. "call him! he hears; 
it add to his torment!" 

she cover her eyes with her hands. she felt his hand slip cold 
between her skin and the elastic about her waist. 

"nick!" she moan again. "nick! oh, my god! nick!" 




27 

two in hell 


the cold hand against pat was still; she felt it rigid and stiff on 
her flesh. she lay passive with closed eyes; have voice her final 
appeal, she was through. the words torn from her misery represent 
the final iota of spirit remain to her; and her bruise body and 
batter mind had nothing further to give. 

the hand quiver and withdrew. for a moment more she lay motionless 
with her arms clutch about her, then she open her eyes, gaze 
dully, hopeless at the demon standing over her. he was watch her 
with a curious abstracted frown; as she stirred, the scowl intensified, 
and he drew back a step. 

his face contort sudden in a spasm of some unguessable emotion. 
his fist clenched; a low unintelligible mutter broke from his lips. 
"strange!" she heard him say, and after a moment, "i'm still master 
here!" 

he _was_ master; in a moment the emotion vanished, and he was again 
standing over her, his face the same impassive demoniac mask. she 
watch him in a dull stupor of despair that was too deep for even a 
whimper of pain as he wrench at the elastic about her waist, and it 
cut into her flesh and parted. he tore the garment away, and the red 
eyes bore down with a wild elation in their depths. 

"mine!" the being muttered, a new hoarse in his voice. "are you 
mine?" 

pat made no answer; his voice croak in more insistent tones. "are you 
mine?" 

she could not reply. she felt his finger bite into the flesh of her 
shoulder. she was shaken roughly, violently, and the question came 
again, fiercely. the eyes flame in command, and she felt through 
her languor and weakness, the stirring of that strange and unholy 
fascination that he held over her. 

"answer!" he croaked. "are you mine?" 

the torture of his searing grip on her shoulder wrung an answer from 
her. 

"yes," she murmur faintly. "yours." 

she closed her eyes again in helpless resignation. she felt the 
hand withdrawn, and she lay passive, waiting, on the verge of 
unconsciousness, numb, spirit-broken, and beaten. 

nothing happened. after a long interval she open her eyes, and saw 
the other standing again with clench fist and contort countenance. 
his features were writhe in the intensity of his struggle; a strange 
low snarl came from his lips. he back away from her, step by step; he 
lean against the book-shelves, and bead of perspiration form on 
his scowl face. 

he was no long master! she saw the change; imperceptible the evil 
vanish from his features, and sudden they were no long his, 
but the weary, horror-stricken visage of her nick! the red eyes were 
no long satanic, but only the blood-shot, troubled, gentle eyes of 
her sweetheart, and the lip had lost their grimness, and gasp and 
quiver and trembled. he reel against the wall, stagger to the 
chair at the table, and sank weak into it. 

pat was far too exhausted, far too dazed, to feel anything but the 
faintest sensation of relief. she realize only dim that tear were 
well from her eyes, and that sharp sob were shake her. she was 
for the moment unable to stir, and it was not long until the being at 
the table turn stricken eyes on her that she moved. then she drew 
her knee up before her, as if to hide her body behind their slim, 
chiffon-clad grace. 

nick rose from the table, approach her with weary, hesitant tread. 
he seize a cover of some sort that was fold over the foot of the 
couch, shook it out and cast it over her. she clutch it about her 
body, sat erect and lean back against the wall in utter exhaustion. 
many minutes pass with no word from either of the occupant of the 
unholy chamber. it was nick who broke the long silence. 

"pat," he murmur in low tones. "pat--dear. are you--all right?" 

she stare at him dazed without answer. 

"honey!" he said. "honey! tell me you're all right!" 

"all right?" she repeated uncomprehendingly. "yes. i guess i'm all 
right." 

"then go, pat! get away from here before he--before anything happens! 
put your clothes on and hurry away!" 

"i can't!" she said, faintly. "i--can't!" 

"you must, honey!" 

"i'm just--not able to. i will soon, nick--honest. when i--when i get 
my breath back." 

"pat!" there was anguish in the cry. "oh, god--pat! we mustn't ever be 
together again--not ever!" 

"no," she said. a bit of sanity was return to her; comprehension of 
her position sent a shudder through her. "no, we mustn't." 

"i couldn't bear another night like this--watching! i'd go mad!" 

"oh!" she choked, tear starting. "if you hadn't come back, nick!" 

"i conquer him," he said. "i don't think i could do it again. it was 
your call that gave me the strength, pat." he shook his head as if 
bewildered. "he thought it was being in love with you that weaken me, 
but in the end it was that which gave me the strength to subdue him." 

"i'm scared!" said the girl suddenly. "oh, nick! i'm frightened!" 

"you'd better go. you'd better dress and leave at once, honey. here." 
he gather her clothes from the floor, deposit them beside her on 
the couch. "there are pin in the tray on the table, pat. fix yourself 
up as well as you can, dear--and hurry out of here!" 

he turn toward the door as if to leave, and a shock of terror shook 
her. 

"nick!" she cried. "don't go away! i'm more afraid when i can't see 
you--afraid that _he_--" she broke off sobbing. 

"all right, honey. i'll turn my back." 

she slip out from under the blanket, found the pins, and repair 
her ruin costume. the frock was torn, crush and bedraggled; she 
pin it together at the throat, though her tremble finger made the 
task difficult. she pull it on and took a tentative step toward the 
door. 

"nick!" she call as a wave of dizzy sent her sway against the 
wall. 

"what's the matter, honey?" he turn anxious at her cry. 

"i'm dizzy," she moaned. "my head aches, and--i'm scared!" 

"pat, darling! you can't go out alone like this--and," he add 
miserably, "i can't take you!" he slip his arm around her tenderly, 
support her to the couch. "honey, what'll we do?" 

"i'll be--all right," she murmured. "i'll go in a moment." the 
dizzy was leave her; strength was returning. 

"you must!" he said dolefully. "what a parting, pat! never to see you 
again, and then have this to remember as farewell!" 

"i know, nick. you see, i love you too." she turn her dark, trouble 
eyes on him. "honey, kiss me good-bye! we'll have that to remember, 
anyway!" tear were again on her cheeks. 

"do i dare?" he ask despondently. "after the things these lip of 
mine have said, and what these arms have done to you?" 

"but you didn't, nick! could i blame you for--that _other_?" 

"god! you're kind, pat! honey, if ever i win out in this battle, if 
ever i know i'm the final victor, i'll--no," he said his tone drop 
abruptly. "i'll never come back to you, pat. it's far too dangerous, 
and--can i ever be certain? can i?" 

"i don't know, nick. can you?" 

"i can't be, pat! i'll never be sure that _he_ isn't just dormant, as 
he was before, wait for my weakness to betray me! i'll never be 
certain, honey! it _has_ to be good-bye!" 

"then kiss me!" 

she clung to him; the room that had been so recently a chamber of 
horrors was transformed. as she held him, as her lip were pressed to 
his, she thought sudden of the words of the demon, that heaven and 
hell were always the same place. they had taken on a new meaning, those 
words; she drew away from nick and turn her tear-bright eyes tender 
on his. 

"honey," she murmured, "i don't want you to leave me. i don't want you 
to go!" 

"nor do i want to, pat! but i must." 

"you mustn't! you're to stay, and we'll fight it out together--be 
married, or any way that permit us to fight it through together." 

"pat! do you think i'd consent to that?" 

"nick," she said. "nick darling--it's worth it to me! i'm realize it 
now; i thought it wasn't--but it is! i can't lose you, nick--anything, 
even that _other_, is better than lose you." 

"you're sweet, pat! you know i'd trade my very soul for that, but--no. 
i can't do it! and don't honey, torture me by suggest it again." 

"but i will, nick!" she was speak softly, earnestly. "you're worth 
anything to me! if _he_ should kill me, you'd still be worth it!" she 
gaze tender at him. "i'd want to die anyway without you!" 

"no more than i without you," he mutter brokenly. "but i won't do it, 
pat! i won't do that to you!" 

"i love you, nick!" she said in a low voice. "i don't want to live 
without you. do you understand me, dear? i don't want to live without 
you!" 

he stare at her somberly. "i've thought of that too," he said. 
"pat--if i only believe that we'd be together after, together 
_anywhere_, i'd say yes. if only i believe there _were_ an afterwards!" 

"doesn't he prove that by his very existence?" 

"your doctor would deny that." 

"doctor carl never saw _him_, nick. and anyway, even oblivion together 
would be better than being separated, and far better than this!" 

he gaze at her silently. she spoke again. "that doesn't frighten me, 
nick. it's only lose you that frighten me, especially the fear of 
lose you to _him_." 

he continue his silent gaze. sudden he drew her close to him, held 
her in a tight, tender embrace. 




28 

lunar omen 


after a considerable interval, during which nick held the girl tight 
and silent in his arms, he release her, sat with his head rest 
on his cup palm in an attitude of deep study. pat, beside him, 
fell mechanical to repinn the throat of her frock, which had 
open during the moments of the embrace. he rose to his feet, pace 
nervous before her. 

"it isn't a thing to do on the impulse of a moment, pat," he muttered, 
pause at her side. "you must see that." 

"it isn't the impulse of a moment." 

"but one doesn't abandon everything, the whole world, so easily, 
honey. one doesn't cast away a last hope, however forlorn a hope it may 
be!" 

"is there a hope, nick?" she ask gently. "is there a chance left to 
us?" 

"i don't know!" his voice held an increase tenseness. "before 
god--i--don't know!" 

"if there's a chance, the very slightest shadow of the specter of a 
chance, we'll take it, won't we? because the other way is always open 
to us, nick." 

"yes. it's always open." 

"but we won't take that chance," she continue defiantly, "if it 
involve my lose you, honey. i meant what i said, nick: i don't want 
to live without you!" 

"what chance have we?" he query somberly. "those are our 
alternatives--life apart, death together." 

"then you know my choice!" she cry desperately. "nick, honey--don't 
let's draw it out in futile talking! i can't stand it!" 

he move his hand in a gesture of bewilder and frustration, and 
turn away, stride nervous toward the window whose blind she had 
raised. he lean his hand on the table, peer dejected out upon 
the street below. 

"what time," he ask irrelevant in a queer voice, "did the doctor 
say the moon rose? do you remember?" 

"no," she said tensely. "oh, honey! please--don't stand there with your 
back to me now, when i'm half crazy!" 

"i'm thinking," he responded. "it rise a little early each night--or 
is it later? no matter; come here, pat." 

she rose weary and join him; he slip his arm about her, and drew 
her against him. 

"look there," he said, indicate the night-dark vista beyond the 
window. 

she look out upon a dim-lit street or court, at the blind end of 
which the house was apparently situated. far off at the open end, 
across a distant highway where even at this hour pass a constant 
stream of traffic, flash a narrow strip of lake; and above it, rising 
gigantic from the coruscate moon-path, lift the satellite. she 
watch the remote flicker of the wave as they toss back the 
broken bit of the light strewn along the path. then she turn puzzle 
eyes on her companion. 

"that's heaven," he said point a finger at the great flowing lunar 
disk. "there's a world that never caught the planet-cancer call life, 
or if it ever suffered, it's cured. it's clean--burned clean by the 
sun and scour clean by the airless zero of space. a dead world, and 
therefore not an unhappy one." 

the girl stare at him without comprehension. she murmured, "i don't 
understand, nick." 

"don't you, pat?" he pointed again at the moon. "that's heaven, the 
dead world, and this is hell, the living one. heaven and hell swinging 
forever about their common center!" he gesture toward the sparkle 
moon-path on the water. "look, pat! the dead world strew flower on 
the grave of the living one!" 

some of his bitter ecstasy caught the girl; she felt his somber mood of 
exaltation. 

"i love you, nick!" she whispered, pressing close to him. 

"what difference do it make--our actions?" he queried. "there's the 
omen, that lifeless globe in the sky. where we go, all humanity now 
living will follow before a century, and in a million years, the human 
race as well! what if we go a year or a million years before the rest? 
will it make any difference in the end?" he look down at her. "all 
we've been value here is hope. to the devil with hope! let's have 
peace instead!" 

"i'm not afraid, nick." 

"nor i. and if we go, _he_ goes, and he's mortally afraid of death!" 

"can he--prevent you?" 

"not now! i'm the strong now. for this time, i'm master." 

he turn again to stare at the glowing satellite as it rose 
imperceptible from the horizon. "there's nothing to regret," he 
murmured, "except one thing--the loss of beauty. beauty like that--and 
like you, pat. that's bitter hard to foreswear!" he lean forward 
toward the remote disk of the moon; he spoke as if address it, in 
tone so low that the girl, pressed close to him, had to quiet the 
sound of her own breath to listen. he said: 

"long mile above cloud-bank and blast, 
and many mile above the sea, 
i watch you rise majestic 
feeling your chilly light at last-- 
cold beauty in the way you cast 
split silver fragment on the waves, 
as if this planet's life were past, 
and all men peaceful in their graves." 

pat was silent for a moment as he paused, then she murmur a low 
phrase. "oh, i love you, nick!" she said. 

"and i you, dear," he responded. "have we decided anything? are 
we--going through with it?" 

"i've not faltered," she said soberly. "i meant it, nick. without you, 
life would be as empty as that airless void you speak of. i'm not 
afraid. what's there to be afraid of?" 

"only the transition, pat. that and the unknown--but no situation could 
possibly be more terrible than our present one. it _couldn't_ be! 
oblivion, annihilation--they're preferable, aren't they?" 

"oh, yes! nothing i can imagine could be other than a change for the 
better." 

"then let's face it!" his voice took on a note of determination. "i've 
thought to face it a dozen times before this, and each time i've 
hesitated. the hesitation of a coward, pat." 

"you're no coward, dear. it was that illusion of hope; that always 
weaken one. no one's strong who hasn't given up hope." 

"then," he repeated, "let's face it!" 

"how, nick?" 

"my father has left us the means. there in the cabinet are a hundred 
deaths--swift ones, lingering ones, painful, and easy! i don't know one 
from the other; our choice must be blind." he strode over to the case, 
send sliver of glass from the shatter front glisten along 
the floor. "i'd choose an easy one, dear, if i knew, for your sake. 
euthanasia!" 

he stare hesitant at the file of mysterious drug with their 
incomprehensible labels. 

sudden the scene appear humorous to the girl, queer funny, in 
some unnatural horrible fashion. her nerves, overstraine for hours, 
were on the verge of breaking; without realization of it, she had come 
to the border of hysteria. 

"shopping for death!" she choked, try to suppress the wild laughter 
that beat in her throat. "which one's most suitable? which one's most 
becoming? which one"--an hysterical laugh sob shook her--"will wear 
the longest?" 

he turned, gaze at her with an illogical concern in his face. 

"what's the difference?" she cry wildly. "i don't care--painful or 
pleasant, it all end in the same grave! close your eyes and choose!" 

sudden he was holding her in his arms again, and she was sobbing, 
clinging to him frantically. she was miserably unstrung; her body 
shook under the impact of her gasp breath. then gradually, she 
quieted, and was silent against him. 

"we've been mad!" he murmured. "it's been an insane idea--for me to 
inflict this on you, pat. do you think i could consider the destruction 
of your beauty, dear? i've been lie to myself, stifle my judgment 
with poetic imagery, when all the while it was just that i'm afraid to 
face the thing alone!" 

"no," she murmured, bury her face against his shoulder. "i'm the 
coward, nick. i'm the one that's frightened, and i'm the one that broke 
down! it's just been--too much, this evening; i'm all right now." 

"but we'll not go through with _this_, pat!" 

"but we will! it's better than life without you, dear. we've argue and 
argued, and at last forgotten the one truth, the one thing i'll never 
retract: i can't face living without you, nick! i can't!" 

he brush his hand weary before his eyes. "back at the start 
point," he muttered. "all right, honey. so be it!" 

he strode again to the cabinet. "corrosive sublimate," he murmured. 
"cyanide of potassium. they're both deadly, but i think the second is 
rapid, and therefore less painful. cyanide let it be!" 

he extract two small beaker from the glassware on the shelf. he 
fill them with water from a carafe on the table, and, while the girl 
watch him with fascinate eyes, he deliberate tilt a spoonful or 
so of white crystal into each of them. the mixture swirl a moment, 
then settled clear and colorless, and the crystal began to shrink as 
they pass swift into solution. 

"there it is," he announce grimly. "there's peace, oblivion, 
forgetfulness, and annihilate for you, for me, and--for _him_! beyond 
all doubt, the logical course for us, isn't it? do we take it?" 

"please," she said faintly. "kiss me first, honey. isn't that the 
proper course for lovers in this situation?" she felt a faint touch of 
astonishment at her own irony; the circumstances had cease to have 
any reality to her, and had become merely a dramatic sequence like the 
happening in a play. 

he gather her again into his arms and pressed his lip to hers. it 
was a long, tender, wistful kiss; when at last it ended, pat found her 
eyes again fill with tears, but not this time the tear of hysteria. 

"nick!" she murmured. "nick, darling!" 

he gave her a deep, somber, but very tender smile, and reach for one 
of the deadly beakers, "to another meeting!" he said as his finger 
closed on it. 

suddenly, amazingly, the strident ring of a doorbell sounded, the more 
surprising since they had all but forgotten the existence of a world 
about them. interruption! it meant only the go through once more of 
all that they had just passed. 

"drink it!" exclaim pat impulsively, seize the remain beaker. 




29 

scopolamine for satan 


the glass was struck from pat's hand, and the water-clear contents 
stream into pools and darken blot over the table and its litter 
of papers. she stare unseeing at the mess, without realize 
that it was nick who had dashed the draught from her very lips. she 
felt neither anger nor relief, but only a numbness, and a sense of 
anti-climax. somewhere below the bell was ring again, and a door was 
resounding to violent blows, but she only continue her bewildered, 
questioning gaze. 

"i can't let you, pat!" he muttered, answer her unspoken query. 

"but nick--why?" 

"there's somebody at the door, isn't there? mustn't we find out who?" 

"what difference can it make?" she ask wearily. 

"i don't know. i want to find out." 

"it's that illusion of hope again," she murmured. "that's all it is, 
nick--and it means now that it's all to do over again! the whole thing, 
from the beginning--and we were so near--the end!" 

"i know," he said miserably. "i know all that, but--" he pause as the 
insistent racket below was redoubled. "i'm go to answer that bell," 
he ended. 

he move away from her, vanish through the room's single door. she 
watch his disappearance without moving, but no soon had he pass 
from sight than a curious feeling of fear oppress her. she cast off 
the numb and languor, and dart after him into the dark of the 
hall. 

"nick!" she called. somewhere ahead a light flash on; she saw the 
well of a stair-case, and heard his footstep descending. she follow 
in frantic haste, gain the top step just as the pounding below 
ceased. she heard the click of the door, and pause sudden at the 
sound of a familiar voice. 

"where's pat?" the words drift up in low, rumbling, ominous tones. 

"dr. carl!" she shrieked. she ran swift down the stairs to nick's 
side, where he stood facing the great figure of the doctor. "dr. carl! 
how'd you find me?" 

the newcomer gave her a long, narrow-eyed, speculative survey. "i 
spent nearly the whole night do it," he growl at last. "it took 
me hour to locate mueller and get this address from him." he step 
forward, taking the girl's arm. "come on!" he said gruffly, without a 
glance at nick standing silent beside her. "i'm taking you home!" 

she held back. "but why?" 

"why? because i don't like the company you keep. is that reason enough?" 

she still resist his insistent tug. "nick hasn't done anything," she 
said defiantly, with a side glance at the youth's flushed, unhappy 
features. 

"he hasn't? look at yourself, girl! look at your clothes, and your 
forehead! what's more, i saw enough from my window; i saw him bundle 
you into that car!" his eyes were flash angrily, and his grip on her 
arm tightened, while his free hand clench into an enormous fist. 

"that wasn't nick!" 

"no. it was your devil, i suppose!" said horker sarcastically. "anyway, 
pat, you're coming with me before i do violence to what remains of your 
devil!" 

nick spoke for the first time since the doctor's entrance. "please do, 
pat," he said softly. "please go with him." 

"i won't!" she snapped. the sudden shift of situation during the long 
hour of that terrible evening were irritate her. she had alternate 
so rapid between horror and hope and despair that her fray nerves 
had seize now at the same reality of anger. 

her mind, so long overstrained, was now deliberate forget her 
swing from the pit of terror to the verge of death. "you come up like a 
hero to the rescue!" she taunt the doctor. "hairbreadth horker!" 

"you little fool!" growl the doctor. "a fine reception, after 
lose a night's sleep! i'll drag you home, if i have to!" he move 
ponderous toward the door; she gave a violent wrench and free her 
arm from his grasp. 

"if you can, you mean!" she jeered. she look at his exasperate face, 
and suddenly, with one of her abrupt change of mood, she softened. 
"dr. carl, honey," she said in apologetic tones, "i'm sorry. you're 
very sweet, and i'm really grateful, but i can't leave nick now." her 
eyes turn troubled. "not now." 

"why, pat?" mollify by the change in her mien, his voice rumble in 
sympathetic notes. 

"i can't," she repeated. "it's--it's get worse." 

"bah!" 

"so it's 'bah'!" she flared. "well, if you're so contemptuous of the 
thing, why don't you cure it? what good did your psychoanalysis do? you 
don't even know what it is!" 

"what do you expect?" roar the doctor. "can i diagnose it by absent 
treatment? i haven't had a chance to see the condition active yet!" 

"all right!" said pat, her strained nerves driving her to impatience. 
"you're here and nick's here! go on with your diagnosis; get it over 
with, and let's see what you can do. _you_ ought at least to be able 
to name the condition--the outstanding authority in the middle west on 
neural and mental pathology!" her tone was sardonic. 

"listen, pat," said horker with exaggerate patience, in the manner of 
one address a stupid child, "i've explain before that i can't get 
at the root of a mental aberration when the subject's as unstrung as 
your young man here seem to be. psychoanalysis just won't work unless 
the subject is calm, composed, and not in a nervous state. can you 
comprehend that?" 

"just dimly!" she snapped. "you ought to know another way--you, the 
outstanding authority--" 

"be still!" he interrupt gruffly. "of course i know another way, 
if i want to drag all of us back to my office, where i have the 
equipment!--which i won't do tonight," he finished grimly. 

"then do it here." 

"i haven't what i need." 

"there's everything upstairs," said pat. "it's all there, all nick's 
father's equipment." 

"not tonight! that's final." 

the girl's manner change again. she turn troubled, implore eyes 
on horker. "dr. carl," she said plaintively, "i can't leave nick now." 
she seize the arm of the silent, dejected youth, who had been standing 
passive by. "i can't leave him, really. i'd not be sure of seeing him 
again, ever. please, dr. carl!" 

"if these frenzy of yours," rumble horker, "are so violent and 
malicious, you ought to be confined. do you know that, young man?" 

"yes, sir," mumble nick wretchedly. 

"and i've thought of it," continue the doctor. "i've thought of it!" 

"please!" cry pat imploringly. "won't you try, dr. carl?" 

"the devil!" he growled. "all right, then." 

he follow the girl up the stairs, while nick trail disconsolate 
behind. she led him back into the chamber they had quitted, where a 
curious odor of peach pit seem to scent the air. horker sniff 
suspiciously, then seize the remain beaker, raise it cautious 
to his nostrils. 

"damnation!" he exploded. "prussic acid--or cyanide! what in--" he 
caught sight of pat's tragic eyes, and sudden replace the container. 
"pat!" he groaned. "pat, honey!" he drew her into the circle of his 
great arm. "i'll help you, dear! all i can, with all my heart, since 
it means that much to you!" he groan again under his breath. "oh, my 
god!" 

he held her a moment, pat her tousle black head with his massive, 
delicate finger hand. then he release her, turning to nick. 

"this the stuff?" he asked, brusquely, indicate the cabinet of 
bottles, with its splinter front. 

nick nodded. pat sank to the chair beside the table and watch horker 
as he scan the array of containers. he pull out a tiny wooden case 
and snap it open to reveal a number of steel needle that glint 
bright in the yellow light. he grunt in satisfaction and continue 
his inspection. 

"atropine," he muttered, reading the label boxes. "cocaine, daturine, 
hyoscine, hyoscyamine--won't do!" 

"what do you need?" the girl query faintly. 

"a mild hypnotic," said the doctor abstractedly, still searching. 
"pretty good substitute for psychoanalysis--certain drugs. dull the 
conscious mind, but not to complete unconsciousness. good means of 
get at the subconscious. see?" 

"sort of," said pat. "if it only works!" 

"oh, it'll work if we can find--ah!" he seize a tiny cardboard box. 
"scopolamine! this'll do the work." 

he extract a tiny glassy something from one or other of the box he 
held, and frown down at it. he seize the carafe of water, plunge 
something pointed and shiny into it. 

"antiseptic," he mutter thoughtfully. he seize a brown bottle from 
the case, held it toward the light, and shook it. "peroxide's gone 
flat," he growled. "nothing but water." 

he pull a silver cigar-lighter from his pocket and snap a yellow 
flame to it. he pass the point of the hypodermic rapid back and 
forth through the little spear of fire. finally he turn to nick. 

"take off your coat," he ordered. "roll up your shirt sleeve--the left 
one. and sit over there." he indicate the couch along the wall. 

the youth obey without a word. the only indication of emotion was a 
long, miserable, wistful look at pat as he seat himself impassive 
on the spot that the girl had so recently occupied. 

"now!" said the doctor briskly, approach the youth. "this will make 
you drowsy, sleepy. that's all it'll do. don't fight the effect. just 
relax, let the thing take its course, and i'll see what i can get out 
of you." 

pat gasp and nick wince as he drove the needle into the bare arm. 

"so!" he said. "now relax. lean back and close your eyes." 

he step to the door, drag in a batter chair from the hall, 
and occupy it. he sat beside pat, watch the pale features of the 
youth, who sat quiet with closed eyes, breathing slowly, heavily. 

"long enough," mutter horker. he raise his voice. "can you hear me?" 
he call to the motionless figure on the couch. there was no response, 
but pat fancy she saw a slight change in nick's expression. 

"can you hear me?" repeated horker in loud tones. 

"yes, i can hear you," came in icy tone from the figure on the couch. 
pat start violent as the voice sounded. the eyes opened, and she 
saw in sudden terror the ruddy orb of the demon! 




30 

the demon free 


pat emit a small, startle shriek, and heard it echo by a 
surprise grunt from dr. horker. 

"queer!" he muttered. "the stuff must be mislabeled. scopolamine 
doesn't act like this; it's a narcotic." 

"he's--the other!" gasp pat, while the being on the couch grin 
sardonically. 

"eh? an attack? can't be!" the doctor shook his head emphatically. 

"it's not nick!" cry the girl in panic. "you're not, are you?" she 
appeal to the grim entity. 

"not your sweetheart?" query the creature, still with his mock 
leer. "a few hour ago you were lie here all but naked, confess 
you were mine. have you forgotten?" 

she shudder at the reference, and shrank back in her chair. she heard 
the doctor's ominous, angry rumble, and the evil titter chuckle of 
the other. 

"pathological or not," snap horker, "i can resent your remarks! i've 
considered several times vary my treatment with another solid cut to 
the jaw!" he rose from his chair, stamp vicious toward the other. 

"a moment," said nichola devine. "do you know what you've done? have 
you any idea what you've done?" he turn cool, mocking, red-glinting 
eyes on the doctor. 

"huh?" horker pause as if puzzled. "what _i've_ done? what do you 
mean?" 

"you don't know, then." the other gave a satyr smile. "you're stupid; 
i gave you the clue, yet you hadn't the intelligence to follow it. 
do you know what i am?" he lean forward, his eyes leer evil 
into the doctor's. "i'll tell you. i'm a question of synapses. that's 
all--merely a question of synapses!" he titter again, horribly. "it 
still means nothing to you, doesn't it, doctor?" 

"i'll show you what it means!" horker clench a massive fist and 
strode toward the figure, whose eyes stared, steadily, unwinking into 
his own. 

"back!" the being snap as the great form bent over him. the doctor 
pause as if struck rigid, his arm and heavy fist drawn back like the 
conventional fight pose of a boxer. "go back!" repeated the other, 
rising. pat whimper in abject terror as she heard horker's surprise 
grunt, and saw him recede slowly, and finally sink into his chair. his 
bewilder eyes were still fixed on those of nichola devine. 

"i'll tell you what you've done!" said the strange being. "you've free 
me! there was nothing wrong with your scopolamine. it worked!" he 
chuckled. "you drug _him_ and free me!" 

horker manage a questioning grunt. 

"i'm free!" exult the other. "for the first time i haven't _him_ to 
fight! he's here, but helpless to oppose me--he's feeble--feeble!" he 
gave again the horrible titter chuckle. "see how weak the two of you 
are against my unopposed powers!" he jeered. "weaklings--food for my 
pleasures!" 

he turn his eyes, luminous and avid, on pat. "this time," he said, 
"there'll be no interruptions. a witness to our experiment will add a 
delicate touch of pleasure--" 

he broke off at the doctor's sudden movement. horker had snatch 
a glisten blue revolver from his pocket, held it level at the 
lust-filled eyes. 

"huh!" growl the doctor triumphantly. "do you think i come trail a 
maniac without some protection? especially a vicious one like you?" 

nichola devine turn his eyes on his opponent. he stare long and 
intently. 

"drop it!" he command at length. pat felt a surge of chaotic terror 
as the weapon clatter to the floor. she turn a frightened glance on 
horker's face, and her fright redouble at the sight of his strain 
jaw, the perspiration-beaded forehead, and his bewilder eyes. the 
demon kick the gun careless aside. 

"puerile!" he said contemptuously. he back away from them, re-seating 
himself on the couch whence he had risen. he survey the pair in 
sardonic mirth. 

"pat!" mutter the doctor huskily. "get out of here, honey! he's got 
some hellish trick of fascination that's paralyze me. get out and get 
help!" 

the girl move as if to rise. nichola devine shift his eyes for the 
barest instant to her face; she felt the strength drain out of her 
body, and she sank weak to her chair. 

"it's useless," she murmur hopeless to the doctor. "he's--he's just 
what i told you--a devil!" 

"i guess you were right," mumble horker dazedly. 

there was a burst of demonic mirth from the being on the couch. "merely 
a matter of synapses," he rasped, chuckling. his face changed, took 
on the familiar coldness, the stony expression pat had observe there 
before. "this palls!" he snapped. "i've better amusement--after we've 
render your friend merely an interested on-looker." he narrow his 
red eyes as if in thought. "take off a stocking," he ordered. "tie his 
hand to the back of the chair." 

"i won't!" said the girl. the eyes shift to her face. "i won't!" she 
repeated tremulous as she kick off a diminutive pump. she shudder 
at the gleam in the evil eyes as she strip the long silken sheath 
from a white, round limb. she slip a bare foot into the pump and 
move reluctantly behind the chair that held the groan horker. she 
took one of the clenched, strain hands, and drew it back, fumble 
with shake finger as she twist the strip of thin chiffon. the 
demon move closer, standing over her. 

"loose knots!" he snarl abruptly. he knock her violent away with 
a sting slap across her cheek, and seize the strip in his own 
hands. he drew the binding tight, twist it about the lowest rung of 
the chair's ladder back. horker was forced to lean awkward to the 
rear; in this unbalance position it was quite impossible to rise. 

nichola devine turn away from the straining, perspire doctor, and 
advanced toward pat, who cower against the shatter cabinet. 

"now!" he muttered. "the experiment!" he chuckle raspingly. "what 
delicacy of degradation! your lover and your guardian angel--both 
helpless watchers! excellent! oh, very excellent!" 

he grasp her wrist, drawing her after him to the center of the room, 
into the full view of the horrified, staring eyes of horker. 

"always before," continue her tormentor, "these hand have prepared 
you for the rites--the ceremony that fail on two other occasion 
to transpire. would it add a poignancy to the torture if i made you 
strip this body of yours with your own hands? or will they suffer more 
watch me? which do you think?" 

pat closed her eyes in helpless resignation to her fate. "nick!" she 
moaned. "oh, nick dearest!" 

"not this time!" sneer the other. "your friend and protector, the 
doctor, has thoughtful eliminate your sweetheart as a factor. he 
struggle too feeble for me to feel." 

"nick!" she murmur again. "dr. carl!" 

but the doctor, now pull painful at his bonds, could only groan in 
distraction, and curse the unsuspected strength of sheer chiffon. he 
writhe miserably at the chafe of his wrists; his strange paralysis 
had departed, but he was quite helpless to assist pat. 

"i think," said the cold tone of nichola devine, "that the more 
delicate torture lie in your willingness. let us see." 

he drew her into his arms. he twist a hand in her hair, jerk her 
head violent backward, and pressed avid lip to hers. she struggle a 
little, but hopelessly, automatically. at last she lay quite passive, 
quite motionless, support by his arms, and making not the slightest 
response to his kiss. 

"are you mine?" he query fiercely, release her lips. "are you mine 
now?" 

she shook her head without opening her eyes. "no," she said dully. "not 
now, or ever." 

again he crush her, while the doctor look on in helpless, 
bewildered, voiceless anger. this time his kiss was painful, burning, 
searing. again that unholy fascination and unnatural delight in her own 
pain stir her, and it took what little effort she was able to make 
to keep from responding. after a long interval, his lip again withdrew. 

"are you mine?" he repeated. she made no answer; she was gasping, 
and tear glisten under her closed eye-lids, from the pain of her 
crush lips. again he kiss her, and again the wild abandon to 
evil suffuse her. she was sudden respond to his agonizing caress; 
she was clinging fierce to his torture lips, feeling an unholy 
exaltation in the pain of his tear finger in the flesh of her back. 

"yours!" she murmur in response to his query. she heard her voice 
repeat madly, "yours! yours! yours!" 

"do you yield willingly?" came the icy tone of the demon. 

"yes--yes--yes! willingly!" 

"take off your clothes!" sound the terrible, overpowering voice. he 
thrust her from him, so that she stagger dizzy backward. she stood 
swaying; the voice repeated its command. 

the girl's eyes widen wildly; she had the appearance of one in an 
ecstasy, a religious fervor. she raise her hand with a jerky impulsive 
gesture to the neck of her frock, still pin together in the 
makeshift repair of the evening. 

there came a strange interruption. the doctor, helpless on-looker, 
had at length evolve an idea out of the bewilder in his mind. he 
open his mouth and emit a tremendous, deep, ear-shattering bellow! 

nichola devine sent the girl spin to the floor with a vicious 
shove, and turn his blazing eyes on horker, who was drawing in his 
breath for a repetition of his roar. "quiet!" he rasped, his red orb 
bore down at the other. "quiet, or i'll muffle you!" close his 
eyes, the doctor repeated his mighty shout. 

the demon snatch the blanket from the couch, toss it over the 
figure of the doctor, where it became a billowing, writhe heap of 
brown wool. he turn his gaze on pat, who was just struggle to her 
feet, and move as if to advance toward her. 

he paused. she had retrieve the doctor's revolver from the floor, and 
now face him with the madness gone out of her eyes, support the 
weapon with both hands, the muzzle waver toward his face. 

"drop it!" he commanded. she felt a recurrence of fascination, and an 
impulse to obey. out of the corner of her eye, she saw the doctor's 
head emerge from the blanket as he shook it off. 

"drop it!" repeated nichola devine. 

she closed her eyes, shut out the vision of his dominant visage. 
with a surge of terror, she squeeze the trigger, staggering back to 
the couch at the roar and the recoil. 

she open her eyes. nichola devine lay in the center of the room on 
his face; a crimson spot was matting the hair on the back of his head. 
she saw the doctor raise a free hand; he was working clear of his bonds. 

"pat!" he said softly. he look at her pale, sicken features. 
"honey," he said, "sit down till i get free. sit down, pat; you look 
faint." 

"never faint!" murmur the girl, and pitch backward to the couch, 
with one clad and one bare leg hanging in curious limp over the 
edge. 




31 

"not humanly possible" 


pat open weary eyes and gaze at a blank, uninformative ceiling. it 
was some moments before she realize that she was lie on the couch in 
the room of nichola devine. somebody had placed her there, presumably, 
since she was quite unaware of the circumstances of her awakening. then 
recollection began to form--dr. carl, the _other_, the roar of a shot. 
after that, nothing save a turmoil ending in blankness. 

a sound of movement beside her drew her attention. she turn her head 
and perceive dr. horker kneel over a form on the floor, fingering 
a white bandage about the head of the figure. her recollection took 
instant form; she remember the catastrophe of the evening--last 
night, rather, since dawn glow dul in the window. she had shot 
nick! she gave a little moan and pushed herself to a sitting position. 

the doctor glance at her with a sick, shaky smile. "hello," he 
said. "come to, have you? sorry i couldn't give you any attention." 
he gave the bandage a final touch. "here's a job i had no heart 
for," he muttered. "better for everyone to let things happen without 
interference." 

the girl, return to full awareness, notice now that the bandage 
consist of strip of the doctor's shirt. she glance fearful at the 
still features of nichola devine; she saw pale cheek and closed eyes, 
but indubitable not the grim mien of the demon. 

"dr. carl!" she whispered. "he isn't--he isn't--" 

"not yet." 

"but will he--?" 

"i don't know. that's a bad spot, a wound in the base of the brain. 
you'd best know it now, pat, but also realize that nothing can happen 
to you. i'll see to that!" 

"to me!" she said dully. "what difference do that make? it's nick i 
want saved." 

"i'll do my best for you, honey," said horker with almost a hint of 
reluctance. "i've phone briggs general for an ambulance. your faint 
last a full quarter hour," he added. 

"what can we tell them?" ask the girl. "what can we say?" 

"don't you say anything, pat. i'm not on the board for nothing." he 
rose from his knees, glancing out of the window into the cool dawn. 
"queer neighborhood!" he said. "all that yell and a shot, and still 
no sign of interest from the neighbors. that's chicago, though," he 
mused. "lucky for us, pat; we can handle the thing quiet now." 

but the girl was staring dul at the still figure on the floor. "oh 
god!" she said huskily. "help him, dr. carl!" 

"i'll do my best," respond horker gloomily. "i was a good surgeon 
before i specialized in psychiatry. brain surgery, too; it led right 
into my present field." 

pat said nothing, but drop her head on her hand and stare vacant 
before her. 

"better for you, and for him too, if i fail," mutter the doctor. 

his words brought a reply. "you won't fail," she said tensely. "you 
won't!" 

"not voluntarily, i'm afraid," he growl morosely. "i've still a 
little respect for medical ethics, but if ever a case--" his voice 
trail into silence as from somewhere in the dawn sound the wail of 
a siren. "there's the ambulance," he finished. 

pat sat unmove as the sound from outdoors detailed the stopping 
of the vehicle before the house. she heard the doctor descend the 
steps, and the creak of the door. though it took place before her eyes, 
she scarcely saw the white-coated youth as they lift the form of 
nichola devine and bore it from the room on a stretcher, tread 
with careful broken steps to prevent the sway of the support. dr. 
horker's order to follow made no impression on her; she sat dul on 
the couch as the chamber emptied. 

why, she wondered, had the thought of nick's death disturbed her so? 
wasn't it but a short time since they had both contemplate it? what 
had occur to alter that determination? nick was dying, she thought 
mournfully; all that remain was for her to follow. there on the 
floor lay the revolver, and on the table, glisten in the wan light, 
repose the untouched lethal draft. that was the preferable way, she 
mused, staring fixedly at its glowing contour. 

but suppose nick weren't to die--she'd have abandoned him to his 
terrible doom, left him to face a situation far more ominous than any 
unknown terror beyond death. she shook her head distractedly, and 
look up to meet the eyes of dr. horker, who was watch her grave 
in the doorway. 

"come on, pat," he said gently. 

she rose, follow him down the stairs and out into the morning light. 
the driver of the ambulance stare curious at her dishevelled, 
bedraggled figure, but she was so weary and forlorn that even the 
effort of brush away the black strand of hair that cloud her 
smoke-dark eyes was beyond her. she slump into the seat of the 
doctor's car and sigh in utter exhaustion. 

"rush it!" horker call to the driver ahead. "i'll follow you." 

the car swept into motion, and the swift cool morning air beating 
against her face from the open window restore some clarity to her 
mind. she fixed her eyes on the rear of the speeding vehicle they 
followed. 

"is there any hope at all?" she query despondently. 

"i don't know, pat. i can't tell yet. when you closed your eyes, he 
half turned, dodged; the bullet enter his skull near the base, 
near the cerebellum. if it had pierce the cerebellum, his heart and 
breathing must have stop instantly. they didn't, however, and that's 
a mildly hopeful sign. very mildly hopeful, though." 

"do you know now what that devil--what the attack was?" 

"no, pat," horker admitted. "i don't. call it a devil if you like; 
i can't name it any better." his voice change to a tone of wonder. 
"pat, i can't understand that paralyze fascination the thing exerted. 
i--any medical man--would say that mental dominance of that sort 
doesn't exist." 

"hypnotism," the girl suggested. 

"bah! every psychiatrist use hypnotism in his business; it's part of 
some treatments. there's nothing of fascination about it; no dominance 
of one will over another, despite the popular view. that's natural 
and understandable; this was like--well, like the exploded claim of 
mesmerism. i tell you, it's not humanly possible--and yet i felt it!" 

"not _humanly_ possible," murmur pat. "that's the answer, then, dr. 
carl. maybe now you'll believe in my devil." 

"i'm tempt to." 

"you'll have to! can't you see it, dr. carl? even his name, 
nick--that's a colloquialism for the devil, isn't it?" 

"and devine, i suppose," said horker, "refers to his angel ancestry. 
devil are only fallen angels, aren't they?" 

"all right," said pat wearily. "make fun of it. you'll see!" 

"i'm not making fun of your theory, honey. i can't offer a better one 
myself. i never saw nor heard of anything similar, and i'm not in 
position to ridicule any theory." 

"but you don't believe me." 

"of course i don't, pat. you're weave an intricate fairy tale about 
a pathological condition and a fortuitous suggestive in names. 
whatever the condition is--and i confess i don't understand it--it's 
something rational, and those things can be treated." 

"treated by exorcism," said the girl. "that's the only way anyone ever 
succeed in casting out a devil." 

the doctor made no answer. the wail vehicle ahead of them swung 
rapid out of sight into an alley, and horker halt his car before 
the gray facade of briggs general. 

"come in here," he said, helping pat to alight. "you'll want to wait, 
won't you?" 

"how long," she query listlessly, "before--before you'll know?" 

"perhaps immediately. the only chance is to get that bullet out at 
once--if there's still time for it." 

she follow him into the building, past a desk where a white-clad girl 
regard her curiously, and up an elevator. he led her into a small 
office. 

"sit here," he said gently, and disappeared. 

she sat dul in the chair he had indicated, and minutes passed. she 
made no attempt to think; the long, cataclysm night had exhaust her 
powers. she simply sat and suffered; the deep scratch of fingernail 
burn in the flesh of her back, her cheek pained from the violent 
slap, and her head and jaw ache from that first blow, the one that had 
knock her unconscious last evening. but these twinge were minor; 
they were merely physical, and the hurt of the demon had struck far 
deep than any physical injury. the damage to her spirit was by all 
odds the more painful; it numb her mind and dull her thoughts, and 
she simply sat idle and stare at the blank wall. 

she had no conception of the interval before dr. horker returned. he 
enter quietly, and began rinse his hand at a basin in the corner. 

"is it over?" she ask listlessly. 

"not even begun," he responded. "however, it isn't too late. he'll be 
ready in a moment or so." 

"i wish it were over," she murmured. "one way or the other." 

"i too!" said the doctor. "with all my heart, i wish it were over! if 
there were anyone within call who could handle it, i'd turn it to him 
gladly. but there isn't!" 

he move again toward the door, leaning out and glancing down the hall. 

"you stay here," he admonish her. "don't try to find us; i want no 
interruptions, no matter what enter that mind of yours!" 

"you needn't worry," she said soberly. "i'm not fool enough for that." 
she lean weary back in the chair, close her eyes. a long interval 
passed; she was vague surprise to see the doctor still standing in 
the doorway when she open her eyes. she had fancy him already in 
the midst of his labor. 

"what will you do?" she asked. 

"about what?" 

"i mean what sort of operation will it need? probe or what?" 

"oh," he said. "i'll have to trephine him. must get that bullet." 

"what's that--trephine?" 

he glance down the hall. "they're ready," he said, and turn to go. 
at the door he paused. "trephining is to open a little door in the 
skull. if your devil is in his head, we'll have it out along with the 
bullet." 

his footstep recede down the hall. 




revelation 


"is it over now?" query pat tremulous as the doctor finally 
reappeared. the interminable wait had left her even more worn, and 
her pallid features bore the mark of strain. 

"twenty minutes ago," said horker. his face too bore evidence of 
tension; moreover, there was a puzzled, dubious expression in his eyes 
that frightened pat. she was too apprehensive to risk a question as to 
the outcome, and simply stare at him with wide, fearful, questioning 
eyes. 

"i call up your home," he said irrelevantly. "i told them you left 
with me early this morning. your mother's still in bed, although it's 
after ten." he paused. "slip in without anyone seeing you, will you, 
honey? and rumple up your bed." 

"if i haven't lost my key," she said, still with the question in her 
eyes. 

"it's in the mail-box. magda found it on the porch this morning. i 
talk to her." 

she could bear the uncertainty no longer. "tell me!" she demanded. 

"it's all right, i think." 

"you mean--he'll live?" 

the doctor nodded. "i think so." he turn his puzzle eyes on her. 

"oh!" breathe pat. "thank god!" 

"you want him back, honey, didn't you?" horker's tone was gentle. 

"oh, yes!" 

"devil and all?" 

"yes--devil and all!" she echoed. sudden she sense something strange 
in the other's manner. she perceive the uncertainty in his visage, and 
felt a rising trepidation. "what's the matter?" she query anxiously. 
"you're not telling me everything! tell me, dr. carl!" 

"there's something else," he said. "i'm not sure, pat, but i think--i 
hope--you've got him back without the devil!" 

"he's cured?" her voice was incredulous; she did not dare accept the 
doctor's meaning. 

"i hope so. at least i located the cause." 

"what was it?" she demanded, an unexpected vigor liven her tired 
body. "what was that devil? tell me! i want to know, dr. carl!" 

"i think the best name for it is a tumor," he said slowly. "i told them 
in there it was a tumor. i wish i knew myself." 

"a tumor! i don't understand!" 

"i don't either, pat--not fully. it's something on or beyond the border 
of medical knowledge. i don't think any living authority could classify 
it definitely." 

"but tell me!" she cry fiercely. "tell me!" 

"well, honey--i'll try." he pause thoughtfully. "cancers and 
tumors--sarcomas--are curious things, dear. doctor aren't at all 
sure just what they are. and one of their peculiarity is that they 
sometimes seem to be try to develop into separate entities, try 
to become human by feed like parasite on their hosts. do you 
understand?" 

"no," said the girl. "i'm sorry, dr. carl, but i don't." 

"i mean," he continued, "that sometimes these growth seem to be try 
to develop into--into organisms. i've seen them, for instance--every 
surgeon has--with bone developing. i've seen one with a rather perfect 
jaw-bone, and little teeth, and hair. as if," he added, "it were 
making a sort of attempt to become human, in a primitive, disorganize 
fashion. now do you see what i mean?" 

"yes," said the girl, with a violent shudder. "dr. carl, that's 
horrible!" 

"life sometimes is," he agreed. "well," he continue slowly, "i open 
up our patient's skull at the point where the fluoroscope indicate the 
bullet. i trephine it, and there, pierce by the shot, was this--" he 
hesitated, "--this tumor." 

"did you--remove it?" 

"of course. but it wasn't a natural sort of brain tumor, honey. it was 
a little cerebrum, apparently join to a y-shaped branch of the spinal 
cord. a little brain, pat--no large than your small fist, but deep 
convoluted, and with the pre-rolandic area highly developed." 

"what's pre-rolandic, dr. carl?" ask pat, shivering. 

"the seat of the motor nerves. the home, you might say, of the will. 
this brain was practically all will--and i wonder," he said musingly, 
"if that explain the ungodly, evil fascination the creature could 
command. a brain that was nothing but pure will-power, relieved by 
its parasitic nature of all the distraction of a direct body! i 
wonder--" he fell silent. 

"tell me the rest!" she said frantically. 

"that's all, honey. i remove it, and i guess i'm the only surgeon in 
the world who ever remove a brain from a human skull without killing 
the patient! luckily, he had two of them!" 

"oh god!" murmur the girl faintly. she turn to horker. "but he will 
live?" 

"i think so. your shot kill the devil, it seems." he frowned. "i said 
it was a tumor; i told them it was a tumor, but i'm not sure. perhaps, 
just as some people are born with six finger or toe on each member, 
he was born with two brains. it's possible; one develop normally, 
humanly, and the other--into that creature we face last night. i don't 
know!" 

"it's what i said," assert pat. "it's a devil, and what you've just 
told me about tumor prove it. they're devils, that's all, and some 
day some student is go to cut one loose and raise it to maturity 
outside a human body, and you'll see what a devil is really like! and 
go ahead and laugh!" 

"i'm not laughing, pat. i'd be the last one to laugh at your theory, 
after facing that thing last night. it had satanic powers, all 
right--that paralyze fascination! you felt it too; it wasn't just a 
mental lapse on my part, was it?" 

"i felt it, dr. carl! i'd felt it before that; i was always helpless in 
the presence of it." 

"could it," he asked, "have impose its will active on yours? i mean, 
could it have made you actually do what it ask there at the end, just 
before i recover enough sense to let out that bellow?" 

"to take off--my dress?" she shivered. "i don't know, dr. carl.--i'm 
afraid so." she look at him appealingly. "why did i yield to it so?" 
she cried. "what made me find such a fierce pleasure in its kisses--in 
its blow and scratches, and the pain it inflict on me? why was that, 
dr. carl?" 

"why," he countered, "do gangsters' girl and apache women enjoy the 
cruelty perpetrate on them by their men? there's a little masochism 
in most women, and that--creature was sadistic, perverted, abnormal, 
and somehow dominating. it took an unfair advantage of you, pat; don't 
blame yourself." 

"it was--utterly evil!" she muttered. "it was the ultimate in 
everything unholy." 

"it was an aberrant brain," said horker. "you can't judge it by human 
standards, since it wasn't actually human. it was, i suppose, just 
what you said--a devil. i didn't even keep it," he add grimly. "i 
destroy it." 

"do you know what it meant by saying it was a question of synapses?" 
she asked. 

"that was queer!" the doctor's voice was puzzled. "that remark imply 
that the thing itself knew what it was. how? it must have possessed 
knowledge that the normal brain lacked." 

"was it a question of synapses?" 

"in a sense it was. the nerves from the two rival brains must have met 
in a synaptic juncture. the often the aberrant brain gain control, 
the easy it became for it to repeat the process, as the synapse, so 
to speak, wore thin. that's why the attack intensify so horrible 
toward the end; the habit was being formed." 

"last night was the very worst!" 

"of course. as the thing itself pointed out, i made the mistake of 
drug the normal brain and give the other complete control of 
the body. at other times, there'd always been the rivalry to weaken 
whichever was dominant." 

"does that mean," ask pat anxiously, "that nick's character will be 
change now?" 

"i think so. i think you'll find him less meek, less gentle, than 
heretofore. more spirited, perhaps, since his energy won't be drain 
so constant by the struggle." 

"i don't care!" she said. "i'd like that, and anyway, it doesn't make a 
bit of difference to me as long as he's just--_my_ nick." 

the doctor gave her a tender smile. "let's go home," he said, pinch 
her cheek in his great hand. 

"can you leave him?" 

"i'll run back after a while, honey. i think he'll do." he took her 
hand, drawing her after him. "don't forget to slip in unseen, pat, and 
rumple up your bed." 

"rumple it!" she gave him a weary smile. "i'll be _in_ it!" 

"good idea. you look a bit worn out, honey, and we can't have you 
get sick now, or even pull a temporary faint like that one last 
night." 

"i didn't faint!" 

"maybe not," grin horker. "perhaps the proceedings grew a little 
boring, and you just lay down on the couch for a nap. it _was_ a dull 
evening." 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the dark other, by stanley g. weinbaum 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the dark other *** 

***** this file should be name 50561.txt or 50561.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/5/6/50561/ 

produce by greg weeks, mary meehan and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition will 
be renamed. 

create the works from print edition not protect by u.s. copyright 
law means that no one own a united states copyright in these works, 
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united 
states without permission and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part 
of this license, apply to copy and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a register trademark, 
and may not be use if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receive 
specific permission. if you do not charge anything for copy of this 
ebook, comply with the rule is very easy. you may use this ebook 
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, 
performance and research. they may be modify and print and given 
away--you may do practically anything in the united states with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribute is subject to the 
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. 

start: full license 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full 
project gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or 
destroy all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your 
possession. if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound 
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this 
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection 
of project gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual 
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united 
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the 
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or create derivative works base on the work as long as 
all reference to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote 
free access to electronic works by freely share project gutenberg-tm 
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the 
project gutenberg-tm name associate with the work. you can easily 
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the 
same format with its attach full project gutenberg-tm license when 
you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are 
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, 
check the law of your country in addition to the terms of this 
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribute or create derivative works base on this work or any 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no 
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any 
country outside the united states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other 
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear 
prominent whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it 
under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this 
ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the 
united states, you'll have to check the law of the country where you 
are located before use this ebook. 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is 
derive from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (does not 
contain a notice indicate that it is post with permission of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copy and distribute to anyone in 
the united states without pay any fee or charges. if you are 
redistribute or providing access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associate with or appear on the work, you must comply 
either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any 
additional terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works 
post with the permission of the copyright holder found at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including 
any word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access 
to or distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official 
version post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense 
to the user, provide a copy, a means of export a copy, or a means 
of obtain a copy upon request, of the work in its original "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. any alternate format must include the 
full project gutenberg-tm license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
provided that 

* you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has 
agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment must be paid 
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are 
legal require to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty 
payment should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specify in 
section 4, "information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation." 

* you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all 
copy of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue 
all use of and all access to other copy of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days of 
receipt of the work. 

* you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than 
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing 
from both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
works not protect by u.s. copyright law in create the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate 
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damage disk or 
other medium, a computer virus, or computer code that damage or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you 
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in 
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person 
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second 
opportunity to receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if 
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing 
without further opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no 
other warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not 
limited to warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of 
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
violate the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or 
limitation permit by the applicable state law. the invalid or 
unenforceable of any provision of this agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in 
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the 
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, 
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirect from any of 
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this 
or any project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addition or deletion to any project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any 
defect you cause. 

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of 
computer including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it 
exist because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation 
from people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future 
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation and how your effort and donation can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at 
www.gutenberg.org section 3. information about the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: po box 750175, fairbanks, ak 99775, but its 
volunteer and employee are scattered throughout numerous 
locations. its business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up to 
date contact information can be found at the foundation's web site and 
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 

dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send 
donation or determine the status of compliance for any particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. to 
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 

section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
freely share with anyone. for forty years, he produce and 
distribute project gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of 
volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not 
necessarily keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper 
edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
