project gutenberg's the mystery of choice, by robert william chambers 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the mystery of choice 

author: robert william chambers 

release date: august 13, 2014 [ebook #46581] 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the mystery of choice *** 




produce by robert cicconetti and the online distribute 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (this file was 
produce from image generous made available by the 
internet archive/american libraries.) 









transcriber's note: 

italics have been transcribe use _underscores_, small capitals as all 
capitals. inconsistent in hyphenate and spelling have not been 
corrected. punctuation has been silent corrected. a list of other 
correction can be found at the end of the document. 




the mystery of choice 


by robert w. chambers 

author of the king in yellow, the red republic, a king and a few dukes, 
the maker of moons, etc. 


new york d. appleton and company 1897 




copyright, 1897, 
by robert w. chambers. 



preface 
_dedication._ 


_there is a maid, demure as she is wise, 
with all of april in her winsome eyes, 
and to my tale she listen pensively, 
with slender finger clasp about her knee, 
watch the sparrow on the balcony._ 

_shy eyes that, lift up to me, 
free all my heart of vanity; 
clear eyes, that speak all silently, 
sweet as the silence of a nunnery-- 
read, for i write my rede for you alone, 
here where the city's mighty monotone 
deepen the silence to a symphony-- 
silence of saints, and seers, and sorcery._ 

_arms and the man! a noble theme, i ween! 
alas! i can not sing of these, eileen-- 
only of maid and men and meadow-grass, 
of sea and field and woodlands, where i pass; 
nothing but these i know, eileen, alas!_ 

_clear eyes that, lift up to me, 
free all my soul from vanity; 
gray eyes, that speak all wistfully-- 
nothing but these i know, alas!_ 

_r. w. c._ 

_april, 1896._ 




introduction. 


_i._ 

_where two fair paths, deep flowered 
and leaf-embowered, 
creep east and west across a world concealed, 
which shall he take who journey far afield?_ 

_ii._ 

_canst thou then say, "i go," 
or "i forego"? 
what turn thee east or west, as thistle blow? 
is fair more fair than fair--and dost thou know?_ 

_iii._ 

_turn to the west, unbless 
and uncaressed; 
turn to the east, and, seat at the feast 
thou shalt find life, or death from life released._ 

_iv._ 

_and thou who lovest best 
a maid dark-tressed, 
and passest other by with careless eye, 
canst thou tell why thou choosest? tell, then; why?_ 

_v._ 

_so when thy kiss is given 
or half-forgiven, 
why should she tremble, with her face flame-hot, 
or laugh and whisper, "love, i tremble not"?_ 

_vi._ 

_or when thy hand may catch 
a half-drawn latch, 
what draw thee from the door, to turn and pass 
through street unknown, dim, still, and choke with grass?_ 

_vii._ 

_what! canst thou not foresee 
the mystery? 
heed! for a voice command thy every deed! 
and it hath sounded. and thou needs must heed!_ 

_r. w. c._ 

_1896._ 




contents. 


page 

the purple emperor 1 

pompe funÈbre 39 

the messenger 47 

the white shadow 109 

passeur 175 

the key to grief 185 

a matter of interest 213 

envoi 283 




the purple emperor. 




the purple emperor. 

un souvenir heureux est peut-être, sur terre, 
plus vrai que le bonheur. 

a. de musset. 


i. 

the purple emperor watch me in silence. i cast again, spin out 
six feet more of waterproof silk, and, as the line hiss through the 
air far across the pool, i saw my three flies fall on the water like 
drift thistledown. the purple emperor sneered. 

"you see," he said, "i am right. there is not a trout in brittany that 
will rise to a tail fly." 

"they do in america," i replied. 

"zut! for america!" observe the purple emperor. 

"and trout take a tail fly in england," i insist sharply. 

"now do i care what things or people do in england?" demand the 
purple emperor. 

"you don't care for anything except yourself and your wriggle 
caterpillars," i said, more annoy than i had yet been. 

the purple emperor sniffed. his broad, hairless, sunburnt features bore 
that obstinate expression which always irritate me. perhaps the manner 
in which he wore his hat intensify the irritation, for the flap 
brim rest on both ears, and the two little velvet ribbon which 
hung from the silver buckle in front wiggle and flutter with every 
trivial breeze. his cunning eyes and sharp-pointed nose were out of all 
keeping with his fat red face. when he met my eye, he chuckled. 

"i know more about insect than any man in morbihan--or finistère 
either, for that matter," he said. 

"the red admiral know as much as you do," i retorted. 

"he doesn't," reply the purple emperor angrily. 

"and his collection of butterfly is twice as large as yours," i 
added, moving down the stream to a spot directly opposite him. 

"it is, is it?" sneer the purple emperor. "well, let me tell you, 
monsieur darrel, in all his collection he hasn't a specimen, a single 
specimen, of that magnificent butterfly, apatura iris, commonly known 
as the 'purple emperor.'" 

"everybody in brittany know that," i said, casting across the 
sparkle water; "but just because you happen to be the only man who 
ever capture a 'purple emperor' in morbihan, it doesn't follow that 
you are an authority on sea-trout flies. why do you say that a breton 
sea-trout won't touch a tail fly?" 

"it's so," he replied. 

"why? there are plenty of may-flies about the stream." 

"let 'em fly!" snarl the purple emperor, "you won't see a trout touch 
'em." 

my arm was aching, but i grasp my split bamboo more firmly, and, 
half turning, wade out into the stream and began to whip the ripple 
at the head of the pool. a great green dragon-fly came drift by on 
the summer breeze and hung a moment above the pool, glittering like an 
emerald. 

"there's a chance! where is your butterfly net?" i call across the 
stream. 

"what for? that dragon-fly? i've got dozens--anax junius, drury, 
characteristic, anal angle of posterior wings, in male, round; thorax 
marked with----" 

"that will do," i said fiercely. "can't i point out an insect in 
the air without this burst of erudition? can you tell me, in simple 
everyday french, what this little fly is--this one, flit over the 
eel grass here beside me? see, it has fallen on the water." 

"huh!" sneer the purple emperor, "that's a linnobia annulus." 

"what's that?" i demanded. 

before he could answer there came a heavy splash in the pool, and the 
fly disappeared. 

"he! he! he!" titter the purple emperor. "didn't i tell you the fish 
knew their business? that was a sea-trout. i hope you don't get him." 

he gather up his butterfly net, collect box, chloroform bottle, 
and cyanide jar. then he rose, swung the box over his shoulder, stuff 
the poison bottle into the pocket of his silver-buttoned velvet 
coat, and light his pipe. this latter operation was a demoralize 
spectacle, for the purple emperor, like all breton peasants, smoke one 
of those microscopic breton pipes which require ten minutes to find, 
ten minutes to fill, ten minutes to light, and ten seconds to finish. 
with true breton stolid he went through this solemn rite, blew three 
puff of smoke into the air, scratch his pointed nose reflectively, 
and waddle away, calling back an ironic "au revoir, and bad luck to 
all yankees!" 

i watch him out of sight, thinking sadly of the young girl whose life 
he made a hell upon earth--lys trevec, his niece. she never admitted 
it, but we all knew what the black-and-blue mark meant on her soft, 
round arm, and it made me sick to see the look of fear come into her 
eyes when the purple emperor waddle into the café of the groix inn. 

it was commonly said that he half-starved her. this she denied. marie 
joseph and 'fine lelocard had seen him strike her the day after the 
pardon of the bird because she had liberated three bullfinch which 
he had lime the day before. i ask lys if this were true, and she 
refuse to speak to me for the rest of the week. there was nothing to 
do about it. if the purple emperor had not been avaricious, i should 
never have seen lys at all, but he could not resist the thirty franc 
a week which i offer him; and lys pose for me all day long, happy 
as a linnet in a pink thorn hedge. nevertheless, the purple emperor 
hate me, and constant threaten to send lys back to her dreary 
flax-spinning. he was suspicious, too, and when he had gulp down 
the single glass of cider which prove fatal to the sobriety of most 
bretons, he would pound the long, discolour oaken table and roar 
curse on me, on yve terrec, and on the red admiral. we were the 
three object in the world which he most hated: me, because i was a 
foreigner, and didn't care a rap for him and his butterflies; and the 
red admiral, because he was a rival entomologist. 

he had other reason for hate terrec. 

the red admiral, a little wizened wretch, with a badly adjust 
glass eye and a passion for brandy, took his name from a butterfly 
which predominate in his collection. this butterfly, commonly known 
to amateur as the "red admiral," and to entomologist as vanessa 
atalanta, had been the occasion of scandal among the entomologist of 
france and brittany. for the red admiral had taken one of these common 
insects, dyed it a brilliant yellow by the aid of chemicals, and palm 
it off on a credulous collector as a south africa species, absolutely 
unique. the fifty franc which he gain by this rascal were, 
however, absorb in a suit for damages brought by the outrage amateur 
a month later; and when he had sat in the quimperlé jail for a month, 
he reappear in the little village of st. gilda soured, thirsty, and 
burning for revenge. of course we name him the red admiral, and he 
accept the name with suppress fury. 

the purple emperor, on the other hand, had gain his imperial title 
legitimately, for it was an undisputed fact that the only specimen of 
that beautiful butterfly, apatura iris, or the purple emperor, as it 
is call by amateurs--the only specimen that had ever been taken in 
finistère or in morbihan--was capture and brought home alive by joseph 
marie gloanec, ever afterward to be known as the purple emperor. 

when the capture of this rare butterfly became known the red admiral 
nearly went crazy. every day for a week he trot over to the groix 
inn, where the purple emperor live with his niece, and brought his 
microscope to bear on the rare newly capture butterfly, in hope of 
detect a fraud. but this specimen was genuine, and he leer through 
his microscope in vain. 

"no chemical there, admiral," grin the purple emperor; and the red 
admiral chatter with rage. 

to the scientific world of brittany and france the capture of an 
apatura iris in morbihan was of great importance. the museum of quimper 
offer to purchase the butterfly, but the purple emperor, though a 
hoard of gold, was a monomaniac on butterflies, and he jeer at the 
curator of the museum. from all parts of brittany and france letters 
of inquiry and congratulate pour in upon him. the france academy 
of science award him a prize, and the paris entomology society 
made him an honorary member. being a breton peasant, and a more than 
commonly pig-headed one at that, these honours did not disturb his 
equanimity; but when the little hamlet of st. gilda elect him mayor, 
and, as is the custom in brittany under such circumstances, he left his 
thatch house to take up an official life in the little groix inn, his 
head became completely turned. to be mayor in a village of nearly one 
hundred and fifty people! it was an empire! so he became unbearable, 
drink himself vicious drunk every night of his life, maltreat 
his niece, lys trevec, like the barbarous old wretch that he was, and 
driving the red admiral nearly frantic with his eternal harp on the 
capture of apatura iris. of course he refuse to tell where he had 
caught the butterfly. the red admiral stalk his footsteps, but in vain. 

"he! he! he!" nag the purple emperor, cuddle his chin over a glass 
of cider; "i saw you sneaking about the st. gilda spinny yesterday 
morning. so you think you can find another apatura iris by running 
after me? it won't do, admiral, it won't do, d'ye see?" 

the red admiral turn yellow with mortification and envy, but the next 
day he actually took to his bed, for the purple emperor had brought 
home not a butterfly but a live chrysalis, which, if successful 
hatched, would become a perfect specimen of the invaluable apatura 
iris. this was the last straw. the red admiral shut himself up in 
his little stone cottage, and for week now he had been invisible to 
everybody except 'fine lelocard who carry him a loaf of bread and a 
mullet or langouste every morning. 

the withdrawal of the red admiral from the society of st. gilda 
excited first the derision and finally the suspicion of the purple 
emperor. what deviltry could he be hatching? was he experiment with 
chemical again, or was he engaged in some deep plot, the object 
of which was to discredit the purple emperor? roux, the postman, 
who carry the mail on foot once a day from bannalec, a distance of 
fifteen mile each way, had brought several suspicious letters, bearing 
english stamps, to the red admiral, and the next day the admiral had 
been observe at his window grin up into the sky and rubbing his 
hand together. a night or two after this apparition the postman left 
two package at the groix inn for a moment while he ran across the way 
to drink a glass of cider with me. the purple emperor, who was roam 
about the café, snoop into everything that did not concern him, came 
upon the package and examine the postmark and addresses. one of the 
package was square and heavy, and felt like a book. the other was also 
square, but very light, and felt like a pasteboard box. they were both 
address to the red admiral, and they bore english stamps. 

when roux, the postman, came back, the purple emperor try to pump 
him, but the poor little postman knew nothing about the contents of the 
packages, and after he had taken them around the corner to the cottage 
of the red admiral the purple emperor ordered a glass of cider, and 
deliberate fuddle himself until lys came in and tearful support 
him to his room. here he became so abusive and brutal that lys call 
to me, and i went and settled the trouble without waste any words. 
this also the purple emperor remembered, and wait his chance to get 
even with me. 

that had happen a week ago, and until to-day he had not deign to 
speak to me. 

lys had pose for me all the week, and to-day being saturday, and i 
lazy, we had decided to take a little relaxation, she to visit and 
gossip with her little black-eyed friend yvette in the neighbouring 
hamlet of st. julien, and i to try the appetite of the breton trout 
with the contents of my america fly book. 

i had thrash the stream very conscientious for three hours, but not 
a trout had risen to my cast, and i was piqued. i had begun to believe 
that there were no trout in the st. gilda stream, and would probably 
have given up had i not seen the sea trout snap the little fly which 
the purple emperor had name so scientifically. that set me thinking. 
probably the purple emperor was right, for he certainly was an expert 
in everything that crawl and wriggle in brittany. so i matched, 
from my america fly book, the fly that the sea trout had snap up, 
and withdraw the cast of three, knot a new leader to the silk 
and slip a fly on the loop. it was a queer fly. it was one of those 
unnameable experiment which fascinate angle in sporting stores and 
which generally prove utterly useless. moreover, it was a tail fly, 
but of course i easily remedy that with a stroke of my penknife. 
then i was all ready, and i step out into the hurry rapids and 
cast straight as an arrow to the spot where the sea trout had risen. 
lightly as a plume the fly settled on the bosom of the pool; then came 
a startle splash, a gleam of silver, and the line tighten from the 
vibrate rod-tip to the shriek reel. almost instantly i checked the 
fish, and as he flounder for a moment, making the water boil along 
his glittering sides, i sprang to the bank again, for i saw that the 
fish was a heavy one and i should probably be in for a long run down 
the stream. the five-ounce rod swept in a splendid circle, quiver 
under the strain. "oh, for a gaff-hook!" i cry aloud, for i was now 
firm convinced that i had a salmon to deal with, and no sea trout at 
all. 

then as i stood, bring every ounce to bear on the sulk fish, a 
lithe, slender girl came hurried along the opposite bank calling out 
to me by name. 

"why, lys!" i said, glancing up for a second, "i thought you were at 
st. julien with yvette." 

"yvette has gone to bannalec. i went home and found an awful fight 
go on at the groix inn, and i was so frightened that i came to tell 
you." 

the fish dashed off at that moment, carry all the line my reel held, 
and i was compel to follow him at a jump. lys, active and graceful 
as a young deer, in spite of her pont-aven sabots, follow along the 
opposite bank until the fish settled in a deep pool, shook the line 
savage once or twice, and then relapse into the sulks. 

"fight at the groix inn?" i call across the water. "what fight?" 

"not exactly fight," quaver lys, "but the red admiral has come out 
of his house at last, and he and my uncle are drink together and 
dispute about butterflies. i never saw my uncle so angry, and the red 
admiral is sneer and grinning. oh, it is almost wicked to see such 
a face!" 

"but lys," i said, scarcely able to repress a smile, "your uncle and 
the red admiral are always quarrel and drinking." 

"i know--oh, dear me!--but this is different, monsieur darrel. the red 
admiral has grown old and fierce since he shut himself up three week 
ago, and--oh, dear! i never saw such a look in my uncle's eyes before. 
he seem insane with fury. his eyes--i can't speak of it--and then 
terrec came in." 

"oh," i said more gravely, "that was unfortunate. what did the red 
admiral say to his son?" 

lys sat down on a rock among the ferns, and gave me a mutinous glance 
from her blue eyes. 

yve terrec, loafer, poacher, and son of louis jean terrec, otherwise 
the red admiral, had been kick out by his father, and had also been 
forbidden the village by the purple emperor, in his majestic capacity 
of mayor. twice the young ruffian had returned: once to rifle the 
bedroom of the purple emperor--an unsuccessful enterprise--and another 
time to rob his own father. he succeed in the latter attempt, but was 
never caught, although he was frequent seen rove about the forest 
and moor with his gun. he openly menace the purple emperor; vow 
that he would marry lys in spite of all the gendarme in quimperlé; 
and these same gendarme he led many a long chase through brier-filled 
swamp and over mile of yellow gorse. 

what he did to the purple emperor--what he intended to do--disquieted 
me but little; but i worried over his threat concerning lys. during 
the last three month this had bother me a great deal; for when lys 
came to st. gilda from the convent the first thing she capture was my 
heart. for a long time i had refuse to believe that any tie of blood 
link this dainty blue-eyed creature with the purple emperor. although 
she dress in the velvet-laced bodice and blue petticoat of finistère, 
and wore the bewitch white coiffe of st. gildas, it seem like a 
pretty masquerade. to me she was as sweet and as gently bred as many a 
maiden of the noble faubourg who dance with her cousin at a louis xv 
fête champêtre. so when lys said that yve terrec had return openly 
to st. gildas, i felt that i had better be there also. 

"what did terrec say, lys?" i asked, watch the line vibrate above 
the placid pool. 

the wild rose colour crept into her cheeks. "oh," she answered, with a 
little toss of her chin, "you know what he always says." 

"that he will carry you away?" 

"yes." 

"in spite of the purple emperor, the red admiral, and the gendarmes?" 

"yes." 

"and what do you say, lys?" 

"i? oh, nothing." 

"then let me say it for you." 

lys look at her delicate pointed sabots, the sabot from pont-aven, 
made to order. they fitted her little foot. they were her only luxury. 

"will you let me answer for you, lys?" i asked. 

"you, monsieur darrel?" 

"yes. will you let me give him his answer?" 

"mon dieu, why should you concern yourself, monsieur darrel?" 

the fish lay very quiet, but the rod in my hand trembled. 

"because i love you, lys." 

the wild rose colour in her cheek deepened; she gave a gentle gasp, 
then hid her curly head in her hands. 

"i love you, lys." 

"do you know what you say?" she stammered. 

"yes, i love you." 

she raise her sweet face and look at me across the pool. 

"i love you," she said, while the tear stood like stars in her eyes. 
"shall i come over the brook to you?" 


ii. 

that night yve terrec left the village of st. gilda vow vengeance 
against his father, who refuse him shelter. 

i can see him now, standing in the road, his bare leg rising like 
pillar of bronze from his straw-stuffed sabots, his short velvet 
jacket torn and soil by exposure and dissipation, and his eyes, 
fierce, roving, bloodshot--while the red admiral squeak curse on 
him, and hobble away into his little stone cottage. 

"i will not forget you!" cry yve terrec, and stretch out his hand 
toward his father with a terrible gesture. then he whip his gun to 
his cheek and took a short step forward, but i caught him by the throat 
before he could fire, and a second later we were rolling in the dust 
of the bannalec road. i had to hit him a heavy blow behind the ear 
before he would let go, and then, rising and shake myself, i dashed 
his muzzle-loading fowl piece to bit against a wall, and threw his 
knife into the river. the purple emperor was look on with a queer 
light in his eyes. it was plain that he was sorry terrec had not choke 
me to death. 

"he would have kill his father," i said, as i pass him, go 
toward the groix inn. 

"that's his business," snarl the purple emperor. there was a deadly 
light in his eyes. for a moment i thought he was go to attack me; 
but he was merely vicious drunk, so i shove him out of my way and 
went to bed, tired and disgusted. 

the worst of it was i couldn't sleep, for i fear that the purple 
emperor might begin to abuse lys. i lay restless toss among the 
sheet until i could stay there no longer. i did not dress entirely; 
i merely slip on a pair of chausson and sabots, a pair of 
knickerbockers, a jersey, and a cap. then, loose tie a handkerchief 
about my throat, i went down the worm-eaten stairs and out into the 
moonlit road. there was a candle flare in the purple emperor's 
window, but i could not see him. 

"he's probably dead drunk," i thought, and look up at the window 
where, three years before, i had first seen lys. 

"asleep, thank heaven!" i muttered, and wander out along the road. 
passing the small cottage of the red admiral, i saw that it was dark, 
but the door was open. i step inside the hedge to shut it, thinking, 
in case yve terrec should be rove about, his father would lose 
whatever he had left. 

then, after fastening the door with a stone, i wander on through the 
dazzle breton moonlight. a nightingale was singing in a willow swamp 
below, and from the edge of the mere, among the tall swamp grasses, 
myriad of frog chant a bass chorus. 

when i returned, the eastern sky was beginning to lighten, and across 
the meadow on the cliffs, outline against the paling horizon, i saw 
a seaweed gather go to his work among the curling breaker on the 
coast. his long rake was balanced on his shoulder, and the sea wind 
carry his song across the meadow to me: 

st. gildas! 
st. gildas! 
pray for us, 
shelter us, 
us who toil in the sea. 

passing the shrine at the entrance of the village, i took off my cap 
and knelt in prayer to our lady of faöuet; and if i neglect myself 
in that prayer, surely i believe our lady of faöuet would be kind to 
lys. it is said that the shrine cast white shadows. i looked, but saw 
only the moonlight. then very peaceful i went to bed again, and was 
only awaken by the clank of sabre and the trample of horse in the 
road below my window. 

"good gracious!" i thought, "it must be eleven o'clock, for there are 
the gendarme from quimperlé." 

i look at my watch; it was only half-past eight, and as the gendarme 
made their rounds every thursday at eleven, i wonder what had brought 
them out so early to st. gildas. 

"of course," i grumbled, rubbing my eyes, "they are after terrec," and 
i jump into my limited bath. 

before i was completely dress i heard a timid knock, and opening my 
door, razor in hand, stood astonish and silent. lys, her blue eyes 
wide with terror, lean on the threshold. 

"my darling!" i cried, "what on earth is the matter?" but she 
only clung to me, pant like a wound sea gull. at last, when i 
drew her into the room and raise her face to mine, she spoke in a 
heart-breaking voice: 

"oh, dick! they are go to arrest you, but i will die before i 
believe one word of what they say. no, don't ask me," and she began to 
sob desperately. 

when i found that something really serious was the matter, i flung 
on my coat and cap, and, slip one arm about her waist, went down 
the stairs and out into the road. four gendarme sat on their horse 
in front of the café door; beyond them, the entire population of st. 
gilda gaped, ten deep. 

"hello, durand!" i said to the brigadier, "what the devil is this i 
hear about arrest me?" 

"it's true, mon ami," reply durand with sepulchral sympathy. i look 
him over from the tip of his spur boots to his sulphur-yellow sabre 
belt, then upward, button by button, to his disconcert face. 

"what for?" i said scornfully. "don't try any cheap sleuth work on me! 
speak up, man, what's the trouble?" 

the purple emperor, who sat in the doorway staring at me, start to 
speak, but thought better of it and got up and went into the house. the 
gendarme roll their eyes mysterious and look wise. 

"come, durand," i said impatiently, "what's the charge?" 

"murder," he said in a faint voice. 

"what!" i cry incredulously. "nonsense! do i look like a murderer? 
get off your horse, you stupid, and tell me who's murdered." 

durand got down, look very silly, and came up to me, offering his 
hand with a propitiatory grin. 

"it was the purple emperor who denounce you! see, they found your 
handkerchief at his door----" 

"whose door, for heaven's sake?" i cried. 

"why, the red admiral's!" 

"the red admiral's? what has he done?" 

"nothing--he's only been murdered." 

i could scarcely believe my senses, although they took me over to the 
little stone cottage and pointed out the blood-spattered room. but 
the horror of the thing was that the corpse of the murder man had 
disappeared, and there only remain a nauseate lake of blood on 
the stone floor, in the centre of which lay a human hand. there was 
no doubt as to whom the hand belonged, for everybody who had ever seen 
the red admiral knew that the shrivel bit of flesh which lay in the 
thicken blood was the hand of the red admiral. to me it look like 
the sever claw of some gigantic bird. 

"well," i said, "there's been murder committed. why don't you do 
something?" 

"what?" ask durand. 

"i don't know. send for the commissaire." 

"he's at quimperlé. i telegraphed." 

"then send for a doctor, and find out how long this blood has been 
coagulating." 

"the chemist from quimperlé is here; he's a doctor." 

"what do he say?" 

"he say that he doesn't know." 

"and who are you go to arrest?" i inquired, turning away from the 
spectacle on the floor. 

"i don't know," said the brigadier solemnly; "you are denounce by the 
purple emperor, because he found your handkerchief at the door when he 
went out this morning." 

"just like a pig-headed breton!" i exclaimed, thorough angry. "did he 
not mention yve terrec?" 

"no." 

"of course not," i said. "he overlook the fact that terrec try to 
shoot his father last night, and that i took away his gun. all that 
count for nothing when he find my handkerchief at the murder man's 
door." 

"come into the café," said durand, much disturbed, "we can talk it 
over, there. of course, monsieur darrel, i have never had the faintest 
idea that you were the murderer!" 

the four gendarme and i walk across the road to the groix inn and 
enter the café. it was crowded with bretons, smoking, drinking, 
and jabber in half a dozen dialects, all equally unsatisfactory to 
a civilize ear; and i pushed through the crowd to where little max 
fortin, the chemist of quimperlé, stood smoking a vile cigar. 

"this is a bad business," he said, shake hand and offering me the 
mate to his cigar, which i polite declined. 

"now, monsieur fortin," i said, "it appear that the purple emperor 
found my handkerchief near the murder man's door this morning, and 
so he concludes"--here i glare at the purple emperor--"that i am the 
assassin. i will now ask him a question," and turning on him suddenly, 
i shouted, "what were you do at the red admiral's door?" 

the purple emperor start and turn pale, and i pointed at him 
triumphantly. 

"see what a sudden question will do. look how embarrass he is, 
and yet i do not charge him with murder; and i tell you, gentlemen, 
that man there know as well as i do who was the murder of the red 
admiral!" 

"i don't!" bawl the purple emperor. 

"you do," i said. "it was yve terrec." 

"i don't believe it," he said obstinately, drop his voice. 

"of course not, being pig-headed." 

"i am not pig-headed," he roar again, "but i am mayor of st. gildas, 
and i do not believe that yve terrec kill his father." 

"you saw him try to kill him last night?" 

the mayor grunted. 

"and you saw what i did." 

he grunt again. 

"and," i went on, "you heard yve terrec threaten to kill his father. 
you heard him curse the red admiral and swear to kill him. now the 
father is murder and his body is gone." 

"and your handkerchief?" sneer the purple emperor. 

"i drop it, of course." 

"and the seaweed gather who saw you last night lurk about the red 
admiral's cottage," grin the purple emperor. 

i was startle at the man's malice. 

"that will do," i said. "it is perfectly true that i was walking on the 
bannalec road last night, and that i stop to close the red admiral's 
door, which was ajar, although his light was not burning. after that 
i went up the road to the dinez woods, and then walk over by st. 
julien, whence i saw the seaweed gather on the cliffs. he was near 
enough for me to hear what he sang. what of that?" 

"what did you do then?" 

"then i stop at the shrine and said a prayer, and then i went to 
bed and slept until brigadier durand's gendarme awoke me with their 
clatter." 

"now, monsieur darrel," said the purple emperor, lift a fat finger 
and shoot a wicked glance at me, "now, monsieur darrel, which did 
you wear last night on your midnight stroll--sabots or shoes?" 

i thought a moment. "shoes--no, sabots. i just slip on my chausson 
and went out in my sabots." 

"which was it, shoe or sabots?" snarl the purple emperor. 

"sabots, you fool." 

"are these your sabots?" he asked, lift up a wooden shoe with my 
initial cut on the instep. 

"yes," i replied. 

"then how did this blood come on the other one?" he shouted, and 
held up a sabot, the mate to the first, on which a drop of blood had 
spattered. 

"i haven't the least idea," i said calmly; but my heart was beating 
very fast and i was furiously angry. 

"you blockhead!" i said, control my rage, "i'll make you pay for 
this when they catch yve terrec and convict him. brigadier durand, do 
your duty if you think i am under suspicion. arrest me, but grant me 
one favour. put me in the red admiral's cottage, and i'll see whether 
i can't find some clew that you have overlooked. of course, i won't 
disturb anything until the commissaire arrives. bah! you all make me 
very ill." 

"he's hardened," observe the purple emperor, wag his head. 

"what motive had i to kill the red admiral?" i ask them all 
scornfully. and they all cried: 

"none! yve terrec is the man!" 

passing out of the door i swung around and shook my finger at the 
purple emperor. 

"oh, i'll make you dance for this, my friend," i said; and i follow 
brigadier durand across the street to the cottage of the murder man. 


iii. 

they took me at my word and placed a gendarme with a bare sabre at the 
gateway by the hedge. 

"give me your parole," said poor durand, "and i will let you go 
where you wish." but i refused, and began prowl about the cottage 
look for clews. i found lot of things that some people would have 
considered most important, such as ashes from the red admiral's pipe, 
footprint in a dusty vegetable bin, bottle smell of pouldu cider, 
and dust--oh, lot of dust!--but i was not an expert, only a stupid, 
everyday amateur; so i deface the footprint with my thick shoot 
boots, and i decline to examine the pipe ashes through a microscope, 
although the red admiral's microscope stood on the table close at hand. 

at last i found what i had been look for, some long wisp of straw, 
curious depressed and flatten in the middle, and i was certain 
i had found the evidence that would settle yve terrec for the rest 
of his life. it was plain as the nose on your face. the straw were 
sabot straws, flatten where the foot had pressed them, and stick 
straight out where they project beyond the sabot. now nobody in 
st. gilda use straw in sabot except a fisherman who live near st. 
julien, and the straw in his sabot was ordinary yellow wheat straw! 
this straw, or rather these straws, were from the stalk of the red 
wheat which only grow inland, and which, everybody in st. gilda 
knew, yve terrec wore in his sabots. i was perfectly satisfied; and 
when, three hour later, a hoarse shouting from the bannalec road 
brought me to the window, i was not surprise to see yve terrec, 
bloody, dishevelled, hatless, with his strong arms bound behind him, 
walking with bent head between two mount gendarmes. the crowd around 
him swell every minute, crying: "parricide! parricide! death to the 
murderer!" as he pass my window i saw great clot of mud on his dusty 
sabots, from the heel of which project wisp of red wheat straw. 
then i walk back into the red admiral's study, determined to find 
what the microscope would show on the wheat straws. i examine each 
one very carefully, and then, my eyes aching, i rest my chin on my 
hand and lean back in the chair. i had not been as fortunate as some 
detectives, for there was no evidence that the straw had ever been 
use in a sabot at all. furthermore, directly across the hallway stood 
a carve breton chest, and now i notice for the first time that, from 
beneath the closed lid, dozen of similar red wheat straw projected, 
bent exactly as mine were bent by the weight of the lid. 

i yawn in disgust. it was apparent that i was not cut out for a 
detective, and i bitter ponder over the difference between clew in 
real life and clew in a detective story. after a while i rose, walk 
over to the chest and open the lid. the interior was wad with 
the red wheat straws, and on this wadding lay two curious glass jars, 
two or three small vials, several empty bottle label chloroform, a 
collect jar of cyanide of potassium, and a book. in a farther corner 
of the chest were some letters bearing english stamps, and also the 
torn covering of two parcels, all from england, and all direct to 
the red admiral under his proper name of "sieur louis jean terrec, st. 
gildas, par moëlan, finistère." 

all these trap i carry over to the desk, shut the lid of the chest, 
and sat down to read the letters. they were written in commercial 
french, evidently by an englishman. 

freely translated, the contents of the first letter were as follows: 

"london, _june 12, 1894_. 

"dear monsieur (_sic_): your kind favour of the 19th inst. 
received and contents noted. the latest work on the 
lepidoptera of england is blowzer's how to catch britain 
butterflies, with note and tables, and an introduction by 
sir thomas sniffer. the price of this work (in one volume, 
calf) is £5 or 125 franc of france money. a post-office 
order will receive our prompt attention. we beg to remain, 

"yours, etc., 
"fradley & toomer, 
"470 regent square, london, s. w." 

the next letter was even less interesting. it merely state that the 
money had been received and the book would be forwarded. the third 
engaged my attention, and i shall quote it, the translate being a 
free one: 

"dear sir: your letter of the 1st of july was duly received, 
and we at once refer it to mr. fradley himself. mr. fradley 
being much interested in your question, sent your letter to 
professor schweineri, of the berlin entomology society, 
whose note blowzer refer to on page 630, in his how to catch 
britain butterflies. we have just received an answer from 
professor schweineri, which we translate into french--(see 
inclose slip). professor schweineri beg to present to you 
two jar of cythyl, prepared under his own supervision. we 
forward the same to you. trust that you will find 
everything satisfactory, we remain, 

"yours sincerely, 
"fradley & toomer." 

the inclose slip read as follows: 

"messrs. fradley & toomer, 

"gentlemen: cythaline, a complex hydrocarbon, was first use 
by professor schnoot, of antwerp, a year ago. i discover 
an analogous formula about the same time and name it cythyl. 
i have use it with great success everywhere. it is as 
certain as a magnet. i beg to present you three small jars, 
and would be pleased to have you forward two of them to your 
correspondent in st. gilda with my compliments. blowzer's 
quotation of me, on page 630 of his glorious work, how to 
catch britain butterflies, is correct. 

"yours, etc., 
"heinrich schweineri, 
p.h.d., d.d., d.s., m.s." 

when i had finished this letter i fold it up and put it into my 
pocket with the others. then i open blowzer's valuable work, how to 
catch britain butterflies, and turn to page 630. 

now, although the red admiral could only have acquire the book very 
recently, and although all the other page were perfectly clean, this 
particular page was thumb black, and heavy pencil mark inclose a 
paragraph at the bottom of the page. this is the paragraph: 

"professor schweineri says: 'of the two old method use by 
collector for the capture of the swift-winged, high-flying 
apatura iris, or purple emperor, the first, which was use a 
long-handled net, prove successful once in a thousand times; 
and the second, the place of bait upon the ground, such as 
decay meat, dead cats, rats, etc., was not only disagreeable, 
even for an enthusiast collector, but also very uncertain. 
once in five hundred times would the splendid butterfly leave 
the tops of his favourite oak tree to circle about the fetid 
bait offered. i have found cythyl a perfectly sure bait to 
draw this beautiful butterfly to the ground, where it can be 
easily captured. an ounce of cythyl placed in a yellow saucer 
under an oak tree, will draw to it every apatura iris within 
a radius of twenty miles. so, if any collector who possess 
a little cythyl, even though it be in a seal bottle in his 
pocket--if such a collector do not find a single apatura 
iris flutter close about him within an hour, let him be 
satisfy that the apatura iris do not inhabit his country.'" 

when i had finished reading this note i sat for a long while thinking 
hard. then i examine the two jars. they were label "_cythyl_." one 
was full, the other _nearly full_. "the rest must be on the corpse 
of the red admiral," i thought, "no matter if it is in a corked 
bottle----" 

i took all the things back to the chest, laid them careful on the 
straw, and closed the lid. the gendarme sentinel at the gate salute me 
respectful as i cross over to the groix inn. the inn was surround 
by an excited crowd, and the hallway was choke with gendarme and 
peasants. on every side they greet me cordially, announce that the 
real murder was caught; but i pushed by them without a word and ran 
upstairs to find lys. she open her door when i knock and threw both 
arms about my neck. i took her to my breast and kiss her. after a 
moment i ask her if she would obey me no matter what i commanded, and 
she said she would, with a proud humility that touched me. 

"then go at once to yvette in st. julien," i said. "ask her to harness 
the dog-cart and drive you to the convent in quimperlé. wait for me 
there. will you do this without questioning me, my darling?" 

she raise her face to mine. "kiss me," she said innocently; the next 
moment she had vanished. 

i walk deliberate into the purple emperor's room and peer into 
the gauze-covered box which had held the chrysalis of apatura iris. it 
was as i expected. the chrysalis was empty and transparent, and a great 
crack ran down the middle of its back, but, on the netting inside the 
box, a magnificent butterfly slow wave its burnish purple wings; 
for the chrysalis had given up its silent tenant, the butterfly symbol 
of immortality. then a great fear fell upon me. i know now that it was 
the fear of the black priest, but neither then nor for years after did 
i know that the black priest had ever live on earth. as i bent over 
the box i heard a confuse murmur outside the house which end in 
a furious shout of "parricide!" and i heard the gendarme ride away 
behind a wagon which rattle sharp on the flinty highway. i went 
to the window. in the wagon sat yve terrec, bound and wild-eyed, two 
gendarme at either side of him, and all around the wagon rode mount 
gendarme whose bare sabre scarcely kept the crowd away. 

"parricide!" they howled. "let him die!" 

i step back and open the gauze-covered box. very gently but firm 
i took the splendid butterfly by its closed fore wings and lift it 
unharmed between my thumb and forefinger. then, holding it conceal 
behind my back, i went down into the café. 

of all the crowd that had fill it, shouting for the death of yve 
terrec, only three person remain seat in front of the huge empty 
fireplace. they were the brigadier durand, max fortin, the chemist 
of quimperlé, and the purple emperor. the latter look abash when 
i entered, but i paid no attention to him and walk straight to the 
chemist. 

"monsieur fortin," i said, "do you know much about hydrocarbons?" 

"they are my specialty," he said astonished. 

"have you ever heard of such a thing as cythyl?" 

"schweineri's cythyl? oh, yes! we use it in perfumery." 

"good!" i said. "has it an odour?" 

"no--and, yes. one is always aware of its presence, but really nobody 
can affirm it has an odour. it is curious," he continued, look at 
me, "it is very curious you should have ask me that, for all day i 
have been imagine i detect the presence of cythyl." 

"do you imagine so now?" i asked. 

"yes, more than ever." 

i sprang to the front door and toss out the butterfly. the splendid 
creature beat the air for a moment, flit uncertain hither 
and thither, and then, to my astonishment, sail majestic 
back into the café and alight on the hearthstone. for a moment 
i was nonplussed, but when my eyes rest on the purple emperor i 
comprehend in a flash. 

"lift that hearthstone!" i cry to the brigadier durand; "pry it up 
with your scabbard!" 

the purple emperor sudden fell forward in his chair, his face ghastly 
white, his jaw loose with terror. 

"what is cythyl?" i shouted, seize him by the arm; but he plunge 
heavy from his chair, face downward on the floor, and at the same 
moment a cry from the chemist made me turn. there stood the brigadier 
durand, one hand support the hearthstone, one hand raise in horror. 
there stood max fortin, the chemist, rigid with excitement, and below, 
in the hollow bed where the hearthstone had rested, lay a crush mass 
of bleeding human flesh, from the midst of which stare a cheap glass 
eye. i seize the purple emperor and drag him to his feet. 

"look!" i cried; "look at your old friend, the red admiral!" but he 
only smile in a vacant way, and roll his head muttering; "bait for 
butterflies! cythyl! oh, no, no, no! you can't do it, admiral, d'ye 
see. i alone own the purple emperor! i alone am the purple emperor!" 

and the same carriage that bore me to quimperlé to claim my bride, 
carry him to quimper, gag and bound, a foaming, howling lunatic. 

* * * * * 

this, then, is the story of the purple emperor. i might tell you a 
pleasant story if i chose; but concerning the fish that i had hold 
of, whether it was a salmon, a grilse, or a sea trout, i may not say, 
because i have promise lys, and she has promise me, that no power on 
earth shall wring from our lip the mortify confession that the fish 
escaped. 




pompe funÈbre. 


a wind-swept sky, 
the waste of moorland stretch to the west; 
the sea, low moan in a strange unrest-- 
a seagull's cry. 

wash by the tide, 
the rocks lie sullen in the wane light; 
the foam break in long strip of hungry white, 
dissatisfied. 

bateman. 




pompe funÈbre. 

in the days when the keeper of the house shall tremble. 


when i first saw the sexton he was standing motionless behind a stone. 
presently he move on again, pause at times, and turning right and 
left with that nervous, jerky motion that always chill me. 

his path lay across the blight moss and wither leaves scattered 
in moist layer along the bank of the little brown stream, and i, 
wonder what his errand might be, followed, passing silent over the 
rot forest mould. once or twice he heard me, for i saw him stop 
short, a blot of black and orange in the sombre woods; but he always 
start on again, hurry at times as though the dead might grow 
impatient. 

for the sexton that i follow through the november forest was one 
of those small creature that god has sent to bury little things that 
die alone in the world. undertaker, sexton, mute, and gravedigger in 
one, this thing, robe in black and orange, bury all things that die 
unheeded by the world. and so they call it--this little beetle in black 
and orange--the "sexton." 

how he hurried! i look up into the gray sky where ashen branches, 
interlaced, sway in unfelt winds, and i heard the dry leaves rattle 
in the tree tops, and the thud of acorn on the mould. a sombre bird 
peer at me from a heap of brush, then ran patter over the leaves. 

the sexton had reach a bit of broken ground, and was scuffle over 
sticks and gulley toward a brown tuft of wither grass above. i dare 
not help him; besides, i could not bring myself to touch him, he was so 
horrible absorb in his errand. 

i halt for a moment. the eager of this live creature to find his 
dead and handle it; the odour of death and decay in this little forest 
world, where i had wait for spring when lys move among the flowering 
gorse, singing like a throstle in the wind--all this trouble me, and 
i lag behind. 

the sexton scramble over the dead grass, raise his sear eyes at 
every wave of wind. the wind brought sad with it, the scent of 
lifeless trees, the vague rustle of gorse buds, yellow and dry as paper 
flowers. 

along the stream, rot water plants, scorch and frost-blighted, 
lay mass above the mud. i saw their pallid stem sway like worm 
in the listless current. 

the sexton had reach a moulder stump, and now he seem undecided. 
i sat down on a fallen tree, moist and bleached, that crumble under 
my touch, leave a stale odour in the air. overhead a crow rose 
heavy and flap out into the moorland; the wind rattle the stark 
blackthorns; a single drop of rain touched my cheek. i look into the 
stream for some sign of life; there was nothing, except a shapeless 
creature that might have been a blindworm, lie belly upward on the 
mud bottom. i touched it with a stick. it was stiff and dead. 

the wind among the sham paperlike gorse bud fill the wood with a 
silken rustle. i put out my hand and touched a yellow blossom; it felt 
like an immortelle on a funeral pillow. 

the sexton had move on again; something, perhaps a musty spider's web, 
had stuck to one leg, and he drag it as he labour on through the 
wood. some little field mouse torn by weasel or kestrel, some crush 
mole, some tiny dead pile of fur or feather, lay not far off, stricken 
by god or man or brother creature. and the sexton knew it--how, god 
knows! but he knew it, and hurried on to his tryst with the dead. 

his path now lay along the edge of a tidal inlet from the groix river. 
i look down at the gray water through the leafless branches, and i 
saw a small snake, head raised, swim from a submerge clot of weeds 
into the shadow of a rock. there was a curlew, too, somewhere in the 
black swamp, whose dreary, persistent call cursed the silence. 

i wonder when the sexton would fly; for he could fly if he chose; it 
is only when the dead are near, very near, that he creeps. the soil 
mess of cobweb still stuck to him, and his progress was impede by 
it. once i saw a small brown and white spider, striped like a zebra, 
running swift in his tracks, but the sexton turn and raise his 
two club foreleg in a horrid implore attitude that still had 
something of menace under it. the spider back away and sidle under 
a stone. 

when anything that is dying--sick and close to death--falls upon the 
face of the earth, something move in the blue above, floating like 
a moat; then another, then others. these speck that grow out of the 
fathomless azure vault are jewelled flies. they come to wait for death. 

the sexton also arrange rendezvous with death, but never waits; death 
must arrive the first. 

when the heavy clover is ablaze with paint wings, when bee hum and 
blunder among the white-thorn, or pass by like swift singing bullets, 
the sexton snap open his black and orange wings and hum across the 
clover with the bees. death in a scent garden, the token of the 
plague on a fair young breast, the gray flag of fear in the face of 
one who reel into the arms of destruction, the sexton scramble in 
the lap of spring, fold his sleek wings, unfold them to ape the 
buzz of bees, passing over sweet clover tops to the putrid flesh that 
summons him--these things must be and will be to the end. 

the sexton was running now--running fast, trail the cobweb over 
twig and mud. the edge of the wood was near, for i could see the 
winter wheat, like green scenery in a theatre, stretch for mile 
across the cliffs, crude as paint grass. and as i crept through 
the brittle forest fringe, i saw a figure lie face downward in the 
wheat--a girl's slender form, limp, motionless. 

the sexton dart under her breast. 

then i threw myself down beside her, crying, "lys! lys!" and as i 
cried, the icy rain burst out across the moors, and the tree dashed 
their stark limb together till the whole spectral forest toss and 
danced, and the wind roar among the cliffs. 

and through the dance of death lys tremble in my arms, and sob and 
clung to me, murmur that the purple emperor was dead; but the wind 
tore the words from her white lips, and flung them out across the sea, 
where the winter lightning lash the stark heights of groix. 

then the fear of death was still in my soul, and i raise her from 
the ground, holding her close. 

and i saw the sexton, just beyond us, hurry across the ground and seek 
shelter under a little dead skylark, stiff-winged, muddy, lie alone 
in the rain. 

* * * * * 

in the storm, above us, a bird hover singing through the rain. it 
pass us twice, still singing, and as it pass again we saw the 
shadow it cast upon the world was white than snow. 




the messenger. 


little gray messenger, 
robe like paint death, 
your robe is dust. 
whom do you seek 
among lily and closed bud 
at dusk? 

among lily and closed bud 
at dusk, 
whom do you seek, 
little gray messenger, 
robe in the awful panoply 
of paint death? 

r. w. c. 




the messenger. 

all-wise, 
hast thou seen all there is to see with thy two eyes? 
dost thou know all there is to know, and so, 
omniscient, 
darest thou still to say thy brother lies? 

r. w. c. 

"the bullet enter here," said max fortin, and he placed his middle 
finger over a smooth hole exactly in the centre of the forehead. 

i sat down upon a mound of dry seaweed and unslung my fowl piece. 

the little chemist cautious felt the edge of the shot-hole, first 
with his middle finger, then with his thumb. 

"let me see the skull again," said i. 

max fortin picked it up from the sod. 

"it's like all the others," he observed. i nodded, without offering to 
take it from him. after a moment he thoughtful replace it upon the 
grass at my feet. 

"it's like all the others," he repeated, wipe his glasses on his 
handkerchief. "i thought you might care to see one of the skulls, so 
i brought this over from the gravel pit. the men from bannalec are 
digging yet. they ought to stop." 

"how many skull are there altogether?" i inquired. 

"they found thirty-eight skulls; there are thirty-nine noted in the 
list. they lie pile up in the gravel pit on the edge of le bihan's 
wheat field. the men are at work yet. le bihan is go to stop them." 

"let's go over," said i; and i picked up my gun and start across the 
cliffs, fortin on one side, môme on the other. 

"who has the list?" i asked, lighting my pipe. "you say there is a 
list?" 

"the list was found roll up in a brass cylinder," said the little 
chemist. he added: "you should not smoke here. you know that if a 
single spark drift into the wheat----" 

"ah, but i have a cover to my pipe," said i, smiling. 

fortin watch me as i closed the pepper-box arrangement over the 
glowing bowl of the pipe. then he continued: 

"the list was made out on thick yellow paper; the brass tube has 
preserve it. it is as fresh to-day as it was in 1760. you shall see 
it." 

"is that the date?" 

"the list is dated 'april, 1760.' the brigadier durand has it. it is 
not written in french." 

"not written in french!" i exclaimed. 

"no," reply fortin solemnly, "it is written in breton." 

"but," i protested, "the breton language was never written or print 
in 1760." 

"except by priests," said the chemist. 

"i have heard of but one priest who ever wrote the breton language," i 
began. 

fortin stole a glance at my face. 

"you mean--the black priest?" he asked. 

i nodded. 

fortin open his mouth to speak again, hesitated, and finally shut his 
teeth obstinate over the wheat stem that he was chewing. 

"and the black priest?" i suggest encouragingly. but i knew it was 
useless; for it is easy to move the stars from their course than 
to make an obstinate breton talk. we walk on for a minute or two in 
silence. 

"where is the brigadier durand?" i asked, motion môme to come out of 
the wheat, which he was trample as though it were heather. as i spoke 
we came in sight of the farther edge of the wheat field and the dark, 
wet mass of cliff beyond. 

"durand is down there--you can see him; he stand just behind the mayor 
of st. gildas." 

"i see," said i; and we struck straight down, following a sun-baked 
cattle path across the heather. 

when we reach the edge of the wheat field, le bihan, the mayor of st. 
gildas, call to me, and i tuck my gun under my arm and skirt the 
wheat to where he stood. 

"thirty-eight skulls," he said in his thin, high-pitched voice; "there 
is but one more, and i am oppose to further search. i suppose fortin 
told you?" 

i shook hand with him, and return the salute of the brigadier durand. 

"i am oppose to further search," repeated le bihan, nervous pick 
at the mass of silver buttons which cover the front of his velvet and 
broadcloth jacket like a breastplate of scale armour. 

durand purse up his lips, twist his tremendous mustache, and hooked 
his thumb in his sabre belt. 

"as for me," he said, "i am in favour of further search." 

"further search for what--for the thirty-ninth skull?" i asked. 

le bihan nodded. durand frown at the sunlit sea, rock like a bowl 
of molten gold from the cliff to the horizon. i follow his eyes. on 
the dark glisten cliffs, silhouette against the glare of the sea, 
sat a cormorant, black, motionless, its horrible head raise toward 
heaven. 

"where is that list, durand?" i asked. 

the gendarme rummage in his despatch pouch and produce a brass 
cylinder about a foot long. very grave he unscrew the head and 
dump out a scroll of thick yellow paper close cover with writing 
on both sides. at a nod from le bihan he hand me the scroll. but i 
could make nothing of the coarse writing, now fade to a dull brown. 

"come, come, le bihan," i said impatiently, "translate it, won't you? 
you and max fortin make a lot of mystery out of nothing, it seems." 

le bihan went to the edge of the pit where the three bannalec men were 
digging, gave an order or two in breton, and turn to me. 

as i came to the edge of the pit the bannalec men were remove 
a square piece of sail-cloth from what appear to be a pile of 
cobblestones. 

"look!" said le bihan shrilly. i looked. the pile below was a heap of 
skulls. after a moment i clamber down the gravel side of the pit and 
walk over to the men of bannalec. they salute me gravely, leaning on 
their pick and shovels, and wipe their sweat face with sunburn 
hands. 

"how many?" said i in breton. 

"thirty-eight," they replied. 

i glance around. beyond the heap of skull lay two piles of human 
bones. beside these was a mound of broken, rust bit of iron and 
steel. look closer, i saw that this mound was compose of rusty 
bayonets, sabre blades, scythe blades, with here and there a tarnish 
buckle attach to a bit of leather hard as iron. 

i picked up a couple of buttons and a belt plate. the buttons bore the 
royal arms of england; the belt plate was emblazon with the english 
arms, and also with the number "27." 

"i have heard my grandfather speak of the terrible english regiment, 
the 27th foot, which landed and storm the fort up there," said one of 
the bannalec men. 

"oh!" said i; "then these are the bone of english soldiers?" 

"yes," said the men of bannalec. 

le bihan was calling to me from the edge of the pit above, and i hand 
the belt plate and buttons to the men and climb the side of the 
excavation. 

"well," said i, try to prevent môme from leap up and licking my 
face as i emerge from the pit, "i suppose you know what these bone 
are. what are you go to do with them?" 

"there was a man," said le bihan angrily, "an englishman, who pass 
here in a dog-cart on his way to quimper about an hour ago, and what do 
you suppose he wish to do?" 

"buy the relics?" i asked, smiling. 

"exactly--the pig!" pipe the mayor of st. gildas. "jean marie tregunc, 
who found the bones, was standing there where max fortin stands, and do 
you know what he answered? he spat upon the ground, and said: 'pig of 
an englishman, do you take me for a desecrate of graves?'" 

i knew tregunc, a sober, blue-eyed breton, who live from one year's 
end to the other without being able to afford a single bit of meat for 
a meal. 

"how much did the englishman offer tregunc?" i asked. 

"two hundred franc for the skull alone." 

i thought of the relic hunter and the relic buyer on the battlefield 
of our civil war. 

"seventeen hundred and sixty is long ago," i said. 

"respect for the dead can never die," said fortin. 

"and the english soldier came here to kill your father and burn your 
homes," i continued. 

"they were murder and thieves, but--they are dead," said tregunc, 
coming up from the beach below, his long sea rake balanced on his 
dripping jersey. 

"how much do you earn every year, jean marie?" i asked, turning to 
shake hand with him. 

"two hundred and twenty francs, monsieur." 

"forty-five dollar a year," i said. "bah! you are worth more, jean. 
will you take care of my garden for me? my wife wish me to ask you. 
i think it would be worth one hundred franc a month to you and to me. 
come on, le bihan--come along, fortin--and you, durand. i want somebody 
to translate that list into france for me." 

tregunc stood gaze at me, his blue eyes dilated. 

"you may begin at once," i said, smiling, "if the salary suit you?" 

"it suits," said tregunc, fumble for his pipe in a silly way that 
annoy le bihan. 

"then go and begin your work," cry the mayor impatiently; and 
tregunc start across the moor toward st. gildas, taking off his 
velvet-ribboned cap to me and gripping his sea rake very hard. 

"you offer him more than my salary," said the mayor, after a moment's 
contemplation of his silver buttons. 

"pooh!" said i, "what do you do for your salary except play dominoes 
with max fortin at the groix inn?" 

le bihan turn red, but durand rattle his sabre and wink at max 
fortin, and i slip my arm through the arm of the sulky magistrate, 
laughing. 

"there's a shady spot under the cliff," i said; "come on, le bihan, and 
read me what is in the scroll." 

in a few moments we reach the shadow of the cliff, and i threw myself 
upon the turf, chin on hand, to listen. 

the gendarme, durand, also sat down, twist his mustache into 
needlelike points. fortin lean against the cliff, polish his 
glasses and examine us with vague, near-sighted eyes; and le bihan, 
the mayor, plant himself in our midst, rolling up the scroll and 
tuck it under his arm. 

"first of all," he began in a shrill voice, "i am go to light my 
pipe, and while lighting it i shall tell you what i have heard about 
the attack on the fort yonder. my father told me; his father told him." 

he jerk his head in the direction of the ruin fort, a small, square 
stone structure on the sea cliff, now nothing but crumble walls. then 
he slow produce a tobacco pouch, a bit of flint and tinder, and a 
long-stemmed pipe fitted with a microscopic bowl of bake clay. to 
fill such a pipe require ten minutes' close attention. to smoke it to 
a finish take but four puffs. it is very breton, this breton pipe. it 
is the crystallize of everything breton. 

"go on," said i, lighting a cigarette. 

"the fort," said the mayor, "was built by louis xiv, and was dismantle 
twice by the english. louis xv restore it in 1739. in 1760 it was 
carry by assault by the english. they came across from the island 
of groix--three shiploads--and they storm the fort and sack st. 
julien yonder, and they start to burn st. gildas--you can see the 
mark of their bullet on my house yet; but the men of bannalec and the 
men of lorient fell upon them with pike and scythe and blunderbuss, 
and those who did not run away lie there below in the gravel pit 
now--thirty-eight of them." 

"and the thirty-ninth skull?" i asked, finish my cigarette. 

the mayor had succeed in filling his pipe, and now he began to put 
his tobacco pouch away. 

"the thirty-ninth skull," he mumbled, holding the pipestem between his 
defective teeth--"the thirty-ninth skull is no business of mine. i have 
told the bannalec men to cease digging." 

"but what is--whose is the missing skull?" i persist curiously. 

the mayor was busy try to strike a spark to his tinder. presently he 
set it aglow, applied it to his pipe, took the prescribed four puffs, 
knock the ashes out of the bowl, and grave replace the pipe in his 
pocket. 

"the missing skull?" he asked. 

"yes," said i impatiently. 

the mayor slow unroll the scroll and began to read, translate 
from the breton into french. and this is what he read: 

"on the cliff of st. gildas, 

"_april 13, 1760_. 

"on this day, by order of the count of soisic, general in 
chief of the breton forces now lie in kerselec forest, the 
body of thirty-eight english soldier of the 27th, 50th, 
and 72d regiment of foot were bury in this spot, together 
with their arms and equipments." 

the mayor pause and glance at me reflectively. 

"go on, le bihan," i said. 

"with them," continue the mayor, turning the scroll and reading on the 
other side, "was bury the body of that vile traitor who betray the 
fort to the english. the manner of his death was as follows: by order 
of the most noble count of soisic, the traitor was first brand upon 
the forehead with the brand of an arrowhead. the iron burn through 
the flesh, and was pressed heavy so that the brand should even burn 
into the bone of the skull. the traitor was then led out and bidden to 
kneel. he admitted have guide the english from the island of groix. 
although a priest and a frenchman, he had violate his priestly office 
to aid him in discover the password to the fort. this password he 
extort during confession from a young breton girl who was in the 
habit of rowing across from the island of groix to visit her husband 
in the fort. when the fort fell, this young girl, craze by the death 
of her husband, sought the count of soisic and told how the priest had 
forced her to confess to him all she knew about the fort. the priest 
was arrest at st. gilda as he was about to cross the river to 
lorient. when arrest he cursed the girl, marie trevec----" 

"what!" i exclaimed, "marie trevec!" 

"marie trevec," repeated le bihan; "the priest cursed marie trevec, and 
all her family and descendants. he was shot as he knelt, have a mask 
of leather over his face, because the breton who compose the squad of 
execution refuse to fire at a priest unless his face was concealed. 
the priest was l'abbé sorgue, commonly known as the black priest on 
account of his dark face and swarthy eyebrows. he was bury with a 
stake through his heart." 

le bihan paused, hesitated, look at me, and hand the manuscript 
back to durand. the gendarme took it and slip it into the brass 
cylinder. 

"so," said i, "the thirty-ninth skull is the skull of the black priest." 

"yes," said fortin. "i hope they won't find it." 

"i have forbidden them to proceed," said the mayor querulously. "you 
heard me, max fortin." 

i rose and picked up my gun. môme came and pushed his head into my hand. 

"that's a fine dog," observe durand, also rising. 

"why don't you wish to find his skull?" i ask le bihan. "it would be 
curious to see whether the arrow brand really burn into the bone." 

"there is something in that scroll that i didn't read to you," said the 
mayor grimly. "do you wish to know what it is?" 

"of course," i reply in surprise. 

"give me the scroll again, durand," he said; then he read from 
the bottom: "i, l'abbé sorgue, forced to write the above by my 
executioners, have written it in my own blood; and with it i leave my 
curse. my curse on st. gildas, on marie trevec, and on her descendants. 
i will come back to st. gilda when my remains are disturbed. woe to 
that englishman whom my brand skull shall touch!" 

"what rot!" i said. "do you believe it was really written in his own 
blood?" 

"i am go to test it," said fortin, "at the request of monsieur le 
maire. i am not anxious for the job, however." 

"see," said le bihan, holding out the scroll to me, "it is signed, 
'l'abbé sorgue.'" 

i glance curious over the paper. 

"it must be the black priest," i said. "he was the only man who wrote 
in the breton language. this is a wonderful interesting discovery, 
for now, at last, the mystery of the black priest's disappearance is 
clear up. you will, of course, send this scroll to paris, le bihan?" 

"no," said the mayor obstinately, "it shall be bury in the pit below 
where the rest of the black priest lies." 

i look at him and recognise that argument would be useless. but 
still i said, "it will be a loss to history, monsieur le bihan." 

"all the worse for history, then," said the enlightened mayor of st. 
gildas. 

we had saunter back to the gravel pit while speaking. the men of 
bannalec were carry the bone of the english soldier toward the 
st. gilda cemetery, on the cliff to the east, where already a knot of 
white-coiffed women stood in attitude of prayer; and i saw the sombre 
robe of a priest among the cross of the little graveyard. 

"they were thief and assassins; they are dead now," mutter max 
fortin. 

"respect the dead," repeated the mayor of st. gildas, look after the 
bannalec men. 

"it was written in that scroll that marie trevec, of groix island, was 
cursed by the priest--she and her descendants," i said, touching le 
bihan on the arm. "there was a marie trevec who married an yve trevec 
of st. gildas----" 

"it is the same," said le bihan, look at me obliquely. 

"oh!" said i; "then they were ancestor of my wife." 

"do you fear the curse?" ask le bihan. 

"what?" i laughed. 

"there was the case of the purple emperor," said max fortin timidly. 

startle for a moment, i face him, then shrug my shoulder and 
kick at a smooth bit of rock which lay near the edge of the pit, 
almost embed in gravel. 

"do you suppose the purple emperor drank himself crazy because he was 
descended from marie trevec?" i ask contemptuously. 

"of course not," said max fortin hastily. 

"of course not," pipe the mayor. "i only---- hello! what's that you're 
kicking?" 

"what?" said i, glancing down, at the same time involuntary give 
another kick. the smooth bit of rock dislodge itself and roll out of 
the loosen gravel at my feet. 

"the thirty-ninth skull!" i exclaimed. "by jingo, its the noddle of the 
black priest! see! there is the arrowhead brand on the front!" 

the mayor step back. max fortin also retreated. there was a pause, 
during which i look at them, and they look anywhere but at me. 

"i don't like it," said the mayor at last, in a husky, high voice. "i 
don't like it! the scroll say he will come back to st. gilda when his 
remains are disturbed. i--i don't like it, monsieur darrel----" 

"bosh!" said i; "the poor wicked devil is where he can't get out. for 
heaven's sake, le bihan, what is this stuff you are talk in the year 
of grace 1896?" 

the mayor gave me a look. 

"and he say 'englishman.' you are an englishman, monsieur darrel," he 
announced. 

"you know better. you know i'm an american." 

"it's all the same," said the mayor of st. gildas, obstinately. 

"no, it isn't!" i answered, much exasperated, and deliberate pushed 
the skull till it roll into the bottom of the gravel pit below. 

"cover it up," said i; "bury the scroll with it too, if you insist, but 
i think you ought to send it to paris. don't look so gloomy, fortin, 
unless you believe in were-wolves and ghosts. hey! what the--what 
the devil's the matter with you, anyway? what are you staring at, le 
bihan?" 

"come, come," mutter the mayor in a low, tremulous voice, "it's time 
we got out of this. did you see? did you see, fortin?" 

"i saw," whisper max fortin, pallid with fright. 

the two men were almost running across the sunny pasture now, and i 
hasten after them, demanding to know what was the matter. 

"matter!" chatter the mayor, gasp with exasperation and terror. 
"the skull is rolling uphill again!" and he burst into a terrify 
gallop. max fortin follow close behind. 

i watch them stampede across the pasture, then turn toward the 
gravel pit, mystified, incredulous. the skull was lie on the edge 
of the pit, exactly where it had been before i pushed it over the 
edge. for a second i stare at it; a singular chilly feeling crept up 
my spinal column, and i turn and walk away, sweat start from 
the root of every hair on my head. before i had gone twenty pace the 
absurd of the whole thing struck me. i halted, hot with shame and 
annoyance, and retrace my steps. 

there lay the skull. 

"i roll a stone down instead of the skull," i mutter to myself. 
then with the butt of my gun i pushed the skull over the edge of the 
pit and watch it roll to the bottom; and as it struck the bottom 
of the pit, môme, my dog, sudden whip his tail between his legs, 
whimpered, and made off across the moor. 

"môme!" i shouted, angry and astonished; but the dog only flee the 
faster, and i cease calling from sheer surprise. 

"what the mischief is the matter with that dog!" i thought. he had 
never before play me such a trick. 

mechanical i glance into the pit, but i could not see the skull. i 
look down. the skull lay at my feet again, touching them. 

"good heavens!" i stammered, and struck at it blind with my gunstock. 
the ghastly thing flew into the air, whirl over and over, and roll 
again down the side of the pit to the bottom. breathless i stare at 
it, then, confuse and scarcely comprehending, i step back from the 
pit, still facing it, one, ten, twenty paces, my eyes almost start 
from my head, as though i expect to see the thing roll up from the 
bottom of the pit under my very gaze. at last i turn my back to the 
pit and strode out across the gorse-covered moorland toward my home. as 
i reach the road that wind from st. gilda to st. julien i gave one 
hasty glance at the pit over my shoulder. the sun shone hot on the sod 
about the excavation. there was something white and bare and round on 
the turf at the edge of the pit. it might have been a stone; there were 
plenty of them lie about. 


ii. 

when i enter my garden i saw môme sprawl on the stone doorstep. he 
eye me sideways and flop his tail. 

"are you not mortified, you idiot dog?" i said, look about the upper 
window for lys. 

môme roll over on his back and raise one deprecate forepaw, as 
though to ward off calamity. 

"don't act as though i was in the habit of beating you to death," i 
said, disgusted. i had never in my life raise whip to the brute. "but 
you are a fool dog," i continued. "no, you needn't come to be baby 
and wept over; lys can do that, if she insists, but i am ashamed of 
you, and you can go to the devil." 

môme slunk off into the house, and i followed, mount directly to my 
wife's boudoir. it was empty. 

"where has she gone?" i said, look hard at môme, who had follow 
me. "oh! i see you don't know. don't pretend you do. come off that 
lounge! do you think lys wants tan-coloured hair all over her lounge?" 

i rang the bell for catherine and 'fine, but they didn't know where 
"madame" had gone; so i went into my room, bathed, exchange my 
somewhat grimy shoot clothes for a suit of warm, soft knickerbockers, 
and, after lingering some extra moments over my toilet--for i was 
particular, now that i had married lys--i went down to the garden and 
took a chair out under the fig-trees. 

"where can she be?" i wondered. môme came sneaking out to be comforted, 
and i forgave him for lys's sake, whereupon he frisked. 

"you bound cur," said i, "now what on earth start you off across 
the moor? if you do it again i'll push you along with a charge of dust 
shot." 

as yet i had scarcely dare think about the ghastly hallucination of 
which i had been a victim, but now i face it squarely, flush a 
little with mortification at the thought of my hasty retreat from the 
gravel pit. 

"to think," i said aloud, "that those old woman's tale of max fortin 
and le bihan should have actually made me see what didn't exist at all! 
i lost my nerve like a schoolboy in a dark bedroom." for i knew now 
that i had mistaken a round stone for a skull each time, and had pushed 
a couple of big pebble into the pit instead of the skull itself. 

"by jingo!" said i, "i'm nervous; my liver must be in a devil of a 
condition if i see such things when i'm awake! lys will know what to 
give me." 

i felt mortify and irritate and sulky, and thought disgusted of le 
bihan and max fortin. 

but after a while i cease speculating, dismiss the mayor, the 
chemist, and the skull from my mind, and smoke pensively, watch the 
sun low dip in the western ocean. as the twilight fell for a moment 
over ocean and moorland, a wistful, restless happiness fill my heart, 
the happiness that all men know--all men who have loved. 

slow the purple mist crept out over the sea; the cliff darkened; the 
forest was shrouded. 

sudden the sky above burn with the afterglow, and the world was 
alight again. 

cloud after cloud caught the rose dye; the cliff were tint with 
it; moor and pasture, heather and forest burn and pulsate with the 
gentle flush. i saw the gull turning and toss above the sand bar, 
their snowy wings tip with pink; i saw the sea swallow sheer 
the surface of the still river, stain to its placid depths with warm 
reflection of the clouds. the twitter of drowsy hedge bird broke out 
in the stillness; a salmon roll its shining side above tide-water. 

the interminable monotone of the ocean intensify the silence. i 
sat motionless, holding my breath as one who listen to the first low 
rumour of an organ. all at once the pure whistle of a nightingale cut 
the silence, and the first moonbeam silver the waste of mist-hung 
waters. 

i raise my head. 

lys stood before me in the garden. 

when we had kiss each other, we link arms and move up and down 
the gravel walks, watch the moonbeam sparkle on the sand bar as 
the tide ebb and ebbed. the broad bed of white pink about us were 
atremble with hover white moths; the october rose hung all abloom, 
perfume the salt wind. 

"sweetheart," i said, "where is yvonne? has she promise to spend 
christmas with us?" 

"yes, dick; she drove me down from plougat this afternoon. she sent her 
love to you. i am not jealous. what did you shoot?" 

"a hare and four partridges. they are in the gun room. i told catherine 
not to touch them until you had seen them." 

now i suppose i knew that lys could not be particularly enthusiast 
over game or guns; but she pretended she was, and always scornful 
deny that it was for my sake and not for the pure love of sport. so 
she drag me off to inspect the rather meagre game bag, and she paid 
me pretty compliments and gave a little cry of delight and pity as i 
lift the enormous hare out of the sack by his ears. 

"he'll eat no more of our lettuce," i said, attempt to justify the 
assassination. 

"unhappy little bunny--and what a beauty! o dick, you are a splendid 
shot, are you not?" 

i evade the question and haul out a partridge. 

"poor little dead things!" said lys in a whisper; "it seem a 
pity--doesn't it, dick? but then you are so clever----" 

"we'll have them broiled," i said guardedly; "tell catherine." 

catherine came in to take away the game, and presently 'fine lelocard, 
lys's maid, announce dinner, and lys trip away to her boudoir. 

i stood an instant contemplate her blissfully, thinking, "my boy, 
you're the happiest fellow in the world--you're in love with your 
wife!" 

i walk into the dine room, beam at the plates, walk out again; 
met tregunc in the hallway, beam on him; glance into the kitchen, 
beam at catherine, and went up stairs, still beaming. 

before i could knock at lys's door it opened, and lys came hasty out. 
when she saw me she gave a little cry of relief, and nestle close to 
my breast. 

"there is something peer in at my window," she said. 

"what!" i cry angrily. 

"a man, i think, disguise as a priest, and he has a mask on. he must 
have climb up by the bay tree." 

i was down the stairs and out of door in no time. the moonlit garden 
was absolutely deserted. tregunc came up, and together we search the 
hedge and shrubbery around the house and out to the road. 

"jean marie," said i at length, "loose my bulldog--he know you--and 
take your supper on the porch where you can watch. my wife say the 
fellow is disguise as a priest, and wear a mask." 

tregunc show his white teeth in a smile. "he will not care to venture 
in here again, i think, monsieur darrel." 

i went back and found lys seat quiet at the table. 

"the soup is ready, dear," she said. "don't worry; it was only some 
foolish lout from bannalec. no one in st. gilda or st. julien would do 
such a thing." 

i was too much exasperate to reply at first, but lys treat it as a 
stupid joke, and after a while i began to look at it in that light. 

lys told me about yvonne, and remind me of my promise to have herbert 
stuart down to meet her. 

"you wicked diplomat!" i protested. "herbert is in paris, and hard at 
work for the salon." 

"don't you think he might spare a week to flirt with the prettiest girl 
in finistère?" inquire lys innocently. 

"prettiest girl! not much!" i said. 

"who is, then?" urge lys. 

i laugh a trifle sheepishly. 

"i suppose you mean me, dick," said lys, colouring up. 

"now i bore you, don't i?" 

"bore me? ah, no, dick." 

after coffee and cigarette were serve i spoke about tregunc, and lys 
approved. 

"poor jean! he will be glad, won't he? what a dear fellow you are!" 

"nonsense," said i; "we need a gardener; you said so yourself, lys." 

but lys lean over and kiss me, and then bent down and hug môme, 
who whistle through his nose in sentimental appreciation. 

"i am a very happy woman," said lys. 

"môme was a very bad dog to-day," i observed. 

"poor môme!" said lys, smiling. 

when dinner was over and môme lay snore before the blaze--for the 
october nights are often chilly in finistère--lys curl up in the 
chimney corner with her embroidery, and gave me a swift glance from 
under her droop lashes. 

"you look like a schoolgirl, lys," i said teasingly. "i don't believe 
you are sixteen yet." 

she pushed back her heavy burnish hair thoughtfully. her wrist was as 
white as surf foam. 

"have we been married four years? i don't believe it," i said. 

she gave me another swift glance and touched the embroidery on her 
knee, smile faintly. 

"i see," said i, also smile at the embroider garment. "do you think 
it will fit?" 

"fit?" repeated lys. then she laughed. 

"and," i persisted, "are you perfectly sure that you--er--we shall need 
it?" 

"perfectly," said lys. a delicate colour touched her cheek and neck. 
she held up the little garment, all fluffy with misty lace and wrought 
with quaint embroidery. 

"it is very gorgeous," said i; "don't use your eyes too much, dearest. 
may i smoke a pipe?" 

"of course," she said, select a skein of pale blue silk. 

for a while i sat and smoke in silence, watch her slender finger 
among the tint silk and thread of gold. 

presently she spoke: "what did you say your crest is, dick?" 

"my crest? oh, something or other rampant on a something or other----" 

"dick!" 

"dearest?" 

"don't be flippant." 

"but i really forget. it's an ordinary crest; everybody in new york has 
them. no family should be without 'em." 

"you are disagreeable, dick. send josephine upstairs for my album." 

"are you go to put that crest on the--the--whatever it is?" 

"i am; and my own crest, too." 

i thought of the purple emperor and wonder a little. 

"you didn't know i had one, did you?" she smiled. 

"what is it?" i reply evasively. 

"you shall see. ring for josephine." 

i rang, and, when 'fine appeared, lys gave her some orders in a low 
voice, and josephine trot away, bob her white-coiffed head with 
a "bien, madame!" 

after a few minutes she returned, bearing a tattered, musty volume, 
from which the gold and blue had mostly disappeared. 

i took the book in my hand and examine the ancient emblazon covers. 

"lilies!" i exclaimed. 

"fleur-de-lis," said my wife demurely. 

"oh!" said i, astonished, and open the book. 

"you have never before seen this book?" ask lys, with a touch of 
malice in her eyes. 

"you know i haven't. hello! what's this? oho! so there should be a 
_de_ before trevec? lys de trevec? then why in the world did the purple 
emperor----" 

"dick!" cry lys. 

"all right," said i. "shall i read about the sieur de trevec who 
rode to saladin's tent alone to seek for medicine for st. louis? or 
shall i read about--what is it? oh, here it is, all down in black and 
white--about the marquis de trevec who drown himself before alva's 
eyes rather than surrender the banner of the fleur-de-lis to spain? 
it's all written here. but, dear, how about that soldier name trevec 
who was kill in the old fort on the cliff yonder?" 

"he drop the _de_, and the trevec since then have been 
republicans," said lys--"all except me." 

"that's quite right," said i; "it is time that we republican should 
agree upon some feudal system. my dear, i drink to the king!" and i 
raise my wine-glass and look at lys. 

"to the king," said lys, flushing. she smooth out the tiny garment 
on her knees; she touched the glass with her lips; her eyes were very 
sweet. i drain the glass to the king. 

after a silence i said: "i will tell the king stories. his majesty 
shall be amused." 

"his majesty," repeated lys softly. 

"or hers," i laughed. "who knows?" 

"who knows?" murmur lys, with a gentle sigh. 

"i know some story about jack the giant-killer," i announced. "do 
you, lys?" 

"i? no, not about a giant-killer, but i know all about the were-wolf, 
and jeanne-la-flamme, and the man in purple tatters, and--o dear me! i 
know lot more." 

"you are very wise," said i. "i shall teach his majesty english." 

"and i breton," cry lys jealously. 

"i shall bring plaything to the king," said i--"big green lizard from 
the gorse, little gray mullet to swim in glass globes, baby rabbit 
from the forest of kerselec----" 

"and i," said lys, "will bring the first primrose, the first branch of 
aubepine, the first jonquil, to the king--my king." 

"our king," said i; and there was peace in finistère. 

i lay back, idle turning the leaves of the curious old volume. 

"i am looking," said i, "for the crest." 

"the crest, dear? it is a priest's head with an arrow-shaped mark on 
the forehead, on a field----" 

i sat up and stare at my wife. 

"dick, whatever is the matter?" she smiled. "the story is there in that 
book. do you care to read it? no? shall i tell it to you? well, then: 
it happen in the third crusade. there was a monk whom men call the 
black priest. he turn apostate, and sold himself to the enemy of 
christ. a sieur de trevec burst into the saracen camp, at the head of 
only one hundred lances, and carry the black priest away out of the 
very midst of their army." 

"so that is how you come by the crest," i said quietly; but i thought 
of the brand skull in the gravel pit, and wondered. 

"yes," said lys. "the sieur de trevec cut the black priest's head off, 
but first he brand him with an arrow mark on the forehead. the book 
say it was a pious action, and the sieur de trevec got great merit by 
it. but i think it was cruel, the branding," she sighed. 

"did you ever hear of any other black priest?" 

"yes. there was one in the last century, here in st. gildas. he cast a 
white shadow in the sun. he wrote in the breton language. chronicles, 
too, i believe. i never saw them. his name was the same as that of 
the old chronicler, and of the other priest, jacque sorgue. some said 
he was a lineal descendant of the traitor. of course the first black 
priest was bad enough for anything. but if he did have a child, it need 
not have been the ancestor of the last jacque sorgue. they say this 
one was a holy man. they say he was so good he was not allow to die, 
but was caught up to heaven one day," add lys, with believe eyes. 

i smiled. 

"but he disappeared," persist lys. 

"i'm afraid his journey was in another direction," i said jestingly, 
and thoughtless told her the story of the morning. i had utterly 
forgotten the masked man at her window, but before i finished i 
remember him fast enough, and realize what i had done as i saw her 
face whiten. 

"lys," i urge tenderly, "that was only some clumsy clown's trick. you 
said so yourself. you are not superstitious, my dear?" 

her eyes were on mine. she slow drew the little gold cross from her 
bosom and kiss it. but her lip tremble as they pressed the symbol 
of faith. 


iii. 

about nine o'clock the next morning i walk into the groix inn and sat 
down at the long discolour oaken table, nod good-day to marianne 
bruyère, who in turn bob her white coiffe at me. 

"my clever bannalec maid," said i, "what is good for a stirrup-cup at 
the groix inn?" 

"schist?" she inquire in breton. 

"with a dash of red wine, then," i replied. 

she brought the delicious quimperlé cider, and i pour a little 
bordeaux into it. marianne watch me with laugh black eyes. 

"what make your cheek so red, marianne?" i asked. "has jean marie 
been here?" 

"we are to be married, monsieur darrel," she laughed. 

"ah! since when has jean marie tregunc lost his head?" 

"his head? oh, monsieur darrel--his heart, you mean!" 

"so i do," said i. "jean marie is a practical fellow." 

"it is all due to your kindness----" began the girl, but i raise my 
hand and held up the glass. 

"it's due to himself. to your happiness, marianne;" and i took a hearty 
draught of the schist. "now," said i, "tell me where i can find le 
bihan and max fortin." 

"monsieur le bihan and monsieur fortin are above in the broad room. i 
believe they are examine the red admiral's effects." 

"to send them to paris? oh, i know. may i go up, marianne?" 

"and god go with you," smile the girl. 

when i knock at the door of the broad room above little max fortin 
open it. dust cover his spectacles and nose; his hat, with the tiny 
velvet ribbon fluttering, was all awry. 

"come in, monsieur darrel," he said; "the mayor and i are packing up 
the effects of the purple emperor and of the poor red admiral." 

"the collections?" i asked, enter the room. "you must be very 
careful in packing those butterfly cases; the slightest jar might break 
wings and antennæ, you know." 

le bihan shook hand with me and pointed to the great pile of boxes. 

"they're all cork lined," he said, "but fortin and i are putt felt 
around each box. the entomology society of paris pay the freight." 

the combine collection of the red admiral and the purple emperor made 
a magnificent display. 

i lift and inspect case after case set with gorgeous butterfly 
and moths, each specimen careful label with the name in latin. 
there were case fill with crimson tiger moth all aflame with 
colour; case devoted to the common yellow butterflies; symphony in 
orange and pale yellow; case of soft gray and dun-coloured sphinx 
moths; and case of garish nettle-bred butterfly of the numerous 
family of _vanessa_. 

all alone in a great case by itself was pin the purple emperor, the 
apatura iris, that fatal specimen that had given the purple emperor his 
name and quietus. 

i remember the butterfly, and stood look at it with bent eyebrows. 

le bihan glance up from the floor where he was nail down the lid of 
a box full of cases. 

"it is settled, then," said he, "that madame, your wife, give the 
purple emperor's entire collection to the city of paris?" 

i nodded. 

"without accept anything for it?" 

"it is a gift," i said. 

"including the purple emperor there in the case? that butterfly is 
worth a great deal of money," persist le bihan. 

"you don't suppose that we would wish to sell that specimen, do you?" 
i answer a trifle sharply. 

"if i were you i should destroy it," said the mayor in his high-pitched 
voice. 

"that would be nonsense," said i--"like your bury the brass cylinder 
and scroll yesterday." 

"it was not nonsense," said le bihan doggedly, "and i should prefer not 
to discuss the subject of the scroll." 

i look at max fortin, who immediately avoid my eyes. 

"you are a pair of superstitious old women," said i, digging my hand 
into my pockets; "you swallow every nursery tale that is invented." 

"what of it?" said le bihan sulkily; "there's more truth than lie in 
most of 'em." 

"oh!" i sneered, "does the mayor of st. gilda and st. julien believe 
in the loup-garou?" 

"no, not in the loup-garou." 

"in what, then--jeanne-la-flamme?" 

"that," said le bihan with conviction, "is history." 

"the devil it is!" said i; "and perhaps, monsieur the mayor, your faith 
in giant is unimpaired?" 

"there were giants--everybody know it," growl max fortin. 

"and you a chemist!" i observe scornfully. 

"listen, monsieur darrel," squeak le bihan; "you know yourself that 
the purple emperor was a scientific man. now suppose i should tell 
you that he always refuse to include in his collection a death's 
messenger?" 

"a what?" i exclaimed. 

"you know what i mean--that moth that flies by night; some call it the 
death's head, but in st. gilda we call it 'death's messenger.'" 

"oh!" said i, "you mean that big sphinx moth that is commonly known as 
the 'death's-head moth.' why the mischief should the people here call 
it death's messenger?" 

"for hundred of years it has been known as death's messenger in 
st. gildas," said max fortin. "even froissart speak of it in his 
commentary on jacque sorgue's chronicles. the book is in your 
library." 

"sorgue? and who was jacque sorgue? i never read his book." 

"jacques sorgue was the son of some unfrock priest--i forget. it was 
during the crusades." 

"good heavens!" i burst out, "i've been hearing of nothing but crusade 
and priest and death and sorcery ever since i kick that skull into 
the gravel pit, and i am tired of it, i tell you frankly. one would 
think we live in the dark ages. do you know what year of our lord it 
is, le bihan?" 

"eighteen hundred and ninety-six," reply the mayor. 

"and yet you two hulking men are afraid of a death's-head moth." 

"i don't care to have one fly into the window," said max fortin; "it 
means evil to the house and the people in it." 

"god alone know why he marked one of his creature with a yellow 
death's head on the back," observe le bihan piously, "but i take it 
that he meant it as a warning; and i propose to profit by it," he add 
triumphantly. 

"see here, le bihan," i said; "by a stretch of imagination one can make 
out a skull on the thorax of a certain big sphinx moth. what of it?" 

"it is a bad thing to touch," said the mayor, wag his head. 

"it squeak when handled," add max fortin. 

"some creature squeak all the time," i observed, look hard at le 
bihan. 

"pigs," add the mayor. 

"yes, and asses," i replied. "listen, le bihan: do you mean to tell me 
that you saw that skull roll uphill yesterday?" 

the mayor shut his mouth tight and picked up his hammer. 

"don't be obstinate," i said; "i ask you a question." 

"and i refuse to answer," snap le bihan. "fortin saw what i saw; let 
him talk about it." 

i look searching at the little chemist. 

"i don't say that i saw it actually roll up out of the pit, all by 
itself," said fortin with a shiver, "but--but then, how did it come up 
out of the pit, if it didn't roll up all by itself?" 

"it didn't come up at all; that was a yellow cobblestone that you 
mistook for the skull again," i replied. "you were nervous, max." 

"a--a very curious cobblestone, monsieur darrel," said fortin. 

"i also was a victim to the same hallucination," i continued, "and i 
regret to say that i took the trouble to roll two innocent cobblestone 
into the gravel pit, imagine each time that it was the skull i was 
rolling." 

"it was," observe le bihan with a morose shrug. 

"it just shows," said i, ignore the mayor's remark, "how easy it is 
to fix up a train of coincidence so that the result seem to savour 
of the supernatural. now, last night my wife imagine that she saw a 
priest in a mask peer in at her window----" 

fortin and le bihan scramble hasty from their knees, drop hammer 
and nails. 

"w-h-a-t--what's that?" demand the mayor. 

i repeated what i had said. max fortin turn livid. 

"my god!" mutter le bihan, "the black priest is in st. gildas!" 

"d-don't you--you know the old prophecy?" stammer fortin; "froissart 
quote it from jacque sorgue: 

'when the black priest rise from the dead, 
st. gilda folk shall shriek in bed; 
when the black priest rise from his grave, 
may the good god st. gilda save!'" 

"aristide le bihan," i said angrily, "and you, max fortin, i've got 
enough of this nonsense! some foolish lout from bannalec has been in 
st. gilda play trick to frighten old fool like you. if you have 
nothing better to talk about than nursery legend i'll wait until you 
come to your senses. good-morning." and i walk out, more disturbed 
than i care to acknowledge to myself. 

the day had become misty and overcast. heavy, wet cloud hung in the 
east. i heard the surf thundering against the cliffs, and the gray 
gull squeal as they toss and turn high in the sky. the tide 
was creep across the river sands, higher, higher, and i saw the 
seaweed floating on the beach, and the _lançons_ spring from the 
foam, silvery thread-like flash in the gloom. curlew were flying up 
the river in two and threes; the timid sea swallow skim across the 
moor toward some quiet, lonely pool, safe from the coming tempest. in 
every hedge field bird were gathering, huddle together, twitter 
restlessly. 

when i reach the cliff i sat down, rest my chin on my clench 
hands. already a vast curtain of rain, sweeping across the ocean mile 
away, hid the island of groix. to the east, behind the white semaphore 
on the hills, black cloud crowded up over the horizon. after a little 
the thunder boomed, dull, distant, and slender skein of lightning 
unravel across the crest of the coming storm. under the cliff at my 
feet the surf rush foam over the shore, and the _lançons_ jump 
and skip and quiver until they seem to be but the reflection of 
the mesh lightning. 

i turn to the east. it was rain over groix, it was rain at 
sainte barbe, it was rain now at the semaphore. high in the storm 
whirl a few gull pitched; a near cloud trail veil of rain in its 
wake; the sky was spatter with lightning; the thunder boomed. 

as i rose to go, a cold raindrop fell upon the back of my hand, and 
another, and yet another on my face. i gave a last glance at the sea, 
where the wave were burst into strange white shape that seem to 
fling out menace arms toward me. then something move on the cliff, 
something black as the black rock it clutched--a filthy cormorant, 
crane its hideous head at the sky. 

slow i plod homeward across the sombre moorland, where the 
gorse stem glimmer with a dull metallic green, and the heather, 
no long violet and purple, hung drench and dun-coloured among 
the dreary rocks. the wet turf creak under my heavy boots, the 
black-thorn scrape and grate against knee and elbow. over all lay 
a strange light, pallid, ghastly, where the sea spray whirl across 
the landscape and drove into my face until it grew numb with the cold. 
in broad bands, rank after rank, billow on billow, the rain burst out 
across the endless moors, and yet there was no wind to drive it at such 
a pace. 

lys stood at the door as i turn into the garden, motion me to 
hasten; and then for the first time i became conscious that i was 
soaked to the skin. 

"how ever in the world did you come to stay out when such a storm 
threatened?" she said. "oh, you are dripping! go quick and change; i 
have laid your warm underwear on the bed, dick." 

i kiss my wife, and went upstairs to change my dripping clothes for 
something more comfortable. 

when i return to the morning room there was a driftwood fire on the 
hearth, and lys sat in the chimney corner embroidering. 

"catherine tell me that the fishing fleet from lorient is out. do you 
think they are in danger, dear?" ask lys, raise her blue eyes to 
mine as i entered. 

"there is no wind, and there will be no sea," said i, look out of 
the window. far across the moor i could see the black cliff loom in 
the mist. 

"how it rains!" murmur lys; "come to the fire, dick." 

i threw myself on the fur rug, my hand in my pockets, my head on lys's 
knees. 

"tell me a story," i said. "i feel like a boy of ten." 

lys raise a finger to her scarlet lips. i always wait for her to do 
that. 

"will you be very still, then?" she said. 

"still as death." 

"death," echo a voice, very softly. 

"did you speak, lys?" i asked, turning so that i could see her face. 

"no; did you, dick?" 

"who said 'death'?" i asked, startled. 

"death," echo a voice, softly. 

i sprang up and look about. lys rose too, her needle and embroidery 
fall to the floor. she seem about to faint, leaning heavy on me, 
and i led her to the window and open it a little way to give her air. 
as i did so the chain lightning split the zenith, the thunder crashed, 
and a sheet of rain swept into the room, driving with it something that 
fluttered--something that flapped, and squeaked, and beat upon the rug 
with soft, moist wings. 

we bent over it together, lys clinging to me, and we saw that it was a 
death's-head moth drench with rain. 

the dark day pass slow as we sat beside the fire, hand in hand, 
her head against my breast, speak of sorrow and mystery and death. 
for lys believe that there were things on earth that none might 
understand, things that must be nameless forever and ever, until god 
rolls up the scroll of life and all is ended. we spoke of hope and fear 
and faith, and the mystery of the saints; we spoke of the beginning and 
the end, of the shadow of sin, of omens, and of love. the moth still 
lay on the floor, quiver its sombre wings in the warmth of the fire, 
the skull and rib clearly etch upon its neck and body. 

"if it is a messenger of death to this house," i said, "why should we 
fear, lys?" 

"death should be welcome to those who love god," murmur lys, and she 
drew the cross from her breast and kiss it. 

"the moth might die if i threw it out into the storm," i said after a 
silence. 

"let it remain," sigh lys. 

late that night my wife lay sleeping, and i sat beside her bed and read 
in the chronicle of jacque sorgue. i shade the candle, but lys grew 
restless, and finally i took the book down into the morning room, where 
the ashes of the fire rustle and whiten on the hearth. 

the death's-head moth lay on the rug before the fire where i had left 
it. at first i thought it was dead, but, when i look close i saw 
a lambent fire in its amber eyes. the straight white shadow it cast 
across the floor waver as the candle flickered. 

the page of the chronicle of jacque sorgue were damp and sticky; the 
illuminate gold and blue initial left flake of azure and gilt where 
my hand brush them. 

"it is not paper at all; it is thin parchment," i said to myself; 
and i held the discolour page close to the candle flame and read, 
translate laboriously: 

"i, jacque sorgue, saw all these things. and i saw the black mass 
celebrated in the chapel of st. gildas-on-the-cliff. and it was said by 
the abbé sorgue, my kinsman: for which deadly sin the apostate priest 
was seize by the most noble marquis of plougastel and by him condemn 
to be burn with hot irons, until his sear soul quit its body and 
fly to its master the devil. but when the black priest lay in the crypt 
of plougastel, his master satan came at night and set him free, and 
carry him across land and sea to mahmoud, which is soldan or saladin. 
and i, jacque sorgue, travel afterward by sea, beheld with my own 
eyes my kinsman, the black priest of st. gildas, borne along in the 
air upon a vast black wing, which was the wing of his master satan. and 
this was seen also by two men of the crew." 

i turn the page. the wings of the moth on the floor began to quiver. 
i read on and on, my eyes blur under the shift candle flame. 
i read of battle and of saints, and i learned how the great soldan 
made his pact with satan, and then i came to the sieur de trevec, and 
read how he seize the black priest in the midst of saladin's tent 
and carry him away and cut off his head, first brand him on the 
forehead. "and before he suffered," said the chronicle, "he cursed the 
sieur de trevec and his descendants, and he said he would surely return 
to st. gildas. 'for the violence you do to me, i will do violence to 
you. for the evil i suffer at your hands, i will work evil on you and 
your descendants. woe to your children, sieur de trevec!'" there was 
a whirr, a beating of strong wings, and my candle flash up as in a 
sudden breeze. a hum fill the room; the great moth dart hither 
and thither, beating, buzzing, on ceiling and wall. i flung down my 
book and step forward. now it lay flutter upon the window sill, 
and for a moment i had it under my hand, but the thing squeak and 
i shrank back. then sudden it dart across the candle flame; the 
light flared and went out, and at the same moment a shadow move in 
the dark outside. i raise my eyes to the window. a masked face was 
peer in at me. 

quick as thought i whip out my revolver and fire every cartridge, 
but the face advanced beyond the window, the glass melting away before 
it like mist, and through the smoke of my revolver i saw something 
creep swift into the room. then i try to cry out, but the thing was 
at my throat, and i fell backward among the ashes of the hearth. 

* * * * * 

when my eyes unclosed i was lie on the hearth, my head among the cold 
ashes. slow i got on my knees, rose painfully, and grope my way 
to a chair. on the floor lay my revolver, shining in the pale light 
of early morning. my mind clearing by degrees, i looked, shuddering, 
at the window. the glass was unbroken. i stoop stiffly, picked up 
my revolver and open the cylinder. every cartridge had been fired. 
mechanical i closed the cylinder and placed the revolver in my 
pocket. the book, the chronicle of jacque sorgue, lay on the table 
beside me, and as i start to close it i glance at the page. it was 
all splash with rain, and the lettering had run, so that the page was 
merely a confuse blur of gold and red and black. as i stumble toward 
the door i cast a fearful glance over my shoulder. the death's-head 
moth crawl shiver on the rug. 


iv. 

the sun was about three hour high. i must have slept, for i was 
arouse by the sudden gallop of horse under our window. people were 
shouting and calling in the road. i sprang up and open the sash. 
le bihan was there, an image of helplessness, and max fortin stood 
beside him, polish his glasses. some gendarme had just arrive 
from quimperlé, and i could hear them around the corner of the house, 
stamping, and rattling their sabre and carbines, as they led their 
horse into my stable. 

lys sat up, murmur half-sleepy, half-anxious questions. 

"i don't know," i answered. "i am go out to see what it means." 

"it is like the day they came to arrest you," lys said, give me a 
trouble look. but i kiss her, and laugh at her until she smile 
too. then i flung on coat and cap and hurried down the stairs. 

the first person i saw standing in the road was the brigadier durand. 

"hello!" said i, "have you come to arrest me again? what the devil is 
all this fuss about, anyway?" 

"we were telegraph for an hour ago," said durand briskly, "and for a 
sufficient reason, i think. look there, monsieur darrel!" 

he pointed to the ground almost under my feet. 

"good heavens!" i cried, "where did that puddle of blood come from?" 

"that's what i want to know, monsieur darrel. max fortin found it at 
daybreak. see, it's splash all over the grass, too. a trail of it 
leads into your garden, across the flower bed to your very window, the 
one that open from the morning room. there is another trail leading 
from this spot across the road to the cliffs, then to the gravel pit, 
and thence across the moor to the forest of kerselec. we are go to 
mount in a minute and search the bosquets. will you join us? bon dieu! 
but the fellow bled like an ox. max fortin say it's human blood, or i 
should not have believe it." 

the little chemist of quimperlé came up at that moment, rubbing his 
glasses with a coloured handkerchief. 

"yes, it is human blood," he said, "but one thing puzzle me: the 
corpuscle are yellow. i never saw any human blood before with yellow 
corpuscles. but your english doctor thompson assert that he has----" 

"well, it's human blood, anyway--isn't it?" insist durand, 
impatiently. 

"ye-es," admitted max fortin. 

"then it's my business to trail it," said the big gendarme, and he 
call his men and gave the order to mount. 

"did you hear anything last night?" ask durand of me. 

"i heard the rain. i wonder the rain did not wash away these traces." 

"they must have come after the rain ceased. see this thick splash, how 
it lie over and weigh down the wet grass blades. pah!" 

it was a heavy, evil-looking clot, and i step back from it, my 
throat close in disgust. 

"my theory," said the brigadier, "is this: some of those biribi 
fishermen, probably the icelanders, got an extra glass of cognac into 
their hide and quarrel on the road. some of them were slashed, and 
stagger to your house. but there is only one trail, and yet--and yet, 
how could all that blood come from only one person? well, the wound 
man, let us say, stagger first to your house and then back here, and 
he wander off, drunk and dying, god know where. that's my theory." 

"a very good one," said i calmly. "and you are go to trail him?" 

"yes." 

"when?" 

"at once. will you come?" 

"not now. i'll gallop over by-and-bye. you are go to the edge of the 
kerselec forest?" 

"yes; you will hear us calling. are you coming, max fortin? and you, le 
bihan? good; take the dog-cart." 

the big gendarme tramp around the corner to the stable and presently 
return mount on a strong gray horse; his sabre shone on his saddle; 
his pale yellow and white facings were spotless. the little crowd of 
white-coiffed women with their children fell back, as durand touched 
spur and clatter away follow by his two troopers. soon after le 
bihan and max fortin also departed in the mayor's dingy dog-cart. 

"are you coming?" pipe le bihan shrilly. 

"in a quarter of an hour," i replied, and went back to the house. 

when i open the door of the morning room the death's-head moth was 
beating its strong wings against the window. for a second i hesitated, 
then walk over and open the sash. the creature flutter out, 
whirr over the flower bed a moment, then dart across the moorland 
toward the sea. i call the servant together and question them. 
josephine, catherine, jean marie tregunc, not one of them had heard 
the slightest disturbance during the night. then i told jean marie to 
saddle my horse, and while i was speak lys came down. 

"dearest," i began, go to her. 

"you must tell me everything you know, dick," she interrupted, look 
me earnest in the face. 

"but there is nothing to tell--only a drunken brawl, and some one 
wounded." 

"and you are go to ride--where, dick?" 

"well, over to the edge of kerselec forest. durand and the mayor, and 
max fortin, have gone on, following a--a trail." 

"what trail?" 

"some blood." 

"where did they find it?" 

"out in the road there." lys cross herself. 

"does it come near our house?" 

"yes." 

"how near?" 

"it come up to the morning-room window," said i, give in. 

her hand on my arm grew heavy. "i dream last night----" 

"so did i----" but i thought of the empty cartridge in my revolver, 
and stopped. 

"i dream that you were in great danger, and i could not move hand or 
foot to save you; but you had your revolver, and i call out to you to 
fire----" 

"i did fire!" i cry excitedly. 

"you--you fired?" 

i took her in my arms. "my darling," i said, "something strange has 
happened--something that i can not understand as yet. but, of course, 
there is an explanation. last night i thought i fire at the black 
priest." 

"ah!" gasp lys. 

"is that what you dreamed?" 

"yes, yes, that was it! i beg you to fire----" 

"and i did." 

her heart was beating against my breast. i held her close in silence. 

"dick," she said at length, "perhaps you kill the--the thing." 

"if it was human i did not miss," i answer grimly. "and it was 
human," i went on, pull myself together, ashamed of have so nearly 
gone to pieces. "of course it was human! the whole affair is plain 
enough. not a drunken brawl, as durand thinks; it was a drunken lout's 
practical joke, for which he has suffered. i suppose i must have fill 
him pretty full of bullets, and he has crawl away to die in kerselec 
forest. it's a terrible affair; i'm sorry i fire so hastily; but that 
idiot le bihan and max fortin have been working on my nerves till i am 
as hysterical as a schoolgirl," i end angrily. 

"you fired--but the window glass was not shattered," said lys in a low 
voice. 

"well, the window was open, then. and as for the--the rest--i've got 
nervous indigestion, and a doctor will settle the black priest for me, 
lys." 

i glance out of the window at tregunc wait with my horse at the 
gate. 

"dearest, i think i had better go to join durand and the others." 

"i will go too." 

"oh, no!" 

"yes, dick." 

"don't, lys." 

"i shall suffer every moment you are away." 

"the ride is too fatiguing, and we can't tell what unpleasant sight 
you may come upon. lys, you don't really think there is anything 
supernatural in this affair?" 

"dick," she answer gently, "i am a bretonne." with both arms around 
my neck, my wife said, "death is the gift of god. i do not fear it when 
we are together. but alone--oh, my husband, i should fear a god who 
could take you away from me!" 

we kiss each other soberly, simply, like two children. then lys 
hurried away to change her gown, and i pace up and down the garden 
wait for her. 

she came, drawing on her slender gauntlets. i swung her into the 
saddle, gave a hasty order to jean marie, and mounted. 

now, to quail under thought of terror on a morning like this, with lys 
in the saddle beside me, no matter what had happen or might happen, 
was impossible. moreover, môme came sneaking after us. i ask tregunc 
to catch him, for i was afraid he might be brain by our horses' hoof 
if he followed, but the wily puppy dodge and bolt after lys, who 
was trot along the high-road. "never mind," i thought; "if he's hit 
he'll live, for he has no brains to lose." 

lys was wait for me in the road beside the shrine of our lady of st. 
gilda when i join her. she cross herself, i doff my cap, then we 
shook out our bridle and gallop toward the forest of kerselec. 

we said very little as we rode. i always love to watch lys in the 
saddle. her exquisite figure and lovely face were the incarnation of 
youth and grace; her curling hair glisten like thread gold. 

out of the corner of my eye i saw the spoil puppy môme come bound 
cheerful alongside, oblivious of our horses' heels. our road swung 
close to the cliffs. a filthy cormorant rose from the black rocks and 
flap heavy across our path. lys's horse reared, but she pull him 
down, and pointed at the bird with her riding crop. 

"i see," said i; "it seem to be go our way. curious to see a 
cormorant in a forest, isn't it?" 

"it is a bad sign," said lys. "you know the morbihan proverb: 'when 
the cormorant turn from the sea, death laugh in the forest, and wise 
woodsmen build boats.'" 

"i wish," said i sincerely, "that there were few proverbs in 
brittany." 

we were in sight of the forest now; across the gorse i could see 
the sparkle of gendarmes' trappings, and the glitter of le bihan's 
silver-buttoned jacket. the hedge was low and we took it without 
difficulty, and trot across the moor to where le bihan and durand 
stood gesticulating. 

they bowed ceremonious to lys as we rode up. 

"the trail is horrible--it is a river," said the mayor in his squeaky 
voice. "monsieur darrel, i think perhaps madame would scarcely care to 
come any nearer." 

lys drew bridle and look at me. 

"it is horrible!" said durand, walking up beside me; "it looks as 
though a bleeding regiment had pass this way. the trail wind and 
wind about there in the thickets; we lose it at times, but we always 
find it again. i can't understand how one man--no, nor twenty--could 
bleed like that!" 

a halloo, answer by another, sound from the depths of the forest. 

"it's my men; they are following the trail," mutter the brigadier. 
"god alone know what is at the end!" 

"shall we gallop back, lys?" i asked. 

"no; let us ride along the western edge of the wood and dismount. the 
sun is so hot now, and i should like to rest for a moment," she said. 

"the western forest is clear of anything disagreeable," said durand. 

"very well," i answered; "call me, le bihan, if you find anything." 

lys wheel her mare, and i follow across the springy heather, môme 
trot cheerful in the rear. 

we enter the sunny wood about a quarter of a kilometre from where 
we left durand. i took lys from her horse, flung both bridle over a 
limb, and, give my wife my arm, aid her to a flat mossy rock which 
overhung a shallow brook gurgle among the beech trees. lys sat down 
and drew off her gauntlets. môme pushed his head into her lap, received 
an undeserved caress, and came doubtful toward me. i was weak enough 
to condone his offence, but i made him lie down at my feet, greatly to 
his disgust. 

i rest my head on lys's knees, look up at the sky through the 
cross branch of the trees. 

"i suppose i have kill him," i said. "it shock me terribly, lys." 

"you could not have known, dear. he may have been a robber, 
and--if--not---- did--have you ever fire your revolver since that day 
four years ago, when the red admiral's son try to kill you? but i 
know you have not." 

"no," said i, wondering. "it's a fact, i have not. why?" 

"and don't you remember that i ask you to let me load it for you the 
day when yve went off, swear to kill you and his father?" 

"yes, i do remember. well?" 

"well, i--i took the cartridge first to st. gilda chapel and dip 
them in holy water. you must not laugh, dick," said lys gently, lay 
her cool hand on my lips. 

"laugh, my darling!" 

overhead the october sky was pale amethyst, and the sunlight burn 
like orange flame through the yellow leaves of beech and oak. gnat 
and midge dance and waver overhead; a spider drop from a twig 
halfway to the ground and hung suspend on the end of his gossamer 
thread. 

"are you sleepy, dear?" ask lys, bend over me. 

"i am--a little; i scarcely slept two hour last night," i answered. 

"you may sleep, if you wish," said lys, and touched my eyes caressingly. 

"is my head heavy on your knees?" 

"no, dick." 

i was already in a half doze; still i heard the brook babble under 
the beech and the hum of forest flies overhead. presently even 
these were stilled. 

the next thing i knew i was sitting bolt upright, my ear ring with 
a scream, and i saw lys cower beside me, covering her white face 
with both hands. 

as i sprang to my feet she cry again and clung to my knees. i saw my 
dog rush growl into a thicket, then i heard him whimper, and he came 
backing out, whining, ear flat, tail down. i stoop and disengaged 
lys's hand. 

"don't go, dick!" she cried. "o god, it's the black priest!" 

in a moment i had leap across the brook and pushed my way into the 
thicket. it was empty. i stare about me; i scan every tree trunk, 
every bush. sudden i saw him. he was seat on a fallen log, his head 
rest in his hands, his rusty black robe gather around him. for 
a moment my hair stir under my cap; sweat start on forehead and 
cheek-bone; then i recover my reason, and understood that the man was 
human and was probably wound to death. ay, to death; for there, at my 
feet, lay the wet trail of blood, over leaves and stones, down into the 
little hollow, across to the figure in black rest silent under the 
trees. 

i saw that he could not escape even if he had the strength, for before 
him, almost at his very feet, lay a deep, shining swamp. 

as i step forward my foot broke a twig. at the sound the figure 
start a little, then its head fell forward again. its face was 
masked. walking up to the man, i bade him tell where he was wounded. 
durand and the other broke through the thicket at the same moment and 
hurried to my side. 

"who are you who hide a masked face in a priest's robe?" said the 
gendarme loudly. 

there was no answer. 

"see--see the stiff blood all over his robe!" mutter le bihan to 
fortin. 

"he will not speak," said i. 

"he may be too badly wounded," whisper le bihan. 

"i saw him raise his head," i said; "my wife saw him creep up here." 

durand step forward and touched the figure. 

"speak!" he said. 

"speak!" quaver fortin. 

durand wait a moment, then with a sudden upward movement he strip 
off the mask and threw back the man's head. we were look into the 
eye socket of a skull. durand stood rigid; the mayor shrieked. the 
skeleton burst out from its rot robe and collapse on the ground 
before us. from between the staring rib and the grin teeth spurt 
a torrent of black blood, shower the shrink grasses; then the 
thing shuddered, and fell over into the black ooze of the bog. little 
bubble of iridescent air appear from the mud; the bone were slow 
engulfed, and, as the last fragment sank out of sight, up from the 
depths and along the bank crept a creature, shiny, shivering, quiver 
its wings. 

it was a death's-head moth. 

* * * * * 

i wish i had time to tell you how lys outgrew superstitions--for she 
never knew the truth about the affair, and she never will know, since 
she has promise not to read this book. i wish i might tell you about 
the king and his coronation, and how the coronation robe fitted. i wish 
that i were able to write how yvonne and herbert stuart rode to a boar 
hunt in quimperlé, and how the hound race the quarry right through 
the town, overturn three gendarmes, the notary, and an old woman. 
but i am becoming garrulous, and lys is calling me to come and hear the 
king say that he is sleepy. and his highness shall not be kept waiting. 

* * * * * 

the king's cradle song. 

seal with a seal of gold 
the scroll of a life unrolled; 
swathe him deep in his purple stole; 
ashes of diamonds, crystal coal, 
drops of gold in each scent fold. 

crimson wings of the little death, 
stir his hair with your silken breath; 
flaming wings of sin to be, 
splendid pinion of prophecy, 
smother his eyes with hue and dyes, 
while the white moon spin and the wind arise, 
and the stars drip through the skies. 

wave, o wings of the little death! 
seal his sight and stifle his breath, 
cover his breast with the gem shroud pressed; 
from north to north, from west to west, 
wave, o wings of the little death! 
till the white moon reel in the crack skies, 
and the ghost of god arise. 




the white shadow. 


we are no other than a moving row 
of magic shadow-shapes, that come and go 
round with this sun-illumined lantern, held 
in midnight by the master of the show. 

a moment's halt--a momentary taste 
of being from the well amid the waste-- 
and lo! the phantom caravan has reach 
the nothing it set out from. oh, make haste! 

ah, love! could you and i with him conspire 
to grasp this sorry scheme of things entire, 
would not we shatter it to bits--and then 
remould it near to the heart's desire! 

fitzgerald. 




the white shadow. 

listen, then, love, and with your white hand clear 
your forehead from its cloudy hair. 


i. 

"three great hulking cousins," said she, close her gray eyes 
disdainfully. 

we accept the rebuke in astonish silence. presently she open her 
eyes, and seem surprise to see us there yet. 

"o," she said, "if you think i am go to stay here until you make up 
your minds----" 

"i've made up mine," said donald. "we will go to the links. you may 
come." 

"i shall not," she announced. "walter, what do you propose?" 

walter look at his cartridge belt and then at the little 
breech-loader standing in a corner of the arbour. 

"oh, i know," she said, "but i won't! i won't! i won't!" 

the uncle and aunt on the piazza turn to look at us; her mother 
arose from a steamer-chair and came across the lawn. 

"won't what, sweetheart?" she asked, place both hand on her 
daughter's shoulders. 

"mamma, walter wants me to shoot, and don wants me to play golf, and 
i--won't!" 

"she doesn't know what she wants," said i. 

"don't i?" she said, flush with displeasure. 

"her mother might suggest something," hazard donald. we look at our 
aunt. 

"sweetheart is spoiled," said that lady decisively. "if you children 
don't go away at once and have a good time, i shall find employment for 
her." 

"algebra?" i ask maliciously. 

"how dare you!" cry sweetheart, sitting up. "oh, isn't he mean! isn't 
he ignoble!--and i've done my algebra; haven't i, mamma?" 

"but your french?" i began. 

donald laughed, and so did walter. as for sweetheart, she arose in all 
the dignity of sixteen years, closed her eyes with superb insolence, 
and, clasp her mother's waist with one round white arm, march out 
of the arbour. 

"we tease her too much," said donald. 

"she's grow up fast; we ought not to call her 'sweetheart' when she 
put her hair up," add walter. 

"she's go to put it up in october, when she go back to school," 
said donald. "jack, she will hate you if you keep remind her of her 
algebra and french." 

"then i'll stop," said i, sudden conscious what an awful thing it 
would be if she hate me. 

donald's two pointer came frisk across the lawn from the kennels, 
and donald picked up his gun. 

"here we go again," said i. "donny's go to the covert after grouse, 
walter's go up on the hill with his dust-shot and arsenic, and i'm 
go across the field after butterflies. why the deuce can't we all 
go together, just for once?" 

"and take sweetheart? she would like it if we all went together," said 
walter; "she is tired of seeing jack net butterflies." 

"collecting bird and shoot grouse are two different things," began 
donald. "you spoil my dogs by shoot your confounded owl and hum 
birds." 

"oh, your precious dogs!" i cried. "shut up, donny, and give sweetheart 
a good day's tramp. it's a pity if three cousin can't pool their 
pleasure for once." 

donald nod uncertainly. 

"come on," said walter, "we'll find sweetheart. jack, you get your 
butterfly togs and come back here." 

i nodded, and watch my two cousin saunter across the lawn--big, 
clean-cut fellows, resemble each other enough to be brother instead 
of cousins. 

we all resemble each other more or less, donald, walter, and i. as for 
sweetheart, she look like none of us. 

it was all very well for her mother to call her sweetheart, and for 
her aunt to echo it in chorus, but the time was coming when we saw we 
should have to stop. a girl of sixteen with such a name is ridiculous, 
and sweetheart was nearly seventeen; and her hair was "going up" and 
her gown were "coming down" in october. 

her own name was pretty enough. i don't know that i ought to tell it, 
but i will: it was the same as her mother's. we call her sweetheart 
sometimes, sometimes "the aspen beauty." donald had given her that name 
from a butterfly in my collection, the vanessa pandora, commonly known 
as the aspen beauty, from its never have been capture in america 
except in our village of aspen. 

here, in the north of new york state, we four cousin spent our summer 
in the family house. there was not much to do in aspen. we use the 
links, we gallop over the sandy roads, we also trot our several 
hobbies, donald, walter, and i. sweetheart had no hobby; to make up for 
this, however, she own a magnificent team of bêtes-noires--algebra 
and french. 

as for me, my butterfly collection languished. i had specimen of 
nearly every butterfly in new york state, and i rather long for new 
states to conquer. anyway, there were plenty of aspen beauties--i mean 
the butterflies--flying about the road and balm-of-gilead trees, and 
perhaps that is why i linger there long enough to collect hundred of 
duplicate for exchange. and perhaps it wasn't. 

i thought of these things as i sat in the sun-flecked arbour, watch 
the yellow elm leaves flutter down from the branches. i thought, too, 
of sweetheart, and wonder how she would look with her hair up. and 
while i sat there smoking, watch the yellow leaves drift across 
the lawn, a sharp explosion startle me and i raise my head. 

sweetheart was standing on the lawn, gaze dreamy at the smoking 
débris of a large firecracker. 

"what's that for?" i asked. 

"it proclaim my independence," said sweetheart--"my independence 
forever. hereafter my cousin will ask to accompany me on my walks; 
they need no long charitable permit me to accompany them. are you 
three boys go to ride your hobbies?" 

"we are," i said. 

"then good-bye. i am go to walk." 

"can't we come too?" i asked, laughing. 

"oh," she said graciously, "if you put it in that way i could not 
refuse." 

"may we bring our guns?" ask donald from the piazza. 

"may i bring my net?" i added, half amused, half annoyed. 

she made a gesture, indifferent, condescending. 

"dear me!" murmur the aunt in chorus from the piazza as we troop 
after the aspen beauty, "sweetheart is grow very fast." 

i smile vague at sweetheart. i was wonder how she would look in 
long frock and coil hair. 


ii. 

in the fall of the year the meadow of aspen glimmer in the sunlight 
like crumple sheet of beaten gold; for aspen is the land of 
golden-rod, of yellow earth and gilded fern. 

there the crisp oak rustle, every leaf a blot of yellow; there the 
burnish pine sound, sound, tremble, and resound, like gilt-stringed 
harp aquiver in the wind. 

sweet fern, sun-dried, bronzed, fill all the hill with incense, vague 
and delicate as the white down drift from the frothy milkweed. 

and where the meadow brook prattled, limpid, filter with sunlight, 
sweetheart stood knee-deep in fragrant mint, watch the aimless 
minnow swimming in circles. on a distant hill, dark against the blue, 
donald move with his dogs, and i saw the sun-glint on his gun, and i 
heard the distant "hi--on! hi--on!" long after he disappear below the 
brown hill's brow. 

walter, too, had gone, leave us there by the brook together, 
sweetheart and i; and i saw the crow flap and circle far over 
the woods, and i heard the soft report of his dust-shot shell among 
the trees. 

"the ruling passion, sweetheart," i said. "donny chase the phantom of 
pleasure with his dogs. the phantom flies from walter, and he follow 
with his dust-shot." 

"then," said sweetheart, "follow your phantom also; there are 
butterfly everywhere." she raise both arms and turn from the 
brook. "everywhere flying i see butterflies--phantoms of pleasure; and, 
jack, you do not follow with your net." 

"no," said i, "the world to-day is too fair to--slay in. i even doubt 
that the happiness of empire hinge on the discovery of a new species 
of anything. do i bore you?" 

"a little," said sweetheart, touching the powdered gold of the blossom 
about her. she laid the tip of her third finger on her lip and then 
on the golden-rod. "i shall not pick it; the world is too fair to-day," 
she said. "what are you go to do, jack?" 

"i could doze," i said. "could you?" 

"yes--if you told me stories." 

i contemplate her in silence for a moment. after a while she sat down 
under an oak and clasp her hands. 

"i am grow so old," she sighed, "i no long take pleasure 
in childish things--donald's dogs, walter's hum birds, your 
butterflies. jack?" 

"what?" 

"sit down on the grass." 

"what for?" 

"because i ask you." 

i sat down. 

presently she said: "i am as tall as mamma. why should i study algebra?" 

"because," i answer evasively. 

"your answer is as rude as though i were twenty, instead of sixteen," 
said sweetheart. "if you treat me as a child from this moment, i shall 
hate you." 

"me--sweetheart?" 

"and that name!--it is good for children and kittens." 

i look at her seriously. "it is good for women, too--when it is 
time," i said. "i prophesy that one day you will hear it again. as for 
me, i shall not call you by that name if you dislike it." 

"i am a woman--now," she said. 

"oh! at sixteen." 

"to-morrow i am to be seventeen." 

presently, look off at the blue hills, i said: "for a long time 
i have recognise that that subtle, indefinable attitude--we call 
it deference--due from men to women is due from us to you. donny and 
walter are slow to accept this. you know what you have been to us 
as a child; we can't bear to lose you--to meet you in another way--to 
reckon with you as we reckon with a woman. but it is true: our little 
sweetheart has vanished, and--_you_ are here!" 

the oak leaves began to rustle in the hill winds; the crow caw from 
the woods. 

"oui c'est moi," she said at length. 

"i shall never call you sweetheart again," i said, smiling. 

"who knows?" she laughed, and lean over to pick a blade of wild 
wheat. she coloured faint a moment later, and said: "i didn't mean 
that, jack." 

and so sweetheart took her first step across that threshold of mystery, 
the temple of idols. and of the gilded idol within the temple, one 
shall turn to living flesh at the sound of a voice. and lo! where 
a child had entered, a woman return with the key to the temple of 
gilded idols. 

"jack," said sweetheart, "you are wrong. no day is too fair to kill in. 
i shall pick my arms full--full of flowers." 

over the yellow fields, red with the stalk of the buckwheat, crown 
with a glimmer cloud of the dusty gold of the golden-rod, sweetheart 
passed, pensive, sedate, awed by the burden of sixteen years. 

i followed. 

over the curling fern and wind-stirred grass the silken milkweed 
seed sailed, sailed, and the great red-brown butterfly drift 
above, ruddy as autumn leaves aglow in the sun. 

"on the sand-cliff there are marigolds," said sweetheart. 

i look at the mass of wild flower in her arms; her white polish 
skin reflect the blaze of colour, warm like ivory under their 
glow. 

"marigolds," i repeated; "we will get some." 

"the sand slide on the face of the cliff; you must be careful," she 
said. 

"and i may see one of those rare cliff butterflies. i haven't any good 
examples." 

i fancy she was not listening; the crow were clamour above the 
beech woods; the hill wind fill our ear with a sound like the sound 
of the sea on shoals. her gray eyes, touched with the sky's deep blue 
and the blue of the misty hills, look out across the mile of wood 
and fields, and saw a world; not a world old, scarred, rock-ribbed, and 
salt with tears, but a new world, youthful, ripe, sunny, hazy with the 
splendour of wonders hidden behind the horizon--a world jewelled with 
gems, span by rose-mist rainbows--a world of sixteen years. 

"we are already at the cliff's edge," i said. 

she step to the edge and look over. i drew her back. the sand 
start among the rocks, running, running with a sound like silver 
water. 

"then you shall not go either," she said. "i do not care for marigolds." 

but i was already on the edge, stoop for a blossom. the next instant 
i fell. 

there was a whistle of sand, a flurry and a rush of wind, a blur of 
rock, fern, dead grasses--a cry! 

for i remember as i fell, fall i called, "sweetheart!" and again 
"sweetheart!" then my body struck the rocks below. 


iii. 

of all the seconds that tick the whole year through, of all the seconds 
that have slip onward marking the beat of time since time was 
loosed, there is one, one brief moment, steep in magic and heavy with 
oblivion, that sometimes linger in the soul of man, annihilate space 
and time. if, at the feet of god, a year is a second pass unnoted, 
this magic second, afloat on the tide of time, move on and on till, 
caught in the vortex of some life's whirl, it sink into the soul of a 
being near to death. 

and in that soul the magic second glow and lingers, stretch into 
minutes, hours, days--aye, days and days, till, if the magic hold, the 
calm years crowd on one by one; and yet it all is but a second--that 
magic moment that come on the tide of time--that came to me and was 
caught up in my life's whirl as i fell, drop there between sky and 
earth. 

and so that magic moment grew to minutes, to hours; and when my body, 
whirling, pitching, struck and lay flung out on the earth, the magic 
second grew until the crystal days fell from my life, as beads, one by 
one, fall from the rosary that saint tell kneeling. 

those days of a life that i have lived, those years that linger still 
aglow in the sun behind me, dim yet splendid as dust-dimmed jewels, 
they also have ended, not in vague night, but in the sunburst of 
another second--such a second as tick from my watch as i write, quick, 
sharp, joyous, irrevocable! so, of that magic second, or day, or year, 
i shall tell--i, as i was, standing beside my body flung there across 
the earth. 

i look at my body, lie in a heap, then turn to the sand cliff 
smiling. 

"sweetheart!" i called. 

but she was already at my side. 

we walk on through fragrant pastures, watch the long shadow 
stretch from field to field, speak of what had been and of all that 
was to be. it was so simple--everything was clear before us. had there 
been doubts, fears, sudden alarms, startle heartbeats? 

if there had been, now they were end forever. 

"not forever," said sweetheart; "who know how long the magic second 
may last?" 

"but we--what difference can that make?" i asked. 

"to us?" 

"yes." 

"none," said sweetheart decisively. 

we look out into the west. the sun turn to a mound of cinders; the 
hill loom in opalescent steam. 

"but--but--your shadow!" said sweetheart. 

i bent my head, thrill with happiness. 

"and yours," i whispered. 

the shadow we cast were white than snow. 

i still heard the hill winds, soft in my ear as break surf; a 
bird-note came from the dusky woodland; a star broke out overhead. 

"what is your pleasure, sweetheart, now all is said?" i asked. 

"the world is all so fair," she sighed; "is it fair beyond the hills, 
jack?" 

"it is fair where you pass by, north, south, and from west to west 
again. in france the poplar are as yellow as our oaks. in morbihan the 
gorse gild all the hills, yellow as golden-rod. shall we go?" 

"but in the spring--let us wait until spring." 

"where?" 

"here." 

"until spring?" 

"it is written that time shall pass as a shadow across the sea. what 
is that book there under your feet--that iron-bound book, half embed 
like a stone in the grass." 

"i did not see it!" 

"bring it to me." 

i raise the book; it left a bare mark in the sod as a stone that is 
turned. then, holding it on my knees, i open it, and sweetheart, 
leaning on my shoulder, read. the tall stars flared like candles, 
flood the page with diamond light; the earth, perfume with 
blossoms, stir with the vague vibration of countless sounds, tiny 
voice sway breathless in the hidden surge of an endless harmony. 

"the white shadow is the shadow of the soul," she read. even the wind 
were hush as her sweet lip moved. 

"and what shall make thee to understand what hell is?... when the 
sun shall be fold up as a garment that is laid away; when the stars 
fall, and the sea boil, and when soul shall be join again to their 
bodies; and when the girl who hath been bury alive shall be ask 
for what crime; when books shall be laid open, when hell shall burn 
fiercely, and when paradise shall be brought very near: 

"every soul shall know what it hath wrought!" 

i closed my eyes; the splendour of the starlight on the page was more 
than my eyes could bear. 

but she read on; for what can dim her eyes? 

"o man, verily, labouring, thou labourest to meet thy lord. 

"and thou shalt meet him! 

"when the earth shall be stretch like a skin, and shall cast forth 
that which is therein; 

"by the heaven adorn with signs, by the witness and the witnessed; 

"by that which appeareth by night; by the daybreak and the ten 
nights--the ten nights; 

"the night of al kadr is better than a thousand months. 

"praise be to god, the lord of all creatures; the most merciful, the 
king of the day of judgment. thee do we worship, and of thee do we beg 
assistance. direct us in the right way, in the way of those to whom 
thou hast been gracious; not of those against whom thou art incensed, 
nor of those who go astray!" 

* * * * * 

in the sudden silence that spread across earth and heaven i heard the 
sound of a voice under the earth, calling, calling, calling. 

"it is already spring," said sweetheart; and she rose, place her 
white hand in mine. "shall we go?" 

"but we are already there," i stammered, turning my eyes fearfully; for 
the tall pine dwindle and cluster and rose again cool and gray in 
the morning air, all turn to stone, fret and carve like lacework; 
and where the pine had faded, the twin tower of a cathedral loomed; 
and where the hill swept across the horizon, the roof of a white city 
glimmer in the morning sun. bridge and quay and street and dome 
and the hum of traffic and rattle of arms; and over all, the veil of 
haze and the twin gray tower of notre dame! 

"sweetheart!" i faltered. 

but we were already in my studio. 


iv. 

the studio had not changed. the sun flood it. 

sweetheart sat in the broken armchair and watch me struggle with the 
packing. every now and then she made an impulsive movement toward the 
heap of clothes on the floor, which i checked with a "thanks! i can fix 
it all alone, sweetheart." 

clifford seem to extract amusement from it all, and said as much to 
rowden, who was as usual ruin my zitherine by try to play it like 
a banjo. 

elliott, knowing he could be of no use to us, had the decency to 
sit outside the studio on one of the garden benches. he appear at 
interval at the studio door, saying, "come along, clifford; they don't 
want you mess about. drop that banjo, rowden, or jack will break 
your head with it--won't you, jack?" 

i said i would, but not with the zitherine. 

clifford flatly refuse to move unless sweetheart would take him 
out into our garden and show him the solitary goldfish which lurk 
in the fountain under the almond trees. but sweetheart, apparently 
fascinate by the mystery of packing, turn a deaf ear to clifford's 
blandishments and rowden's discords. 

"i imagined," said clifford, somewhat hurt, "that you would delight in 
taking upon yourself the duty of a hostess. i should be pleased to 
believe that i am not an unwelcome guest." 

"so should i," echo rowden; "i'd be pleased too." 

"what a shame for you to bother, jack!" she said. "mr. clifford shall 
go and make some tea directly. mr. rowden, you may take a table out by 
the fountain--and stay there." 

clifford, motion elliott to take the other end of the japan 
table, back with it through the hallway and out to the gravel walk, 
expostulating. 

"the sugar is there in that tin box by the model stand," she said, when 
he reappeared, "and the extra spoon are lie in a long box on jack's 
big easel." 

when rowden, reluctantly relinquish the zitherine, follow 
clifford, bearing the cup and alcohol lamp, i raise my head and 
wipe the dust from my forehead. i believe i swore a little in french. 
sweetheart look startled. she knew more france than i supposed she 
did. 

"what is it, jack?" 

"mais--rien, ça m'embête--cette espèce de malle----" 

"then why won't you let me help you, jack? i can at least put in my 
gowns." 

"but i must pack my colour box first, and the gun case, and the 
box of reels, and the pastel case, and our shoot boots, and the 
water-colour box, and the cartridge belt, and your golf shoes, and----" 

"o dear!" said sweetheart with a shudder. 

i stood up and scowl at the trunk. 

"to look at you, jack," murmur sweetheart, "one might think you 
unhappy." 

unhappy! at the thought our eyes met across the table. 

"unhappy!" i whispered. 

then clifford came stumble in, wearing a pair of joseph's sabots, 
and, imitate that faithful domestic in voice and manner, invite us 
to tea under the lilac and almond blossoms. 

"in a moment," cry sweetheart impatiently. "go and pour the tea." 

clifford look aghast. "no, no!" he cried; "it's impossible--i won't 
believe that you two are deliberate get rid of me so you can be 
alone to spoon! and your honeymoon already a year old, and----" 

sweetheart frowned, and tap her foot. 

clifford retired indignant. 

then she raise her eyes to mine, and a delicate colour stain her 
cheek and neck. 

"yes," i said, "we have been married nearly a year, sweetheart." 

we look at our white shadow on the floor. 


v. 

sweetheart sat under the lilac blossom pour out tea for clifford, 
elliott, and rowden. she was gracious to clifford, gentle to elliott, 
and she took rowden under her wing in the sweetest way possible, to 
which clifford state his objections. 

"mr. rowden is younger than you are," she said gravely. "monsieur 
clifford, i do not wish you to torment him." 

"rowden's no baby; he's as old as jack is, and jack doesn't murder 
music." 

"i am glad to see you acknowledge jack's superior in all matters," 
said sweetheart with a dangerous smile. 

"i don't," cry clifford laughing; "and i don't see what you find 
to care about in a man who clip his hair like a gendarme and paints 
everything purple." 

"everything is purple--if jack paints it so," said sweetheart, smile 
at her reflect face in the water. she stood at the rim of the little 
stone fountain with her hand clasp behind her back. elliott and 
clifford were poke about in the water plant to dislodge the solitary 
goldfish, while rowden gather dewy cluster of lilac as an offering. 

"there he goes!" said elliott. 

"poor fellow, living there all alone!" said sweetheart. "jack must 
leave word with joseph to get him a little lady fish to pay his court 
to." 

"better put in another gentleman fish, then, if you're following 
nature," said clifford, with an attempt at cynicism which drew the 
merriest laugh from sweetheart. 

"oh, how funny is monsieur clifford when he wants to be like 
frenchmen!" she murmured. 

"jack," said elliott, as i came from the studio and picked up a cup of 
tea grown cold, "clifford's do the world-worn disenchant roué." 

"and--and i fear he will next make love to me!" cry sweetheart. 

"you'd better look out, jack," said clifford darkly, and pretended to 
sulk until sweetheart sent him off to buy the bonbon she would need 
for the train. 

"they're packed," i said, "every trunk of them!" 

sweetheart was enchanted. "all my new gowns, and the shoe 
from rix's--o jack, you didn't forget the shoes--and the bath 
robes--and----" 

"all packed," i said, swallow the tea with a wry face. 

"oh," she cry reproachfully, "don't drink that! here, i will have 
some hot tea in a moment," and she ran over and perch on the arm of 
the garden bench while i light the alcohol lamp and then a cigarette. 

rowden came up with his offering of lilacs, and she decorate each of 
us with a spray. 

it was grow late. the long shadow fell across the gravel walk and 
fleck the white wall of the sculptor's studio opposite. 

"it's the nine-o'clock train, isn't it?" said elliott. 

"we will meet you at the station at eight-thirty," add rowden. 

"you don't mind, do you, our dine alone?" said sweetheart shyly; 
"it's our last day--jack's and mine--in the old studio." 

"not the last, i hope," said elliott sincerely. 

we all sat silent for a moment. 

"o paris, paris--how i fear it!" murmur sweetheart to me; and in the 
same breath, "no, no, we must love it, you and i." 

then elliott said aloud, "i suppose you have no idea when you will 
return?" 

"no," i replied, thinking of the magic second that had become a year. 

and so we dine alone, sweetheart and i, in the old studio. 

at half-past eight o'clock the cab stood at the gate with all our trap 
pile on top, and joseph and his wife and the two brat were crying, 
"au revoir, madame! au revoir, monsieur! we will keep the studio well 
dusted. bon voyage! bon voyage!" and all of a sudden my arm was caught 
by sweetheart's little glove hand, and she drew me back through 
the long ivy-covered alley to the garden where the studio stood, its 
doorway closed and silent, the hollow window black and grim. truly the 
light had pass away with the passing of sweetheart. her hand slip 
from my arm, and she went and knelt down at the threshold and kiss 
it. 

"i first knew happiness when i first cross it," she said; "it break 
my heart to leave it. only that magic second! but it seem years that 
we have live here." 

"it was you who brought happiness to it," i said. 

"good-bye! good-bye, dear, dear, old studio!" she cried. "oh, if jack 
is always the same to me as he has been here--if he will be faithful 
and true in that new home!" 

the new home was to be in a strange land. sweetheart was a little 
frightened, but was die to go there. sweetheart had never seen the 
golden gorse ablaze on the moor of morbihan. 


vi. 

i went inside the brass railing and wait my turn to buy the tickets. 
when it came, i took two first class to quimperlé, for it was to be 
an all-night ride, and there was no sleep car. clifford had taken 
charge of the baggage, and i went with him to have it registered, 
leave sweetheart with elliott and rowden. all the trap were 
there--the big trunks, the big valises, my sketch kit, the zitherine 
in a leather case, two handbags, a bundle of umbrella and canes, and a 
huge package of canvases. the toilet case and the rug and waterproof 
we took with us into the compartment. 

the compartment was empty. sweetheart nestle into one corner, and 
when i had placed our trap in the rack overhead i sat down opposite, 
while clifford hand in our sandwiches, a bottle of red wine, and 
sweetheart's box of bonbons. 

we didn't say much; most had been said before starting. clifford was 
more affected than he care to show--i know by the way he grasp my 
hand. they are dear fellows, every one. we did not realize that we were 
actually going--going, perhaps, forever. she laughed, and chatted, and 
made fun of clifford, and tease rowden, aid and abet by elliott, 
until the start gong clang and a warning whistle sound along the 
gaslit platform. 

"jack," cry clifford, leaning in the window, "god bless you! god 
bless you both!" 

elliott touched her hand and wrung mine, and rowden risk his neck to 
give us both one last cordial grasp. 

"count on me--on us," cry clifford, speak in english, "if you 
are--troubled!" 

by what, my poor clifford? can you, with all your gay courage, turn 
back the hand of the dials? can you, with all your warm devotion, add 
one second to the magic second and make it two? the shadow we cast are 
white. 

the train stole out into the night, and i saw them group on the 
platform, silhouette in the glare of the yellow signals. i drew in my 
head and shut the window. sweetheart's face had grown very serious, but 
now she smile across from her corner. 

"aren't you coming over by me, jack?" 


vii. 

we must have been moving very swiftly, for the car rock and trembled, 
and it was probably that which awoke me. i look across at sweetheart. 
she was lie on her side, one cheek rest on her glove hand, her 
travel cap pushed back, her eyes shut. i smooth away the curly 
strand of hair which straggle across her cheeks, and tuck another 
rug well about her feet. her feet were small as a child's. i speak as 
if she were not a child. she was eighteen then. 

the next time i awoke we lay in a long gaslit station. some soldier 
were disembark from the forward carriages, and a gendarme stalk up 
and down the platform. 

i look sleepy about for the name of the station. it was paint 
in blue over the buffet--"petit st. yves." "is it possible we are in 
brittany?" i thought. then the voice of the station hands, who were 
hoist a small boat upon the forward carriage, settled my doubts. 
"allons! tire hardiment, jean louis! met le cannotte deboutte." 

"arrête toi yves! doucement! doucement! sacrée garce!" 

somewhere in the dark a mellow bell tolled. i settled back to 
slumber, my eyes on sweetheart. 

she slept. 


viii. 

i awoke in a flood of brightest sunshine. from our window i could look 
into the centre of a most enchanting little town, all built of white 
limestone and granite. the june sunshine slant on thatch roof and 
paint gable, and fairly blaze on the little river slip by under 
the stone bridge in the square. 

the street and the square were alive with rosy-faced women in white 
head-dresses. everywhere the constant motion of blue skirt and 
spotless coiffes, the twinkle of varnish socks, the clump! clump! of 
sabots. 

like a black shadow a priest stole across the square. above him the 
cross on the church glow like a live cinder, flash its reflection 
along the purple-slated roof from the eaves of which a cloud of 
ash-gray pigeon drift into the gutter below. i turn from the 
window to encounter sweetheart's eyes. her lip move a little, her 
long lash heavy with slumber droop lower, then with a little sigh 
she sat bolt upright. when i laughed, as i always did, she smiled, 
a little confused, a little ashamed, murmuring: "bonjour, mon chéri! 
quelle heure est-il?" that was always the way sweetheart awoke. 

"o dear, i am so rumpled!" she said. "jack, get me the satchel this 
minute, and don't look at me until i ask you to." 

i unlock the satchel, and then turning to the window again threw it 
wide open. oh, how sweet came the morning air from the meadows! some 
young fellow below on the bank of the stream were poke long cane 
fishing-rods under the arch of the bridge. 

"sweetheart," i said over my shoulder, "i believe there are trout in 
this stream." 

"mr. elliott say that whenever you see a puddle you always say that," 
she replied. 

"what do he know about it?" i answered, for i am touchy on the 
subject; "he doesn't know a catfish from a--a dogfish." 

"neither do i, jack dear, but i'm go to learn. don't be cross." 

she had finished her toilet and came over to the window, leaning out 
over my shoulder. 

"where are we?" she cry in startle wonder at the little white town 
and the acre of sway clover. "oh, jack, is--is this the country?" 

a man in uniform passing under our window look up surprised. 

"what are you do here?" he demanded; then, seeing sweetheart, he 
took off his gold-laced cap, and added, with a bow: "this carriage go 
no farther, monsieur--madame----" 

"merci!" exclaim sweetheart, "we wish to go to quimperlé!" 

"and we have ticket for quimperlé," i insisted. 

"but," smile the official, "this is quimperlé." 

it was true. there was the name written over the end of the station; 
and, look ahead, i saw that our car had been detached and was 
standing in stately seclusion under the freight shed. how long it had 
been standing so heaven alone knows; but they evidently had neglect 
to call us, and there we were inhabit a detached carriage in the 
heart of quimperlé. i manage to get a couple of porters, and presently 
we found all our trap pile up on the platform, and a lumber 
vehicle with a breton driver wait to convey us to the hotel. 

"which," said i to the docile breton, "is the best hotel in quimperlé?" 

"the hôtel lion d'or," he replied. 

"how do you know?" i demanded. 

"because," said he mildly, "it is the only hotel in quimperlé." 

sweetheart observe that this ought to be convincing, even to me, 
and she torment me all the way to the square, where i got even by 
pretend to be horrify at her dishevelled condition incident to a 
night's railway ride in a stuffy compartment. 

"don't, jack! people will look at us." 

"let 'em." 

"oh, this is cruel! oh, i'll pay you for this!" 

and they did look at us--or rather at her; for from the time sweetheart 
and i had cast our lot together, i notice that i seem to escape the 
observation of passers-by. when i live alone in paris i attract a 
fair share of observation from the world as it wag on its parisian 
way. it was pleasant to meet a pretty girl's eyes now and then in the 
throng which flow through the park and boulevard. i really never 
flatter myself that it was because of my personal beauty; but in 
paris, any young fellow who is dress in the manner of albion, hat 
and glove in the same style, is not entire a cipher. but now it was 
not the same, by a long shot. 

sweetheart's beauty simply put me in my place as an unnoticed but 
perhaps correct supplement to her. 

she knew she was a beauty, and was delight when she look into her 
mirror. nothing escape her. the soft hair thread with sunshine, 
which, when loosened, curl to her knees; the clear white forehead and 
straight brows; the nose delicate and a trifle upturned; the scarlet 
lip and fine cut chin--she knew the value of each of these. she was 
pleased with the soft, full curve of her throat, the little ears, and 
the colour which came and went in her cheeks. 

but her eyes were the first thing one noticed. they were the most 
beautiful gray eyes that ever open under silken lashes. she approve 
of my telling her this, which duty i fulfill daily. perhaps it may be 
superfluous to say that we were very much in love. did i say _were_? 

i think that, as i am chant the graces of sweetheart, it might not 
be amiss to say that she is just an inch short than i am, and that 
no parisienne carry a pretty gown with more perfection than she 
did. i have seen gown that look like the devil on the manikin, but 
when sweetheart wore them they were the astonishment and admiration of 
myself. and i do know when a woman is well dressed, though i am an art 
critic. 

sweetheart regard her beauty as an intimate affair between ourselves, 
a precious gift for our mutual benefit, to be careful treasure and 
petted. her attitude toward the world was unmistakable. the world might 
look--she was indifferent. with our intimate friends she was above 
being flattered. clifford said to me once: "she carry her beauty as 
a princess would carry the koh-i-noor--she know she is worthy of it, 
and hope it is worthy of her." 

"we ought to be so happy that i am beautiful!" she would say to me. 
"just think, supposing i were not!" 

i use to try to make her believe that it would have made no difference. 

"oh, not now," she would say gravely. "i know that if i lost it it 
would be the same to us both, now; but you can't make me believe that, 
at first, when you use to lean over the terrace of the luxembourg and 
wait patient for hour just to see me walk out of the odeon." 

"i didn't," i would always explain; "i was there by accident." 

"oh, what a funny accident to happen every day for two months!" 

"stop teasing! of course, after the first week----" 

"and what a funny accident that i should pass the same way every day 
for two months, when before i always went by the rue de seine!" 

there was once such an accident, and such a girl. i never knew her; she 
is dead. i wonder sometimes that sweetheart knew, and believe it was 
she herself. yet the other woman's shadow was black. 

sweetheart had a most peculiar and unworld habit of not embellish 
facts. she presently display it when we arrive at the hôtel lion 
d'or. 

"jack," said she nervously, "the cinders have made your face 
unpleasant. i am ashamed. they may not believe you are my husband." 

"as monsieur and madame," i said, "we may have dirty face and be 
honest." 

"do you suppose they--they will believe it? these queer people----" 

"they'd better!" i said fiercely. 

"i--i hadn't thought of that," she said. "you see, in our own little 
place in paris everybody knew it, but here----" 

i said, "dearest, what nonsense!" and we march unceremonious up 
to the register, where i wrote our names. then, with a hasty little 
squeeze of her glove hand, she turn to the maid and trip off to 
inspect our quarters. while i was pump the fat-headed old proprietor 
about the trout fishing in the vicinity, the maid return with the 
request that i mount to the room above. i follow her along the tile 
passage and found sweetheart sitting on a trunk. 

"it's charming! charming!" she said. "just look at the rose outside, 
and the square, and the river! and oh, jack, the funny little breton 
cattle, and the old man with knee-breeches! it's charming! and"--here 
she caught sight of the enrapture and fascinate maid--"and you are 
charming, with your red cheek and white coiffe," she said. "oh, how 
pretty!" 

"oh, madame!" murmur the servant in dire confusion. 

i said, "dearest, that will do. nobody speak of my peculiar charms, 
and i wish to be noticed." 

the presence of the maid prevent sweetheart from making amends, so we 
told her we were satisfied, and we would spare her life if she prepared 
breakfast in seventeen seconds. 

she accept the gift of existence with a daze courtsey, and vanished. 

it was refreshing to get hold of a sponge and cold water after fourteen 
hour in a cramped compartment. hunger drove us to hurry--a thing we 
rarely did in the morning--and the way we splash cold water about 
would have been fatal to any but a tile floor. 

"dear," i said, "you have not yet seen me in my tyrolese knickerbockers 
and beautiful shoot jacket. you have never beheld my leg clothe in 
tyrolese stockings, at twenty franc a pair." 

"the legs?" she inquire from the depths of a bath robe. 

i ignore the question, and part my hair with care. then i sat down 
on the window and whistled. 

of course i was ready first. sweetheart's hair had got into a tangle 
and need to be all comb out. 

"oh, i know you are impatient, because you're whistle the chant du 
départ," she said from the door of her toilet room. 

"as usual," i said, "i am ready first." 

"if you say that again----" she threatened. 

i said it, and dodge a sponge. presently i was request to open the 
trunk and select a gown for her. dear little sweetheart! she love 
to pretend that she had so many it need long consultation to decide 
which. 

"the dark blue?" i inquired. 

"don't you think it is too warm?" 

"the pale blue, then--or the pink and white?" 

"why not the white, with the cuffs à l'anglaise, and the canoe hat?" 

i haul it out. 

then, of course, she change her mind. 

"i think the gray is better for the morning; then i can wear the big 
chip hat." 

i fish up the gray. it was light, almost silvery, and had white spot 
on it. 

"jack, dear," she said, coming out with her hair tuck up in a knot, 
drawing the bath robe up to her chin with both hands, "i think that the 
white cloth would be better, and that i can wear the béret." 

by this time the trunk was in a pretty mess, which amuse her; but at 
last i ferret out the white cloth dress, and, refuse to listen to 
further discussion, sat down on the window seat. sweetheart enjoy it. 

"stop telling me to hurry," she said; "i can't, if you keep saying it 
all the time." 

after a while she call me to fasten her corsage, which hooked with 
about ten hundred hook along the side and collar. i hate to do it, 
and my finger end stung for hour after, but, as sweetheart very 
rightly says, "when we are rich enough to have a maid you needn't," i 
submit with an air which delight her. her torment "thank you, 
jack," was the last straw, so i calm picked her up and carry her 
out, and almost to the dine room, where i set her down just in time 
to avoid the proprietor and three domestic issue from the office. 

sweetheart was half inclined to laugh, half indignant, and wholly 
scandalized. but she did not dare say anything, for we were at the 
dining-room door. 

there were some people there, but except for a slight inclination we 
did not notice each other. we had a small table to ourselves by the 
rose-bowered window. 

we were very hungry. breakfast began with fresh sardine just caught, 
and end with little breton cake and a demi-tasse. i finished first; 
i always do, because the wretched habit of bolt my food, contract 
while study under bouguereau at julian's, cling to me yet. oh, 
i shall have a merry time pay for it when i am forty! i began, as 
usual, to tease sweetheart. 

"if you continue to eat like this, dear, you will never be able to wear 
your new frocks. this one seem a trifle too tight now." 

sweetheart, who pride herself as much on her figure as on her lovely 
face, repel the insult with disdain and nibble her breton biscuit 
defiantly. when at last she condescend to rise, we stroll out 
under the tree in front of the hotel, and sat down on the low stone 
wall surrounding the garden. the noon sun hung in the zenith, flood 
the town with a dazzle downpour. sunbeam glance and dance on 
the water; sunbeam filter through the foliage; sunbeam stole 
under sweetheart's big straw hat, searching the depths of the gray 
eyes. sunbeam play merry mischief with my ear and neck, which 
were beginning to sting in the first sunburn of the year. through the 
square the white-coiffed women pass and repassed; small urchin with 
silver-buckled hatband roam about the bridge and market-place until 
collected and troop off to school by a black-robed jesuit frère; 
and in the shade of the tree a dozen sprawl men in breton costume 
smoke their microscopic pipes and watch the water. 

"they are an industrious race," said i with fine irony, watch a 
happy inebriate pursue a serpentine course toward the café opposite. 

sweetheart, who was as patriotic a little girl as ever hum the 
marseillaise, and adopt france as long as she live in it, was up in 
arms in an instant. 

"i have read," she said with conviction, "that the breton are a brave, 
industrious race. they are french." 

"they speak a different language," i said--"not a word of france in it." 

"they are french," repeated sweetheart, with an inflection which 
decided me to shun the subject until i could unpack my guide-book. 

we sat a little while long under the trees, until we both began 
nod and mutual accused each other. then sweetheart went up to 
the room to take a nap, and i, scorn such weakness, lay down in a 
steamer chair under our window and fell fast asleep in no time. 

i was arouse by a big pink rose which hit me square on the mouth. 
sweetheart was perch in the window seat above, and as i look up she 
sent a shower of blossom down upon me. 

"jack, you lazy creature, it's five o'clock, and i'm dress and ready 
for a walk!" 

"so am i," i said, jump up. 

"but not like that. you must come up and make yourself nice for dinner." 

"nice? what's the matter with these tweeds? aren't these new stocking 
presentable?" 

"look at your hair!" she said evasively. "come up this minute and brush 
it." 

i went, and was compel to climb into a white collar and shirt, and 
trousers of an english cut. but before we had gone far along the great 
military road that climb the heights above the little river, i took 
sweetheart's hand in mine and impart to her my view and intentions 
upon the subject of my costume for the future. 

"you see, dearest, we are here in brittany for three reasons. the 
first is, that i should paint outdoors. the second is, that we should 
economize like the deuce. the third is, our shadows----" 

"i know," she interrupt faintly. "never mind, jack, dear." 

we walk silent for a while, hand clasp hand very tightly, for we 
were both thinking of the third reason. 

i broke the silence first, speak cheerfully, and she look up with 
a quick smile while the shadow fell from her brow. 

"you see, dear, in this place, where we are going, there are no people 
but peasants. your frock are all right for a place like this; we 
must both wear our free-and-easy togs--i for painting, and you for 
scramble about after your wild flower or fishing with me. if you get 
tired of seeing me in corduroy or tweeds, i'll dress for you when you 
think you can't stand it any longer." 

"oh, jack, i do like your knickerbockers----" 

"and you shall wear your most gorgeous gown for me----" 

"indeed i won't," she laughed, add impulsively, "indeed i 
will--every day, if you wish it!" 

at the top of the hill stood an ancient ursuline convent surround 
by a high wall, which also inclose the broad acre of the wealthy 
sisterhood. we sat down by the roadside hedge and look across the 
valley, where the hurry river had cease to hasten and now linger 
in placid pools and long, deep reaches. the sun had set behind the 
forest, and the sky threw a purple light over wood and meadow. the 
grassy pools below were swept by flock of whistle martin and 
swallows. one or two white gull flap slow toward the tide water 
below, and a young curlew, speeding high overhead, utter a lonesome 
cry. the grass--the brilliant green grass of brittany--had turn a 
deep metallic blue in the twilight. a pale primrose light grew and die 
in the sky, and the forest change from rose to ashes. then a dull red 
bar shot across the parting cloud in the west, the forest smoulder 
an instant, and the pools glow crimson. slow the red bar melt 
away, the light die out among the branches, the pools turn sombre. 
look up, we saw the new moon flash in the sky above our heads. 
sweetheart sigh in perfect contentment. 

"it's beautiful!" i said, with another sigh. 

"ah, yes," she murmured, "beautiful to you, and to me--to me, jack, who 
have never before seen this land of morbihan." 

after a while she said, "and the ocean--oh, how i long to see it! is it 
near us, jack?" 

"the river runs into it twenty kilometre below. we feel the tide at 
quimperlé." i did not add, "baedeker." 

"i wonder," i said presently, "what are the feelings of a little 
america who see this country--the real country--for the first time?" 

"i suppose you mean me," she said. "i don't know--i don't think i 
understand it yet, but i know i shall love it, and never want to go 
back." 

"perhaps we never shall," i said. "the magic second may stretch into 
years that end at last as all ends." 

then our hand met in that sudden nervous clasp which seem to help 
and steady us when we were thinking of the real world, so long, so long 
forgotten. 


ix. 

i was awaken next morning by a spongeful of cold water in the face, 
which i hate. i start up to wreak vengeance upon sweetheart, but she 
flee to the toilet room and lock herself in. from this retreat she 
taunt me until further sleep was out of the question, and i bowed 
to the inevitable--indignantly, when i saw my watch pointed to five 
o'clock. 

sweetheart was perfectly possessed to row; so when i had bolt my 
coffee and sat watch her placid sip hers, we decided to go down to 
the bank of the little stream and hire a boat. the boat was a wretched, 
shapeless affair, with two enormous oar and the remnant of rowlocks. 
it was the best boat in town, so we took it. i manage to get away 
from the bank, and, conscious of sweetheart's open admiration, pull 
bold down the stream. it was easy work, for the tide was ebbing. the 
river up to the bridge was tidal, but above the bridge it leap and 
flowed, a regular salmon stream. sweetheart was so impatient to take 
the oar that i relinquish them and picked up my rod. the boat swung 
down the stream and under the high stone viaduct, where i insist 
on anchor and whipping the promising-looking water. the water was 
likely enough, and the sudden splash of a leap grilse add to its 
likelihood. i was in hope a grilse might become entangle with one of 
the flies, but though a big one shot up out of the water within five 
feet of sweetheart, cause her to utter a suppress scream, neither 
grilse nor trout rose to the beautiful lure i trail about, and i 
only hooked two or three enormous dace, which came up like log and 
cover the bottom of the boat with their coarse scales. 

sweetheart had never seen a france trout uncooked, and scarcely share 
my disappointment. 

"they are splendid fish," she repeated; "you are unreasonable." 

there was an ancient breton squat on the bank; from his sulky 
attitude i took him to be a poacher visiting his infernal set lines and 
snares; but i hail him pleasant with a bonjour, which he return 
civilly enough. 

"are there trout in this stream?" 

"about the bridge," he reply cautiously. 

"have you caught any?" 

"i ain't fishing," he said, much alarmed. 

"what's that?" i demanded, point to as plump a trout as ever i saw, 
floating on the end of a string under the bank. 

"where?" he asked, look about him with affected concern. 

"there!" 

he look around, everywhere except where i pointed. he examine the 
horizon, and the tree tops, as though he expect a fish on every twig. 
i pole the boat up to the bank and pointed out the fish. 

"ma doui!" he exclaimed, "there _is_ a fish!" 

"yes, a trout," i said. 

"trout?" he burst into a forced laugh. "trout! ha! ha! why, monsieur, 
that is a dace--a poor little dace!" he hasty jerk it up with a 
long homemade gaff which lay--of course quite by accident--at his feet. 

"a poor little dace!" he mumbled. "of course, monsieur would not care 
to claim such a poor, coarse little fish; but i am only too glad to eat 
it--ah, yes, only too glad!" 

"you see," said sweetheart impulsively, "that you are wrong. give him 
our fish; that will make four dace for the poor fellow." 

i placed the three dace across the blade of my oar and held it out to 
the poacher. he took them as if he were really glad to get them. then 
i said, "these are dace, and they don't have red spots." 

he stood as if ready to bolt, but i laughed, and settled back on my 
oars, saying: "you're a poacher; but i don't care a continental, and 
you can poach all day in this confounded country, where there is about 
one trout to the kilometre. don't look scared. what do i care? only 
don't tell me i'm unable to distinguish a trout when i can see the tip 
of his nose." 

i then sail majestic out into the stream. 

sweetheart want to know whether that was really a real poacher. 
she had read about them. her ideal poacher was a young, stalwart, 
eagle-eyed giant, with a tangle of hair and a disposition toward 
assassination. the reality shock her. 

"anyway," she said, "you frightened the poor old thing. how rough men 
are!" 

we return to the landing place with difficulty, for the tide was 
still on the ebb, and we got aground more than once. my hand were in 
a fine condition when at last i drove that wretched scow into the mud 
and lift sweetheart out to the firm bank. the evil-eyed old man who 
rent us the boat glance sardonic at my rod and blister hands, 
and i was glad enough to pay him all he ask and break away for the 
hotel. 

we had an hour to lunch in, pack, and be ready for the trap which 
was to bear us to our destination--the distant village of faöuet, in 
morbihan. 


x. 

a long drive on a smooth white road, acre of gorse and broom, beech 
wood and oak thickets, and the "heu! heu! allo! allons! en route!" of 
the breton driver, these are my recollection of the ride to faöuet. 
there are others, too--the hedge heavy with bloom, the perfume of the 
wild honeysuckle, the continual bird chorus from every grove and every 
bramble patch--and sweetheart's veil flying into my face. 

we have spoken of it since together, but she has few recollection 
of that journey. she only remember it as her first steps into our 
heritage. 

and so we enter into our heritage, sweetheart and i; and our heritage 
was very fair, for it lay everywhere about us. it was a world which 
we alone inhabited. men said, "this land is gloanec's," "this is 
gurnalec's," "this is kerdec's"; they spoke of "my woods" and "his 
meadows" and "their pastures." and how we laughed; for when we pass 
together through their lands, around us, far as the eye could reach, 
our heritage lay in the sunshine. 


xi. 

one day, when sweetheart had been weeping--for we were thinking of the 
end to the magic second--i spoke of our heritage which swept far as the 
eye could reach across the moor of faöuet. 

she said: "the past is ours, jack; the present is ours; the future----" 

we try to smile, but our heart were like lead. yet we know that the 
future will also be ours. i know it as i write. 


xii. 

the letter from st. gildas, bring with it a breath of salt air, lay 
on the table before us. sweetheart clasp her hand and look at me. 

"i'm in favour of go at once," i said for the third time. over by 
the wall were pile my canvases, the result of three month in faöuet. 

the first was a study of sweetheart under the tree of the ancient 
orchard in the convent grounds. what trouble i had had with that 
canvas! i remember the morning that the old garden came over 
and stood behind me as i painted; and when i had reply to his 
"good-morning," i recall the pang his next words gave me: 

"i am so sorry, monsieur, but it is forbidden to enter the convent 
grounds." 

my canvas was almost finished, and, as the romance have it, "my 
despair was great!" a month's work for nothing--or next to nothing! 

sweetheart rose from her pose on the low bough of the apple tree and 
came over to my side. "never mind, jack; i shall go and ask the mother 
superior about it." 

i knew that she would win over the mother superior; and when, that 
evening, she came back radiant, crying, "she is lovely!--she say you 
may finish the picture, and i think you ought to go and thank her," i 
put on my cap, and step across the street, we rang at the gate. 

the old garden let us in, and in a moment i stood before the lattice 
window behind which some one was moving. in a low voice the invisible 
nun told us that the superior grant to us the privilege of working in 
the orchard, but we must be careful of the grass, because it was almost 
time to cut it. 

"i am sure we may have confidence in you," she said. 

"we will not trample the grass, my sister, and i thank you for us both." 

the lattice trembled, was raise a little, and then fell. 

"you are english," said the hidden nun. 

"i am american, my sister." 

i look at the lattice a moment, then drop my eyes. i may have been 
mistaken, but i think she sighed. 

sweetheart came close to the lattice and murmur her thanks. 

there was a pause. 

then came the voice again, sweet and gentle: "may our lady of saint 
gilda protect you"; and we went out by the little iron wicket. 

the next picture was another study of sweetheart in the woods; the 
next, another study of sweetheart; and the other were study of the 
same young lady. 

the light in the room had grown dim, and i walk to the window which 
overlook the convent chapel. the chapel window were open; within, 
the nun stood or knelt chanting. three white-veiled figures were 
advance to the altar, and the others, drape in black now knelt 
behind. i didn't think i had any business to look at them, so i did 
not. after all, they were cloister nuns, and it was only on hot 
nights that they open the chapel windows. sweetheart was speak 
beside my shoulder. 

"poor things! the one in white, they are the novices; they will never 
see parent or friends again. when they enter the gate they never 
leave--never; they are bury there." 

i said: "after all, we are much like them. we have left all; we have 
nothing now but each other, for the world is dead, and we are bound by 
vow which keep us within the narrow confines of our heritage." 

"but our heritage is everywhere--as far as we can see." 

"ah, yes, but we can only see to the horizon. there is a world beyond." 

"i have renounce it," said sweetheart faintly. 


xiii. 

the letter from st. gilda had been lie on our table for a week 
before i thought of answer it, and even then it was sweetheart who 
wrote: 

"dear mr. stuart: 

"jack is too lazy to answer your kind note, so, in pure shame 
for his discourtesy, i hasten to reply to your questions. 

"first: yes; we have been working very hard, and jack's 
pictures are charming, though he growl over them all day. 

"second: yes; we intend to stay in brittany this winter for 
lot of reasons--one being economy, and another, jack's 
outdoor painting. 

"third: yes; we are coming to st. gildas. 

"fourth: to-morrow. 

"fifth: no; we had not heard of mr. clifford's affair with 
the policeman; and oh, i am so sorry he was lock up and 
fined! jack laughs. i suspect he, too, was as wicked as you 
all when he was a student, alone in paris. 

"sixth: i know you are jack's oldest and most intimate friend, 
so i allow you more liberty than i do messieurs clifford and 
elliott; therefore i will answer your question as to whether 
the honeymoon is not on the wane. no! no! no! there are three 
answer to one question. see how generous i can be!" 

sweetheart call me to see whether or not i approved. i did, and add 
my answer to stuart's last question as follows: "no, you idiot!" then 
i sign the note, and sweetheart seal and direct it. 

so we left for st. gilda next morning before sunrise and in the rain. 
this leave at such an unearthly hour was not my doing, but sweetheart 
was determined, and rose by candlelight in spite of desperate 
opposition on my part. it was cold, and the rain beat against the 
windows. 

it was many kilometre to st. gildas, but before we had gone six, the 
rain had cease and the eastern sky flushed to a pale rose. 

"thank goodness!" i said, "we shall have the sun." 

then the daily repeated miracle of the coming of dawn was wrought 
before our eyes. the heaven glow in rainbow tints; the shred mist 
rising along the river was touched with purple and gold, and acre 
of meadow and pasture drip precious stones. shred of the fade 
night-mist drift among the tree tops, now tip with fire, while in 
the forest depths faint sparkle came from some lost ray of morning 
light fall on wet leaves. then of a sudden up shot the sun, and 
against it, black and gigantic, a peasant towered, leaning upon his 
spade. 


xiv. 

we were fast near the end of our long journey. the sun blaze on 
us from the zenith, and the wheels creak with the heat of the white 
road. the driver lean back, saying, "we enter finistère here by this 
granite post." presently he added, "the ocean!" 

there it lay, a basin of silver and blue. sweetheart had start to her 
feet, speechless, one hand holding to my shoulder, the other clasp 
to her breast. and now, as the road wound through the hill and down 
to the coast, long stretch of white sand skirt the distant cliffs, 
and over the cliff wave mile and mile of yellow gorse. a cluster of 
white and gray house lay in the hollow to the left almost at the mouth 
of the river, and beyond, the wave were beating in the bar--beating 
the same rhythm which we were to hear so long there together, day and 
night. there was not a boat to be seen, not a creature, nor was there 
any sign of life save for the smoke curling from a cottage chimney 
below. the ocean lay sparkle beneath, and beyond its deep blue 
melt into the haze on the horizon. 

suddenly, in the road below, the figure of a man appeared, and at the 
same moment a pointer pup came gambol up beside us in an ecstasy 
of self-abnegation and apology. i sprang out of the lumber vehicle 
and lift sweetheart to the ground, and in an instant we were shake 
hand with a stalwart young fellow in knickerbockers and jersey, who 
said we were a pretty pair not to have come sooner, and told sweetheart 
he pity her lot--meaning me. 

then we walk arm in arm down a fragrant lane to the river bank, where 
the dearest old lady toddle out of the granite house to welcome us and 
show us our rooms. sweetheart went with her, while i stop an instant 
to chat with stuart. 

"that is madame ylven," he said. "she is the most stunning peasant 
woman in finistère, and you will want for nothing." then, after a 
moment, "good heavens! jack, what a beauty your wife----" he stop 
short, but added, "what a delicious little beauty sweetheart has grown 
to be!" 

a white-coiffed maid came to the door, and said, "will monsieur have 
the goodness to come? madame wish him to see the rooms." 

the wind blew from the south, and the thunder of the sea was in my ear 
as i mount the stairs to our new quarters. 

sweetheart met me at the door, saying, "it seem almost too much 
happiness to bear, but i feel that we are at home at last--alone 
together for all time." 

alone together? the ocean at our threshold, the moor and forest at 
our back, and a good slate roof above us. before me through the open 
door i could see the great old-fashioned room, warm in the afternoon 
sunlight--the room we were to live in so long, the room in which we 
were to pass the happiest and bitterest moments of our lives. 

she hesitate an instant before the threshold. i think we knew that we 
stood upon the threshold of our destiny. then i said, half in earnest: 
"are you afraid to cross with me into the unknown future? see, the room 
is fill with sunshine. are you afraid?" 

she sprang across the threshold, and, turning to me, held out both 
hands. 


xv. 

the sun slip lower and lower into the sea, until a distant toss 
wave wash it out against the sky. light die in the room, and shadow 
closed around us; yet it was in the dark and shadow that we drew 
near to each other, then and after. 


xvi. 

stuart stood under our window and yell up at me, "oh, jack! i say, 
jack!" 

sweetheart, who was fuss over the half-unpacked trunk, went to the 
window and threw open the panes. 

"you don't mean to say you have had your coffee?" she said. "jack isn't 
up yet." 

"jack is up," i explained, coming to the window in pajamas. "hello!" 

"i only want to say that i haven't had my coffee," he explained, "and 
i'm go to take it with you when you're ready." 

sweetheart picked up her béret, and, passing a hatpin through it, 
turn to me with a warning, "i shall eat all the breakfast, monsieur!" 
and vanish down the stairs. a moment later i heard her clear voice 
below: 

sonnez le chœur, 
chasseur! 
sonnez la mort! 

before i had finished dressing, sweetheart trip in with my coffee 
and toast. 

"of course i've finished," she said, "and you don't deserve this. 
mr. stuart has gone off with his canvases, and say he'll see you at 
lunch." 

i swallow the coffee and browse on little square of toast which 
she condescending butter for me, and then, lighting a cigarette, i 
announce my intention of commanding an explore expedition consist 
of sweetheart and myself. a scratch at the door and a patter of feet 
announce that i had been overheard. 

sweetheart unlatched the door, and the pointer pup of the evening 
before charged into the room and cover us with boisterous caresses, 
which we took to indicate that he not only approve of the expedition, 
but intended to undertake the general supervise of it himself. i 
resigned the leadership at once. 

"his name," said sweetheart in the tone of one who presents a 
distinguished guest, "is 'luff.'" 

i grave acknowledge the honour by pat his head. 

"i'm afraid," i said to sweetheart, "that there is a bar sinister 
upon his escutcheon, but possibly it is only the indelible mark of the 
conquer britain foxhound." 

sweetheart said, "nonsense!" and the expedition moved, luff leading 
with a series of ear-splitting orders in the dog language which we 
perfectly understood. 

in ten minutes we stood on the cliffs, the salt wind whipping our 
faces. saint-gildas-des-prés lay at our feet. 

"i know," observe sweetheart calmly, "all about this place. captain 
ylven told me at breakfast." 

"well," said i, "what's that island on the horizon?" 

then she overwhelm me with erudition, until i long for baedeker and 
revenge. 

"that is the isle de groix, and all about us is the bay of biscay. this 
little hamlet on the cliff is st. julien, and if we follow the coast 
far enough we come to lorient." 

"follow the coast? which way?" 

sweetheart had forgotten, and i triumph in silence, until she stamp 
her foot and march off to assist luff in investigate a suspicious 
hole in the cliff. 

i went to the edge of the plateau and look over. the surf thunder 
against the rocks, toss long strand of seaweed over the pebbly 
beach. a man with a wooden rake stood in the water up to his knees. he 
rake the seaweed from the breaker as a farmer rake weeds from the 
lawn. the salt wind began to sting my lip and eyes. my throat felt dry 
and salty. i turn toward the hamlet of st. gildas. i had not imagine 
it so small. besides our house there were but three other cluster 
under the river bank. behind it stretch wood and grain field broken 
by patch of yellow gorse. across the river stood a stone chapel 
almost lost in the mile of moorland. to the east and west the downs 
cover with gorse and heather roll to the horizon. here and there 
along the cliff stood what appear to be the ruins of ancient forts, 
and on a rock, just where the river sweep out into the sea, rose a 
dirty white signal tower. the tower was low and squatty and wet. it 
look like some saline excrescence which had slow exude from the 
brine-soaked rock. on the bar hundred of white gull rose and settled 
as the tide encroached; curlew were running along the foam-splashed 
shore under the eastern cliff across the river. 

on our side of the river the cliff were cover with blackthorn and 
hawthorn, with here and there a stunt oak, probably so placed by 
providence as general rendezvous for all the small twitter bird of 
finistère. bird were everywhere. from the cloud came the ceaseless 
carol of skylarks; from the grain field and the flowering gorse rose 
an unbroken chorus, taken up and repeated by flock of microscopic 
songster among the blackthorn on the cliffs. 

"this is paradise, this wilderness," i thought. 

then, as i heard sweetheart's mock voice from the cliff: 

o frère jacques, 
dormez vous! 

"i'm not asleep!" i cry in answer. "what is it?" 

"luff has unearth a poor little mole, but i won't allow him to hurt 
it." 

"jack, dear," she said, as i came up, "couldn't we keep it as a pet? 
see, the poor little thing is blind." 

as it was blind we call it "love," which later was change to 
"cupid," and finally, when we discover it true gormandize 
character, for "cupid" we substitute "cupidity," by which name it 
flourish and fattened. 

"what a change," said sweetheart sadly, "from blind love to blind 
greed!" 

the mole grew very fat. 


xvii. 

when the wind stir the leaves among the poplars, and the long shadow 
fall athwart the fields; when the wind rise at night, and the branch 
scrape and crack above the moonlit snow; when in the long hot days 
the earth is bath in fragrance, and all the little creature of 
the field are silent; when in the still evenings the flower perfume 
the air, and the gravel walk shine white in the moonlight; when the 
breeze quicken from the distant coast; when the sand shakes beneath 
the shock of the breakers, and every wave is plumed with white; when 
the calm eye of the beacon turn to mine, lingers, and turn away, and 
the surf is yeasty and thick; when i start at the sound of a voice from 
the cliffs, and my eyes are raise in vain; when the white gull toss 
and drift in the storm-clouds, and the water hurry out in the black 
ebb tide; when i rise and look from the window; when i dress; when i 
work with pen and colour; when i rest; when i walk; when i sleep--there 
is one face before my eyes, one name on my lips. for the white shadow 
is turning gray, and god alone know the end. 


xviii. 

and god alone know the end, for the mists are crowding, brood 
like angry-browed clouds, and i hear the whistle of unseen winds, and 
my life-flame waver and sink and flares, blown hither and thither, 
tossing, fading, leaping, but fading, always fading. 

in a flash, like a print picture on a screen, illuminated, keen 
etch in the white glare, i see the bed, and the people around me, 
the black gowns, the pale eyes of the doctor, the sponge and basin, the 
rolls of lint. 

voices, minute but clean-cut and clear as picked harp-strings, tinkle 
in my ears; the voice of the doctor, other voices, but always the 
voice of the doctor--"the splinter of bone on the brain; the splinter 
pressing on the tissues; the depression." 

the doctor! that is the man! that is the man who come to my side, who 
follows, follow where i go, who seek me throughout the world! i saw 
him as i lay flung on the turf, limp, unconscious, below the cliff 
on the aspen hills; i felt his presence in the studio; i heard him 
creep at my heel across the gorse thicket of st. gildas. and now 
he has come to cut short the magic second, to turn back time--back, 
back, into the old worn channels, rock-ribbed and salt with tears. 

as a leaf of written paper torn in two, so shall my life be torn in 
two; and the long tear shall mangle the chapter written in rose and 
gold. 

then, too, my shadow, already turn from white to gray, shall fall 
with a deep stain wherever i pass; and i shall see the yellow gorse 
glimmer and turn to golden-rod, and the poplar turn to oaks; and the 
twin tower of notre dame, filmy, lace-carved, and gray with centuries, 
shall dwindle as i look--dwindle and sway and turn to pines, singing 
pine that murmur to the winds, blow across the aspen hills. 

* * * * * 

all that is fair shall pass away; all that i love, all that i fear 
for--these shall the doctor take away, lift them from my memory on 
the point of a steel blade. what has he to give in return? a hell of 
vapour, distort sight; a hell of sound, drown the soul. 

* * * * * 

gigantic apparition arise across the world of water, waver like 
shadow on the clouds. steel-clad, clothe in skins, casque in steel, 
their wing head bend and nod and move against the clouds. and even 
they are change as cloud change shape. i see steel limb turn red 
and naked. i see wing casque trail to the earth, feathered, paint 
in colours of earth. 

ihó! inâh! etó! e-hó! 

the bridge of stars span the vast lake of air; the sun and the moon 
travel over it. 

* * * * * 

my shadow is turning dark; i can scarcely see the doctor, but now--god 
have mercy!--_i can touch him._ 

* * * * * 

all the high spectre are stoop from the clouds, bend above me to 
watch. i know them and their eyes of shadow--i know them now; hârpen 
that was to chaské what hárpstinâ shall be to hapéda; and hârka shall 
come after all with the voice of winter winds: 

"aké u, aké u, aké u!" 

but the magic second shall never return. 

"mâ cânté maséca!" 

* * * * * 

now they leave my bed, the people who crowded there under the shadowy 
form of the spectres; now the doctor bends over; i see and feel him. 
his hand are tangle in the thread of time; he is cutting a thread; 
he---- 


xix. 

when i spoke to him first i spoke in the france language. before he 
answered, the scream of a blue jay in the elm outside set my nerves 
aquiver, and i call for donald and walter. 

as i lay there i could see the aspen hill from the window, heap 
of crumple gold bath in sunshine. over them sail the froth from 
the silken milkweed; over them drift the big brown-red butterflies, 
luminous as richest autumn leaves. 

some one closed the door softly. the doctor had gone. 

the sunlight pour into the window, etching my shadow on the wall 
behind. lie very still there i saw it motionless beside me. _the 
shadow was black._ 

somebody said in the next room, "will he die?" 

"die?" i said aloud. 

a bird twitter outside my window. 

the door open again, noiselessly. 

"sweetheart?" i whispered. 

"yes, jack." 

after a moment i said, "when do you go back to school?" 

"i? i finished school a year ago." 

"come nearer." 

"i am here, jack." 

"time stop a year ago." 

"a year ago to-day." 

the same gray eyes, the same face, paler, perhaps. 

"we have journey far," i sighed, "always together, but in those days 
our shadow were white as snow. am i go to die? there are tear in 
your eyes." 

they fell on my cheek; her arms fell too, closer, closer, around my 
neck. 

"life has begun," she said. 

"life? what was the year that end to-day? the magic second of life?" 

"a year of death, to me!" 

ah, but her soul know of a life in death! and she shall know it, 
too, when her shadow turn white than snow. for the temple of idol 
has closed its door at the sound of a voice, and an idol of gilt has 
turn to flesh and blood. 

i-hó! 

so shall she know of the life in death when her soul and her body are 
one. 




passeur. 


o friends, i've serve ye food and bed; 
o friends, the mist is rising wet; 
then bide a moment, o my dead, 
where, lonely, i must linger yet! 




passeur. 

because man goeth to his long home, 
and the mourner go about the streets. 


when he had finished his pipe he tap the brier bowl against the 
chimney until the ashes powdered the char log smoulder across 
the andirons. then he sank back in his chair, absently touching the hot 
pipe-bowl with the tip of each finger until it grew cool enough to be 
drop into his coat pocket. 

twice he raise his eyes to the little america clock ticking upon the 
mantel. he had half an hour to wait. 

the three candle that light the room might be trim to advantage; 
this would give him something to do. a pair of scissors lay open 
upon the bureau, and he rose and picked them up. for a while he stood 
dreamy shut and opening the scissors, his eyes roam about the 
room. there was an easel in the corner, and a pile of dusty canvas 
behind it; behind the canvas there was a shadow--that gray, menace 
shadow that never moved. 

when he had trim each candle he wipe the smoky scissors on a paint 
rag and flung them on the bureau again. the clock pointed to ten; he 
had been occupy exactly three minutes. 

the bureau was litter with neckties, pipes, comb and brushes, 
matches, reel and fly-books, collars, shirt studs, a new pair of 
scotch shoot stockings, and a woman's workbasket. 

he picked out all the neckties, fold them once, and hung them over 
a bit of twine that stretch across the looking-glass; the shirt 
stud he shovel into the top drawer along with brushes, combs, and 
stockings; the reel and fly-books he dust with his handkerchief 
and placed methodical along the mantel shelf. twice he stretch out 
his hand toward the woman's workbasket, but his hand fell to his side 
again, and he turn away into the room staring at the die fire. 

outside the snow-sealed window a shutter broke loose and bang 
monotonously, until he flung open the pane and fasten it. the soft, 
wet snow, that had choke the window-panes all day, was frozen hard 
now, and he had to break the polish crust before he could find the 
rusty shutter hinge. 

he lean out for a moment, his numb hand rest on the snow, the 
roar of a rising snow-squall in his ears; and out across the desolate 
garden and stark hedgerow he saw the flat black river spread through 
the gloom. 

a candle sputter and snap behind him; a sheet of drawing-paper 
flutter across the floor, and he closed the pane and turn back 
into the room, both hand in his worn pockets. 

the little america clock on the mantel tick and ticked, but the 
hand lagged, for he had not been occupy five minutes in all. he went 
up to the mantel and watch the hand of the clock. a minute--longer 
than a year to him--crept by. 

around the room the furniture stood ranged--a chair or two of yellow 
pine, a table, the easel, and in one corner the broad curtain bed; 
and behind each lay shadows, menace shadow that never moved. 

a little pale flame start up from the smoking log on the andirons; 
the room sang with the sudden hiss of escape wood gases. after a 
little the back of the log caught fire; jet of blue flared up here and 
there with mellow sound like the lighting of gas-burners in a row, and 
in a moment a thin sheet of yellow flame wrap the whole char log. 

then the shadow moved; not the shadow behind the furniture--they 
never moved--but other shadows, thin, gray, confusing, that came and 
spread their slim pattern all around him, and tremble and trembled. 

he dare not step or tread upon them, they were too real; they mesh 
the floor around his feet, they ensnare his knees, they fell across 
his breast like ropes. some night, in the silence of the moors, when 
wind and river were still, he fear these strand of shadow might 
tighten--creep higher around his throat and tighten. but even then he 
knew that those other shadow would never move, those gray shape that 
knelt crouch in every corner. 

when he look up at the clock again ten minutes had straggle past. 
time was disturbed in the room; the strand of shadow seem entangle 
among the hand of the clock, drag them back from their rotation. 
he wonder if the shadow would strangle time, some still night when 
the wind and the flat river were silent. 

there grew a sudden chill across the floor; the crack of the boards 
let it in. he lean down and drew his sabot toward him from their 
place near the andirons, and slip them over his chaussons; and as he 
straighten up, his eyes mechanical sought the mantel above, where 
in the dusk another pair of sabot stood, little, slender, delicate 
sabots, carve from red beech. a year's dust gray their surface; a 
year's rust dull the silver band across the instep. he said this to 
himself aloud, knowing that it was within a few minutes of the year. 

his own sabot came from mort-dieu; they were shave square and band 
with steel. but in days past he had thought that no sabot in mort-dieu 
was delicate enough to touch the instep of the mort-dieu passeur. so he 
sent to the shore lighthouse, and they sent to lorient, where the women 
are coquettish and show their hair under the coiffe, and wear dainty 
sabots; and in this town, where vanity corrupt and there is much lace 
on coiffe and collarette, a pair of delicate sabot was found, band 
with silver and chisel in red beech. the sabot stood on the mantel 
above the fire now, dusty and tarnished. 

there was a sound from the window, the soft murmur of snow blot 
glass panes. the wind, too, mutter under the roof eaves. presently it 
would begin to whisper to him from the chimney--he knew it--and he held 
his hand over his ear and stare at the clock. 

in the hamlet of mort-dieu the pine sing all day of the sea secrets, 
but in the night the ghost of little gray bird fill the branches, 
singing of the sunshine of past years. he heard the song as he sat, 
and he crush his hand over his ears; but the gray bird join with 
the wind in the chimney, and he heard all that he dare not hear, and 
he thought all that he dare not hope or think, and the swift tear 
scald his eyes. 

in mort-dieu the nights are long than anywhere on earth; he knew 
it--why should he not know? this had been so for a year; it was 
different before. there were so many things different before; days and 
nights vanish like minutes then; the pine told no secret of the 
sea, and the gray bird had not yet come to mort-dieu. also, there was 
jeanne, passeur at the carmes. 

when he first saw her she was pole the square, flat-bottomed ferry 
skiff from the carme to mort-dieu, a red handkerchief bound across her 
silky black hair, a red skirt flutter just below her knees. the next 
time he saw her he had to call to her across the placid river, "ohé! 
ohé, passeur!" she came, pole the flat skiff, her deep blue eyes 
fixed pensive on him, the scarlet skirt and kerchief idle flap in 
the april wind. then day follow day when the far call "passeur!" grew 
clear and more joyous, and the faint answer cry, "i come!" ripple 
across the water like music tinge with laughter. then spring came, 
and with spring came love--love, carry free across the ferry from the 
carme to mort-dieu. 

the flame above the char log whistled, flickered, and went out in 
a jet of wood vapour, only to play like lightning above the gas and 
relight again. the clock tick more loudly, and the song from the 
pine fill the room. but in his strain eyes a summer landscape was 
reflected, where white cloud sail and white foam curl under the 
square bow of a little skiff. and he pressed his numb hand tight 
to his ear to drown the cry, "passeur! passeur!" 

and now for a moment the clock cease ticking. it was time to go--who 
but he should know it, he who went out into the night swinging his 
lantern? and he went. he had gone each night from the first--from that 
first strange winter evening when a strange voice had answer him 
across the river, the voice of the new passeur. he had never heard 
_her_ voice again. 

so he pass down the windy wooden stairs, lantern hanging light in 
his hand, and step out into the storm. through sheet of drift 
snow, over heap of frozen seaweed and icy drift he moved, shift his 
lantern right and left, until its glimmer on the water warn him. then 
he call out into the night, "passeur!" the frozen spray spatter 
his face and crust the lantern; he heard the distant boom of breaker 
beyond the bar, and the noise of mighty wind among the seaward cliffs. 

"passeur!" 

across the broad flat river, black as a sea of pitch, a tiny light 
sparkle a moment. again he cried, "passeur!" 

"i come!" 

he turn ghastly white, for it was her voice--or was he crazy?--and 
he sprang waist deep into the icy current and cry out again, but his 
voice end in a sob. 

slow through the snow the flat skiff took shape, creep near 
and nearer. but she was not at the pole--he saw that; there was only a 
tall, thin man, shroud to the eyes in oilskin; and he leap into the 
boat and bade the ferryman hasten. 

halfway across he rose in the skiff, and called, "jeanne!" but the roar 
of the storm and the thrashing of icy wave drown his voice. yet he 
heard her again, and she call to him by name. 

when at last the boat grate upon the invisible shore, he lift his 
lantern, trembling, stumble among the rocks, and calling to her, as 
though his voice could silence the voice that had spoken a year ago 
that night. and it could not. he sank shiver upon his knees, and 
look out into the darkness, where an ocean roll across a world. 
then his stiff lip moved, and he repeated her name; but the hand of 
the ferryman fell gently upon his head. 

and when he raise his eyes he saw that the ferryman was death. 




the key to grief. 

the moving finger writes, and, have writ, 
move on; nor all your piety nor wit 
shall lure it back to cancel half a line, 
nor all your tear wash out a word of it. 

fitzgerald. 




the key to grief. 

the wild hawk to the wind-swept sky 
the deer to the wholesome wold, 
and the heart of a man to the heart of a maid, 
as it was in the days of old. 

kipling. 


i. 

they were do their work very badly. they got the rope around his 
neck, and tie his wrist with moose-bush withes, but again he fell, 
sprawling, turning, twist over the leaves, tear up everything 
around him like a trap panther. 

he got the rope away from them; he clung to it with bleeding fists; he 
set his white teeth in it, until the jute strand relaxed, unravelled, 
and snapped, gnaw through by his white teeth. 

twice tulle struck him with a gum hook. the dull blow fell on flesh 
rigid as stone. 

panting, foul with forest mould and rotten leaves, hand and face 
smear with blood, he sat up on the ground, glaring at the circle of 
men around him. 

"shoot him!" gasp tully, dashing the sweat from his bronze brow; and 
bates, breathing heavily, sat down on a log and drag a revolver from 
his rear pocket. the man on the ground watch him; there was froth in 
the corner of his mouth. 

"git back!" whisper bates, but his voice and hand trembled. "kent," 
he stammered, "won't ye hang?" 

the man on the ground glared. 

"ye've got to die, kent," he urged; "they all say so. ask lefty 
sawyer; ask dyce; ask carrots.--he's got to swing fur it--ain't he, 
tully?--kent, fur god's sake, swing fur these here gents!" 

the man on the ground panted; his bright eyes never moved. 

after a moment tulle sprang on him again. there was a flurry of leaves, 
a crackle, a gasp and a grunt, then the thumping and thrashing of two 
body writhe in the brush. dyce and carrot jump on the prostrate 
men. lefty sawyer caught the rope again, but the jute strand gave 
way and he stumbled. tulle began to scream, "he's chokin' me!" dyce 
stagger out into the open, moan over a broken wrist. 

"shoot!" shout lefty sawyer, and drag tulle aside. "shoot, jim 
bates! shoot straight, b' god!" 

"git back!" gasp bates, rising from the fallen log. 

the crowd part right and left; a quick report rang 
out--another--another. then from the whirl of smoke a tall form 
staggered, dealing blows--blows that sound sharp as the crack of a 
whip. 

"he's off! shoot straight!" they cried. 

there was a gallop of heavy boots in the woods. bates, faint and dazed, 
turn his head. 

"shoot!" shriek tully. 

but bat was sick; his smoking revolver fell to the ground; his white 
face and pale eyes contracted. it last only a moment; he start 
after the others, plunging, wallow through thicket of osier and 
hemlock underbrush. 

far ahead he heard kent crashing on like a young moose in november, 
and he knew he was making for the shore. the other knew too. already 
the gray gleam of the sea cut a straight line along the forest edge; 
already the soft clash of the surf on the rocks broke faint through 
the forest silence. 

"he's got a canoe there!" bawl tully. "he'll be into it!" 

and he was into it, kneel in the bow, driving his paddle to the 
handle. the rising sun gleam like red lightning on the flash 
blade; the canoe shot to the crest of a wave, hung, bow dripping in 
the wind, drop into the depths, glided, tipped, rolled, shot up 
again, staggered, and plunge on. 

tulle ran straight out into the cove surf; the water broke against his 
chest, bare and wet with sweat. bat sat down on a worn black rock and 
watch the canoe listlessly. 

the canoe dwindle to a speck of gray and silver; and when carrots, who 
had run back to the gum camp for a rifle, returned, the speck on the 
water might have been easy to hit than a loon's head at twilight. so 
carrots, being thrifty by nature, fire once, and was satisfy to save 
the other cartridges. the canoe was still visible, making for the open 
sea. somewhere beyond the horizon lay the keys, a string of rocks bare 
as skulls, black and slimy where the sea cut their base, white on the 
crest with the excrement of sea birds. 

"he's makin' fur the key to grief!" whisper bat to dyce. 

dyce, moaning, and nursing his broken wrist, turn a sick face out to 
sea. 

the last rock seaward was the key to grief, a splinter pinnacle 
polish by the sea. from the key to grief, seaward a day's paddle, if 
a man dared, lay the long wooded island in the ocean known as grief on 
the chart of the bleak coast. 

in the history of the coast, two men had made the voyage to the key to 
grief, and from there to the island. one of these was a rum-crazed pelt 
hunter, who live to come back; the other was a college youth; they 
found his batter canoe at sea, and a day later his batter body was 
flung up in the cove. 

so, when bat whisper to dyce, and when dyce call to the others, 
they knew that the end was not far off for kent and his canoe; and they 
turn away into the forest, sullen, but satisfy that kent would get 
his dues when the devil got his. 

lefty spoke vague of the wages of sin. carrots, with an eye to 
thrift, suggest a plan for an equitable division of kent's property. 

when they reach the gum camp they pile kent's personal effects on a 
blanket. 

carrot took the inventory: a revolver, two gum hooks, a fur cap, a 
nickel-plated watch, a pipe, a pack of new cards, a gum sack, forty 
pound of spruce gum, and a fry pan. 

carrot shuffle the cards, picked out the joker, and flip it 
pensive into the fire. then he dealt cold deck all around. 

when the goods and chattel of their late companion had been divide by 
chance--for there was no chance to cheat--somebody remember tully. 

"he's down there on the coast, starin' after the canoe," said bat 
huskily. 

he rose and walk toward a heap on the ground cover by a blanket. he 
start to lift the blanket, hesitated, and finally turn away. under 
the blanket lay tully's brother, shot the night before by kent. 

"guess we'd better wait till tulle comes," said carrot uneasily. bat 
and kent had been campmates. an hour later tulle walk into camp. 

he spoke to no one that day. in the morning bat found him down on 
the coast digging, and said: "hello, tully! guess we ain't much hell on 
lynchin'!" 

"naw," said tully. "git a spade." 

"goin' to plant him there?" 

"yep." 

"where he kin hear them waves?" 

"yep." 

"purty spot." 

"yep." 

"which way will he face?" 

"where he kin watch fur that damn canoe!" cry tulle fiercely. 

"he--he can't see," venture bat uneasily. "he's dead, ain't he?" 

"he'll heave up that there sand when the canoe come back! an' it's 
a-comin'! an' bud kent'll be in it, dead or alive! git a spade!" 

the pale light of superstition flicker in bates's eyes. he hesitated. 

"the--the dead can't see," he began; "kin they?" 

tulle turn a distort face toward him. 

"yer lie!" he roared. "my brother kin see, dead or livin'! an' he'll 
see the hangin' of bud kent! an' he'll git up outer the grave fur to 
see it, bill bates! i'm tellin' ye! i'm tellin' ye! deep as i'll plant 
him, he'll heave that there sand and call to me, when the canoe come 
in! i'll hear him; i'll be here! an' we'll live to see the hangin' of 
bud kent!" 

about sundown they plant tully's brother, face to the sea. 


ii. 

on the key to grief the green wave rub all day. white at the summit, 
black at the base, the shaft rocks rear splinter pinnacles, 
slant like channel buoys. on the polish pillar sea bird 
brood--white-winged, bright-eyed sea birds, that nestle and preen and 
flap and clatter their orange-coloured beak when the sift spray 
drive and drift across the reef. 

as the sun rose, painting crimson streak criss-cross over the waters, 
the sea bird sidle together, huddle row on row, steep in downy 
drowse. 

where the sun of noon burnish the sea, an opal wave washed, listless, 
noiseless; a sea bird stretch one listless wing. 

and into the silence of the waters a canoe glided, bronze by the 
sunlight, jewelled by the salt drops string from prow to thwart, 
seaweed a-trail in the diamond-flashing wake, and in the bow a man 
dripping with sweat. 

up rose the gulls, sweeping in circles, turning, turning over rock and 
sea, and their clamour fill the sky, start little ripple echo 
among the rocks. 

the canoe grate on a shelf of ebony; the seaweed rock and washed; 
the little sea crab sheer sideways, down, down into limpid depths of 
greenest shadows. such was the coming of bud kent to the key to grief. 

he drew the canoe halfway up the shelf of rock and sat down, breathing 
heavily, one brown arm across the bow. for an hour he sat there. the 
sweat dry under his eyes. the sea bird came back, filling the air 
with soft querulous notes. 

there was a livid mark around his neck, a red, raw circle. the salt 
wind stung it; the sun burn it into his flesh like a collar of 
red-hot steel. he touched it at times; once he wash it with cold salt 
water. 

far in the north a curtain of mist hung on the sea, dense, motionless 
as the fog on the grand banks. he never move his eyes from it; he knew 
what it was. behind it lay the island of grief. 

all the year round the island of grief is hidden by the bank of mist, 
rampart of dead white fog encircle it on every side. ship give it 
wide berth. some speak of warm spring on the island whose waters flow 
far out to sea, rising in steam eternally. 

the pelt hunter had come back with tale of forest and deer and 
flower everywhere; but he had been drink much, and much was 
forgiven him. 

the body of the college youth toss up in the cove on the mainland 
was batter out of recognition, but some said, when found, one hand 
clutch a crimson blossom half wilted, but broad as a sap pan. 

so kent lay motionless beside his canoe, burn with thirst, every 
nerve vibrating, thinking of all these things. it was not fear that 
whiten the firm flesh under the tan; it was the fear of fear. he 
must not think--he must throttle dread; his eyes must never falter, his 
head never turn from that wall of mist across the sea. with set teeth 
he crush back terror; with glittering eyes he look into the hollow 
eyes of fright. and so he conquer fear. 

he rose. the sea bird whirl up into the sky, pitching, tossing, 
screaming, till the sharp flap of their pinion set the snap 
echo flying among the rocks. 

under the canoe's sharp prow the kelp bob and dip and parted; the 
sunlit wave ran out ahead, glittering, dancing. splash! splash! bow 
and stern! and now he knelt again, and the polish paddle swung and 
dipped, and swept and swung and dip again. 

far behind, the clamour of the sea bird linger in his ears, till 
the mellow dip of the paddle drown all sound and the sea was a sea of 
silence. 

no wind came to cool the hot sweat on cheek and breast. the sun blaze 
a path of flame before him, and he follow out into the waste of 
waters. the still ocean divide under the bow and ripple innocent 
away on either side, tinkling, foaming, sparkle like the current in 
a woodland brook. he look around at the world of flatten water, and 
the fear of fear rose up and grip his throat again. then he lower 
his head, like a torture bull, and shook the fear of fear from his 
throat, and drove the paddle into the sea as a butcher stabs, to the 
hilt. 

so at last he came to the wall of mist. it was thin at first, thin and 
cool, but it thicken and grew warmer, and the fear of fear drag at 
his head, but he would not look behind. 

into the fog the canoe shot; the gray water ran by, high as the 
gunwales, oily, silent. shape flicker across the bows, pillar of 
mist that rode the waters, robe in film of tattered shadows. gigantic 
form tower to dizzy heights above him, shake out shred shroud 
of cloud. the vast drapery of the fog sway and hung and tremble as 
he brush them; the white twilight deepen to a sombre gloom. and now 
it grew thinner; the fog became a mist, and the mist a haze, and the 
haze float away and vanish into the blue of the heavens. 

all around lay a sea of pearl and sapphire, lapping, lap on a 
silver shoal. 

so he came to the island of grief. 


iii. 

on the silver shoal the wave wash and washed, break like crush 
opal where the sands sang with the hum froth. 

troops of little shore birds, wade on the shoal, toss their 
sun-tipped wings and scuttle inland, where, dappled with shadow from 
the fringe forest, the white beach of the island stretched. 

the water all around was shallow, limpid as crystal, and he saw the 
ribbed sand shining on the bottom, where purple seaweed floated, and 
delicate sea creature dart and swarm and scattered again at the 
dip of his paddle. 

like velvet rub on velvet the canoe brush across the sand. he 
stagger to his feet, stumble out, drag the canoe high up under 
the trees, turn it bottom upward, and sank beside it, face downward 
in the sand. sleep came to drive away the fear of fear, but hunger, 
thirst, and fever fought with sleep, and he dreamed--dreamed of a 
rope that saw his neck, of the fight in the woods, and the shots. he 
dreamed, too, of the camp, of his forty pound of spruce gum, of tully, 
and of bates. he dream of the fire and the smoke-scorched kettle, of 
the foul odour of musty bedding, of the greasy cards, and of his own 
new pack, hoard for week to please the others. all this he dreamed, 
lie there face downward in the sand; but he did not dream of the face 
of the dead. 

the shadow of the leaves move on his blonde head, crisp with clip 
curls. a butterfly flit around him, alight now on his legs, 
now on the back of his bronze hands. all the afternoon the bee hung 
drone among the wildwood blossoms; the leaves above scarcely rustled; 
the shore bird brood along the water's edge; the thin tide, sleep 
on the sand, mirror the sky. 

twilight pale the zenith; a breeze move in the deep woods; a star 
glimmered, went out, glimmer again, faded, and glimmered. 

night came. a moth dart to and fro under the trees; a beetle hum 
around a heap of seaweed and fell scramble in the sand. somewhere 
among the tree a sound had become distinct, the song of a little 
brook, melodious, interminable. he heard it in his dream; it thread 
all his dream like a needle of silver, and like a needle it prick 
him--pricked his dry throat and cracked lips. it could not awake him; 
the cool night swathe him head and foot. 

toward dawn a bird woke up and piped. other bird stirred, restless, 
half awakened; a gull spread a cramped wing on the shore, preen its 
feathers, scratch its tuft neck, and took two drowsy steps toward 
the sea. 

the sea breeze stir out behind the mist bank; it raise the feather 
on the sleep gulls; it set the leaves whispering. a twig snapped, 
broke off, and fell. kent stirred, sighed, trembled, and awoke. 

the first thing he heard was the song of the brook, and he stumble 
straight into the woods. there it lay, a thin, deep stream in the gray 
morning light, and he stretch himself beside it and laid his cheek 
in it. a bird drank in the pool, too--a little fluffy bird, bright-eyed 
and fearless. 

his knee were firm when at last he rose, heedless of the drops that 
bead lip and chin. with his knife he dug and scrape at some white 
roots that hung half mesh in the bank of the brook, and when he had 
clean them in the pool he ate them. 

the sun stain the sky when he went down to the canoe, but the eternal 
curtain of fog, far out at sea, hid it as yet from sight. 

he lift the canoe, bottom upwards, to his head, and, paddle and pole 
in either hand, carry it into the forest. 

after he had set it down he stood a moment, opening and shut his 
knife. then he look up into the trees. there were bird there, if 
he could get at them. he look at the brook. there were the print of 
his finger in the sand; there, too, was the print of something else--a 
deer's pointed hoof. 

he had nothing but his knife. he open it again and look at it. 

that day he dug for clam and ate them raw. he wade out into the 
shallows, too, and jab at fish with his setting pole, but hit 
nothing except a yellow crab. 

fire was what he wanted. he hack and chip at flinty-looking 
pebbles, and scrape tinder from a stick of sun-dried driftwood. his 
knuckle bled, but no fire came. 

that night he heard deer in the woods, and could not sleep for 
thinking, until the dawn came up behind the wall of mist, and he rose 
with it to drink his fill at the brook and tear raw clam with his 
white teeth. again he fought for fire, craving it as he had never 
crave water, but his knuckle bled, and the knife scrape on the flint 
in vain. 

his mind, perhaps, had suffer somewhat. the white beach seem to 
rise and fall like a white carpet on a gusty hearth. the birds, too, 
that ran along the sand, seem big and juicy, like partridges; and 
he chase them, hurling shell and bit of driftwood at them till he 
could scarcely keep his feet for the rising, plunge beach--or carpet, 
whichever it was. that night the deer arouse him at intervals. he 
heard them splash and grunt and crackling along the brook. once 
he arose and stole after them, knife in hand, till a false step into 
the brook awoke him to his folly, and he felt his way back to the 
canoe, trembling. 

morning came, and again he drank at the brook, lie on the sand where 
countless heart-shaped hoof had pass leave clean imprints; and 
again he rip the raw clam from their shell and swallow them, 
whimpering. 

all day long the white beach rose and fell and heave and flatten 
under his bright dry eyes. he chase the shore bird at times, till the 
unsteady beach trip him up and he fell full length in the sand. then 
he would rise moaning, and creep into the shadow of the wood, and watch 
the little song-birds in the branches, moaning, always moaning. 

his hands, sticky with blood, hack steel and flint together, but so 
feeble that now even the cold sparks no long came. 

he began to fear the advance night; he dread to hear the big warm 
deer among the thickets. fear clutch him suddenly, and he lower his 
head and set his teeth and shook fear from his throat again. 

then he start aimless into the woods, crowd past bushes, 
scrape trees, tread on moss and twig and mouldy stump, his bruise 
hand swinging, always swinging. 

the sun set in the mist as he came out of the wood on to another 
beach--a warm, soft beach, crimson by the glow in the evening clouds. 

and on the sand at his feet lay a young girl asleep, swathe in the 
silken garment of her own black hair, round limbed, brown, smooth as 
the bloom on the tawny beach. 

a gull flap overhead, screaming. her eyes, deep than night, 
unclosed. then her lip part in a cry, soft with sleep, "ihó!" 

she rose, rubbing her velvet eyes. "ihó!" she cry in wonder; "inâh!" 

the gilded sand settled around her little feet. her cheek crimsoned. 

"e-hó! e-hó!" she whispered, and hid her face in her hair. 


iv. 

the bridge of the stars span the sky seas; the sun and the moon are 
the traveller who pass over it. this was also known in the lodge of 
the isantee, hundred of years ago. chaské told it to hârpam, and when 
hârpam knew he told it to hapéda; and so the knowledge spread to hârka, 
and from winona to wehârka, up and down, across and ever across, woof 
and web, until it came to the island of grief. and how? god knows! 

wehârka, prattle in the tules, may have told ne-kâ; and ne-kâ, 
high in the november clouds, may have told kay-óshk, who told it to 
shinge-bis, who told it to skeé-skah, who told it to sé-só-kah. 

ihó! inâh! behold the wonder of it! and this is the fate of all 
knowledge that come to the island of grief. 

* * * * * 

as the red glow die in the sky, and the sand swam in shadows, the girl 
part the silken curtains of her hair and look at him. 

"ehó!" she whisper again in soft delight. 

for now it was plain to her that he was the sun! he had cross the 
bridge of stars in the blue twilight; he had come! 

"e-tó!" 

she step nearer, shivering, faint with the ecstasy of this holy 
miracle wrought before her. 

he was the sun! his blood streak the sky at dawn; his blood stain 
the cloud at even. in his eyes the blue of the sky still lingered, 
smother two blue stars; and his body was as white as the breast of 
the moon. 

she open both arms, hand timid stretched, palm upward. her face 
was raise to his, her eyes slow closed; the deep-fringed lid 
trembled. 

like a young priestess she stood, motionless save for the sudden quiver 
of a limb, a quick pulse-flutter in the round throat. and so she 
worshipped, naked and unashamed, even after he, reeling, fell heavy 
forward on his face; even when the evening breeze steal over the 
sands stir the hair on his head, as wind stir the fur of a dead 
animal in the dust. 

* * * * * 

when the morning sun peer over the wall of mist, and she saw it was 
the sun, and she saw him, flung on the sand at her feet, then she knew 
that he was a man, only a man, pallid as death and smear with blood. 

and yet--miracle of miracles!--the divine wonder in her eyes deepened, 
and her body seem to swoon, and fall a-trembling, and swoon again. 

for, although it was but a man who lay at her feet, it had been easy 
for her to look upon a god. 

he dream that he breathe fire--fire, that he crave as he had never 
crave water. mad with delirium, he knelt before the flames, rubbing 
his torn hands, washing them in the crimson-scented flames. he had 
water, too, cool scent water, that spray his burning flesh, that 
wash in his eyes, his hair, his throat. after that came hunger, 
a fierce rend agony, that scorch and clutch and tore at his 
entrails; but that, too, die away, and he dream that he had eaten 
and all his flesh was warm. then he dream that he slept; and when he 
slept he dream no more. 

one day he awoke and found her stretch beside him, soft palm tight 
closed, smiling, asleep. 


v. 

now the days began to run more swift than the tide along the tawny 
beach; and the nights, star-dusted and blue, came and vanish and 
returned, only to exhale at dawn like perfume from a violet. 

they count hour as they count the golden bubbles, wink with 
a million eyes along the foam-flecked shore; and the hour ended, and 
began, and glimmered, iridescent, and end as bubble end in a tiny 
rainbow haze. 

there was still fire in the world; it flash up at her touch and where 
she chose. a bow strung with the silk of her own hair, an arrow wing 
like a sea bird and tip with shell, a line from the silver tendon of 
a deer, a hook of polish bone--these were the mystery he learned, 
and learned them laughing, her silken head bent close to his. 

the first night that the bow was wrought and the glossy string attuned, 
she stole into the moonlit forest to the brook; and there they stood, 
whispering, listening, and whispering, though neither understood the 
voice they loved. 

in the deep woods, kaug, the porcupine, scrape and snuffed. they 
heard wabóse, the rabbit, pit-a-pat, pit-a-pat, lope across dead 
leaves in the moonlight. skeé-skah, the wood-duck, sail past, 
noiseless, gorgeous as a floating blossom. 

out on the ocean's placid silver, shinge-bis, the diver, shook the 
scent silence with his idle laughter, till kay-óshk, the gray gull, 
stir in his slumber. there came a sudden ripple in the stream, a 
mellow splash, a soft sound on the sand. 

"ihó! behold!" 

"i see nothing." 

the beloved voice was only a wordless melody to her. 

"ihó! ta-hinca, the red deer! e-hó! the buck will follow!" 

"ta-hinca," he repeated, notch the arrow. 

"e-tó! ta-mdóka!" 

so he drew the arrow to the head, and the gray gull feather brush 
his ear, and the dark hum with the harmony of the singing 
string. 

thus die ta-mdóka, the buck deer of seven prongs. 


vi. 

as an apple toss spin into the air, so spun the world above the 
hand that toss it into space. 

and one day in early spring, sé-só-kah, the robin, awoke at dawn, and 
saw a girl at the foot of the blossom tree holding a babe cradle in 
the silken sheet of her hair. 

at its feeble cry, kaug, the porcupine, raise his quill head. 
wabóse, the rabbit, sat still with palpitate sides. kay-óshk, the 
gray gull, tiptoe along the beach. 

kent knelt with one bronze arm around them both. 

"ihó! inâh!" whisper the girl, and held the babe up in the rosy 
flame of dawn. 

but kent tremble as he looked, and his eyes filled. on the pale green 
moss their shadow lay--three shadows. but the shadow of the babe was 
white as froth. 

because it was the firstborn son, they name it chaské; and the girl 
sang as she cradle it there in the silken vestment of her hair; all 
day long in the sunshine she sang: 

wâ-wa, wâ-wa, wâ-we--yeá; 
kah-wéen, nee-zhéka ke-diaus-âi, 
ke-gâh nau-wâi, ne-mé-go s'weén, 
ne-bâun, ne-bâun, ne-dâun-is âis. 
e-we wâ-wa, wâ-we--yeá; 
e-we wâ-wa, wâ-we--yeá. 

out in the calm ocean, shinge-bis, the diver, listened, preen his 
satin breast in silence. in the forest, ta-hinca, the red deer, turn 
her delicate head to the wind. 

that night kent thought of the dead, for the first time since he had 
come to the key of grief. 

"aké-u! aké-u!" chirp sé-só-kah, the robin. but the dead never come 
again. 

"beloved, sit close to us," whisper the girl, watch his trouble 
eyes. "ma-cânte maséca." 

but he look at the babe and its white shadow on the moss, and he only 
sighed: "ma-cânte maséca, beloved! death sit watch us across the 
sea." 

now for the first time he knew more than the fear of fear; he knew 
fear. and with fear came grief. 

he never before knew that grief lay hidden there in the forest. now he 
knew it. still, that happiness, eternal reborn when two small hand 
reach up around his neck, when feeble finger clutch his hand--that 
happiness that sé-só-kah understood, chirp to his brood 
mate--that ta-mdóka knew, licking his dappled fawns--that happiness 
gave him heart to meet grief calmly, in dream or in the forest depths, 
and it help him to look into the hollow eyes of fear. 

he often thought of the camp now; of bates, his blanket mate; of dyce, 
whose wrist he had broken with a blow; of tully, whose brother he had 
shot. he even seem to hear the shot, the sudden report among the 
hemlocks; again he saw the haze of smoke, he caught a glimpse of a tall 
form fall through the bushes. 

he remember every minute incident of the trial: bates's hand laid 
on his shoulder; tully, red-bearded and wild-eyed, demanding his 
death; while dyce spat and spat and smoke and kick at the blacken 
log-ends project from the fire. he remembered, too, the verdict, and 
tully's terrible laugh; and the new jute rope that they strip off 
the market-sealed gum packs. 

he thought of these things, sometimes wade out on the shoals, 
shell-tipped fish spear poised: at such times he would miss his fish. 
he thought of it sometimes when he knelt by the forest stream listen 
for ta-hinca's splash among the cresses: at such moments the feather 
shaft whistle far from the mark, and ta-mdóka stamp and snort 
till even the white fisher, stretch on a rot log, flatten his 
whiskers and stole away into the forest's blackest depths. 

when the child was a year old, hour for hour notch at sunset and 
sunrise, it prattle with the birds, and call to ne-kâ, the wild 
goose, who call again to the child from the sky: "northward! 
northward, beloved!" 

when winter came--there is no frost on the island of grief--ne-kâ, the 
wild goose, passing high in the clouds, called: "southward! southward, 
beloved!" and the child answer in a soft whisper of an unknown 
tongue, till the mother shivered, and cover it with her silken hair. 

"o beloved!" said the girl, "chaské call to all things living--to 
kaug, the porcupine, to wabóse, to kay-óshk, the gray gull--he calls, 
and they understand." 

kent bent and look into her eyes. 

"hush, beloved; it is not _that_ i fear." 

"then what, beloved?" 

"his shadow. it is white as surf foam. and at night--i--i have seen----" 

"oh, what?" 

"the air about him aglow like a pale rose." 

"ma cânté maséca. the earth alone lasts. i speak as one dying--i know, 
o beloved!" 

her voice die away like a summer wind. 

"beloved!" he cried. 

but there before him she was changing; the air grew misty, and her hair 
waver like shred of fog, and her slender form swayed, and faded, and 
swerved, like the mist above a pond. 

in her arms the babe was a figure of mist, rosy, vague as a breath on 
a mirror. 

"the earth alone lasts. inâh! it is the end, o beloved!" 

the words came from the mist--a mist as formless as the ether--a mist 
that drove in and crowded him, that came from the sea, from the clouds, 
from the earth at his feet. faint with terror, he stagger forward 
calling, "beloved! and thou, chaské, o beloved! aké u! aké u!" 

far out at sea a rosy star glimmer an instant in the mist and went 
out. 

a sea bird screamed, soar over the waste of fog-smothered waters. 
again he saw the rosy star; it came nearer; its reflection glimmer in 
the water. 

"chaské!" he cried. 

he heard a voice, dull in the choke mist. 

"o beloved, i am here!" he call again. 

there was a sound on the shoal, a flicker in the fog, the flare of a 
torch, a face white, livid, terrible--the face of the dead. 

he fell upon his knees; he closed his eyes and open them. tulle stood 
beside him with a coil of rope. 

* * * * * 

ihó! behold the end! the earth alone lasts. the sand, the opal wave on 
the golden beach, the sea of sapphire, the dust starlight, the wind, 
and love, shall die. death also shall die, and lie on the shore of 
the sky like the bleach skull there on the key to grief, polished, 
empty, with its teeth embed in the sand. 




a matter of interest. 




a matter of interest. 

he that know not, and know not that he know not, is a fool. shun 
him. 
he that know not, and know that he know not, is simple. teach him. 
he that knows, and know not that he knows, is asleep. wake him. 
he that knows, and know that he knows, is wise. follow him. 

_arabian proverb._ 


i. 

much as i dislike it, i am oblige to include this story in a volume 
devoted to fiction: i have attempt to tell it as an absolutely true 
story, but until three month ago, when the indisputable proof were 
placed before the britain association by professor james holroyd, 
i was regard as an impostor. now that the smithsonian institute 
in washington, the philadelphia zoölogical society, and the natural 
history museum of new york city, are convinced that the story is 
truthful and accurate in every particular, i prefer to tell it my own 
way. professor holroyd urge me to do this, although professor bruce 
stoddard, of columbia college, is now at work upon a pamphlet, to be 
publish the latter part of next month, describe scientific the 
extraordinary discovery which, to the shame of the united states, was 
first accept and recognise in england. 

now, have no technical ability concerning the affair in question, 
and have no knowledge of either comparative anatomy or zoölogy, i 
am perhaps unfit to tell this story. but the story is true; the 
episode occur under my own eyes--here, within a few hours' sail of 
the battery. and as i was one of the first person to verify what has 
long been a theory among scientists, and, moreover, as the result of 
professor holroyd's discovery is to be placed on exhibition in madison 
square garden on the twentieth of next month, i have decided to tell, 
as simply as i am able, exactly what occurred. 

i first wrote out the story on april 1, 1896. the north america 
review, the popular science monthly, the scientific american, nature, 
forest and stream, and the fossiliferous magazine in turn reject it; 
some curt inform me that fiction had no place in their columns. 
when i attempt to explain that it was not fiction, the editor of 
these periodical either maintain a contemptuous silence, or bluntly 
notify me that my literary service and opinion were not desired. 
but finally, when several publisher offer to take the story as 
fiction, i cut short all negotiation and decided to publish it myself. 
where i am known at all, it is my misfortune to be known as a writer 
of fiction. this make it impossible for me to receive a hearing from a 
scientific audience. i regret it bitterly, because now, when it is too 
late, i am prepared to prove certain scientific matter of interest, 
and to produce the proofs. in this case, however, i am fortunate, for 
nobody can dispute the existence of a thing when the bodily proof is 
exhibit as evidence. 

this is the story; and if i write it as i write fiction, it is because 
i do not know how to write it otherwise. 

i was walking along the beach below pine inlet, on the south shore 
of long island. the railroad and telegraph station is at west oyster 
bay. everybody who has travelled on the long island railroad know the 
station, but few, perhaps, know pine inlet. duck shooters, of course, 
are familiar with it; but as there are no hotel there, and nothing 
to see except salt meadow, salt creek, and a strip of dune and sand, 
the summer-squatting public may probably be unaware of its existence. 
the local name for the place is pine inlet; the map give its name as 
sand point, i believe, but anybody at west oyster bay can direct you 
to it. captain mcpeek, who keeps the west oyster bay house, drive duck 
shoot there in winter. it lie five mile southeast from west oyster 
bay. 

i had walk over that afternoon from captain mcpeek's. there was a 
reason for my go to pine inlet--it embarrass me to explain it, 
but the truth is i meditate writing an ode to the ocean. it was out 
of the question to write it in west oyster bay, with the whistle of 
locomotive in my ears. i knew that pine inlet was one of the loneliest 
place on the atlantic coast; it is out of sight of everything except 
league of gray ocean. rarely one might make out fishing smack 
drift across the horizon. summer squatter never visit it; 
sportsmen shun it, except in winter. therefore, as i was about to do 
a bit of poetry, i thought that pine inlet was the spot for the deed. 
so i went there. 

as i was strolling along the beach, biting my pencil reflectively, 
tremendous impress by the solitude and the solemn thunder of 
the surf, a thought occur to me: how unpleasant it would be if i 
sudden stumble on a summer boarder. as this joyless impossible 
flit across my mind, i round a bleak sand dune. 

a summer girl stood directly in my path. 

if i jumped, i think the young lady has pardon me by this time. she 
ought to, because she also started, and said something in a very faint 
voice. what she said was "oh!" 

she stare at me as though i had just crawl up out of the sea to bite 
her. i don't know what my own expression resembled, but i have been 
given to understand it was idiotic. 

now i perceived, after a few moments, that the young lady was 
frightened, and i knew i ought to say something civil. so i said, "are 
there any mosquito here?" 

"no," she replied, with a slight quiver in her voice; "i have only seen 
one, and it was biting somebody else." 

i look foolish; the conversation seem so futile, and the young 
lady appear to be more nervous than before. i had an impulse to say, 
"do not run; i have breakfasted," for she seem to be meditate a 
plunge into the breakers. what i did say was: "i did not know anybody 
was here. i do not intend to intrude. i come from captain mcpeek's, 
and i am writing an ode to the ocean." after i had said this it seem 
to ring in my ear like, "i come from table mountain, and my name is 
truthful james." 

i glance timid at her. 

"she's thinking of the same thing," said i to myself. "what an ass i 
must appear!" 

however, the young lady seem to be a trifle reassured. i notice she 
drew a sigh of relief and look at my shoes. she look so long that 
it made me suspicious, and i also examine my shoes. they seem to be 
fairly respectable. 

"i--i am sorry," she said, "but would you mind not walking on the 
beach?" 

this was sudden. i had intended to retire and leave the beach to her, 
but i did not fancy being driven away so abruptly. 

"i was about to withdraw, madam," said i, bowing stiffly; "i beg you 
will pardon any inconvenience----" 

"dear me!" she cried, "you don't understand. i do not--i would 
not think for a moment of ask you to leave pine inlet. i merely 
venture to request you to walk on the dunes. i am so afraid that your 
footprint may obliterate the impression that my father is studying." 

"oh!" said i, look about me as though i had been caught in the 
middle of a flower-bed; "really i did not notice any impressions. 
impression of what--if i may be permitted?" 

"i don't know," she said, smile a little at my awkward pose. "if you 
step this way in a straight line you can do no damage." 

i did as she bade me. i suppose my movements resemble the gait of 
a wet peacock. possibly they recall the delicate manœuvres of the 
kangaroo. anyway, she laughed. 

this seriously annoy me. i had been at a disadvantage; i walk well 
enough when let alone. 

"you can scarcely expect," said i, "that a man absorb in his own 
idea could notice impression on the sand. i trust i have obliterate 
nothing." 

as i said this i look back at the long line of footprint stretch 
away in prospective across the sand. they were my own. how large they 
looked! was that what she was laugh at? 

"i wish to explain," she said gravely, look at the point of her 
parasol. "i am very sorry to be oblige to warn you--to ask you to 
forego the pleasure of strolling on a beach that do not belong to me. 
perhaps," she continued, in sudden alarm, "perhaps this beach belong 
to you?" 

"the beach? oh, no," i said. 

"but--but you were go to write poem about it?" 

"only one--and that do not necessitate own the beach. i have 
observed," said i frankly, "that the people who own nothing write many 
poem about it." 

she look at me seriously. 

"i write many poems," i added. 

she laugh doubtfully. 

"would you rather i went away?" i ask politely. 

"i? why, no--i mean that you may do as you please--except please do not 
walk on the _beach_." 

"then i do not alarm you by my presence?" i inquired. my clothes 
were a bit ancient. i wore them shooting, sometimes. "my family is 
respectable," i added; and i told her my name. 

"oh! then you wrote 'culled cowslips' and 'faded fig-leaves,' and 
you imitate maeterlinck, and you---- oh, i know lot of people that 
you know;" she cry with every symptom of relief; "and you know my 
brother." 

"i am the author," said i coldly, "of 'culled cowslips,' but 'faded 
fig-leaves' was an early work, which i no long recognise, and i 
should be grateful to you if you would be kind enough to deny that i 
ever imitate maeterlinck. possibly," i added, "he imitate me." 

"now, do you know," she said, "i was afraid of you at first? papa is 
digging in the salt meadow nearly a mile away." 

it was hard to bear. 

"can you not see," said i, "that i am wearing a shoot coat?" 

"i do see--now; but it is so--so old," she pleaded. 

"it is a shoot coat all the same," i said bitterly. 

she was very quiet, and i saw she was sorry. 

"never mind," i said magnanimously, "you probably are not familiar with 
sporting goods. if i knew your name i should ask permission to present 
myself." 

"why, i am daisy holroyd," she said. 

"what! jack holroyd's little sister?" 

"little!" she cried. 

"i didn't mean that," said i. "you know that your brother and i were 
great friends in paris----" 

"i know," she said significantly. 

"ahem! of course," i said, "jack and i were inseparable----" 

"except when shut in separate cells," said miss holroyd coldly. 

this unfeeling allusion to the unfortunate termination of a 
latin-quarter celebration hurt me. 

"the police," said i, "were too officious." 

"so jack says," reply miss holroyd demurely. 

we had unconscious move on along the sand hills, side by side, as we 
spoke. 

"to think," i repeated, "that i should meet jack's little----" 

"please," she said, "you are only three years my senior." 

she open the sunshade and tip it over one shoulder. it was white, 
and had spot and posy on it. 

"jack send us every new book you write," she observed. "i do not 
approve of some things you write." 

"modern school," i mumbled. 

"that is no excuse," she said severely; "anthony trollope didn't do it." 

the foam spume from the breaker was drift across the dunes, and the 
little tip-up snipe ran along the beach and teeter and whistle and 
spread their white-barred wings for a low, straight flight across the 
shingle, only to tip and skeep and sail on again. the salt sea wind 
whistle and curl through the crested waves, blow in perfume 
puff across thicket of sweet bay and cedar. as we pass through the 
crackling juicy-stemmed marsh weed myriad of fiddler crab raise 
their fore-claws in warning and back away, rustling, through the 
reeds, aggressive, protesting. 

"like million of pigmy ajaxe defy the lightning," i said. 

miss holroyd laughed. 

"now i never imagine that author were clever except in print," she 
said. 

she was a most extraordinary girl. 

"i suppose," she observe after a moment's silence--"i suppose i am 
taking you to my father." 

"delighted!" i mumbled. "h'm! i had the honour of meeting professor 
holroyd in paris." 

"yes; he bail you and jack out," said miss holroyd serenely. 

the silence was too painful to last. 

"captain mcpeek is an interesting man," i said. i spoke more loud 
than i intended; i may have been nervous. 

"yes," said daisy holroyd, "but he has a most singular hotel clerk." 

"you mean mr. frisby?" 

"i do." 

"yes," i admitted, "mr. frisby is queer. he was once a bill-poster." 

"i know it!" exclaim daisy holroyd, with some heat. "he ruins 
landscape whenever he has an opportunity. do you know that he has a 
passion for bill-posting? he has; he post bill for the pure pleasure 
of it, just as you play golf, or tennis, or billiards." 

"but he's a hotel clerk now," i said; "nobody employ him to post 
bills." 

"i know it! he do it all by himself for the pure pleasure of it. papa 
has engaged him to come down here for two weeks, and i dread it," said 
the girl. 

what professor holroyd might want of frisby i had not the faintest 
notion. i suppose miss holroyd notice the bewilder in my face, for 
she laughed, and nod her head twice. 

"not only mr. frisby, but captain mcpeek also," she said. 

"you don't mean to say that captain mcpeek is go to close his 
hotel!" i exclaimed. 

my trunk was there. it contained guarantee of my respectability. 

"oh, no; his wife will keep it open," reply the girl. "look! you can 
see papa now. he's digging." 

"where?" i blurt out. 

i remember professor holroyd as a prim, spectacled gentleman, with 
close-cut, snowy beard and a clerical allure. the man i saw digging 
wore green goggles, a jersey, a batter sou'wester, and hip-boots 
of rubber. he was delve in the muck of the salt meadow, his face 
stream with perspiration, his boots and jersey splash with 
unpleasant-looking mud. he glance up as we approached, shading his 
eyes with a sunburnt hand. 

"papa, dear," said miss holroyd, "here is jack's friend, whom you 
bail out of mazas." 

the introduction was startling. i turn crimson with mortification. 
the professor was very decent about it; he call me by name at once. 

when he said this he look at his spade. it was clear that he 
considered me a nuisance and wish to go on with his digging. 

"i suppose," he said, "you are still writing?" 

"a little," i replied, try not to speak sarcastically. my output had 
rival that of "the duchess"--in quantity, i mean. 

"i seldom read--fiction," he said, look restless at the hole in 
the ground. 

miss holroyd came to my rescue. 

"that was a charming story you wrote last," she said. "papa should read 
it--you should, papa; it's all about a fossil." 

we both look narrowly at miss holroyd. her smile was guileless. 

"fossils!" repeated the professor. "do you care for fossils?" 

"very much," said i. 

now i am not perfectly sure what my object was in lying. i look at 
daisy holroyd's dark-fringed eyes. they were very grave. 

"fossils," said i, "are my hobby." 

i think miss holroyd wince a little at this. i did not care. i went on: 

"i have seldom had the opportunity to study the subject, but, as a boy, 
i collected flint arrow-heads----" 

"flint arrow-heads!" said the professor coldly. 

"yes; they were the nearest things to fossil obtainable," i replied, 
marvel at my own mendacity. 

the professor look into the hole. i also looked. i could see nothing 
in it. "he's digging for fossils," thought i to myself. 

"perhaps," said the professor cautiously, "you might wish to aid me 
in a little research--that is to say, if you have an inclination for 
fossils." the double-entendre was not lost upon me. 

"i have read all your books so eagerly," said i, "that to join you, 
to be of service to you in any research, however difficult and trying, 
would be an honour and a privilege that i never dare to hope for." 

"that," thought i to myself, "will do its own work." 

but the professor was still suspicious. how could he help it, when 
he remember jack's escapades, in which my name was always blended! 
doubtless he was satisfy that my influence on jack was evil. the 
contrary was the case, too. 

"fossils," he said, worry the edge of the excavation with his 
spade, "fossils are not things to be lightly considered." 

"no, indeed!" i protested. 

"fossils are the most interesting as well as puzzle things in the 
world," said he. 

"they are!" i cry enthusiastically. 

"but i am not look for fossils," observe the professor mildly. 

this was a facer. i look at daisy holroyd. she bit her lip and fixed 
her eyes on the sea. her eyes were wonderful eyes. 

"did you think i was digging for fossil in a salt meadow?" query 
the professor. "you can have read very little about the subject. i am 
digging for something quite different." 

i was silent. i knew that my face was a trifle flushed. i long to 
say, "well, what the devil are you digging for?" but i only stare into 
the hole as though hypnotized. 

"captain mcpeek and frisby ought to be here," he said, look first at 
daisy and then across the meadows. 

i ache to ask him why he had subpœnaed captain mcpeek and frisby. 

"they are coming," said daisy, shading her eyes. "do you see the speck 
on the meadows?" 

"it may be a mud hen," said the professor. 

"miss holroyd is right," i said. "a wagon and team and two men are 
coming from the north. there is a dog beside the wagon--it's that 
miserable yellow dog of frisby's." 

"good gracious!" cry the professor, "you don't mean to tell me that 
you see all that at such a distance?" 

"why not?" i said. 

"i see nothing," he insisted. 

"you will see that i'm right, presently," i laughed. 

the professor remove his blue goggles and rub them, glancing 
oblique at me. 

"haven't you heard what extraordinary eyesight duck shoot have?" 
said his daughter, look back at her father. "jack say that they can 
tell exactly what kind of a duck is flying before most people could see 
anything at all in the sky." 

"it's true," i said; "it come to anybody, i fancy, who has had 
practice." 

the professor regard me with a new interest. there was inspiration in 
his eyes. he turn toward the ocean. for a long time he stare at the 
toss wave on the beach, then he look far out to where the horizon 
met the sea. 

"are there any ducks out there?" he ask at last. 

"yes," said i, scan the sea, "there are." 

he produce a pair of binoculars from his coat-tail pocket, adjust 
them, and raise them to his eyes. 

"h'm! what sort of ducks?" 

i look more carefully, holding both hand over my forehead. 

"surf ducks--scoters and widgeon. there is one bufflehead among 
them--no, two; the rest are coots," i replied. 

"this," cry the professor, "is most astonishing. i have good eyes, 
but i can't see a blessed thing without these binoculars!" 

"it's not extraordinary," said i; "the surf ducks and coot any novice 
might recognise; the widgeon and bufflehead i should not have been 
able to name unless they had risen from the water. it is easy to tell 
any duck when it is flying, even though it looks no big than a black 
pin-point." 

but the professor insist that it was marvellous, and he said that i 
might render him invaluable service if i would consent to come and camp 
at pine inlet for a few weeks. 

i look at his daughter, but she turn her back--not exactly in 
disdain either. her back was beautiful moulded. her gown fitted also. 

"camp out here?" i repeated, pretend to be unpleasant surprised. 

"i do not think he would care to," said miss holroyd without turning. 

i had not expect that. 

"above all things," said i, in a clear, pleasant voice, "i like to camp 
out." 

she said nothing. 

"it is not exactly camping," said the professor. "come, you shall see 
our conservatory. daisy, come, dear! you must put on a heavy frock; 
it is get toward sundown." 

at that moment, over a near dune, two horses' head appeared, follow 
by two human heads, then a wagon, then a yellow dog. 

i turn triumphant to the professor. 

"you are the very man i want," he muttered; "the very man--the very 
man." 

i look at daisy holroyd. she return my glance with a defiant little 
smile. 

"waal," said captain mcpeek, driving up, "here we be! git out, frisby." 

frisby, fat, nervous, and sentimental, hop out of the cart. 

"come!" said the professor, impatient moving across the dunes. i 
walk with daisy holroyd. mcpeek and frisby followed. the yellow dog 
walk by himself. 


ii. 

the sun was dip into the sea as we trudge across the meadow 
toward a high dome-shaped dune cover with cedar and thicket of 
sweet bay. i saw no sign of habitation among the sand hills. far as the 
eye could reach, nothing broke the gray line of sea and sky save the 
squat dune crown with stunt cedars. 

then, as we round the base of the dune, we almost walk into the 
door of a house. my amaze amuse miss holroyd, and i notice also 
a touch of malice in her pretty eyes. but she said nothing, following 
her father into the house, with the slightest possible gesture to me. 
was it invitation, or was it menace? 

the house was merely a light wooden frame, cover with some waterproof 
stuff that look like a mixture of rubber and tar. over this--in 
fact, over the whole roof--was pitch an awning of heavy sail-cloth. 
i notice that the house was anchor to the sand by chains, already 
rust red. but this one-storied house was not the only building 
nestling in the south shelter of the big dune. a hundred feet away 
stood another structure--long, low, also built of wood. it had row on 
row of round porthole on every side. the port were fitted with heavy 
glass, hinge to swing open if necessary. a single big double door 
occupy the front. 

behind this long, low building was still another, a mere shed. smoke 
rose from the sheet-iron chimney. there was somebody moving about 
inside the open door. 

as i stood gape at this mushroom hamlet the professor appear at the 
door and ask me to enter. i step in at once. 

the house was much large than i had imagined. a straight hallway ran 
through the centre from east to west. on either side of this hallway 
were rooms, the door swinging wide open. i count three door on each 
side; the three on the south appear to be bedrooms. 

the professor usher me into a room on the north side, where i found 
captain mcpeek and frisby sitting at a table, upon which were drawing 
and sketch of articulated animal and fishes. 

"you see, mcpeek," said the professor, "we only want one more man, 
and i think i've got him.--haven't i?" turning eager to me. 

"why, yes," i said, laughing; "this is delightful. am i invite to stay 
here?" 

"your bedroom is the third on the south side; everything is ready. 
mcpeek, you can bring his trunk to-morrow, can't you?" demand the 
professor. 

the red-faced captain nodded, and shift a quid. 

"then it's all settled," said the professor, and he drew a sigh of 
satisfaction. "you see," he said, turning to me, "i was at my wit's end 
to know whom to trust. i never thought of you. jack's out in china, and 
i didn't dare trust anybody in my own profession. all you care about is 
writing verse and stories, isn't it?" 

"i like to shoot," i reply mildly. 

"just the thing!" he cried, beam at us all in turn. "now i can see 
no reason why we should not progress rapidly. mcpeek, you and frisby 
must get those box up here before dark. dinner will be ready before 
you have finished unloading. dick, you will wish to go to your room 
first." 

my name isn't dick, but he spoke so kindly, and beam upon me in such 
a fatherly manner, that i let it go. i had occasion to correct him 
afterward, several times, but he always forgot the next minute. he 
call me dick to this day. 

it was dark when professor holroyd, his daughter, and i sat down to 
dinner. the room was the same in which i had notice the drawing of 
beast and bird, but the round table had been extend into an oval, and 
neat spread with dainty linen and silver. 

a fresh-cheeked sweden girl appear from a further room, bearing the 
soup. the professor ladle it out, still beaming. 

"now, this is very delightful!--isn't it, daisy?" he said. 

"very," said miss holroyd, with the faintest tinge of irony. 

"very," i repeated heartily; but i look at my soup when i said it. 

"i suppose," said the professor, nod mysterious at his daughter, 
"that dick know nothing of what we're about down here?" 

"i suppose," said miss holroyd, "that he think we are digging for 
fossils." 

i look at my plate. she might have spare me that. 

"well, well," said her father, smile to himself, "he shall know 
everything by morning. you'll be astonished, dick, my boy." 

"his name isn't dick," correct daisy. 

the professor said, "isn't it?" in an absent-minded way, and relapse 
into contemplation of my necktie. 

i ask miss holroyd a few question about jack, and was informed that 
he had given up law and enter the diplomatic service--as what, i did 
not dare ask, for i know what our diplomatic service is. 

"in china," said daisy. 

"choo choo is the name of the city," add her father proudly; "it's 
the terminus of the new trans-siberian railway." 

"it's on the yellow river," said daisy. 

"he's vice-consul," add the professor triumphantly. 

"he'll make a good one," i observed. i knew jack. i pity his consul. 

so we chat on about my old playmate, until freda, the red-cheeked 
maid, brought coffee, and the professor light a cigar, with a little 
bow to his daughter. 

"of course, you don't smoke," she said to me, with a glimmer of malice 
in her eyes. 

"he mustn't," interpose the professor hastily; "it will make his hand 
tremble." 

"no, it doesn't," said i, laughing; "but my hand will shake if i don't 
smoke. are you go to employ me as a draughtsman?" 

"you'll know to-morrow," he chuckled, with a mysterious smile at his 
daughter.--"daisy, give him my best cigars; put the box here on the 
table. we can't afford to have his hand tremble." 

miss holroyd rose, and cross the hallway to her father's room, 
return presently with a box of promising-looking cigars. 

"i don't think he know what is good for him," she said. "he should 
smoke only one every day." 

it was hard to bear. i am not vindictive, but i decided to treasure up 
a few of miss holroyd's gentle taunts. my intimacy with her brother was 
certainly a disadvantage to me now. jack had apparently been talk 
too much, and his sister appear to be thorough acquaint with my 
past. it was a disadvantage. i remember her vague as a girl with 
long braids, who use to come on sunday with her father and take tea 
with us in our rooms. then she went to germany to school, and jack and 
i employ our sunday evenings otherwise. it is true that i regard 
her weekly visit as a species of infliction, but i did not think i 
ever show it. 

"it is strange," said i, "that you did not recognise me at once, miss 
holroyd. have i change so greatly in five years?" 

"you wore a pointed france beard in paris," she said--"a very downy 
one. and you never stay to tea but twice, and then you only spoke 
once." 

"oh!" said i blankly. "what did i say?" 

"you ask me if i like plums," said daisy, burst into an 
irresistible ripple of laughter. 

i saw that i must have made the same sort of an ass of myself that most 
boys of eighteen do. 

it was too bad. i never thought about the future in those days. who 
could have imagine that little daisy holroyd would have grown up 
into this bewilder young lady? it was really too bad. presently the 
professor retired to his room, carry with him an armful of drawings, 
and bidding us not to sit up late. when he closed his door miss holroyd 
turn to me. 

"papa will work over those drawing until midnight," she said, with a 
despairing smile. 

"it isn't good for him," i said. "what are the drawings?" 

"you may know to-morrow," she answered, leaning forward on the table 
and shading her face with one hand. "tell me about yourself and jack in 
paris." 

i look at her suspiciously. 

"what! there isn't much to tell. we studied. jack went to the law 
school, and i attended--er--oh, all sort of schools." 

"did you? surely you gave yourself a little recreation occasionally?" 

"occasionally," i nodded. 

"i am afraid you and jack studied too hard." 

"that may be," said i, look meek. 

"especially about fossils." 

i couldn't stand that. 

"miss holroyd," i said, "i do care for fossils. you may think that i am 
a humbug, but i have a perfect mania for fossils--now." 

"since when?" 

"about an hour ago," i said airily. out of the corner of my eye i saw 
that she had flushed up. it pleased me. 

"you will soon tire of the experiment," she said with a dangerous smile. 

"oh, i may," i reply indifferently. 

she drew back. the movement was scarcely perceptible, but i notice it, 
and she knew i did. 

the atmosphere was vague hostile. one feel such mental conditions 
and change instantly. i picked up a chessboard, open it, set up the 
pieces with elaborate care, and began to move, first the white, then 
the black. miss holroyd watch me cold at first, but after a dozen 
move she became interested and lean a shade nearer. i move a black 
pawn forward. 

"why do you do that?" said daisy. 

"because," said i, "the white queen threaten the pawn." 

"it was an aggressive move," she insisted. 

"purely defensive," i said. "if her white highness will let the pawn 
alone, the pawn will let the queen alone." 

miss holroyd rest her chin on her wrist and gaze steady at the 
board. she was flush furiously, but she held her ground. 

"if the white queen doesn't block that pawn, the pawn may become 
dangerous," she said coldly. 

i laughed, and closed up the board with a snap. 

"true," i said, "it might even take the queen." after a moment's 
silence i asked, "what would you do in that case, miss holroyd?" 

"i should resign," she said serenely; then realize what she had said, 
she lost her self-possession for a second, and cried: "no, indeed! i 
should fight to the bitter end! i mean----" 

"what?" i asked, lingering over my revenge. 

"i mean," she said slowly, "that your black pawn would never have the 
chance--never! i should take it immediately." 

"i believe you would," said i, smiling; "so we'll call the game yours, 
and--the pawn captured." 

"i don't want it," she exclaimed. "a pawn is worthless." 

"except when it's in the king row." 

"chess is most interesting," she observe sedately. she had completely 
recover her self-control. still i saw that she now had a certain 
respect for my defensive powers. it was very soothe to me. 

"you know," said i gravely, "that i am fond of jack than of anybody. 
that's the reason we never write each other, except to borrow things. i 
am afraid that when i was a young cub in france i was not an attractive 
personality." 

"on the contrary," said daisy, smiling, "i thought you were very big 
and very perfect. i had illusions. i wept often when i went home and 
remember that you never took the trouble to speak to me but once." 

"i was a cub," i said; "not selfish and brutal, but i didn't understand 
schoolgirls. i never had any sisters, and i didn't know what to say to 
very young girls. if i had imagine that you felt hurt----" 

"oh, i did--five years ago. afterward i laugh at the whole thing." 

"laughed?" i repeated, vague disappointed. 

"why, of course. i was very easily hurt when i was a child. i think i 
have outgrown it." 

the soft curve of her sensitive mouth contradict her. 

"will you forgive me now?" i asked. 

"yes. i had forgotten the whole thing until i met you an hour or so 
ago." 

there was something that had a ring not entire genuine in this 
speech. i notice it, but forgot it the next moment. 

"tiger cubs have stripes," said i. "selfishness blossom in the cradle, 
and prophecy is not difficult. i hope i am not more selfish than my 
brothers." 

"i hope not," she said, smiling. 

presently she rose, touched her hair with the tip of one finger, and 
walk to the door. 

"good-night," she said, courtesy very low. 

"good-night," said i, opening the door for her to pass. 


iii. 

the sea was a sheet of silver, tinge with pink. the tremendous arch of 
the sky was all shimmer and glimmer with the promise of the sun. 
already the mist above, fleck with cluster clouds, flushed with 
rose colour and dull gold. i heard the low splash of the wave break 
and curling across the beach. a wandering breeze, fresh and fragrant, 
blew the curtains of my window. there was the scent of sweet bay in the 
room, and everywhere the subtile, nameless perfume of the sea. 

when at last i stood upon the shore, the air and sea were all aglimmer 
in a rosy light, deepen to crimson in the zenith. along the beach i 
saw a little cove, shelving and all ashine, where shallow wave wash 
with a mellow sound. fine as dust gold the shingle glowed, and the 
thin film of water rose, receded, crept up again a little higher, and 
again flow back, with the low hiss of snowy foam and gilded bubble 
breaking. 

i stood a little while quiet, my eyes upon the water, the invitation of 
the ocean in my ears, vague and sweet as the murmur of a shell. then i 
look at my bathing suit and towels. 

"in we go!" said i aloud. a second later the prophecy was fulfilled. 

i swam far out to sea, and as i swam the waters all around me turn to 
gold. the sun had risen. 

there is a fragrance in the sea at dawn that none can name. whitethorn 
abloom in may, sedge asway, and scent rushes rustling in an inland 
wind recall the sea to me--i can't say why. 

far out at sea i raise myself, swung around, dived, and set out again 
for shore, striking strong stroke until the fleck foam flew. and 
when at last i shot through the breakers, i laugh aloud and sprang 
upon the beach, breathless and happy. then from the ocean came another 
cry, clear, joyous, and a white arm rose in the air. 

she came drift in with the wave like a white sea-sprite, laugh 
at me from her tangle hair, and i plunge into the breaker again to 
join her. 

side by side we swam along the coast, just outside the breakers, until 
in the next cove we saw the flutter of her maid's cap strings. 

"i will beat you to breakfast!" she cried, as i rested, watch her 
glide up along the beach. 

"done!" said i--"for a sea-shell!" 

"done!" she call across the water. 

i made good speed along the shore, and i was not long in dressing, 
but when i enter the dining-room she was there, demure, smiling, 
exquisite in her cool, white frock. 

"the sea-shell is yours," said i. "i hope i can find one with a pearl 
in it." 

the professor hurried in before she could reply. he greet me very 
cordially, but there was an abstracted air about him, and he call me 
dick until i recognise that remonstrance was useless. he was not long 
over his coffee and rolls. 

"mcpeek and frisby will return with the last load, including your 
trunk, by early afternoon," he said, rising and pick up his bundle 
of drawings. "i haven't time to explain to you what we are doing, 
dick, but daisy will take you about and instruct you. she will give 
you the rifle standing in my room--it's a good winchester. i have 
sent for an 'express' for you, big enough to knock over any elephant 
in india.--daisy, take him through the shed and tell him everything. 
luncheon is at noon.--do you usually take luncheon, dick?" 

"when i am permitted," i smiled. 

"well," said the professor doubtfully, "you mustn't come back here 
for it. freda can take you what you want. is your hand unsteady after 
eating?" 

"why, papa!" said daisy. "do you intend to starve him?" 

we all laughed. 

the professor tuck his drawing into a capacious pocket, pull his 
sea boots up to his hips, seize a spade, and left, nod to us as 
though he were thinking of something else. 

we went to the door and watch him across the salt meadow until a 
distant sand dune hid him. 

"come," said daisy holroyd, "i am go to take you to the shop." 

she put on a broad-brimmed straw hat, a distracting pretty 
combination of filmy cool stuffs, and led the way to the long low 
structure that i had notice the evening before. 

the interior was light by the numberless little portholes, and i 
could see everything plainly. i acknowledge i was nonplus by what i 
did see. 

in the centre of the shed, which must have been at least a hundred feet 
long, stood what i thought at first was the skeleton of an enormous 
whale. after a moment's silent contemplation of the thing i saw that 
it could not be a whale, for the frames of two gigantic bat-like wings 
rose from each shoulder. also i notice that the animal possessed 
legs--four of them--with most unpleasant-looking webbed claw fully 
eight feet long. the bony framework of the head, too, resemble 
something between a crocodile and a monstrous snap turtle. 
the wall of the shanty were hung with drawing and blue prints. a 
man dress in white linen was tinker with the vertebræ of the 
lizardlike tail. 

"where on earth did such a reptile come from?" i ask at length. 

"oh, it's not real!" said daisy scornfully; "it's papier-maché." 

"i see," said i--"a stage prop." 

"a what?" ask daisy, in hurt astonishment. 

"why, a--a sort of siegfry dragon--a what's-his-name--er, pfafner, or 
peffer, or----" 

"if my father heard you say such things he would dislike you," said 
daisy. she look grieved, and move toward the door. i apologized--for 
what, i knew not--and we became reconciled. she ran into her father's 
room and brought me the rifle, a very good winchester. she also gave me 
a cartridge belt, full. 

"now," she smiled, "i shall take you to your observatory, and when we 
arrive you are to begin your duty at once." 

"and that duty?" i ventured, shoulder the rifle. 

"that duty is, to watch the ocean. i shall then explain the whole 
affair--but you mustn't look at me while i speak; you must watch the 
sea." 

"this," said i, "is hardship. i had rather go without the luncheon." 

i do not think she was offend at my speech; still she frown for 
almost three seconds. 

we pass through acre of sweet bay and spear grass, sometimes 
skirt thicket of twist cedars, sometimes walking in the full 
glare of the morning sun, sink into shift sand where sun-scorched 
shell crackle under our feet, and sun-browned seaweed glistened, 
bronze and iridescent. then, as we climb a little hill, the sea wind 
freshen in our faces, and lo! the ocean lay below us, far-stretching 
as the eye could reach, glittering, magnificent. 

daisy sat down flat on the sand. it take a clever girl to do that and 
retain the respectful deference due her from men. it take a graceful 
girl to accomplish it triumphant when a man is looking. 

"you must sit beside me," she said--as though it would prove irksome to 
me. 

"now," she continued, "you must watch the water while i am talking." 

i nodded. 

"why don't you do it, then?" she asked. 

i succeed in wrench my head toward the ocean, although i felt sure 
it would swing gradual round again in spite of me. 

"to begin with," said daisy holroyd, "there's a thing in that ocean 
that would astonish you if you saw it. turn your head!" 

"i am," i said meekly. 

"did you hear what i said?" 

"yes--er--a thing in the ocean that's go to astonish me." vision of 
mermaid rose before me. 

"the thing," said daisy, "is a thermosaurus!" 

i nod vaguely, as though anticipate a delightful introduction to 
a nautical friend. 

"you don't seem astonished," she said reproachfully. 

"why should i be?" i asked. 

"please turn your eyes toward the water. suppose a thermosauru should 
look out of the waves!" 

"well," said i, "in that case the pleasure would be mutual." 

she frowned, and bit her upper lip. 

"do you know what a thermosauru is?" she asked. 

"if i am to guess," said i, "i guess it's a jellyfish." 

"it's that big, ugly, horrible creature that i show you in the shed!" 
cry daisy impatiently. 

"eh!" i stammered. 

"not papier-maché either," she continue excitedly; "it's a real one." 

this was pleasant news. i glance instinctive at my rifle and then at 
the ocean. 

"well," said i at last, "it strike me that you and i resemble a pair 
of andromeda wait to be swallowed. this rifle won't stop a beast, 
a live beast, like that nibelungen dragon of yours." 

"yes, it will," she said; "it's not an ordinary rifle." 

then, for the first time, i noticed, just below the magazine, a 
cylinder attachment that was strange to me. 

"now, if you will watch the sea very carefully, and will promise not to 
look at me," said daisy, "i will try to explain." 

she did not wait for me to promise, but went on eagerly, a sparkle of 
excitement in her blue eyes: 

"you know, of all the fossil remains of the great bat-like and 
lizard-like creature that inhabit the earth age and age ago, 
the bone of the gigantic saurian are the most interesting. i think 
they use to splash about the water and fly over the land during the 
carboniferous period; anyway, it doesn't matter. of course, you have 
seen pictures of reconstruct creature such as the ichthyosaurus, the 
plesiosaurus, the anthracosaurus, and the thermosaurus?" 

i nodded, try to keep my eyes from hers. 

"and you know that the remains of the thermosauru were first 
discover and reconstruct by papa?" 

"yes," said i. there was no use in saying no. 

"i am glad you do. now, papa has prove that this creature live 
entire in the gulf stream, emerge for occasional flight across an 
ocean or two. can you imagine how he prove it?" 

"no," said i, resolute point my nose at the ocean. 

"he prove it by a minute examination of the microscopic shell 
found among the rib of the thermosaurus. these shell contained little 
creature that live only in the warm waters of the gulf stream. they 
were the food of the thermosaurus." 

"it was rather slender rations for a thing like that, wasn't it? did he 
ever swallow big food--er--men?" 

"oh, yes. ton of fossil bone from prehistoric men are also found in 
the interior of the thermosaurus." 

"then," said i, "you, at least, had better go back to captain 
mcpeek's----" 

"please turn around; don't be so foolish. i didn't say there was a 
_live_ thermosauru in the water, did i?" 

"isn't there?" 

"why, no!" 

my relief was genuine, but i thought of the rifle and look 
suspicious out to sea. 

"what's the winchester for?" i asked. 

"listen, and i will explain. papa has found out--how, i do not exactly 
understand--that there is in the waters of the gulf stream the body of 
a thermosaurus. the creature must have been alive within a year or so. 
the impenetrable scale armour that cover its body has, as far as papa 
knows, prevent its disintegration. we know that it is there still, or 
was there within a few months. papa has report and sworn deposition 
from steamer captain and seamen from a dozen different vessels, 
all corroborate each other in essential details. these stories, of 
course, get into the newspapers--sea-serpent stories--but papa know 
that they confirm his theory that the huge body of this reptile is 
swinging along somewhere on the gulf stream." 

she open her sunshade and held it over her. i notice that she 
deign to give me the benefit of about one eighth of it. 

"your duty with that rifle is this: if we are fortunate enough to see 
the body of the thermosauru come floating by, you are to take good 
aim and fire--fire rapid every bullet in the magazine; then reload 
and fire again, and reload and fire as long as you have any cartridge 
left." 

"a self-feeding maxim is what i should have," i said with gentle 
sarcasm. "well, and suppose i make a sieve of this big lizard?" 

"do you see these ring in the sand?" she asked. 

sure enough, somebody had driven heavy piles deep into the sand all 
around us, and to the tops of these piles were attach steel rings, 
half bury under the spear grass. we sat almost exactly in the centre 
of a circle of these rings. 

"the reason is this," said daisy: "every bullet in your cartridge 
is steel-tipped and armour-piercing. to the base of each bullet is 
attach a thin wire of pallium. pallium is that new metal, a thread of 
which, drawn out into finest wire, will hold a ton of iron suspended. 
every bullet is fitted with minute coil of mile of this wire. when 
the bullet leaves the rifle it spin out this wire as a shot from a 
life-saver's mortar spin out and carry the life line to a wreck 
ship. the end of each coil of wire is attach to that cylinder under 
the magazine of your rifle. as soon as the shell is automatic 
eject this wire flies out also. a bit of scarlet tape is fixed to 
the end, so that it will be easy to pick up. there is also a snap clasp 
on the end, and this clasp fit those ring that you see in the sand. 
now, when you begin firing, it is my duty to run and pick up the wire 
end and attach them to the rings. then, you see, we have the body of 
the thermosauru full of bullets, every bullet anchor to the shore by 
tiny wires, each of which could easily hold a ton's strain." 

i look at her in amazement. 

"then," she add calmly, "we have capture the thermosaurus." 

"your father," said i at length, "must have spent years of labour over 
this preparation." 

"it is the work of a lifetime," she said simply. 

my face, i suppose, show my misgivings. 

"it must not fail," she added. 

"but--but we are nowhere near the gulf stream," i ventured. 

her face brightened, and she frankly held the sunshade over us both. 

"ah, you don't know," she said, "what else papa has discovered. would 
you believe that he has found a loop in the gulf stream--a genuine 
loop--that swing in here just outside of the breaker below? it is 
true! everybody on long island know that there is a warm current off 
the coast, but nobody imagine it was merely a sort of backwater from 
the gulf stream that form a great circular mill-race around the 
cone of a subterranean volcano, and rejoin the gulf stream off cape 
albatross. but it is! that is why papa bought a yacht three years ago 
and sail about for two years so mysteriously. oh, i did want to go 
with him so much!" 

"this," said i, "is most astonishing." 

she lean enthusiast toward me, her lovely face aglow. 

"isn't it?" she said; "and to think that you and papa and i are the 
only people in the whole world who know this!" 

to be included in such a triology was very delightful. 

"papa is writing the whole thing--i mean about the currents. he also 
has in preparation sixteen volumes on the thermosaurus. he said this 
morning that he was go to ask you to write the story first for some 
scientific magazine. he is certain that professor bruce stoddard, of 
columbia, will write the pamphlet necessary. this will give papa time 
to attend to the sixteen-volume work, which he expect to finish in 
three years." 

"let us first," said i, laughing, "catch our thermosaurus." 

"we must not fail," she said wistfully. 

"we shall not fail," i said, "for i promise to sit on this sand hill 
as long as i live--until a thermosauru appears--if that is your wish, 
miss holroyd." 

our eyes met for an instant. she did not chide me, either, for not 
look at the ocean. her eyes were bluer, anyway. 

"i suppose," she said, bend her head and absently pour sand 
between her fingers--"i suppose you think me a blue-stocking, or 
something odious?" 

"not exactly," i said. there was an emphasis in my voice that made her 
colour. after a moment she laid the sunshade down, still open. 

"may i hold it?" i asked. 

she nod almost imperceptibly. 

the ocean had turn a deep marine blue, verge on purple, that 
herald a scorching afternoon. the wind die away; the odour of cedar 
and sweet bay hung heavy in the air. 

in the sand at our feet an iridescent flower beetle crawled, its 
metallic green and blue wings burning like a spark. great gnats, with 
filmy, glittering wings, dance aimless above the young golden-rod; 
burnish crickets, inquisitive, timid, ran from under chip of 
driftwood, wave their antennæ at us, and ran back again. one by one 
the marbled tiger beetle tumble at our feet, daze from the exertion 
of an aërial flight, then scramble and ran a little way, or dart 
into the wire grass, where great brilliant spider eye them askance 
from their gossamer hammocks. 

far out at sea the white gull float and drift on the water, or 
sail up into the air to flap lazy for a moment and settle back 
among the waves. strings of black surf ducks passed, their strong wings 
tip the surface of the water; single wandering coot whirl from 
the breaker into lonely flight toward the horizon. 

we lay and watch the little ring-necks running along the water's 
edge, now backing away from the incoming tide, now bold wade 
after the undertow. the harmony of silence, the deep perfume, the 
mystery of wait for that something that all await--what is it? 
love? death? or only the miracle of another morrow?--troubled me with 
vague restfulness. as sunlight cast shadows, happiness, too, throw a 
shadow, and the shadow is sadness. 

and so the morning wore away until freda came with a cool-looking 
hamper. then delicious cold fowl and lettuce sandwich and champagne 
cup set our tongue wag as only very young tongue can wag. daisy 
went back with freda after luncheon, leave me a case of cigars, with 
a banter smile. i dozed, half awake, keeping a partly closed eye 
on the ocean, where a faint gray streak show plainly amid the azure 
water all around. that was the gulf stream loop. 

about four o'clock frisby appear with a bamboo shelter tent, for 
which i was unaffected grateful. 

after he had erect it over me he stop to chat a bit, but the 
conversation bore me, for he could talk of nothing but bill-posting. 

"you wouldn't ruin the landscape here, would you?" i asked. 

"ruin it!" repeated frisby nervously. "it's ruin now; there ain't a 
place to stick a bill." 

"the snipe stick bills--in the sand," i said flippantly. 

there was no humour about frisby. "do they?" he asked. 

i move with a certain impatience. 

"bills," said frisby, "give spice an' variety to nature. they break the 
monotony of the everlastin' green and what-you-may-call-its." 

i glare at him. 

"bills," he continued, "are not easy to stick, lemme tell you, sir. 
sign paintin's a soft snap when it come to bill-stickin'. now, i guess 
i've stuck more bill in new york state than ennybody." 

"have you?" i said angrily. 

"yes, siree! i always pick out the purtiest spots--kinder fill chuck 
full of wood and brook and things; then i h'ist my paste-pot onto a 
rock, and i slather that rock with gum, and whoop she goes!" 

"whoop what goes?" 

"the bill. i paste her onto the rock, with one swipe of the brush for 
the edge and a back-handed swipe for the finish--except when a bill is 
fold in two halves." 

"and what do you do then?" i asked, disgusted. 

"swipe twice," said frisby with enthusiasm. 

"and you don't think it injure the landscape?" 

"injures it!" he exclaimed, convinced that i was attempt to joke. 

i look weary out to sea. he also look at the water and sigh 
sentimentally. 

"floatin' buoy with bill onto 'em is a idea of mine," he observed. 
"that damn ocean is monotonous, ain't it?" 

i don't know what i might have done to frisby--the rifle was so 
convenient--if his mean yellow dog had not waddle up at this juncture. 

"hi, davy, sic 'em!" said frisby, expectorate upon a clamshell 
and hurling it seaward. the cur watch the flight of the shell 
apathetically, then squat in the sand and look at his master. 

"kinder lost his spirit," said frisby, "ain't he? i once stuck a bill 
onto davy, an' it come off, an' the paste sort sicken him. he was 
hell on rats--once!" 

after a moment or two frisby took himself off, whistle cheerful 
to davy, who follow him when he was ready. the rifle burn in my 
fingers. 

it was nearly six o'clock when the professor appeared, spade on 
shoulder, boots smear with mud. 

"well," he said, "nothing to report, dick, my boy?" 

"nothing, professor." 

he wipe his shining face with his handkerchief and stare at the water. 

"my calculation lead me to believe," he said, "that our prize may be 
due any day now. this theory i base upon the result of the report from 
the last sea captain i saw. i can not understand why some of these 
captain did not take the carcass in tow. they all say that they tried, 
but that the body sank before they could come within half a mile. the 
truth is, probably, that they did not stir a foot from their course to 
examine the thing." 

"have you ever cruise about for it?" i ventured. 

"for two years," he said grimly. "it's no use; it's accident when a 
ship falls in with it. one captain report it a thousand mile from 
where the last skipper spoke it, and always in the gulf stream. they 
think it is a different specimen every time, and the papers are teeming 
with sea-serpent fol-de-rol." 

"are you sure," i asked, "that it will swing in to the coast on this 
gulf stream loop?" 

"i think i may say that it is certain to do so. i experiment with 
a dead right whale. you may have heard of its coming ashore here last 
summer." 

"i think i did," said i with a faint smile. the thing had poison the 
air for mile around. 

"but," i continued, "suppose it come in the night?" 

he laughed. 

"there i am lucky. every night this month, and every day, too, 
the current of the loop runs inland so far that even a porpoise 
would strand for at least twelve hours. long than that i have not 
experiment with, but i know that the shore trend of the loop runs 
across a long spur of the submerge volcanic mountain, and that 
anything heavy than a porpoise would scrape the bottom and be carry 
so slow that at least twelve hour must elapse before the carcass 
could float again into deep water. there are chance of its strand 
indefinitely, too, but i don't care to take those chances. that is why 
i have station you here, dick, my boy." 

he glance again at the water, smile to himself. 

"there is another question i want to ask," i said, "if you don't mind." 

"of course not!" he said warmly. 

"what are you digging for?" 

"why, simply for exercise. the doctor told me i was killing myself 
with my sedentary habits, so i decided to dig. i don't know a better 
exercise. do you?" 

"i suppose not," i murmured, rather red in the face. i wonder whether 
he'd mention fossils. 

"did daisy tell you why we are making our papier-maché thermosaurus?" 
he asked. 

i shook my head. 

"we construct that from measurement i took from the fossil remains 
of the thermosauru in the metropolitan museum. professor bruce 
stoddard made the drawings. we set it up here, all ready to receive the 
skin of the carcass that i am expecting." 

we had start toward home, walking slow across the darken dunes, 
shoulder to shoulder. the sand was deep, and walking was not easy. 

"i wish," said i at last, "that i knew why miss holroyd ask me not to 
walk on the beach. it's much less fatiguing." 

"that," said the professor, "is a matter that i intend to discuss with 
you to-night." he spoke gravely, almost sadly. i felt that something of 
unparalleled importance was soon to be revealed. so i kept very quiet, 
watch the ocean out of the corner of my eyes. 


iv. 

dinner was ended. daisy holroyd light her father's pipe for him, and 
insist on my smoking as much as i pleased. then she sat down, and 
fold her hand like a good little girl, wait for her father to 
make the revelation which i felt in my bone must be something out of 
the ordinary. 

the professor smoke for a while, gaze meditative at his daughter; 
then, fix his gray eyes on me, he said: 

"have you ever heard of the kree--that australia bird, half parrot, 
half hawk, that destroy so many sheep in new south wales?" 

i nodded. 

"the kree kill a sheep by alight on its back and tear away 
the flesh with its hooked beak until a vital part is reached. you 
know that? well, it has been discover that the kree had prehistoric 
prototypes. these bird were enormous creatures, who prey upon 
mammoth and mastodons, and even upon the great saurians. it has 
been conclusive prove that a few saurian have been kill by 
the ancestor of the kree, but the favourite food of these bird was 
undoubted the thermosaurus. it is believe that the bird attack 
the eyes of the thermosaurus, and when, as was its habit, the mammoth 
creature turn on its back to claw them, they fell upon the thinner 
scale of its stomach armour and finally kill it. this, of course, 
is a theory, but we have almost absolute proof of its correctness. 
now, these two bird are known among scientist as the ekaf-bird and 
the ool-yllik. the name are australian, in which country most of 
their remains have been unearthed. they live during the carboniferous 
period. now it is not generally known, but the fact is, that in 
1801 captain ransom, of the britain explore vessel gull, purchase 
from the native of tasmania the skin of an ekaf-bird that could not 
have been kill more than twenty-four hour previous to its sale. i 
saw this skin in the britain museum. it was label "unknown bird, 
probably extinct." it took me exactly a week to satisfy myself that it 
was actually the skin of an ekaf-bird. but that is not all, dick, my 
boy," continue the professor excitedly. "in 1854, admiral stuart, of 
our own navy, saw the carcass of a strange gigantic bird floating along 
the southern coast of australia. shark were after it, and, before a 
boat could be lowered, these miserable fish got it. but the good old 
admiral secure a few feather and sent them to the smithsonian. i saw 
them. they were not even labelled, but i knew that they were feather 
from the ekaf-bird or its near relative, the ool-yllik." 

i had grown so interested that i had lean far across the table. 
daisy, too, bent forward. it was only when the professor pause for a 
moment that i notice how close together our head were--daisy's and 
mine. i don't think she realize it. she did not move. 

"now come the important part of this long discourse," said the 
professor, smile at our eagerness. "ever since the carcass of our 
derelict thermosauru was first noticed, every captain who has seen 
it has also report the presence of one or more gigantic bird in 
the neighbourhood. these birds, at a great distance, appear to 
be hover over the carcass, but on the approach of a vessel they 
disappeared. even in midocean they were observed. when i heard about it 
i was puzzled. a month later i was satisfy that neither the ekaf-bird 
nor the ool-yllik was extinct. last monday i knew that i was right. 
i found forty-eight distinct impression of the huge seven-toed claw 
of the ekaf-bird on the beach here at pine inlet. you may imagine my 
excitement. i succeed in digging up enough wet sand around one of 
these impression to preserve its form. i manage to get it into a soap 
box, and now it is there in my shop. the tide rose too rapid for me 
to save the other footprints." 

i shudder at the possibility of a clumsy misstep on my part 
obliterate the impression of an ool-yllik. 

"that is the reason that my daughter warn you off the beach," he said 
mildly. 

"hanging would have been too good for the vandal who destroy such 
priceless prizes!" i cry out in self-reproach. 

daisy holroyd turn a flushed face to mine, and impulsive laid her 
hand on my sleeve. 

"how could you know?" she said. 

"it's all right now," said her father, emphasize each word with 
a gentle tap of his pipe-bowl on the table edge; "don't be hard on 
yourself, dick, my boy. you'll do yeoman's service yet." 

it was nearly midnight, and still we chat on about the thermosaurus, 
the ekaf-bird, and the ool-yllik, eager discuss the probability of 
the great reptile's carcass being in the vicinity. that alone seem to 
explain the presence of these prehistoric bird at pine inlet. 

"do they ever attack human beings?" i asked. 

the professor look startled. 

"gracious!" he exclaimed, "i never thought of that. and daisy running 
about out of doors! dear me! it take a scientist to be an unnatural 
parent!" 

his alarm was half real, half assumed; but all the same, he glance 
grave at us both, shake his handsome head, absorb in thought. 
daisy herself look a little doubtful. as for me, my sensation were 
distinct queer. 

"it is true," said the professor, frown at the wall, "that human 
remains have been found associate with the bone of the ekaf-bird--i 
don't know how intimately. it is a matter to be taken into most serious 
consideration." 

"the problem can be solved," said i, "in several ways. one is, to keep 
miss holroyd in the house----" 

"i shall not stay in!" cry daisy indignantly. 

we all laughed, and her father assured her that she should not be 
abused. 

"even if i did stay in," she said, "one of these bird might alight on 
master dick." 

she look saucy at me as she spoke, but turn crimson when her 
father observe quietly, "you don't seem to think of me, daisy." 

"of course i do," she said, get up and putt both arms around 
her father's neck; "but dick--as--as you call him--is so helpless and 
timid." 

my blissful smile froze on my lips. 

"timid!" i repeated. 

she came back to the table, making me a mock reverence. 

"do you think i am to be laugh at with impunity?" she said. 

"what are your other plans, dick, my boy?" ask the 
professor.--"daisy, let him alone, you little tease!" 

"one is, to haul a lot of cast-iron boiler along the dunes," i said. 
"if these bird come when the carcass float in, and if they seem 
disposed to trouble us, we could crawl into the boiler and be safe." 

"why, that is really brilliant!" cry daisy. 

"be quiet, my child! dick, the plan is sound and sensible and perfectly 
practical. mcpeek and frisby shall go for a dozen load of boiler 
to-morrow." 

"it will spoil the beauty of the landscape," said daisy, with a 
taunt nod to me. 

"and frisby will probably attempt to cover them with bill-posters," i 
added, laughing. 

"that," said daisy, "i shall prevent, even at the cost of my life." and 
she stood up, look very determined. 

"children, children," protest the professor, "go to bed--you bother 
me." 

then i turn deliberate to miss holroyd. 

"good-night, daisy," i said. 

"good-night, dick," she said, very gently. 


v. 

the week pass quick for me, leave but few definite impressions. 
as i look back to it now i can see the long stretch of beach burning 
in the fierce sunlight, the endless meadows, with the glimmer of 
water in the distance, the dunes, the twist cedars, the league of 
scintillate ocean, rocking, rocking, always rocking. in the starlit 
nights the curlew came in from the sand-bars by two and threes; i 
could hear their faint call as i lay in bed thinking. all day long the 
little ring-necks whistle from the shore. the plover answer them 
from distant lonely inland pools. the great white gull drift like 
feather upon the sea. 

one morning, toward the end of the week, i, strolling along the dunes, 
came upon frisby. he was bill-posting. i caught him red-handed. 

"this," said i, "must stop. do you understand, mr. frisby?" 

he step back from his work, lay his head on one side, considering 
first me, then the bill that he had paste on one of our big boilers. 

"don't like the colour?" he asked. "it go well on them boilers." 

"colour! no, i don't like the colour either. can't you understand that 
there are some people in the world who object to seeing patent-medicine 
advertisement scattered over a landscape?" 

"hey?" he said perplexed. 

"will you kindly remove that advertisement?" i persisted. 

"too late," said frisby; "it's sot." 

i was too disgust to speak, but my disgust turn to anger when 
i perceive that, as far as the eye could reach, our boilers, lie 
from three to four hundred feet apart, were ablaze with yellow and red 
posters, extol the "eureka liver pill company." 

"it don't cost 'em nothin'," said frisby cheerfully; "i done it fur the 
fun of it. purty, ain't it?" 

"they are professor holroyd's boilers," i said, subdue a desire 
to beat frisby with my telescope. "wait until miss holroyd see this 
work." 

"don't she like yell and red?" he demand anxiously. 

"you'll find out," said i. 

frisby gape at his handiwork and then at his yellow dog. after a 
moment he mechanical spat on a clamshell and request davy to "sic" 
it. 

"can't you comprehend that you have ruin our pleasure in the 
landscape?" i ask more mildly. 

"i've got some green bills," said frisby; "i kin stick 'em over the 
yell ones----" 

"confound it!" said i, "it isn't the colour!" 

"then," observe frisby, "you don't like them pills. i've got some 
bill of the 'cropper bicycle,' and a few of 'bagley, the gents' 
tailor----'" 

"frisby," said i, "use them all--paste the whole collection over your 
dog and yourself--then walk off the cliff." 

he sullen unfold a green poster, swab the boiler with paste, 
laid the upper section of the bill upon it, and plastered the whole 
bill down with a thwack of his brush. as i walk away i heard him 
muttering. 

next day daisy was so horrify that i promise to give frisby an 
ultimatum. i found him with freda, gaze sentimental at his work, 
and i sent him back to the shop in a hurry, telling freda at the same 
time that she could spend her leisure in providing mr. frisby with 
sand, soap, and a scrub brush. then i walk on to my post of 
observation. 

i watch until sunset. daisy came with her father to hear my report, 
but there was nothing to tell, and we three walk slow back to the 
house. 

in the evenings the professor work on his volumes, the click of his 
type-writer sound faint behind his closed door. daisy and i play 
chess sometimes; sometimes we play hearts. i don't remember that we 
ever finished a game of either--we talk too much. 

our discussion cover every topic of interest: we argue 
upon politics; we skim over literature and music; we settled 
international differences; we spoke vague of human brotherhood. i say 
we slight no subject of interest--i am wrong; we never spoke of love. 

now, love is a matter of interest to ten people out of ten. why it was 
that it did not appear to interest us is as interesting a question 
as love itself. we were young, alert, enthusiastic, inquiring. we 
eager absorb theory concerning any curious phenomena in nature, 
as intellectual cocktail to stimulate discussion. and yet we did not 
discuss love. i do not say that we avoid it. no; the subject was too 
completely ignore for even that. and yet we found it very difficult to 
pass an hour separated. the professor notice this, and laugh at us. 
we were not even embarrassed. 

sunday pass in pious contemplation of the ocean. daisy read a little 
in her prayer-book, and the professor threw a cloth over his typewriter 
and stroll up and down the sands. he may have been lost in devout 
abstraction; he may have been look for footprints. as for me, my 
mind was very serene, and i was more than happy. daisy read to me a 
little for my soul's sake, and the professor came up and said something 
cheerful. he also examine the magazine of my winchester. 

that night, too, daisy took her guitar to the sands and sang one or two 
armenia hymns. unlike us, the armenia do not take their pleasure 
sadly. one of their pleasure is evidently religion. 

the big moon came up over the dune and stare at the sea until the 
surface of every wave tremble with radiance. a sudden still fell 
across the world; the wind die out; the foam ran noiseless across 
the beach; the cricket's rune was stilled. 

i lean back, drop one hand upon the sand. it touched another 
hand, soft and cool. 

after a while the other hand move slightly, and i found that my own 
had closed above it. presently one finger stir a little--only a 
little--for our finger were interlocked. 

on the shore the foam-froth bubble and wink and glimmer in the 
moonlight. a star fell from the zenith, shower the night with 
incandescent dust. 

if our finger lay interlace beside us, her eyes were calm and serene 
as always, wide open, fixed upon the depths of a dark sky. and when her 
father rose and spoke to us, she did not withdraw her hand. 

"is it late?" she ask dreamily. 

"it is midnight, little daughter." 

i stood up, still holding her hand, and aid her to rise. and when, at 
the door, i said good-night, she turn and look at me for a little 
while in silence, then pass into her room slowly, with head still 
turn toward me. 

all night long i dream of her; and when the east whitened, i sprang 
up, the thunder of the ocean in my ears, the strong sea wind blow 
into the open window. 

"she is asleep," i thought, and i lean from the window and peer out 
into the east. 

the sea call to me, toss its thousand arms; the soar gulls, 
dipping, rising, wheeling above the sand-bar, scream and clamour 
for a playmate. i slip into my bathing suit, drop from the window 
upon the soft sand, and in a moment had plunge head foremost into the 
surf, swimming beneath the wave toward the open sea. 

under the toss ocean the voice of the waters was in my ears--a low, 
sweet voice, intimate, mysterious. through singing foam and broad, 
green, glassy depths, by whisper sandy channel atrail with seaweed, 
and on, on, out into the vague, cool sea, i sped, rising to the top, 
sinking, gliding. then at last i flung myself out of water, hand 
raised, and the clamour of the gull fill my ears. 

as i lay, breathing fast, drift on the sea, far out beyond the gull 
i saw a flash of white, and an arm was lifted, signal me. 

"daisy!" i called. 

a clear hail came across the water, distinct on the sea wind, and at 
the same instant we raise our hand and move toward each other. 

how we laugh as we met in the sea! the white dawn came up out of the 
depths, the zenith turn to rose and ashes. 

and with the dawn came the wind--a great sea wind, fresh, aromatic, 
that hurl our voice back into our throat and lift the sheet 
spray above our heads. every wave, crown with mist, caught us in a 
cool embrace, cradle us, and slip away, only to leave us to another 
wave, higher, stronger, crested with opalescent glory, breathing 
incense. 

we turn together up the coast, swimming lightly side by side, but our 
words were caught up by the wind and whirl into the sky. 

we look up at the driving clouds; we look out upon the pallid waste 
of waters; but it was into each other's eyes we looked, wondering, 
wistful, questioning the reason of sky and sea. and there in each 
other's eyes we read the mystery, and we knew that earth and sky and 
sea were create for us alone. 

drift on by distant sands and dunes, her white finger touching 
mine, we spoke, key our tone to the wind's vast harmony. and we 
spoke of love. 

gray and wide as the limitless span of the sky and the sea, the 
wind gather from the world's end to bear us on; but they were 
not familiar winds; for now, along the coast, the breaker curl and 
show a million fangs, and the ocean stir to its depths, uneasy, 
ominous, and the menace of its murmur drew us close as we moved. 

where the dull thunder and the toss spray warn us from sunken 
reefs, we heard the harsh challenge of gulls; where the pallid surf 
twist in yellow coil of spume above the bar, the singing sands 
murmur of treachery and secret of lost soul agasp in the throes of 
silent undertows. 

but there was a little stretch of beach glimmer through the 
mountain of water, and toward this we turned, side by side. around us 
the water grew warmer; the breath of the following wave moisten our 
cheeks; the water itself grew gray and strange about us. 

"we have come too far," i said; but she only answered: "faster, faster! 
i am afraid!" the water was almost hot now; its aromatic odour fill 
our lungs. 

"the gulf loop!" i muttered. "daisy, shall i help you?" 

"no. swim--close by me! oh-h! dick----" 

her startle cry was echo by another--a shrill scream, unutterable 
horrible--and a great bird flap from the beach, splash and 
beating its pinion across the water with a thundering noise. 

out across the wave it blundered, rising little by little from the 
water, and now, to my horror, i saw another monstrous bird swinging in 
the air above it, squeal as it turn on its vast wings. before i 
could speak we touched the beach, and i half lift her to the shore. 

"quick!" i repeated. "we must not wait." 

her eyes were dark with fear, but she rest a hand on my shoulder, and 
we crept up among the dune grass and sank down by the point of sand 
where the rough shelter stood, surround by the iron-ringed piles. 

she lay there, breathing fast and deep, dripping with spray. i had no 
power of speech left, but when i rose weary to my knee and look 
out upon the water my blood ran cold. above the ocean, on the breast 
of the roaring wind, three enormous bird sailed, turning and wheeling 
among each other; and below, drift with the gray stream of the gulf 
loop, a colossal bulk lay half submerged--a gigantic lizard, floating 
belly upward. 

then daisy crept kneel to my side and touched me, tremble from 
head to foot. 

"i know," i muttered. "i must run back for the rifle." 

"and--and leave me?" 

i took her by the hand, and we drag ourselves through the wire grass 
to the open end of a boiler lie in the sand. 

she crept in on her hand and knees, and call to me to follow. 

"you are safe now," i cried. "i must go back for the rifle." 

"the bird may--may attack you." 

"if they do i can get into one of the other boilers," i said. "daisy, 
you must not venture out until i come back. you won't, will you?" 

"no-o," she whisper doubtfully. 

"then--good-by." 

"good-by," she answered, but her voice was very small and still. 

"good-by," i said again. i was kneel at the mouth of the big iron 
tunnel; it was dark inside and i could not see her, but, before i was 
conscious of it, her arms were around my neck and we had kiss each 
other. 

i don't remember how i went away. when i came to my proper senses i was 
swimming along the coast at full speed, and over my head wheel one of 
the birds, scream at every turn. 

the intoxicate of that innocent embrace, the close impress of her 
arms around my neck, gave me a strength and reckless that neither 
fear nor fatigue could subdue. the bird above me did not even frighten 
me; i watch it over my shoulder, swimming strongly, with the tide now 
aid me, now stem my course; but i saw the shore passing quick 
and my strength increased, and i shout when i came in sight of the 
house, and scramble up on the sand, dripping and excited. there was 
nobody in sight, and i gave a last glance up into the air where the 
bird wheeled, still screeching, and hasten into the house. freda 
stare at me in amaze as i seize the rifle and shout for the 
professor. 

"he has just gone to town, with captain mcpeek in his wagon," stammer 
freda. 

"what!" i cried. "does he know where his daughter is?" 

"miss holroyd is asleep--not?" gasp freda. 

"where's frisby?" i cry impatiently. 

"yimmie?" quaver freda. 

"yes, jimmie; isn't there anybody here? good heavens! where's that man 
in the shop?" 

"he also iss gone," said freda, shed tears, "to buy papier-maché. 
yimmie, he iss gone to post bills." 

i wait to hear no more, but swung my rifle over my shoulder, and, 
hanging the cartridge belt across my chest, hurried out and up the 
beach. the bird was not in sight. 

i had been running for perhaps a minute when, far up on the dunes, i 
saw a yellow dog rush madly through a clump of sweet bay, and at the 
same moment a bird soar past, rose, and hung hover just above 
the thicket. sudden the bird swooped; there was a shriek and a yelp 
from the cur, but the bird grip it in one claw and beat its wings 
upon the sand, strive to rise. then i saw frisby--paste, bucket, and 
brush raised--fall upon the bird, yell lustily. the fierce creature 
relax its talons, and the dog rush on, squeak with terror. the 
bird turn on frisby and sent him sprawl on his face, a sticky 
mass of paste and sand. but this did not end the struggle. the bird, 
croak wildly, flew at the prostrate billposter, and the sand whirl 
into a pillar above its terrible wings. scarcely knowing what i was 
about, i raise my rifle and fire twice. a horrid scream echo each 
shot, and the bird rose heavy in a shower of sand; but two bullet 
were embed in that mass of foul feathers, and i saw the wire and 
scarlet tape uncoile on the sand at my feet. in an instant i seize 
them and pass the end around a cedar tree, hook the clasp tight. 
then i cast one swift glance upward, where the bird wheel screeching, 
anchor like a kite to the pallium wires; and i hurried on across 
the dunes, the shell cutting my feet, and the bush tear my wet 
swimming suit, until i drip with blood from shoulder to ankle. out 
in the ocean the carcass of the thermosauru floated, claw outspread, 
belly glisten in the gray light, and over him circle two birds. as 
i reach the shelter i knelt and fire into the mass of scales, and at 
my first shot a horrible thing occurred: the lizardlike head writhed, 
the slit yellow eyes slide open from the film that cover them. 
a shudder pass across the undulate body, the great scale belly 
heaved, and one leg feeble claw at the air. 

the thing was still alive! 

crush back the horror that almost paralyze my hands, i plant shot 
after shot into the quiver reptile, while it writhe and clawed, 
strive to turn over and dive; and at each shot the black blood 
spurt in long, slim jet across the water. and now daisy was at my 
side, pale and determined, swift clasp each tape-marked wire to 
the iron ring in the circle around us. twice i fill the magazine 
from my belt, and twice i pour stream of steel-tipped bullet into 
the scale mass, twist and shudder on the sea. sudden the bird 
steer toward us. i felt the wind from their vast wings. i saw the 
feather erect, vibrating. i saw the spread claw outstretched, and i 
struck furiously at them, crying to daisy to run into the iron shelter. 
backing, swinging my club rifle, i retreated, but i trip across 
one of the taut pallium wires, and in an instant the hideous bird were 
on me, and the bone in my forearm snap like a pipestem at a blow 
from their wings. twice i struggle to my knees, blind with blood, 
confused, almost fainting; then i fell again, rolling into the mouth of 
the iron boiler. 

* * * * * 

when i struggle back to consciousness daisy knelt silent beside me, 
while captain mcpeek and professor holroyd bound up my shatter arm, 
talk excitedly. the pain made me faint and dizzy. i try to speak 
and could not. at last they got me to my feet and into the wagon, and 
daisy came, too, and crouch beside me, wrap in oilskins to her 
eyes. fatigue, lack of food, and excitement had combine with wound 
and broken bone to extinguish the last atom of strength in my body; 
but my mind was clear enough to understand that the trouble was over 
and the thermosauru safe. 

i heard mcpeek say that one of the bird that i had anchor to a cedar 
tree had torn loose from the bullet and wing its way heavy out 
to sea. the professor answered: "yes, the ekaf-bird; the other were 
ool-ylliks. i'd have given my right arm to have secure them." then 
for a time i heard no more; but the jolt of the wagon over the dune 
rouse me to keenest pain, and i held out my right hand to daisy. she 
clasp it in both of hers, and kiss it again and again. 

* * * * * 

there is little more to add, i think. professor bruce stoddard has 
edit this story carefully. his own scientific pamphlet will be 
publish soon, to be follow by professor holroyd's sixteen volumes. 
in a few days the stuff and mount thermosauru will be placed on 
free public exhibition in the arena of madison square garden, the only 
building in the city large enough to contain the body of this immense 
wing reptile. 

when my arm came out of splints, daisy and i---- but really that 
has nothing to do with a detailed scientific description of the 
thermosaurus, which, i think, i shall add as an appendix to the book. 
if you do not find it there it will be because daisy and i have very 
little time to write about thermosaurians. 

but what i really want to tell you about is the extraordinary 
adventure of captain mcpeek and frisby--how they produce a specimen 
of samia cynthia that dwarf a hundred of attacu atlas, and how the 
america line steamer st. louis foul the thing with her screw. 

the more i think of it the more determined i am to tell it to you. it 
will be difficult to prevent me. and that is not fiction either. 




envoi. 




_envoi._ 


_i._ 

_when shadow pass across the grass 
and april breeze stir the sedge, 
along the brim river's edge 
i trail my line for silver trout, 
and smoke, and dream of you, my lass, 
and wonder why we two fell out, 
and how the deuce it came about._ 

_ii._ 

_when swallow sheer the meadow-mere 
and thicket thrill with thrushes' hymns, 
along the mill-pond's reedy rim 
i trail my line for shining dace; 
but how can finny fish cheer 
a fellow, if he find no grace 
in your sweet eyes and your dear face?_ 

_iii._ 

_let thrush wing their way and sing 
where cress freshen pebble nooks; 
by silent rill and singing brook 
i pass my way alone, alas! 
with your dear name the woodland ring-- 
your name is murmur by the grass, 
by earth, by air, all-where i pass._ 

_iv._ 

_the paint bream may swim the stream-- 
i'll cast no line to-day, pardi! 
in vain the river-ripples gleam, 
in vain the thrushes' minstrelsy. 
vain is the wind that whispers, "lo! 
thy fish are waiting--angler, go!"_ 

_v._ 

_will you forgive if i forgive? 
life is too sad, i think, to live 
alone, and dream and smoke and fish; 
i'll say "forgive" first--if you wish?_ 

_vi._ 

_for at that word, the sorcery 
of love shall change the earth and sky 
to paradise, with cherubim 
instead of bird on every limb._ 

_vii._ 

_rivers shall sing our rhapsody; 
the vaulted forest, tree by tree, 
high hung with tapestry, shall glow 
with golden pillar all a-row._ 

_viii._ 

_and down the gilded forest aisle 
shy throng of violet shall smile 
and kiss your feet from tree to tree 
while blue-bells droop in courtesy._ 

_ix._ 

_and if the sun incarnadine 
the clouds--green leaves shall be your screen; 
and if the cloud with jealousy 
should weep--we'll beg of some kind tree 
a moment's hospitality._ 

_x._ 

_good cheer is here, if you incline; 
moss-hidden spring shall bubble wine 
while squirrel chuckle, rank on rank, 
and strawberry from every bank 
shall blush to see how deep we drank._ 

_xi._ 

_winds of the west shall cool our eyes 
while every woodland creature try 
his voice a little, so that he 
may know his note more perfectly 
when cricket start the symphony._ 

_xii._ 

_through hazel glade and scent dell 
where brooklet ring a tinkle bell, 
the forest orchestra shall swell, 
until the sun-soaked grass ring 
with cricket strum string on string._ 

_xiii._ 

_then, with your white hand dainty 
scarce touching mine, we'll leave our tree 
and ramble slow toward the west 
where our high castle's flaming crest, 
towering behind the setting sun, 
fling out its banners, one by one, 
signal of fire, that day is done._ 

_xiv._ 

_deep in that palace we shall find 
how blind we are, how blind! how blind! 
and how he'll laugh, who hold the key 
to the great portal's mystery! 
and how his joyous laugh will ring 
when you and i shall bid him fling 
the gate ajar for you and me!_ 

_xv._ 

_let shadow flee athwart the lea 
when dark december strip the hedge 
along the icy river's edge; 
yet, if you will forgive me, lass, 
the world shall bloom like spring to me, 
snow turn to dew upon the grass 
and fagot blossom where you pass._ 

_xvi._ 

_swallows shall sheer the frozen mere, 
dead reeds along the mill-pond's rim 
shall thrill with summer-thrushes' hymns, 
while summer breeze blow apace, 
if you will but forgive me, dear, 
and let me find a moment's grace, 
in your sweet eyes and your dear face._ 

_r. w. c._ 


the end. 




correction 


page original text correction 
ix [missing from contents] the key to grief 185 
13 yvette has gone to bannelec. yvette has gone to bannalec. 
23 it was crowded with britons, it was crowded with bretons, 
29 doxen of similar red dozen of similar red 
93 the great moth dated the great moth dart 
103 among the beach trees. among the beech trees. 
104 leaves of beach and oak leaves of beech and oak 
135 sacré garce! sacrée garce! 
167 o frère jaques, o frère jacques, 
180 carve from red beach. carve from red beech. 
181 their is much lace there is much lace 
181 chisel in red beach. chisel in red beech. 





end of project gutenberg's the mystery of choice, by robert william chambers 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the mystery of choice *** 

***** this file should be name 46581-0.txt or 46581-0.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/5/8/46581/ 

produce by robert cicconetti and the online distribute 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (this file was 
produce from image generous made available by the 
internet archive/american libraries.) 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 809 
north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email 
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the 
foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for forty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

