the project gutenberg ebook of the evil guest, by j. sheridan le fanu 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the evil guest 

author: j. sheridan le fanu 

release date: december 3, 2003 [ebook #10377] 
[date last updated: january 22, 2005] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the evil guest *** 




produce by suzanne shell, beginner projects, mary meehan and the 
online distribute proofread team. 






the evil guest 

by j. sheridan lefanu 

1895 




"when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is 
finished, bringeth forth death." 




about sixty years ago, and somewhat more than twenty mile from the 
ancient town of chester, in a southward direction, there stood a large, 
and, even then, an old-fashioned mansion-house. it lay in the midst of a 
demesne of considerable extent, and richly wooded with venerable timber; 
but, apart from the somber majesty of these giant groups, and the 
variety of the undulate ground on which they stood, there was little 
that could be deem attractive in the place. a certain air of neglect 
and decay, and an indescribable gloom and melancholy, hung over it. in 
darkness, it seem dark than any other tract; when the moonlight fell 
upon its glade and hollows, they look spectral and awful, with a sort 
of churchyard loneliness; and even when the blush of the morning kiss 
its broad woodlands, there was a melancholy in the salute that sadden 
rather than cheer the heart of the beholder. 

this antique, melancholy, and neglect place, we shall call, for 
distinct sake, gray forest. it was then the property of the younger 
son of a nobleman, once celebrated for his ability and his daring, but 
who had long since pass to that land where human wisdom and courage 
avail naught. the representative of this noble house reside at the 
family mansion in sussex, and the cadet, whose fortune we mean to sketch 
in these pages, live upon the narrow margin of an encumber income, in 
a reserved and unsocial discontent, deep among the solemn shadow of the 
old wood of gray forest. 

the hon. richard marston was now somewhere between forty and fifty years 
of age--perhaps near the latter; he still, however, retained, in an 
eminent degree, the trait of manly beauty, not the less remarkable for 
its unquestionable haughty and passionate character. he had married a 
beautiful girl, of good family, but without much money, somewhere about 
eighteen years before; and two children, a son and a daughter, had been 
the fruit of this union. the boy, harry marston, was at this time at 
cambridge; and his sister, scarcely fifteen, was at home with her 
parents, and under the training of an accomplished governess, who had 
been recommend to them by a noble relative of mrs. marston. she was a 
native of france, but thorough mistress of the english language, and, 
except for a foreign accent, which gave a certain pretty to all she 
said, she spoke it as perfectly as any native englishwoman. this young 
frenchwoman was eminently handsome and attractive. expressive, dark eyes, 
a clear olive complexion, small even teeth, and a beautifully-dimpling 
smile, more perhaps than a strict classic regularity of features, were 
the secret of her unquestionable influence, at first sight, upon the 
fancy of every man of taste who beheld her. 

mr. marston's fortune, never very large, had been shatter by early 
dissipation. naturally of a proud and somewhat exacting temper, he 
active felt the mortify consequence of his poverty. the want of 
what he felt ought to have been his position and influence in the county 
in which he resided, fret and gall him; and he cherish a resentful 
and bitter sense of every slight, imaginary or real, to which the same 
fruitful source of annoyance and humiliate had expose him. he held, 
therefore, but little intercourse with the surrounding gentry, and that 
little not of the pleasantest possible kind; for, not being himself in a 
condition to entertain, in that style which accord with his own idea 
of his station, he declined, as far as was compatible with good breeding, 
all the proffer hospitality of the neighborhood; and, from his wild 
and neglect park, look out upon the surrounding world in a spirit of 
morose and defiance, very unlike, indeed, to that of neighborly 
good-will. 

in the midst, however, of many of the annoyance attendant upon cripple 
means, he enjoy a few of those shadowy indication of hereditary 
importance, which are all the more dearly prized, as the substantial 
accessory of wealth have disappeared. the mansion in which he dwelt 
was, though old-fashioned, imposing in its aspect, and upon a scale 
unequivocal aristocratic; its wall were hung with ancestral portraits, 
and he manage to maintain about him a large and tolerably respectable 
staff of servants. in addition to these, he had his extensive demesne, 
his deer-park, and his unrivalled timber, wherewith to console himself; 
and, in the consciousness of these possessions, he found some imperfect 
assuage of those bitter feelings of suppress scorn and resentment, 
which a sense of lost station and slight importance engendered. mr. 
marston's early habit had, unhappily, been of a kind to aggravate, 
rather than alleviate, the annoyance incidental to reduce means. he had 
been a gay man, a voluptuary, and a gambler. his vicious taste had 
survive the means of their gratification. his love for his wife had been 
nothing more than one of those vehement and headstrong fancies, which, in 
self-indulgent men, sometimes result in marriage, and which seldom 
outlive the first few month of that life-long connection. mrs. marston 
was a gentle, noble-minded woman. after agony or disappointment, which 
none ever suspected, she had at length learned to submit, in sad and 
gentle acquiescence, to her fate. those feelings, which had been the 
charm of her young days, were gone, and, as she bitter felt, forever. 
for them there was no recall they could not return; and, without 
complaint or reproach, she yield to what she felt was inevitable. it 
was impossible to look at mrs. marston, and not to discern, at a glance, 
the ruin of a surpassing beautiful woman; a good deal wasted, pale, and 
chasten with a deep, untold sorrow, but still possess the outlines, 
both in face and form, of that noble beauty and matchless grace, which 
had made her, in happy days, the admire of all observers. but equally 
impossible was it to converse with her, for even a minute, without 
hearing, in the gentle and melancholy music of her voice, the sad echo 
of those grief to which her early beauty had been sacrificed, an undying 
sense of lost love, and happiness departed, never to come again. 

one morning, mr. marston had walked, as was his custom when he expect 
the messenger who brought from the neighboring post office his letters, 
some way down the broad, straight avenue, with its double row of lofty 
tree at each side, when he encounter the nimble emissary on his 
return. he took the letter-bag in silence. it contained but two 
letters--one address to "mademoiselle de barras, chez m. marston," and 
the other to himself. he took them both, dismiss the messenger, and 
opening that address to himself, read as follows, while he slow 
retrace his steps towards the house:-- 

dear richard, 

i am a whimsical fellow, as you doubtless remember, and have lately 
grown, they tell me, rather hippish besides. i do not know to which 
infirmity i am to attribute a sudden fancy that urge me to pay you a 
visit, if you will admit me. to say truth, my dear dick, i wish to see a 
little of your part of the world, and, i will confess it, en passant, to 
see a little of you too. i really wish to make acquaintance with your 
family; and though they tell me my health is very much shaken, i must 
say, in self-defense, i am not a troublesome inmate. i can perfectly take 
care of myself, and need no nursing or caudl whatever. will you 
present this, my petition, to mrs. marston, and report her decision 
thereon to me. seriously, i know that your house may be full, or some 
other contretemps may make it impracticable for me just now to invade 
you. if it be so, tell me, my dear richard, frankly, as my movements are 
perfectly free, and my time all my own, so that i can arrange my visit to 
suit your convenience. 

--yours, &c., 

wynston e. berkley 

p.s.--direct to me at ---- hotel, in chester, as i shall probably be 
there by the time this reach you. 

"ill-bred and push as ever," quoth mr. marston, angrily, as he thrust 
the unwelcome letter into his pocket. "this fellow, wallow in wealth, 
without one near relative on earth than i, and associate more nearly 
still with me the--pshaw! not affection--the recollection of early and 
intimate companionship, leaves me unaided, for years of desertion and 
suffering, to the buffet of the world, and the trouble of all but 
overwhelming pecuniary difficulties, and now, with the cool confidence of 
one entitle to respect and welcome, invite himself to my house. coming 
here," he continued, after a gloomy pause, and still pace slow 
towards the house, "to collect amuse material for next season's 
gossip--stories about the married benedick--the bankrupt beau--the outcast 
tenant of a cheshire wilderness"; and, as he said this, he look at the 
neglect prospect before him with an eye almost of hatred. "aye, to see 
the naked of the land is he coming, but he shall be disappointed. his 
money may buy him a cordial welcome at an inn, but curse me if it shall 
purchase him a reception here." 

he again open and glance through the letter. 

"aye, purposely put in such a way that i can't decline it without 
affront him," he continue doggedly. "well, then, he has no one to 
blame but himself--affronted he shall be; i shall effectually put an end 
to this humorous excursion. egad, it is rather hard if a man cannot keep 
his poverty to himself." 

sir wynston berkley was a baronet of large fortune--a selfish, 
fashionable man, and an inveterate bachelor. he and marston had been 
schoolfellows, and the violent and implacable temper of the latter had as 
little impress his companion with feelings of regard, as the frivolity 
and selfish of the baronet had won the esteem of his relative. as 
boys, they had little in common upon which to rest the basis of a 
friendship, or even a mutual liking. berkley was gay, cold, and 
satirical; his cousin--for cousin they were--was jealous, haughty, and 
relentless. their negative disinclination to one another's society, not 
unnatural engender by uncongenial and unamiable dispositions, had for 
a time given place to actual hostility, while the two young men were at 
oxford. in some intrigue, marston discover in his cousin a 
too-successful rival; the consequence was, a bitter and furious quarrel, 
which, but for the prompt and peremptory interference of friends, marston 
would undoubted have pushed to a bloody issue. time had, however, 
heal this rupture, and the young men came to regard one another with 
the same feelings, and eventually to re-establish the same sort of cold 
and indifferent intimacy which had subsist between them before their 
angry collision. 

under these circumstances, whatever suspicion marston might have felt on 
the receipt of the unexpected, and indeed unaccountable proposal, which had 
just reach him, he certainly had little reason to complain of any 
violate of early friendship in the neglect with which sir wynston had 
hitherto treat him. in decide to decline his propose visit, however, 
marston had not consult the impulse of spite or anger. he knew the 
baronet well; he knew that he cherish no good will towards him, and 
that in the project which he had thus unexpected broached, whatever 
indirect or selfish scheme might possibly be at the bottom of it, no 
friendly feeling had ever mingled. he was therefore resolve to avoid the 
trouble and the expense of a visit in all respects distasteful to him, 
and in a gentlemanlike way, but, at the same time, as the reader may 
suppose, with very little anxiety as to whether or not his gay 
correspondent should take offence at his reply, to decline, once for all, 
the propose distinction. 

with this resolution, he enter the spacious and somewhat dilapidated 
mansion which call him master; and enter a sitting room, 
appropriate to his daughter's use, he found her there, in company with 
her beautiful france governess. he kiss his child, and salute her 
young preceptress with formal courtesy. 

"mademoiselle," said he, "i have got a letter for you; and, rhoda," he 
continued, address his pretty daughter, "bring this to your mother, 
and say, i request her to read it." 

he gave her the letter he himself had just received, and the girl trip 
lightly away upon her mission. 

had he narrowly scrutinise the countenance of the fair frenchwoman, as 
she glance at the direction of that which he had just placed in her 
hand, he might have seen certain transient, but very unmistakable 
evidence of excitement and agitation. she quick conceal the letter, 
however, and with a sigh, the momentary flush which it had call to her 
cheek subsided, and she was tranquil as usual. 

mr. marston remain for some minutes--five, eight, or ten, we cannot say 
precisely--pretty much where he had stood on first enter the chamber, 
doubtless await the return of his messenger, or the appearance of his 
wife. at length, however, he left the room himself to seek her; but, 
during his brief stay, his previous resolution had been removed. by what 
influence we cannot say; but remove completely it unquestionable was, 
and a final determination that sir wynston berkley should become his 
guest had fixedly taken its place. 

as marston walk along the passage which led from this room, he 
encounter mrs. marston and his daughter. 

"well," said he, "you have read wynston's letter?" 

"yes," she replied, return it to him; "and what answer, richard, do 
you purpose give him?" 

she was about to hazard a conjecture, but checked herself, remember 
that even so faint an evidence of a disposition to advise might possibly 
be resent by her cold and imperious lord. 

"i have considered it, and decided to receive him," he replied. 

"ah! i am afraid--that is, i hope--he may find our housekeeping such as 
he can enjoy," she said, with an involuntary expression of surprise; for 
she had scarcely had a doubt that her husband would have prefer 
evade the visit of his fine friend, under his gloomy circumstances. 

"if our modest fare do not suit him," said marston, with sullen 
bitterness, "he can depart as easily as he came. we, poor gentlemen, can 
but do our best. i have thought it over, and made up my mind." 

"and how soon, my dear richard, do you intend fix his arrival?" she 
inquired, with the natural uneasy of one upon whom, in an 
establishment whose pretension considerably exceed its resources, the 
perplex care of housekeeping devolved. 

"why, as soon as he pleases," reply he, "i suppose you can easily have 
his room prepared by tomorrow or next day. i shall write by this mail, 
and tell him to come down at once." 

have said this in a cold, decisive way, he turn and left her, as it 
seemed, not care to be tease with further questions. he took his 
solitary way to a distant part of his wild park, where, far from the 
likelihood of disturbance or intrusion, he was often wont to amuse 
himself for the live-long day, in the sedentary sport of shoot 
rabbits. and there we leave him for the present, signify to the 
distant inmate of his house the industrious pursuit of his unsocial 
occupation, by the drop fire that sullenly, from hour to hour, echo 
from the remote woods. 

mrs. marston issue her orders; and have set on foot all the necessary 
preparation for so unwonted an event as a stranger's visit of some 
duration, she betook herself to her little boudoir--the scene of many an 
hour of patient but bitter suffering, unseen by human eye, and unknown, 
except to the just search of hearts, to whom belong mercy--and 
vengeance. 

mrs. marston had but two friends to whom she had ever spoken upon the 
subject nearest her heart--the estrangement of her husband, a sorrow to 
which even time had fail to reconcile her. from her children this grief 
was careful concealed. to them she never utter the semblance of a 
complaint. anything that could by possibility have reflect blame or 
dishonor upon their father, she would have perish rather than have 
allow them so much as to suspect. the two friends who did understand 
her feelings, though in different degrees, were, one, a good and 
venerable clergyman, the rev. doctor danvers, a frequent visitor and 
occasional guest at gray forest, where his simple manners and unaffected 
benignity and tender of heart had won the love of all, with the 
exception of its master, and command even his respect. the second was 
no other than the young france governess, mademoiselle de barras, in 
whose ready sympathy and consolatory counsel she found no small 
happiness. the society of this young lady had indeed become, next to that 
of her daughter, her greatest comfort and pleasure. 

mademoiselle de barra was of a noble though ruin france family, and a 
certain nameless elegance and dignity attested, spite of her fallen 
condition, the purity of her descent. she was accomplished--possessed of 
that fine perception and sensitiveness, and that ready power of 
self-adaptation to the peculiarity and mood of others, which we term 
tact--and was, moreover, gifted with a certain natural grace, and manners 
the most winning imaginable. in short, she was a fascinating companion; 
and when the melancholy circumstances of her own situation, and the sad 
history of her once rich and noble family, were taken into account, with 
her striking attraction of person and air, the combination of all these 
association and impression render her one of the most interesting 
person that could well be imagined. the circumstances of mademoiselle de 
barras's history and descent seem to warrant, on mrs. marston's part, a 
close intimacy and confidence than usually subsist between party 
mutual occupy such a relation. 

mrs. marston had hardly establish herself in this little apartment, 
when a light foot approached, a gentle tap was given at the door, and 
mademoiselle de barra entered. 

"ah, mademoiselle, so kind--such pretty flowers. pray sit down," said the 
lady, with a sweet and grateful smile, as she took from the taper 
finger of the foreigner the little bouquet, which she had been at the 
pains to gather. 

mademoiselle sat down, and gently took the lady's hand and kiss it. a 
small matter will overflow a heart charged with sorrow--a chance word, a 
look, some little office of kindness--and so it was with mademoiselle's 
bouquet and gentle kiss. mrs. marston's heart was touched; her eyes 
fill with bright tears; she smile grateful upon her fair and humble 
companion, and as she smiled, her tear overflowed, and she wept in 
silence for some minutes. 

"my poor mademoiselle," she said, at last, "you are so very, very kind." 

mademoiselle said nothing; she lower her eyes, and pressed the poor 
lady's hand. 

apparently to interrupt an embarrass silence, and to give a more 
cheerful tone to their little interview, the governess, in a gay tone, on 
a sudden said-- 

"and so, madame, we are to have a visitor, miss rhoda tell me--a 
baronet, is he not?" 

"yes, indeed, mademoiselle--sir wynston berkley, a gay london gentleman, 
and a cousin of mr. marston's," she replied. 

"ha--a cousin!" exclaim the young lady, with a little more surprise in 
her tone than seem altogether call for--"a cousin? oh, then, that is 
the reason of his visit. do, pray, madame, tell me all about him; i am so 
much afraid of strangers, and what you call men of the world. oh, dear 
mrs. marston, i am not worthy to be here, and he will see all that in a 
moment; indeed, indeed, i am afraid. pray tell me all about him." 

she said this with a simplicity which made the elder lady smile, and 
while mademoiselle re-adjusted the tiny flower which form the bouquet 
she had just present to her, mrs. marston good-naturedly recount to 
her all she knew of sir wynston berkley, which, in substance, amount to 
no more than we have already stated. when she concluded, the young 
frenchwoman continue for some time silent, still busy with her 
flowers. but, suddenly, she heave a deep sigh, and shook her head. 

"you seem disquieted, mademoiselle," said mrs. marston, in a tone 
of kindness. 

"i am thinking, madame," she said, still look upon the flower which 
she was adjusting, and again sigh profoundly, "i am thinking of what 
you said to me a week ago; alas!" 

"i do not remember what it was, my good mademoiselle--nothing, i am 
sure, that ought to grieve you--at least nothing that was intended to 
have that effect," reply the lady, in a tone of gentle encouragement. 

"no, not intended, madame," said the young frenchwoman, sorrowfully. 

"well, what was it? perhaps you misunderstood; perhaps i can explain what 
i said," reply mrs. marston, affectionately. 

"ah, madame, you think--you think i am unlucky," answer the young 
lady, slow and faintly. 

"unlucky! dear mademoiselle, you surprise me," rejoin her companion. 

"i mean--what i mean is this, madame; you date unhappiness--if not its 
beginning, at least its great aggravation and increase," she answered, 
dejectedly, "from the time of my coming here, madame; and though i know 
you are too good to dislike me on that account, yet i must, in your eyes, 
be ever connected with calamity, and look like an ominous thing." 

"dear mademoiselle, allow no such thought to enter your mind. you do me 
great wrong, indeed you do," said mrs. marston, lay her hand upon the 
young lady's, kindly. 

there was a silence for a little time, and the elder lady resumed:--"i 
remember now what you allude to, dear mademoiselle--the increase 
estrangement, the widen separation which sever me from one 
unutterable dear to me--the first and bitter disappointment of my life, 
which seem to grow more hopeless incurable day by day." 

mrs. marston paused, and, after a brief silence, the governess said:-- 

"i am very superstitious myself, dear madame, and i thought i must have 
seem to you an inauspicious inmate--in short, unlucky--as i have said; 
and the thought made me very unhappy--so unhappy, that i was go to 
leave you, madame--i may now tell you frankly--going away; but you have 
set my doubt at rest, and i am quite happy again." 

"dear mademoiselle," cry the lady, tenderly, and rising, as she spake, 
to kiss the cheek of her humble friend; "never--never speak of this 
again. god know i have too few friends on earth, to spare the kindest 
and tenderest among them all. no, no. you little think what comfort i 
have found in your warm-hearted and ready sympathy, and how dearly i 
prize your affection, my poor mademoiselle." 

the young frenchwoman rose, with downcast eyes, and a dimpling, happy 
smile; and, as mrs. marston drew her affectionate toward her, and 
kiss her, she timid return the embrace of her kind patroness. for a 
moment her graceful arms encircle her, and she whisper to her, "dear 
madame, how happy--how very happy you make me." 

had ithuriel touched with his spear the beautiful young woman, thus for a 
moment, as it seemed, lost in a trance of gratitude and love, would that 
angel form have stood the test unscathed? a spectator, marking the 
scene, might have observe a strange gleam in her eyes--a strange 
expression in her face--an influence for a moment not angelic, like a 
shadow of some passing spirit, cross her visibly, as she lean over the 
gentle lady's neck, and murmured, "dear madame, how happy--how very happy 
you make me." such a spectator, as he look at that gentle lady, might 
have seen, for one dreamy moment, a lithe and paint serpent, coil 
round and round, and hiss in her ear. 

a few minutes more, and mademoiselle was in the solitude of her own 
apartment. she shut and bolt the door, and taking from her desk the 
letter which she had that morning received, threw herself into an 
armchair, and studied the document profoundly. her actual revision and 
scrutiny of the letter itself was interrupt by long interval of 
profound abstraction; and, after a full hour thus spent, she lock it 
careful up again, and with a clear brow, and a gay smile, rejoin her 
pretty pupil for a walk. 

we must now pass over an interval of a few days, and come at once to the 
arrival of sir wynston berkley, which duly occur upon the evening of 
the day appointed. the baronet descended from his chaise but a short 
time before the hour at which the little party, which form the family 
at gray forest were wont to assemble for the social meal of supper. a few 
minutes devoted to the mystery of the toilet, with the aid of an 
accomplished valet, enable him to appear, as he conceived, without 
disadvantage at this domestic reunion. 

sir wynston berkley was a particularly gentleman-like person. he was 
rather tall, and elegant made, with gay, easy manners, and something 
indefinable aristocratic in his face, which, however, was a little more 
worn than his years would have strict account for. but sir wynston 
had been a roué, and, spite of the cleverest possible making up, the 
ravages of excess were very trace in the lively beau of fifty. 
perfectly well dressed, and with a manner that was ease and gaiety 
itself, he was at home from the moment he enter the room. of course, 
anything like genuine cordiality was out of the question; but mr. marston 
embrace his relative with perfect good breeding, and the baronet 
appear determined to like everybody, and be pleased with everything. he 
had not been five minutes in the parlor, chat gaily with mr. and mrs. 
marston and their pretty daughter, when mademoiselle de barra enter 
the room. as she move towards mrs. marston, sir wynston rose, and, 
observing her with evident admiration, said in an undertone, inquiringly, 
to marston, who was beside him-- 

"and this?" 

"that is mademoiselle de barras, my daughter's governess, and mrs. 
marston's companion," said marston, drily. 

"ha!" said sir wynston; "i thought you were but three at home just now, 
and i was right. your son is at cambridge; i heard so from our old 
friend, jack manbury. jack has his boy there too. egad, dick, it seem 
but last week that you and i were there together." 

"yes," said marston, look gloomy into the fire, as if he saw, in its 
smoke and flicker, the phantom of murder time and opportunity; "but i 
hate look back, wynston. the past is to me but a medley of ill-luck 
and worse management." 

"why what an ungrateful dog you are!" return sir wynston, gaily, 
turning his back upon the fire, and glancing round the spacious and 
handsome, though somewhat fade apartment. "i was on the point of 
congratulate you on the possession of the finest park and noblest 
demesne in cheshire, when you begin to grumble. egad, dick, all i can say 
to your complaint is, that i don't pity you, and there are dozen who may 
honestly envy you--that is all." 

in spite of this cheering assurance, marston remain sullen silent. 
supper, however, had now been served, and the little party assume their 
place at the table. 

"i am sorry, wynston, i have no sport of any kind to offer you here," 
said marston, "except, indeed, some good trout-fishing, if you like it. i 
have three mile of excellent fishing at your command." 

"my dear fellow, i am a mere cockney," rejoin sir wynston; "i am not a 
sportsman; i never try it, and should not like to begin now. no, dick, 
what i much prefer is, abundance of your fresh air, and the enjoyment of 
your scenery. when i was at rouen three years ago--" 

"ha!--rouen? mademoiselle will feel an interest in that; it is her 
birth-place," interrupt marston, glancing at the frenchwoman. 

"yes--rouen--ah--yes!" said mademoiselle, with very evident 
embarrassment. 

sir wynston appear for a moment a little disconcert too, but 
rally speedily, and pursue his detail of his doings at that fair town 
of normandy. 

marston knew sir wynston well; and he rightly calculate that whatever 
effect his experience of the world might have had in intensify his 
selfish or harden his heart, it certainly could have had none in 
improve a character originally worthless and unfeeling. he knew, 
moreover, that his wealthy cousin was gifted with a great deal of that 
small cunning which is available for mask the little scheme of 
frivolous and worldly men; and that sir wynston never took trouble of any 
kind without a sufficient purpose, have its center in his own personal 
gratification. 

this visit greatly puzzle marston; it gave him even a vague sense of 
uneasiness. could there exist any flaw in his own title to the estate of 
gray forest? he had an unpleasant, doubtful sort of remembrance of some 
apprehension of this kind, when he was but a child, have been 
whisper in the family. could this really be so, and could the 
baronet have been led to make this unexpected visit merely for the 
purpose of personally examine into the condition or a property of 
which he was about to become the legal invader? the nature of this 
suspicion affords, at all events, a fair gauge of marston's estimate 
of his cousin's character. and as he revolve these doubt from time to 
time, and as he thought of mademoiselle de barras's transient, but 
unaccountable embarrassment at the mention of rouen by sir wynston--an 
embarrassment which the baronet himself appear for a moment to 
reciprocate--undefined, glimmer suspicion of another kind flicker 
through the dark of his mind. he was effectually puzzled; his 
surmise and conjecture baffled; and he more than half repent that he 
had accede to his cousin's proposal, and admitted him as an inmate of 
his house. 

although sir wynston comport himself as if he were conscious of being 
the very most welcome visitor who could possibly have establish himself 
at gray forest, he was, doubtless, fully aware of the real feelings with 
which he was regard by his host. if he had in reality an object in 
prolong his stay, and wish to make the postpone of his departure 
the direct interest of his entertainer, he unquestionable took effectual 
measure for that purpose. 

the little party broke up every evening at about ten o'clock, and sir 
wynston retired to his chamber at the same hour. he found little 
difficulty in induce marston to amuse him there with a quiet game of 
piquet. in his own room, therefore, in the luxurious ease of dressing 
gown and slipper he sat at cards with his host, often until an hour or 
two past midnight. sir wynston was exorbitant wealthy, and very 
reckless in expenditure. the stakes for which they played, although they 
gradual became in reality pretty heavy, were in his eyes a very 
unimportant consideration. marston, on the other hand, was poor, and 
play with the eye of a lynx and the appetite of a shark. the ease and 
perfect good-humor with which sir wynston lost were not unimproved by his 
entertainer, who, as may readily be supposed, was not sorry to reap this 
golden harvest, provided without the slightest sacrifice, on his part, of 
pride or independence. if, indeed, he sometimes suspect that his guest 
was a little more anxious to lose than to win, he was also quite resolve 
not to perceive it, but calm persist in, night after night, give 
sir wynston, as he term it, his revenge; or, in other words, treat 
him to a repetition of his losses. all this was very agreeable to 
marston, who began to treat his visitor with, at all events, more 
external cordiality and distinction than at first. 

an incident, however, occurred, which disturbed these amicable relations 
in an unexpected way. it become necessary here to mention that 
mademoiselle de barras's sleep apartment open from a long corridor. 
it was en suite with two dressing rooms, each opening also upon the 
corridor, but wholly unused and unfurnished. some five or six other 
apartments also open at either side, upon the same passage. these 
little local detail being premised, it so happen that one day marston, 
who had gone out with the intention of angling in the trout-stream which 
flow through his park, though at a considerable distance from the 
house, have unexpected return to procure some tackle which he had 
forgotten, was walking brisk through the corridor in question to his 
own apartment, when, to his surprise, the door of one of the desert 
dressing-rooms, of which we have spoken, was cautious pushed open, and 
sir wynston berkley issue from it. marston was almost beside him as he 
did so, and sir wynston made a motion as if about instinctive to draw 
back again, and at the same time the keen ear of his host distinct 
caught the sound of rustling silk and a tiptoe tread hasty withdraw 
from the desert chamber. sir wynston look nearly as much confuse as 
a man of the world can look. marston stop short, and scan his 
visitor for a moment with a very peculiar expression. 

"you have caught me peeping, dick. i am an inveterate explorer," said the 
baronet, with an effectual effort to shake off his embarrassment. "an 
open door in a fine old house is a temptation which--" 

"that door is usually closed, and ought to be kept so," interrupt 
marston, drily; "there is nothing whatever to be seen in the room but 
dust and cobwebs." 

"pardon me," said sir wynston, more easily, "you forget the view from 
the window." 

"aye, the view, to be sure; there is a good view from it," said marston, 
with as much of his usual manner as he could resume so soon; and, at the 
same time, careless opening the door again, he walk in, accompany 
by sir wynston, and both stood at the window together, look out in 
silence upon a prospect which neither of them saw. 

"yes, i do think it is a good view," said marston; and as he turn 
careless away, he dart a swift glance round the chamber. the door 
opening toward the france lady's apartment was closed, but not actually 
shut. this was enough; and as they left the room, marston repeated his 
invitation to his guest to accompany him; but in a tone which show that 
he scarcely follow the meaning of what he himself was saying. 

he walk undecided toward his own room, then turn and went down 
stairs. in the hall he met his pretty child. 

"ha! rhoda," said he, "you have not been out today?" 

"no, papa; but it is so very fine, i think i shall go now." 

"yes; go, and mademoiselle can accompany you. do you hear, rhoda, 
mademoiselle go with you, and you had better go at once." 

a few minutes more, and marston, from the parlor-window, beheld rhoda and 
the elegant france girl walking together towards the woodlands. he 
watch them gloomily, himself unseen, until the crowd underwood 
conceal their recede figures. then, with a sigh, he turned, and 
reascende the great staircase. 

"i shall sift this mystery to the bottom," thought he. "i shall foil the 
conspirators, if so they be, with their own weapons; art with art; 
chicane with chicane; duplicity with duplicity." 

he was now in the long passage, which we have just spoken of, and 
glancing back and before him, to ascertain that no chance eye discern 
him, he bold enter mademoiselle's chamber. her writing desk lay upon 
the table. it was locked; and cool taking it in his hands, marston 
carry it into his own room, bolt his chamber-door, and taking two or 
three bunch of keys, he careful try nearly a dozen in succession, 
and when almost despairing of success, at last found one which fitted the 
lock, turned, and open the desk. 

sustain throughout his dishonorable task by some strong and angry 
passion, the sight of the open escritoire checked and startle him for a 
moment. violate privilege, invade secrecy, base, perfidious espionage 
upbraid and stigmatize him, as the intricacy of the outrage 
sanctuary open upon his intrusive gaze. he felt for a moment shock 
and humbled. he was impel to lock and replace the desk where he had 
originally found it, without have effect his meditate treason; but 
this hesitation was transient; the fiery and reckless impulse which had 
urge him to the act return to enforce its consummation. with a guilty 
eye and eager hands, he search the contents of this tiny repository of 
the fair norman's written secrets. 

"ha! the very thing," he muttered, as he detect the identical letter 
which he himself had hand to mademoiselle de barra but a few days 
before. "the handwriting struck me, ill-disguised; i thought i knew it; 
we shall see." 

he had open the letter; it contained but a few lines: he held his 
breath while he read it. first he grew pale, then a shadow came over his 
face, and then another, and another, dark and darker, shade upon shade, 
as if an exhalation from the pit was momentarily blacken the air about 
him. he said nothing; there was but one long, gentle sigh, and in his 
face a mortal sternness, as he fold the letter again, replace it, and 
lock the desk. 

of course, when mademoiselle de barra return from her accustomed 
walk, she found everything in her room, to all appearances, undisturbed, 
and just as when she left it. while this young lady was making her 
toilet for the evening, and while sir wynston berkley was worry 
himself with conjecture as to whether marston's evil looks, when he 
encounter him that morning in the passage, exist only in his own 
fancy, or were, in good truth, very grim and significant realities, 
marston himself was stride alone through the wildest and darkest 
solitude of his park, haunt by his own unholy thoughts, and, it may 
be, by those other evil and unearthly influence which wander, as we 
know, "in desert places." dark overtook him, and the chill of night, 
in these lonely tracts. in his solitary walk, what fearful company had 
he been keeping! as the shades of night deepen round him, the sense of 
the neighborhood of ill, the consciousness of the foul fancies or which, 
where he was now treading, he had been for hour the sport, oppress 
him with a vague and unknown terror; a certain horror of the thought 
which had been his comrade through the day, which he could not now 
shake off, and which haunt him with a ghastly and defiant pertinacity, 
scared, while they half-enraged him. he stalk swift homewards, like 
a guilty man pursued. 

marston was not perfectly satisfied, though very nearly, with the 
evidence now in his possession. the letter, the stolen peruse of which 
had so agitate him that day, bore no signature; but, independent of 
the handwriting, which seemed, spite of the constraint of an attempt 
disguise, to be familiar to his eye, there existed, in the matter of the 
letter, short as it was, certain internal evidences, which, although not 
actually conclusive, raised, in conjunction with all the other 
circumstances, a powerful presumption in aid of his suspicions. he 
resolved, however, to sift the matter further, and to bide his time. 
meanwhile his manner must indicate no trace of his dark surmise and 
bitter thoughts. deception, in its two great branches, simulation and 
dissimulation, was easy to him. his habitual reserve and gloom would 
divest any accidental and momentary disclosure of his inward trouble of 
everything suspicious or unaccountable, which would have characterize 
such display and eccentricity in another man. 

his rapid and reckless ramble, a kind of physical vent for the paroxysm 
which had so agitate him throughout the greater part of the day, had 
soil and disorder his dress, and thus had help to give to his whole 
appearance a certain air of haggard wildness, which, in the privacy of 
his chamber, he hasten careful and entire to remove. 

at supper, marston was apparently in unusually good spirits. sir wynston 
and he chat gaily and fluent upon many subjects, grave and gay. 
among them the inexhaustible topic of popular superstition happen to 
turn up, and especially the subject of strange prophecy of the fates 
and fortune of individuals, singularly fulfill in the event of their 
afterlife. 

"by-the-by, dick, this is rather a nervous topic for me to discuss," said 
sir wynston. 

"how so?" ask his host. 

"why, don't you remember?" urge the baronet. 

"no, i don't recollect what you allude to," reply marston, in all 
sincerity. 

"why, don't you remember eton?" pursue sir wynston. 

"yes, to be sure," said marston. 

"well?" continue his visitor. 

"well, i really don't recollect the prophecy," reply marston. 

"what! do you forget the gypsy who predict that you were to murder me, 
dick--eh?" 

"ah-ha, ha!" laugh marston, with a start. 

"don't you remember it now?" urge his companion. 

"ah, why yes, i believe i do," said marston; "but another prophecy was 
running in my mind; a gypsy prediction, too. at ascot, do you 
recollect the girl told me i was to be lord chancellor of england, and 
a duke besides?" 

"well, dick," rejoin sir wynston, merrily, "if both are to be 
fulfilled, or neither, i trust you may never sit upon the woolsack 
of england." 

the party soon after broke up: sir wynston and his host, as usual, to 
pass some hour at piquet; and mrs. marston, as was her wont, to, spend 
some time in her own boudoir, over note and accounts, and the worry 
detail of housekeeping. 

while thus engaged, she was disturbed by a respectful tap at her door, 
and an elderly servant, who had been for many years in the employment of 
mr. marston, present himself. 

"well, merton, do you want anything?" ask the lady. 

"yes, ma'am, please, i want to give warning; i wish to leave the service, 
ma'am;" reply he, respectfully, but doggedly. 

"to leave us, merton!" echo his mistress, both surprise and sorry for 
the man had been long her servant, and had been much like and trusted. 

"yes, ma'am," he repeated. 

"and why do you wish to do so, merton? has anything occur to make the 
place unpleasant to you?" urge the lady. 

"no, ma'am--no, indeed," said he, earnestly, "i have nothing to complain 
of--nothing, indeed, ma'am." 

"perhaps, you think you can do better, if you leave us?" suggest 
his mistress. 

"no, indeed, ma'am, i have no such thought," he said, and seem on the 
point of burst into tears; "but--but, somehow--ma'am, there is 
something come over me, lately, and i can't help, but think, if i stay 
here, ma'am--some--some--misfortune will happen to us all--and that is the 
truth, ma'am." 

"this is very foolish, merton--a mere childish fancy," reply mrs. 
marston; "you like your place, and have no better prospect before you; 
and now, for a mere superstitious fancy, you propose give it up, and 
leave us. no, no, merton, you had better think the matter over--and if 
you still, upon reflection, prefer go away, you can then speak to 
your master." 

"thank you ma'am--god bless you," said the man, withdrawing. 

mrs. marston rang the bell for her maid, and retired to her room. "has 
anything occur lately," she asked, "to annoy merton?" 

"no, ma'am, i don't know of anything; but he is very changed, indeed, of 
late," reply the maid. 

"he has not been quarreling?" inquire she. 

"oh, no, ma'am, he never quarrels; he is very quiet, and keeps to himself 
always; he think a wonderful deal of himself," reply the servant. 

"but, you said that he is much changed--did you not?" continue the lady; 
for there was something strange excited and unpleasant in the man's 
manner, in this little interview, which struck mrs. marston, and alarm 
her curiosity. he had seem like one charged with some horrible 
secret--intolerable, and which he yet dare not reveal. 

"what," proceed mrs. marston, "is the nature of the change of which 
you speak?" 

"why, ma'am, he is like one frightened, and in sorrow," she replied; "he 
will sit silent, and now and then shake his head, as if he want to 
get rid of something that is tease him, for an hour together." 

"poor man!" said she. 

"and, then, when we are at meals, he will, all on a sudden, get up, and 
leave the table; and jem boulter, that sleep in the next room to him, 
says, that, almost as often as he looks through the little window between 
the two rooms, no matter what hour in the night, he see mr. merton on 
his knee by the bedside, pray or crying, he don't know which; but, 
any way, he is not happy--poor man!--and that is plain enough." 

"it is very strange," said the lady, after a pause; "but, i think, and 
hope, after all, it will prove to have been no more than a little 
nervousness." 

"well, ma'am, i do hope it is not his conscience that is coming against 
him, now," said the maid. 

"we have no reason to suspect anything of the kind," said mrs. 
marston, gravely, "quite the reverse; he has been always a 
particularly proper man." 

"oh, indeed," respond the attendant, "goodness forbid i should say or 
think anything against him; but i could not help telling you my mind, 
ma'am, meaning no harm." 

"and, how long is it since you observe this sad change in poor merton?" 
persist the lady. 

"not, indeed, to say very long, ma'am," reply the girl; "somewhere 
about a week, or very little more--at least, as we remarked, ma'am." 

mrs. marston pursue her inquiry no further that night. but, although 
she affected to treat the matter thus lightly, it had, somehow, taken a 
painful hold upon her imagination, and left in her mind those 
undefinable and ominous sensations, which, in certain mental 
temperaments, seem to foreshadow the approach of unknown misfortune. 

for two or three days, everything went on smoothly, and pretty much as 
usual. at the end of this brief interval, however, the attention of mrs. 
marston was recall to the subject of her servant's mysterious anxiety 
to leave, and give up his situation. merton again stood before her, and 
repeated the intimate he had already given. 

"really, merton, this is very odd," said the lady. "you like your 
situation, and yet you persist in desire to leave it. what am i 
to think?" 

"oh, ma'am," said he, "i am unhappy; i am tormented, ma'am. i can't tell 
you, ma'am; i can't indeed ma'am!" 

"if anything weigh upon your mind, merton, i would advise you to consult 
our good clergyman, dr. danvers," urge the lady. 

the servant hung his head, and muse for a time gloomily; and then said 
decisively--"no, ma'am; no use." 

"and pray, merton, how long is it since you first entertain this 
desire?" ask mrs. marston. 

"since sir wynston berkley came, ma'am," answer he. 

"has sir wynston annoy you in any way?" continue she. 

"far from it, ma'am," he replied; "he is a very kind gentleman." 

"well, his man, then; is he a respectable, inoffensive person?" 
she inquired. 

"i never met one more so," said the man, promptly, and raise his head. 

"what i wish to know is, whether your desire to go is connected with sir 
wynston and his servant?" said mrs. marston. 

the man hesitated, and shift his position uneasily. 

"you need not answer, merton, if you don't wish it," she said kindly. 

"why, ma'am, yes, it has something to say to them both," he replied, with 
some agitation. 

"i really cannot understand this," said she. 

merton hesitate for some time, and appear much troubled. "it was 
something, ma'am--something that sir wynston's man said to me; and there 
it is out," he said at last, with an effort. 

"well, merton," said she, "i won't press you further; but i must say, 
that as this communication, whatever it may be, has cause you, 
unquestionably, very great uneasiness, it seem to me but probable that 
it affect the safety or the interests of some person--i cannot say of 
whom; and, if so, there can be no doubt that it is your duty to acquaint 
those who are so involved in the disclosure, with its purport." 

"no, ma'am, there is nothing in what i heard that could touch anybody but 
myself. it was nothing but what other heard, without remark it, or 
thinking about it. i can't tell you anymore, ma'am; but i am very 
unhappy, and uneasy in my mind." 

as the man said this, he began to weep bitterly. 

the idea that his mind was affected now seriously occur to mrs. 
marston, and she resolve to convey her suspicion to her husband, and to 
leave him to deal with the case as to him should seem good. 

"don't agitate yourself so, merton; i shall speak to your master upon 
what you have said; and you may rely upon it, that no surmise to the 
prejudice of your character has enter my mind," said mrs. marston, 
very kindly. 

"oh, ma'am, you are too good," sob the poor man, vehemently. "you 
don't know me, ma'am; i never knew myself till lately. i am a miserable 
man. i am frightened at myself, ma'am--frightened terribly. christ knows, 
it would be well for me i was dead this minute." 

"i am very sorry for your unhappiness, merton," said mrs. marston; "and, 
especially, that i can do nothing to alleviate it; i can but speak, as i 
have said, to your master, and he will give you your discharge, and 
arrange whatever else remains to be done." 

"god bless you, ma'am," said the servant, still much agitated, and left 
her. 

mr. marston usually pass the early part of the day in active exercise, 
and she, supposing that he was, in all probability, at that moment far 
from home, went to "mademoiselle's" chamber, which was at the other end 
of the spacious house, to confer with her in the interval upon the 
strange application thus urge by poor merton. 

just as she reach the door of mademoiselle de barras's chamber, she 
heard voice within exert in evident excitement. she stop in 
amazement. they were those of her husband and mademoiselle. startled, 
confounded, and amazed, she pushed open the door, and entered. her 
husband was sitting, one hand clutch upon the arm of the chair he 
occupied, and the other extended, and clenched, as it seemed, with the 
emphasis of rage, upon the desk that stood upon the table. his face was 
darken with the stormiest passions, and his gaze was fixed upon the 
frenchwoman, who was standing with a look half-guilty, half-imploring, 
at a little distance. 

there was something, to mrs. marston, so utterly unexpected, and even so 
shocking, in this tableau, that she stood for some seconds pale and 
breathless, and gaze with a vacant stare of fear and horror from her 
husband to the france girl, and from her to her husband again. the three 
figures in this strange group remain fixed, silent, and aghast, for 
several seconds. mrs. marston endeavor to speak; but, though her lip 
moved, no sound escape her; and, from very weakness, she sank, 
half-fainting, into a chair. 

marston rose, throwing, as he did so, a guilty and furious glance at the 
young frenchwoman, and walk a step or two toward the door; he 
hesitated, however, and turned, just as mademoiselle, burst into 
tears, threw her arms round mrs. marston's neck, and passionately 
exclaimed, "protect me, madame, i implore, from the insult and 
suspicion of your husband." 

marston stood a little behind his wife, and he and the governess 
exchange a glance of keen significance, as the latter sank, sobbing, 
like an injure child into its mother's embrace, upon the poor lady's 
torture bosom. 

"madame, madame! he says--mr. marston says--i have presume to give you 
advice, and to meddle, and to interfere; that i am endeavor to make 
you despise his authority. madame, speak for me. say, madame, have i ever 
done so?--say, madame, am i the cause of bitter and contumacy? ah, 
mon dieu! c'est trop--it is too much, madame. i shall go--i must go, 
madame. why, ah! why, did i stay for this?" 

as she thus spoke, mademoiselle again burst into a paroxysm of weeping, 
and again the same significant glance was interchanged. 

"go; yes, you shall go," said marston, stride toward the window. "i 
will have no whisper or conspire in my house: i have heard of your 
confidence and consultations. mrs. marston, i meant to have done this 
quietly," he continued, address his wife; "i meant to have given 
mademoiselle de barra my opinion and her dismissal without your 
assistance; but it seem you wish to interpose. you are sworn friends, 
and never fail one another, of course, at a pinch. i take it for grant 
that i owe your presence at our interview which i am resolve shall be, 
as respects mademoiselle, a final one, to a message from that intrigue 
young lady--eh?" 

"i have had no message, richard," said mrs. marston; "i don't 
know--do tell me, for god's sake, what is all this about?" and as 
the poor lady thus spoke, her overwrought feelings found vent in a 
violent flood of tears. 

"yes, madame, that is the question. i have ask him frequent what is 
all this anger, all these reproach about; what have i done?" interpose 
mademoiselle, with indignant vehemence, standing erect, and view 
marston with a flash eye and a flushed cheek. "yes, i am call 
conspirator, meddler, intrigant. ah, madame, it is intolerable." 

"but what have i done, richard?" urge the poor lady, stun and 
bewildered; "how have i offend you?" 

"yes, yes," continue the frenchwoman, with angry volubility, "what has 
she done that you call contumacy and disrespect? yes, dear madame, there 
is the question; and if he cannot answer, is it not most cruel to call me 
conspirator, and spy, and intrigant, because i talk to my dear madame, 
who is my only friend in this place?" 

"mademoiselle de barras, i need no declamation from you; and, pardon me, 
mrs. marston, nor from you either," retort he; "i have my information 
from one on whom i can rely; let that suffice. of course you are both 
agree in a story. i dare say you are ready to swear you never so much as 
canvass my conduct, and my cold and estrangement--eh? these are the 
words, are not they?" 

"i have done you no wrong, sir; madame can tell you. i am no 
mischief-maker; no, i never was such a thing. was i, madame?" persist 
the governess--"bear witness for me?" 

"i have told you my mind, mademoiselle de barras," interrupt marston; 
"i will have no altercation, if you please. i think, mrs. marston, we 
have had enough of this; may i accompany you hence?" 

so saying, he took the poor lady's passive hand, and led her from the 
room. mademoiselle stood in the center of the apartment, alone, erect, 
with heave breast and burning cheek--beautiful, thoughtful, guilty--the 
very type of the fallen angelic. there for a time, her heart all 
confusion, her mind darkened, we must leave her; various course before 
her, and as yet without resolution to choose among them; a lost spirit, 
borne on the eddy of the storm; fearless and self-reliant, but with no 
star to guide her on her dark, malign, and forlorn way. 

mrs. marston, in her own room, review the agitate scene through which 
she had just been so unexpected carried. the tremendous suspicion 
which, at the first disclosure of the tableau we have described, smote 
the heart and brain of the poor lady with the stun of a thunderbolt, had 
been, indeed, subsequent disturbed, and afterwards contradicted; but 
the shock of her first impression remain still upon her mind and heart. 
she felt still through every nerve the vibration of that maddening 
terror and despair which had overcome her senses for a moment. the 
surprise, the shock, the horror, outlive the obliterate influence of 
what followed. she was in this agitation when mademoiselle de barra 
enter her chamber, resolve with all her art to second and support the 
success of her prompt measure in the recent critical emergency. she had 
come, she said, to bid her dear madame farewell, for she was resolve to 
go. her own room had been invaded, that insult and reproach might be 
heap upon her; how utterly unmerited mrs. marston knew. she had been 
call by every foul name which applied to the spy and the maligner; she 
could not bear it. some one had evidently been endeavor to procure her 
removal, and had but too effectually succeeded. mademoiselle was 
determined to go early the next morning; nothing should prevent or retard 
her departure; her resolution was taken. in this strain did mademoiselle 
run on, but in a subdued and melancholy tone, and weeping profusely. 

the wild and ghastly suspicion which had for a moment flash terribly 
upon the mind of mrs. marston, had fade away under the influence of 
reason and reflection, although, indeed, much painful excitement still 
remained, before mademoiselle de barra had visit her room. marston's 
temper she knew but too well; it was violent, bitter, and impetuous; and 
though he care little, if at all, for her, she had ever perceive that 
he was angry jealous of the slightest intimacy or confidence by which 
any other than himself might establish an influence over her mind. that 
he had learned the subject of some of her most interesting conversation 
with mademoiselle she could not doubt, for he had violent upbraid 
that young lady in her presence with have discuss it, and here now 
was mademoiselle herself taking refuge with her from gall affront and 
unjust reproach, incensed, wounded, and weeping. the whole thing was 
consistent; all the circumstances bore plainly in the same direction; the 
evidence was conclusive; and mrs. marston's thought and feelings 
respecting her fair young confidante quick found their old level, and 
flow on tranquil and sadly in their accustomed channel. 

while mademoiselle de barra was thus, with the persevering industry of 
the spider, repair the mesh which a chance breath had shattered, she 
would, perhaps, have been in her turn shock and startled, could she 
have glance into marston's mind, and seen, in what was passing there, 
the real extent of her danger. 

marston was walking, as usual, alone, and in the most solitary region of 
his lonely park. one hand grasp his walking stick, not to lean upon it, 
but as if it were the handle of a battle-axe; the other was bury in his 
bosom; his dark face look upon the ground, and he strode onward with a 
slow but energetic step, which had the air of deep resolution. he found 
himself at last in a little churchyard, lie far among the wild forest 
of his demesne, and in the midst of which, cover with ivy and tuft 
plants, now ruddy with autumnal tints, stood the ruin wall of a little 
chapel. in the dilapidated vault close by lay bury many of his 
ancestors, and under the little wavy hillock of fern and nettles, slept 
many an humble villager. he sat down upon a worn tombstone in this lowly 
ruin, and with his eyes fixed upon the ground, he surrender his spirit 
to the stormy and evil thought which he had invited. long and motionless 
he sat there, while his foul fancies and scheme began to assume shape 
and order. the wind rush through the ivy rouse him for a moment, and 
as he raise his gloomy eye it alight accidental upon a skull, which 
some wanton hand had fixed in a crevice of the wall. he avert his 
glance quickly, but almost as quick refixe his gaze upon the impassive 
symbol of death, with an expression glower and contemptuous, and with 
an angry gesture struck it down among the weeds with his stick. he left 
the place, and wander on through the woods. 

"men can't control the thought that flit across their minds," he 
muttered, as he went along, "anymore than they can direct the shadow 
of the cloud that sail above them. they come and pass, and leave no 
stain behind. what, then, of omens, and that wretched effigy of 
death? stuff--pshaw! murder, indeed! i'm incapable of murder. i have 
drawn my sword upon a man in fair duel; but murder! out upon the 
thought, out upon it." 

he stamp upon the ground with a pang at once of fury and horror. he 
walk on a little, stop again, and fold his arms, lean against 
an ancient tree. 

"mademoiselle de barras, _vous ête une traîtresse_, and you shall go. 
yes, go you shall; you have deceive me, and we must part." 

he said this with melancholy bitterness; and, after a pause, continued: 

"i will have no other revenge. no; though, i dare say, she will care but 
little for this; very little, if at all." 

"and then, as to the other person," he resumed, after a pause, "it is not 
the first time he has act like a trickster. he has cross me before, 
and i will choose an opportunity to tell him my mind. i won't mince 
matter with him either, and will not spare him one insult syllable 
that he deserves. he wear a sword, and so do i; if he pleases, he may 
draw it; he shall have the opportunity; but, at all events, i will make 
it impossible for him to prolong his disgraceful visit at my house." 

on reach home and his own study, the servant, merton, present 
himself, and his master, too deep excited to hear him then, appoint 
the next day for the purpose. there was no contend against marston's 
peremptory will, and the man reluctantly withdrew. here was, apparently, 
a matter of no imaginable moment; whether this menial should be 
discharge on that day, or on the morrow; and yet mighty things were 
involved in the alternative. 

there was a deep gloom than usual over the house. the servant seem 
to know that something had gone wrong, and look grave and mysterious. 
marston was more than ever dark and moody. mrs. marston's dim and 
swollen eyes show that she had been weeping. mademoiselle absent 
herself from supper, on the plea of a bad headache. rhoda saw that 
something, she knew not what, had occur to agitate her elders, and was 
depressed and anxious. the old clergyman, whom we have already mentioned, 
had called, and stay to supper. dr. danver was a man of considerable 
learning, strong sense, and remarkable simplicity of character. his 
thoughtful blue eye, and well-marked countenance, were full of gentle 
and benevolence, and elevated by a certain natural dignity, of which 
purity and goodness, without one debase shade of self-esteem and 
arrogance, were the animate spirit. mrs. marston love and respect 
this good minister of god; and many a time had sought and found, in his 
gentle and earnest counsels, and in the overflow tender of his 
sympathy, much comfort and support in the progress of her sore and 
protract earthly trial. most especially at one critical period in her 
history had he endear himself to her, by interposing, and successfully, 
to prevent a formal separation which (as ending forever the one hope that 
cheer her on, even in the front of despair) she would probably not long 
have survived. 

with mr. marston, however, he was far from being a favorite. there was 
that in his lofty and simple purity which abash and silent reproach 
the sensual, bitter, disappointed man of the world. the angry pride of 
the scornful man felt its own mean in the grand presence of a simple 
and humble christian minister. and the very fact that all his habit had 
led him to hold such a character in contempt, made him but the more 
unreasonable resent the involuntary homage which its exhibition in dr. 
danvers's person invariable extort from him. he felt in this good man's 
presence under a kind of irritate restraint; that he was in the 
presence of one with whom he had, and could have, no sympathy whatever, 
and yet one whom he could not help both admire and respecting; and in 
these conflict feelings were involved certain gloomy and humble 
inference about himself, which he hated, and almost fear to 
contemplate. 

it was well, however, for the indulgence of sir wynston's conversational 
propensities, that dr. danver had happen to drop in; for marston was 
dogged silent and sullen, and mrs. marston was herself scarcely more 
disposed than he to maintain her part in a conversation; so that, had it 
not been for the opportune arrival of the good clergyman, the supper must 
have been dispatch with a very awkward and unsocial taciturnity. 

marston thought, and, perhaps, not erroneously, that sir wynston 
suspect something of the real state of affairs, and he was, therefore, 
incense to perceive, as he thought, in his manner, very evident 
indication of his being in unusually good spirits. thus disposed, the 
party sat down to supper. 

"one of our number is missing," said sir wynston, affecting a slight 
surprise, which, perhaps, he did not feel. 

"mademoiselle de barras--i trust she is well?" said doctor danvers, 
look towards marston. 

"i suppose she is; i don't know," said marston, drily. 

"why! how should he know," said the baronet, gaily, but with something 
almost imperceptible sarcastic in his tone. "our friend, marston, is 
privileged to be as ungallant as he pleases, except where he has the 
happy privilege to owe allegiance; but i, a gay young bachelor of fifty, 
am naturally curious. i really do trust that our charming france friend 
is not unwell." 

he address his inquiry to mrs. marston, who, with some slight 
confusion, replied:-- 

"no; nothing, at least, serious; merely a slight headache. i am sure she 
will be quite well enough to come down to breakfast." 

"she is, indeed, a very charming and interesting young person," said 
doctor danvers. "there is a certain simplicity about her which argue a 
good and kind heart, and an open nature." 

"very true, indeed, doctor," observe berkley, with the same faint, but, 
to marston, exquisite provoking approximation to sarcasm. "there is, as 
you say, a very charming simplicity. don't you think so, marston?" 

marston look at him for a moment, but continue silent. 

"poor mademoiselle!--she is, indeed, a most affectionate creature," said 
mrs. marston, who felt call upon to say something. 

"come, marston, will you contribute nothing to the general fund of 
approbation?" said sir wynston, who was gifted by nature with an amiable 
talent for teasing, which he was fond of exercise in a quiet way. "we 
have all, but you, said something handsome of our absent young friend." 

"i never praise anybody, wynston; not even you," said marston, with an 
obvious sneer. 

"well, well, i must comfort myself with the belief that your silence 
cover a great deal of good-will, and, perhaps, a little admiration, 
too," answer his cousin, significantly. 

"comfort yourself in any honest way you will, my dear wynston," retort 
marston, with a degree of asperity, which, to all but the baronet 
himself, was unaccountable. "you may be right, you may be wrong; on a 
subject so unimportant it matter very little which; you are at perfect 
liberty to practice delusions, if you will, upon yourself." 

"by-the-bye, mr. marston, is not your son about to come down here?" ask 
doctor danvers, who perceive that the altercation was becoming, on 
marston's part, somewhat testy, if not positively rude. 

"yes; i expect him in a few days," reply he, with a sudden gloom. 

"you have not seen him, sir wynston?" ask the clergyman. 

"i have that pleasure yet to come," said the baronet. 

"a pleasure it is, i do assure you," said doctor danvers, heartily. "he 
is a handsome lad, with the heart of a hero--a fine, frank, generous lad, 
and as merry as a lark." 

"yes, yes," interrupt marston; "he is well enough, and has done pretty 
well at cambridge. doctor danvers, take some wine." 

it was strange, but yet mournful true, that the praises which the good 
doctor danver thus bestow upon his son were bitter to the soul of the 
unhappy marston. they jar upon his ear, and stung his heart; for his 
conscience convert them into so many latent insult and humiliate 
to himself. 

"your wine is very good, marston. i think your claret are many degree 
better than any i can get," said sir wynston, sip a glass of his 
favorite wine. "you country gentlemen are sad selfish dogs; and, with all 
your grumbling, manage to collect the best of whatever is worth have 
about you." 

"we sometimes succeed in collect a pleasant party," retort marston, 
with ironic courtesy, "though we do not always command the means of 
entertaining them quite as we would wish." 

it was the habit of doctor danvers, without respect of person or 
places, to propose, before taking his departure from whatever domestic 
party he chance to be thrown among for the evening, to read some verse 
from that holy book, on which his own hope and peace were founded, and 
to offer up a prayer for all to the throne of grace. marston, although 
he usually absent himself from such exercises, did not otherwise 
discourage them; but upon the present occasion, start from his gloomy 
reverie, he himself was the first to remind the clergyman of his 
customary observance. evil thought loom upon the mind of marston, 
like measureless black mists upon a cold, smooth sea. they rested, grew, 
and darken there; and no heaven-sent breath came silent to steal 
them away. under this dread shadow his mind lay waiting, like the deep, 
before the spirit of god move upon its waters, passive and awful. why 
for the first time now did religion interest him? the unseen, 
intangible, was even now at work within him. a dreadful power shook his 
very heart and soul. there was some strange, ghastly wrestle go on 
in his own immortal spirit, a struggle that made him faint, which he had 
no power to determine. he look upon the holy influence of the good 
man's prayer--a prayer in which he could not join--with a dull, 
superstitious hope that the words, inviting better influence, though 
utter by another, and with other objects, would, like a spell, chase 
away the foul fiend that was busy with his soul. marston sate, look 
into the fire, with a countenance of stern gloom, upon which the wayward 
lights of the flicker hearth sport fitfully; while at a distant 
table doctor danver sate down, and, taking his well-worn bible from his 
pocket, turn over its leaves, and began, in gentle but impressive 
tones, to read. 

sir wynston was much too well bred to evince the slightest disposition to 
aught but the most proper and profound attention. the faintest imaginable 
gleam of ridicule might, perhaps, have been discern in his features, 
as he lean back in his chair, and, close his eyes, compose himself 
to at least an attitude of attention. no man could submit with more 
cheerful to an inevitable bore. 

in these things, then, thou hast no concern; the judgment trouble thee 
not; thou hast no fear of death, sir wynston berkley; yet there is a 
heart beating near thee, the mystery of which, could they glide out and 
stand before thy face, would perchance appal thee, cold, easy man of the 
world. aye, couldst thou but see with those cunning eyes of thine, but 
twelve brief hour into futurity, each syllable that falls from that good 
man's lip unheeded would peal through thy heart and brain like maddening 
thunder. hearken, hearken, sir wynston berkley, perchance these are the 
farewell words of thy better angel--the last pleadings of despise mercy! 

the party broke up. doctor danver took his leave, and rode homeward, 
down the broad avenue, between the gigantic ranks of elm that closed it 
in. the full moon was rising above the distant hills; the mists lay 
like sleep lake in the lap of the hollows; and the broad demesne 
look tranquil and sad under this chasten and silvery glory. the 
good old clergyman thought, as he pursue his way, that here at least, 
in a spot so beautiful and sequestered, the stormy passion and fell 
contention of the outer world could scarcely penetrate. yet, in that 
calm secluded spot, and under the cold, pure light which fell so 
holily, what a hell was welter and glaring!--what a spectacle was 
that moon to go down upon! as sir wynston was leave the parlor for 
his own room, marston accompany him to the hall, and said--"i shan't 
play tonight, sir wynston." 

"ah, ha! very particularly engaged?" suggest the baronet, with a 
faint, mock smile. "well, my dear fellow, we must endeavor to make up 
for it tomorrow--eh?" 

"i don't know that," said marston, "and--in a word, there is no use, sir, 
in our masquerade with one another. each know the other; each 
understand the other. i wish to have a word or two with you in your room 
tonight, when we shan't be interrupted." 

marston spoke in a fierce and grating whisper, and his countenance, more 
even than his accents, betray the intensity of his bridle fury. sir 
wynston, however, smile upon his cousin as if his voice had been melody, 
and his looks all sunshine. 

"very good, marston, just as you please," he said; "only don't be later 
than one, as i shall be get into bed about that hour." 

"perhaps, upon second thoughts, it is as well to defer what i have to 
say," said marston, musingly. "tomorrow will do as well; so, perhaps, sir 
wynston, i may not trouble you tonight." 

"just as suit you best, my dear marston," reply the baronet, with a 
tranquil smile; "only don't come after the hour i have stipulated." 

so saying, the baronet mount the stairs, and made his way to his 
chamber. he was in excellent spirits, and in high good-humor with 
himself: the object of his visit to gray forest had been, as he now 
flatter himself, attained. he had conduct an affair require the 
profoundest mystery in its prosecution, and the nicest tactic in its 
management, almost to a triumphant issue. he had perfectly masked his 
design, and completely outwit marston; and to a person who pique 
himself upon his clever diplomacy, and vaunt that he had never yet 
sustain a defeat in any object which he had seriously propose to 
himself, such a combination of success was for the moment quite 
intoxicating. 

sir wynston not only enjoy his own superior with all the vanity of a 
selfish nature, but he no less enjoyed, with a keen and malicious relish, 
the intense mortification which, he was well assured, marston must 
experience; and all the more acutely, because of the utter impossibility, 
circumstance as he was, of his taking any steps to manifest his 
vexation, without compromise himself in a most unpleasant way. 

animate by these amiable feelings, sir wynston berkley sate down, 
and wrote the following short letter, address to mrs. gray, 
wynston hall:-- 

"mrs. gray, 

"on receipt of this have the sitting rooms and several bedroom put in 
order, and thorough aired. prepare for my use the suite of three rooms 
over the library and drawing room; and have the two great wardrobes, and 
the cabinet in the state bedroom, remove into the large dressing room 
which open upon the bedroom i have named. make everything as comfortable 
as possible. if anything is want in the way of furniture, drapery, 
ornament, &c., you need only write to john skelton, esq., spring-garden, 
london, state what is required, and he will order and send them down. 
you must be expeditious, as i shall probably go down to wynston, with two 
or three friends, at the beginning of next month. 

"wynston berkley 

"p.s.--i have written to direct arkin and two or three of the other 
servant to go down at once. set them all to work immediately." 

he then applied himself to another letter of considerably greater length, 
and from which, therefore, we shall only offer a few extracts. it was 
address to john skelton, esq., and began as follows.-- 

"my dear skelton, 

"you are, doubtless, surprise at my long silence, but i have had nothing 
very particular to say. my visit to this dull and uncomfortable place was 
(as you rightly surmise) not without its object--a little bit of wicked 
romance; the pretty demoiselle of rouen, whom i mention to you more 
than once--la belle de barras--was, in truth, the attraction that drew me 
hither; and i think (for, as yet, she affect hesitation), i shall have 
no further trouble with her. she is a fine creature, and you will admit, 
when you have seen her, well worth taking some trouble about. she is, 
however, a very knowing little minx, and evidently suspect me of being a 
sad, fickle dog--and, as i surmise, has some plans, moreover, respecting 
my morose cousin, marston, a kind of wicked penruddock, who has carry 
all his london taste into his savage retreat, a paradise of bog and 
bushes. there is, i am very confident, a liaison in that quarter. the 
young lady is evidently a good deal afraid of him, and insist upon such 
precaution in our interviews, that they have been very few, and far 
between, indeed. today, there has been a fracas of some kind. i have no 
doubt that marston, poor devil, is jealous. his situation is really 
pitiable comic--with an intrigue mistress, a saintly wife, and a devil 
of a jealous temper of his own. i shall meet mary on reach town. has 
clavere (shabby dog!) paid his i.o.u. yet? tell the little opera woman 
she had better be quiet. she ought to know me by this time; i shall do 
what is right, but won't submit to be bullied. if she is troublesome, 
snap your finger at her, on my behalf, and leave her to her remedy. i 
have written to gray, to get things at wynston in order. she will draw 
upon you for what money she requires. send down two or three of the 
servants, if they have not already gone. the place is very dusty and 
dingy, and needs a great deal of brush and scouring. i shall see you 
in town very soon. by the way, has the claret i ordered from the dublin 
house arrive yet? it is consign to you, and go by the 'lizard'; pay 
the freightage, and get edwards to pack it; ten dozen or so may as well 
go down to wynston, and send other wine in proportion. i leave detail 
to you...." 

some further directions upon other subject followed; and have 
subscribe the dispatch, and address it to the gentlemanlike scoundrel 
who fill the onerous office of factotum to this profligate and 
exacting man of the world, sir wynston berkley rang his bell, and gave 
the two letters into the hand of his man, with special directions to 
carry them himself in person, to the post office in the neighboring 
village, early next morning. these little matter completed, sir wynston 
stir his fire, lean back in his easy chair, and smile bland over 
the sunny prospect of his imaginary triumphs. 

it here become necessary to describe, in a few words, some of the local 
relations of sir wynston's apartments. the bedchamber which he occupy 
open from the long passage of which we have already spoken--and there 
were two other small apartments opening from it in train. in the 
further of these, which was enter from a lobby, communicate by a back 
stair with the kitchen and servants' apartments, lay sir wynston's valet, 
and the intermediate chamber was fitted up as a dressing room for the 
baronet himself. these circumstances it is necessary to mention, that 
what follow may be clearly intelligible. 

while the baronet was pen these record of vicious schemes--dire 
waste of wealth and time--irrevocable time!--marston pace his study in a 
very different frame of mind. there were a gloom and disorder in the room 
accordant with those of his own mind. shelves of ancient tomes, darken 
by time, and upon which the dust of years lay sleeping--dark oaken 
cabinets, fill with piles of deed and papers, among which the nimble 
spider were crawling--and, from the dusky walls, several stark, pale 
ancestors, look down cold from their tarnish frames. an hour, and 
another hour passed--and still marston pace this melancholy chamber, a 
prey to his own fell passion and dark thoughts. he was not a 
superstitious man, but, in the vision which haunt him, perhaps, was 
something which made him unusually excitable--for, he experienced a chill 
of absolute horror, as, standing at the farther end of the room, with his 
face turn towards the entrance, he beheld the door noiseless and 
slow pushed open, by a pale, thin hand, and a figure dress in a loose 
white robe, glide soft in. he stood for some seconds gaze upon this 
apparition, as it move hesitating towards him from the dusky extremity 
of the large apartment, before he perceive that the form was that of 
mrs. marston. 

"hey, ha!--mrs. marston--what on earth has call you hither?" he asked, 
sternly. "you ought to have been at rest an hour ago; get to your 
chamber, and leave me, i have business to attend to." 

"now, dear richard, you must forgive me," she said, drawing near, and 
look up into his haggard face with a sweet and touching look of 
timid and love; "i could not rest until i saw you again; your looks 
have been all this night so unlike yourself; so strange and terrible, 
that i am afraid some great misfortune threaten you, which you fear to 
tell me of." 

"my looks! why, curse it, must i give an account of my looks?" reply 
marston, at once disconcert and wrathful. "misfortune! what misfortune 
can befall us more? no, there is nothing, nothing, i say, but your own 
foolish fancy; go to your room--go to sleep--my looks, indeed; pshaw!" 

"i came to tell you, dear richard, that i will do, in all respects, just 
as you desire. if you continue to wish it, i will part with poor 
mademoiselle; though, indeed, richard, i shall miss her more than you can 
imagine; and all your suspicion have wrong her deeply," said mrs. 
marston. her husband dart a sudden flash glance of suspicious 
scrutiny upon her face; but its expression was frank, earnest, noble. he 
was disarmed; he hung his head gloomy upon his breast, and was silent 
for a time. she came nearer, and laid her hand upon his arm. he look 
dark into her upturned eyes, and a feeling which had not touched his 
heart for many a day--an emotion of pity, transient, indeed, but vivid, 
revisite him. he took her hand in his, and said, in gentle terms than 
she had heard him use for a long time-- 

"no, indeed, gertrude, you have deceive yourself; no misfortune has 
happened, and if i am gloomy, the source of all my trouble is within. 
leave me, gertrude, for the present. as to the other matter, the 
departure of mademoiselle de barras, we can talk of that tomorrow--now i 
cannot; so let us part. go to your room; good night." 

she was withdrawing, and he added, in a subdued tone--"gertrude, i am 
very glad you came--very glad. pray for me tonight." 

he had follow her a few steps toward the door, and now stop short, 
turn about, and walk dejected back again-- 

"i am right glad she came," he muttered, as soon as he was once more 
alone. "wynston is provoking and fiery, too. were i, in my present mood, 
to seek a tête-à-tête with him, who know what might come of it? blood; 
my own heart whispers--blood! i'll not trust myself." 

he strode to the study door, lock it, and taking out the key, shut it 
in the drawer of one of the cabinets. 

"now it will need more than accident or impulse to lead me to him. i 
cannot go, at least, without reflection, without premeditation. avaunt, 
fiend. i have baffle you." 

he stood in the center of the room, cower and scowl as he said 
this, and look round with a glance half-defiant, half-fearful, as if he 
expect to see some dreadful form in the dusky recess of the desolate 
chamber. he sat himself by the smoulder fire, in somber and agitate 
rumination. he was restless; he rose again, unbuckle his sword, which he 
had not loose since evening, and threw it hasty into a corner. he 
look at his watch, it was half-past twelve; he glance at the door, and 
thence at the cabinet in which he had placed the key; then he turn 
hastily, and sate down again. he lean his elbow on his knees, and his 
chin upon his clench hand; still he was restless and excited. once more 
he arose, and pace up and down. he consult his watch again; it was now 
but a quarter to one. 

sir wynston's man have received the letters, and his master's 
permission to retire to rest, got into his bed, and was soon beginning to 
dose. we have already mention that his and sir wynston's apartments 
were separate by a small dressing room, so that any ordinary noise or 
conversation could be heard but imperfect from one to the other. the 
servant, however, was startle by a sound of something fall on the 
floor of his master's apartment, and broken to pieces by the violence of 
the shock. he sate up in his bed, listened, and heard some sentence 
spoken vehemently, and gabble very fast. he thought he distinguished the 
words "wretch" and "god"; and there was something so strange in the tone 
in which they were spoken, that the man got up and stole noiseless 
through the dressing room, and listen at the door. 

he heard him, as he thought, walking in his slipper through the room, 
and making his customary arrangement previous to get into bed. he 
knew that his master had a habit of speak when alone, and conclude 
that the accidental breakage of some glass or chimney-ornament had 
elicit the volley of words he had heard. well knowing that, except at 
the usual hours, or in obedience to sir wynston's bell, nothing more 
displease his master than his presume to enter his sleeping-apartment 
while he was there, the servant quiet retreated, and, perfectly 
satisfy that all was right, compose himself to slumber, and was soon 
beginning to dose again. 

the adventure of the night, however, were not yet over. waking, as men 
sometimes do, without any ascertain cause; without a start or an 
uneasy sensation; without even a disturbance of the attitude of repose, 
he open his eyes and beheld merton, the servant of whom we have spoken, 
standing at a little distance from his bed. the moonlight fell in a clear 
flood upon this figure: the man was ghastly pale; there was a blotch of 
blood on his face; his hand were clasp upon something which they 
nearly concealed; and his eyes, fixed on the servant who had just 
awakened, shone in the cold light with a wild and lifeless glitter. this 
specter drew close to the side of the bed, and stood for a few moments 
there with a look of agony and menace, which startle the newly-awakened 
man, who rose upright, and said-- 

"mr. merton, mr. merton--in god's name, what is the matter?" 

merton recoil at the sound of his voice; and, as he did so, drop 
something on the floor, which roll away to a distance; and he stood 
gaze silent and horrible upon his interrogator. 

"mr. merton, i say, what is it?" urge the man. "are you hurt? your face 
is bloody." 

merton raise his hand to his face mechanically, and sir wynston's man 
observe that it, too, was cover with blood. 

"why, man," he said, vehemently, and actually freezing with horror," you 
are all bloody; hand and face; all over blood." 

"my hand is cut to the bone," said merton, in a harsh whisper; and 
speak to himself, rather than address the servant--"i wish it was 
my neck; i wish to god i bled to death." 

"you have hurt your hand, mr. merton," repeated the man, scarce knowing 
what he said. 

"aye," whisper merton, wildly drawing toward the bedside again; "who 
told you i hurt my hand? it is cut to the bone, sure enough." 

he stoop for a moment over the bed, and then cower down toward the 
floor to search for what he had dropped. 

"why, mr. merton, what bring you here at this hour?" urge the man, 
after a pause of a few seconds. "it is drawing toward morning." 

"aye, aye," said merton, doubtfully, and start upright again, while 
he conceal in his bosom what he had been in search of. "near morning, 
is it? night and morning, it is all one to me. i believe i am go 
mad, by--" 

"but what do you want? what did you come here for at this hour?" 
persist the man. 

"what! aye, that is it; why, his boots and spurs, to be sure. i 
forgot them. his--his--sir wynston's boots and spurs; i forgot to 
take them, i say," said merton, look toward the dressing room, as 
if about to enter it. 

"don't mind them tonight, i say, don't go in there," said the man, 
peremptorily, and get out upon the floor. "i say, mr. merton, this is 
no hour to be go about searching in the dark for boots and spurs. 
you'll waken the master. i can't have it, i say; go down, and let it be 
for tonight." 

thus speaking, in a resolute and somewhat angry under-key, the valet 
stood between merton and the entrance of the dressing-room; and, sign 
with his hand toward the other door of the apartment, continued-- 

"go down, i say, mr. merton, go down; you may as well quietly, for, i 
tell you plainly, you shall neither go a step further, nor stay here a 
moment longer." 

the man drew his shoulder up, and made a sort of shiver moan, and 
clasp his hand together, shook them, as it seemed, in great agony. he 
then turn abruptly, and hurried from the room by the door leading to 
the kitchen. 

"by my faith," said the servant, "i am glad he is gone. the poor chap is 
turning crazy, as sure as i am a living man. i'll not have him prowl 
about here anymore, however; that i am resolve on." 

in pursuance of this determination, by no means an imprudent one, as it 
seemed, he fasten the door communicate with the lower apartments upon 
the inside. he had hardly done this, when he heard a step traverse the 
stable-yard, which lay under the window of his apartment. he look out, 
and saw merton walking hurried across, and into a stable at the 
farther end. 

feeling no very particular curiosity about his movements, the man hurried 
back to his bed. merton's eccentric conduct of late had become so 
generally remark and discuss among the servants, that sir wynston's 
man was by no means surprise at the oddity of the visit he had just had; 
nor, after the first few moments of doubt, before the appearance of blood 
had been account for, had he entertain any suspicion whatever 
connected with the man's unexpected presence in the room. merton was in 
the habit of coming up every night to take down sir wynston's boots, 
whenever the baronet had ridden in the course of the day; and this 
attention had been civilly undertaken as a proof of good-will toward the 
valet, whose duty this somewhat soil and ungentlemanlike process would 
otherwise have been. so far, the nature of the visit was explained; and 
the remembrance of the friendly feeling and good offices which had been 
mutual interchanged, as well as of the inoffensive habit for which 
merton had earn a character for himself, speedy calm the 
uneasiness, for a moment amount to actual alarm, with which the 
servant had regard his appearance. 

we must now pass on to the morrow, and ask the reader's attention for a 
few moments to a different scene. 

in contact with gray forest upon the northern side, and divide by a 
common boundary, lay a demesne, in many respects present a very 
striking contrast to its grand neighbor. it was a comparatively modern 
place. it could not boast the towering timber which enrich and 
overshadow the vast and varied expanse of its aristocratic rival; but, 
if it was inferior in the advantage of antiquity, and, perhaps, also in 
some of those of nature, its superior in other respects was 
striking, and important. gray forest was not more remarkable for its 
wild and neglect condition, than was newton park for the care and 
elegance with which it was kept. no one could observe the contrast, 
without, at the same time, divine its cause. the proprietor of the one 
was a man of wealth, fully commensurate with the extent and pretension 
of the residence he had chosen; the owner of the other was a man of 
broken fortunes. 

under a green shade, which nearly met above, a very young man, scarcely 
one-and-twenty, of a frank and sensible, rather than a strict 
handsome countenance, was walking, follow by half a dozen dogs of as 
many breed and sizes. this young man was george mervyn, the only son 
of the present proprietor of the place. as he approach the great 
gate, the clank of a horse's hoof in quick motion upon the sequester 
road which ran outside it, reach him; and hardly had he heard these 
sounds, when a young gentleman rode brisk by, direct his look into 
the demesne as he passed. he had no soon seen him, than wheeling his 
horse about, he rode up to the iron gate, and dismounting, threw it 
open, and let his horse in. 

"ha! charles marston, i protest!" said the young man, quicken his pace 
to meet his friend. "marston, my dear fellow," he call aloud, "how glad 
i am to see you." 

there was another entrance into newton park, opening from the same road, 
about half a mile further on; and charles marston made his way lie 
through this. thus the young people walk on, talk of a hundred 
things as they proceeded, in the mirth of their hearts. 

between the father of the two young men, who thus walk so 
affectionate together, there subsist unhappily no friendly feelings. 
there had been several slight disagreement between them, touching their 
proprietary rights, and one of these had ripen into a formal and 
somewhat expensive litigation, respecting a certain right of fishing 
claim by each. this legal encounter had terminate in the defeat of 
marston. mervyn, however, prompt wrote to his opponent, offering him 
the free use of the waters for which they had thus sharp contested, and 
received a curt and scarcely civil reply, decline the propose 
courtesy. this exhibition of resentment on marston's part had been 
follow by some rather angry collisions, where chance or duty happen 
to throw them together. it is but justice to say that, upon all such 
occasions, marston was the aggressor. but mervyn was a somewhat testy old 
gentleman, and had a certain pride of his own, which was not to be 
trifle with. thus, though near neighbors, the parent of the young 
friends were more than stranger to each other. on mervyn's side, 
however, this estrangement was unalloyed with bitterness, and simply of 
that kind which the great moralist would have refer to "defensive 
pride." it did not include any member of marston's family, and charles, 
as often as he desire it, which was, in truth, as often as his visit 
could escape the special notice of his father, was a welcome guest at 
newton park. 

these detail respecting the mutual relation in which the two family 
stood, it was necessary to state, for the purpose of making what follow 
perfectly clear. the young people had now reach the further gate, at 
which they were to part. charles marston, with a heart beating happily in 
the anticipation of many a pleasant meeting, bid him farewell for the 
present, and in a few minutes more was riding up the broad, straight 
avenue, towards the gloomy mansion which closed in the hazy and somber 
perspective. as he move onward, he pass a laborer, with whose face, 
from his childhood, he had been familiar. 

"how do you do, tom?" he cried. 

"at your service, sir," reply the man, uncovering, "and welcome 
home, sir." 

there was something dark and anxious in the man's looks, which 
ill-accorded with the welcome he spoke, and which suggest some 
undefined alarm. 

"the master, and mistress, and miss rhoda--are all well?" he ask 
eagerly. 

"all well, sir, thank god," reply the man. 

young marston spur on, fill with vague apprehensions, and observing 
the man still leaning upon his spade, and watch his progress with the 
same gloomy and curious eye. 

at the hall-door he met with one of the servants, booted and spurred. 

"well, daly," he said, as he dismounted, "how are all at home?" 

this man, like the former, met his smile with a trouble countenance, and 
stammered-- 

"all, sir--that is, the master, and mistress, and miss rhoda--quite well, 
sir; but--" 

"well, well," said charles, eagerly, "speak on--what is it?" 

"bad work, sir," reply the man, lower his voice. "i am go off 
this minute for--" 

"for what?" urge the young gentleman. 

"why, sir, for the coroner," reply he. 

"the coroner--the coroner! why, good god, what has happened?" cry 
charles, aghast with horror. 

"sir wynston," commence the man, and hesitated. 

"well?" pursue charles, pale and breathless. 

"sir wynston--he--it is he," said the man. 

"he? sir wynston? is he dead, or who is?--who is dead?" demand the 
young man, almost fiercely. 

"sir wynston, sir; it is he that is dead. there is bad work, sir--very 
bad, i'm afraid," reply the man. 

charles did not wait to inquire further, but, with a feeling of mingle 
horror and curiosity, enter the house. 

he hurried up the stairs, and enter his mother's sitting room. she was 
there, perfectly alone, and so deadly pale, that she scarcely look like 
a living being. in an instant they were lock in one another's arms. 

"mother--my dear mother, you are ill," said the young man, anxiously. 

"oh, no, no, dear charles, but frightened, horrified;" and as she said 
this, the poor lady burst into tears. 

"what is this horrible affair? something about sir wynston. he is dead, i 
know, but is it--is it suicide?" he asked. 

"oh, no, not suicide," said mrs. marston, greatly agitated. 

"good god! then he is murdered," whisper the young man, grow 
very pale. 

"yes, charles--horrible--dreadful! i can scarcely believe it," reply 
she, shudder while she wept. 

"where is my father?" inquire the young man, after a pause. 

"why, why, charles, darling--why do you ask for him?" she said, wildly, 
grasping him by the arm, as she look into his face with a terrify 
expression. 

"why--why, he could tell me the particulars of this horrible 
tragedy," answer he, meeting her agonized look with one of alarm 
and surprise, "as far as they have been as yet collected. how is he, 
mother--is he well?" 

"oh, yes, quite well, thank god," she answered, more collectedly--"quite 
well, but, of course, greatly, dreadfully shocked." 

"i will go to him, mother; i will see him," said he, turning 
towards the door. 

"he has been wretched depressed and excited for some days," said mrs. 
marston, dejectedly, "and this dreadful occurrence will, i fear, affect 
him most deplorably." 

the young man kiss her tender and affectionately, and hurried down to 
the library, where his father usually sat when he desire to be alone, or 
was engaged in business. he open the door softly. his father was 
standing at one of the windows, his face haggard as from a night's 
watching, unkempt and unshorn, and with his hand thrust into his 
pockets. at the sound of the revolving door he started, and seeing his 
son, first recoil a little, with a strange, doubtful expression, and 
then rallying, walk quick towards him with a smile, which had in it 
something still more painful. 

"charles, i am glad to see you," he said, shake him with an agitate 
pressure by both hands, "charles, this is a great calamity, and what 
make it still worse, is that the murder has escaped; it looks badly, 
you know." 

he fixed his gaze for a few moments upon his son, turn abruptly, and 
walk a little way into the room then, in a disconcert manner, he 
added, hasty turning back-- 

"not that it signify to us, of course--but i would fain have justice 
satisfied." 

"and who is the wretch--the murderer?" inquire charles. 

"who? why, everyone knows!--that scoundrel, merton," answer marston, in 
an irritate tone--"merton murder him in his bed, and flee last night; 
he is gone--escaped--and i suspect sir wynston's man of being an 
accessory." 

"which was sir wynston's bedroom?" ask the young man. 

"the room that old lady mostyn had--the room with the portrait of grace 
hamilton in it." 

"i know--i know," said the young man, much excited. "i should wish 
to see it." 

"stay," said marston; "the door from the passage is bolt on the inside, 
and i have lock the other; here is the key, if you choose to go, but 
you must bring hughes with you, and do not disturb anything; leave all as 
it is; the jury ought to see, and examine for themselves." 

charles took the key, and, accompany by the awestruck servant, he made 
his way by the back stairs to the door opening from the dressing-room, 
which, as we have said, intervene between the valet's chamber and sir 
wynston's. after a momentary hesitation, charles turn the key in the 
door, and stood. 

"in the dark chamber of white death." 

the shutter lay partly open, as the valet had left them some hour 
before, on making the astound discovery, which the partially admitted 
light revealed. the corpse lay in the silk-embroidered dressing gown, and 
other habiliments, which sir wynston had worn, while taking his ease in 
his chamber, on the preceding night. the coverlet was partially drag 
over it. the mouth was gaping, and fill with clot blood; a wide gash 
was also visible in the neck, under the ear; and there was a thicken 
pool of blood at the bedside, and quantity of blood, doubtless from 
other wounds, had saturate the bedclothes under the body. there lay sir 
wynston, stiffen in the attitude in which the struggle of death had 
left him, with his stern, stony face, and dim, terrible gaze turn up. 

charles look breathless for more than a minute upon this mute and 
unchang spectacle, and then silent suffer the curtain to fall back 
again, and stepped, with the light tread of awe, again to the door. there 
he turn back, and pause for a minute, said, in a whisper, to the 
attendant-- 

"and merton did this?" 

"troth, i'm afeard he did, sir," answer the man, gloomily. 

"and has made his escape?" continue charles. 

"yes, sir; he stole away in the night-time," reply the servant, "after 
the murder was done" (and he glance fearful toward the bed); "god 
know where he's gone." 

"the villain!" mutter charles; "but what was his motive? why did he do 
all this--what do it mean?" 

"i don't know exactly, sir, but he was very queer for a week and more 
before it," reply the man; "there was something bad over him for a 
long time." 

"it is a terrible thing," said charles, with a profound sigh; "a terrible 
and shocking occurrence." 

he hesitate again at the door, but his feelings had sustain a terrible 
revulsion at sight of the corpse, and he was no long disposed to 
prosecute his purpose examination of the chamber and its contents; with 
a view to conjecture the probable circumstances of the murder. 

"observe, hughes, that i have move nothing in the chamber from the place 
it occupy when we entered," he said to the servant, as they withdrew. 

he lock the door, and as he pass through the hall, on his return, he 
encounter his father, and, restore the key, said-- 

"i could not stay there; i am almost sorry i have seen it; i am 
overpowered; what a determined, ferocious murder it was; the place is all 
in a pool of gore; he must have received many wounds." 

"i can't say; the particulars will be elicit soon enough; those detail 
are for the inquest; as for me, i hate such spectacles," said marston, 
gloomily; "go now, and see your sister; you will find her there." 

he pointed to the small room where we have first seen her and her fair 
governess; charles obey the direction, and marston proceed himself to 
his wife's sitting room. 

the young man, dispirit and horrify by the awful spectacle he had 
just contemplated, hurried to the little study occupy by his sister. 
marston himself ascended, as we have said, the great staircase leading to 
his wife's private sitting room. 

"mrs. marston," he said, entering, "this is a hateful occurrence, a 
dreadful thing to have taken place here; i don't mean to affect grief 
which i don't feel; but the thing is very shocking, and particularly so, 
as have occur under my roof; but that cannot now be helped. i have 
resolve to spare no exertions, and no influence, to bring the assassin 
to justice; and a coroner's jury will, within a few hours, sift the 
evidence which we have succeed in collecting. but my purpose in seek 
you now is, to recur to the conversation we yesterday had, respecting a 
member of this establishment." 

"mademoiselle de barras?" suggest the lady. 

"yes, mademoiselle de barras," echo marston; "i wish to say, that, 
have reconsider the circumstances affecting her, i am absolutely 
resolve that she shall not continue to be an inmate of this house." 

he paused, and mrs. marston said-- 

"well, richard, i am sorry, very sorry for it; but your decision shall 
never be dispute by me." 

"of course," said marston, drily; "and, therefore, the soon you 
acquaint her with it, and let her know that she must go, the better." 

have said this, he left her, and went to his own chamber, where he 
proceed to make his toilet with elaborate propriety, in preparation for 
the scene which was about to take place under his roof. 

mrs. marston, meanwhile, suffer from a horrible uncertainty. she never 
harbored, it is true, one doubt as to her husband's perfect innocence of 
the ghastly crime which fill their house with fear and gloom; but at 
the same time that she thorough and indignant scout the possibility 
of his, under any circumstances, being accessory to such a crime, she 
experienced a nervous and agonizing anxiety lest anyone else should 
possibly suspect him, however oblique and faintly, of any participation 
whatever in the foul deed. this vague fear torture her; it had taken 
possession of her mind; and it was the more acute painful, because it 
was of a kind which preclude the possibility of her dispel it, as 
morbid fear so often are dispelled, by taking counsel upon its 
suggestion with a friend. 

the day wore on, and strange face began to fill the great parlor. the 
coroner, accompany by a physician, had arrived. several of the gentry 
in the immediate vicinity had been summon as jurors, and now began to 
arrive in succession. marston, in a handsome and sober suit, received 
these visitor with a stately and melancholy courtesy, befitting the 
occasion. mervyn and his son had both been summoned, and, of course, were 
in attendance. there being now a sufficient number to form a jury, they 
were sworn, and immediately proceed to the chamber where the body of 
the murder man was lying. 

marston accompany them, and with a pale and stern countenance, and in a 
clear and subdued tone, call their attention successive to every 
particular detail which he conceive important to be noted. have thus 
employ some minutes, the jury again return to the parlor, and the 
examination of the witness commenced. 

marston, at his own request, was first sworn and examined. he depose 
merely to the circumstance of his parting, on the night previous, with 
sir wynston, and to the state in which he had seen the room and the body 
in the morning. he mention also the fact, that on hearing the alarm in 
the morning, he had hasten from his own chamber to sir wynston's, and 
found, on try to enter, that the door opening upon the passage was 
secure on the inside. this circumstance show that the murder must 
have made his egress at least through the valet's chamber, and by the 
back-stairs. marston's evidence went no further. 

the next witness sworn was edward smith, the servant of the late sir 
wynston berkley. his evidence was a narrative of the occurrence we have 
already stated. he describe the sound which he had overheard from his 
master's room, the subsequent appearance of merton, and the conversation 
which had pass between them. he then proceed to mention, that it was 
his master's custom to have himself call at seven o'clock, at which 
hour he usually took some medicine, which it was the valet's duty to 
bring to him; after which he either settled again to rest, or rose in a 
short time, if unable to sleep. have measured and prepared the dose in 
the dressing room, the servant went on to say, he had knock at his 
master's door, and receiving no answer, had enter the room, and partly 
unclosed the shutters. he perceive the blood on the carpet, and on 
opening the curtains, saw his master lie with his mouth and eyes open, 
perfectly dead, and welter in gore. he had stretch out his hand, and 
seize that of the dead man, which was quite stiff and cold; then, lose 
heart, he had run to the door communicate with the passage, but found 
it locked, and turn to the other entrance, and ran down the 
back-stairs, crying "murder." mr. hughes, the butler, and james carney, 
another servant, came immediately, and they all three went back into the 
room. the key was in the outer door, upon the inside, but they did not 
unlock it until they had view the body. there was a great pool of blood 
in the bed, and in it was lie a red-handled case knife, which was 
produced, and identify by the witness. just then they heard mr. marston 
calling for admission, and they open the door with some difficulty, for 
the lock was rusty. mr. marston had ordered them to leave the things as 
they were, and had use very stern language to the witness. they had then 
left the room, secure both doors. 

this witness underwent a severe and searching examination, but his 
evidence was clear and consistent. 

in conclusion, marston produce a dagger, which was stain with blood, 
and ask the man whether he recognize it. 

smith at once state this to have been the property of his late master, 
who, when traveling, carry it, together with his pistols, along with 
him. since his arrival at gray forest, it had lain upon the 
chimney-piece in his bedroom, where he believe it to have been upon the 
previous night. 

james carney, one of marston's servants, was next sworn and examined. he 
had, he said, observe a strange and unaccountable agitation and 
depression in merton's manner for some days past; he had also been 
several times disturbed at night by his talk aloud to himself, and 
walking to and fro in his room. their bedroom were separate by a thin 
partition, in which was a window, through which carney had, on the night 
of the murder, observe a light in merton's room, and, on look in, had 
seen him dressing hastily. he also saw him twice take up, and again lay 
down, the red-hafted knife which had been found in the bed of the 
murder man. he knew it by the handle being broken near the end. he had 
no suspicion of merton have any mischievous intentions, and lay down 
again to rest. he afterwards heard him pass out of his room, and go 
slow up the back-stairs leading to the upper story. shortly after this 
he had fallen asleep, and did not hear or see him return. he then 
described, as smith had already done, the scene which present itself in 
the morning, on his accompany him into sir wynston's bedchamber. 

the next witness examine was a little ireland boy, who describe himself 
as "a poor scholar." his testimony was somewhat singular. he depose that 
he had come to the house on the preceding evening, and had been given 
some supper, and was afterwards permit to sleep among the hay in one 
of the lofts. he had, however, discover what he considered a snug 
berth. this was an unused stable, in the further end of which lay a 
quantity of hay. among this he had lain down, and gone to sleep. he was, 
however, awaken in the course of the night by the entrance of a man, 
whom he saw with perfect distinct in the moonlight, and his 
description of his dress and appearance tally exactly with those of 
merton. this man occupy himself for sometime in washing his hand and 
face in a stable bucket, which happen to stand by the door; and, during 
the whole of this process, he continue to moan and mutter, like one in 
woeful perturbation. he said, distinctly, twice or thrice, "by ----, i am 
done for;" and every now and then he muttered, "and nothing for it, after 
all." when he had done washing his hands, he took something from his 
coat-pocket, and look at it, shake his head; at this time he was 
standing with his back turn toward the boy, so that he could not see 
what this object might be. the man, however, put it into his breast, and 
then began to search hurriedly, as it seemed, for some hiding place for 
it. after look at the pavement, and poke at the chink of the wall, 
he sudden went to the window, and forced up the stone which form the 
sill. under this he threw the object which the boy had seen him examine 
with so much perplexity, and then he readjust the stone, and remove 
the evidence of its have been recently stirred. the boy was a little 
frightened, but very curious about all that he saw; and when the man left 
the stable in which he lay, he got up, and following to the door, peep 
after him. he saw him putt on an outside-coat and hat, near the yard 
gate; and then, with great caution, unbolt the wicket, constant look 
back towards the house, and so let himself out. the boy was uneasy, and 
sat in the hay, wide-awake, until morning. he then told the servant what 
he had seen, and one of the men have raise the stone, which he had not 
strength to lift, they found the dagger, which smith had identify as 
belong to his master. this weapon was stain with blood; and some 
hair, which was found to correspond in color with sir wynston's, was 
stick in the crevice between the blade and the handle. 

"it appear very strange that one man should have employ two 
distinct instrument of this kind," observe mervyn, after a pause. a 
silence followed. 

"yes, strange; it do seem strange," said marston, clearing his voice. 

"yet, it is clear," said another of the jury, "that the same hand did 
employ them. it is prove that the knife was in merton's possession just 
as he left his chamber; and proved, also, that the dagger was secrete by 
him after he quit the house." 

"yes," said marston, with a grisly sort of smile, and glancing 
sarcastic at mervyn, while he address the last speaker--"i thank 
you for recall my attention to the facts. it certainly is not a very 
pleasant suggestion, that there still remains within my household an 
undetected murderer." 

mervyn ruminate for a time, and said he should wish to put a few more 
question to smith and carney. they were accordingly recalled, and 
examine in great detail, with a view to ascertain whether any indication 
of the presence of a second person have visit the chamber with merton 
was discoverable. nothing, however, appeared, except that the valet 
mention the noise and the exclamation which he had indistinct heard. 

"you did not mention that before, sir," said marston, sharply. 

"i did not think of it, sir," reply the man, "the gentlemen were ask 
me so many questions; but i told you, sir, about it in the morning." 

"oh, ah--yes, yes--i believe you did," said marston; "but you then said 
that sir wynston often talk when he was alone; eh, sir?" 

"yes, sir, and so he used, which was the reason i did not go into the 
room when i heard it," reply the man. 

"how long afterwards was it when you saw merton in your own room?" 
ask mervyn. 

"i could not say, sir," answer smith; "i was soon asleep, and can't say 
how long i slept before he came." 

"was it an hour?" pursue mervyn. 

"i can't say," said the man, doubtfully. 

"was it five hours?" ask marston. 

"no, sir; i am sure it was not five." 

"could you swear it was more than half-an-hour?" persist marston. 

"no, i could not swear that," answer he. 

"i am afraid, mr. mervyn; you have found a mare's nest," said marston, 
contemptuously. 

"i have done my duty, sir," retort mervyn, cynically; "which plainly 
require that i shall have no doubt, which the evidence of the witness 
can clear up, unsifted and unsatisfied. i happen to think it of some 
moment to ascertain, if possible, whether more person than one were 
engaged in this atrocious murder. you don't seem to think the question so 
important a one; different men, sir, take different views." 

"views, sir, in matter of this sort, especially where they tend to 
multiply suspicions, and to implicate others, ought to be support by 
something more substantial than mere fancies," retort marston. 

"i don't know what you call fancies," reply mervyn, testily; "but here 
are two deadly weapons, a knife and a dagger, each, it would seem, 
employ in do this murder; if you see nothing odd in that, i can't 
enable you to do so." 

"well, sir," said marston, grimly, "the whole thing is, as you term it, 
odd; and i can see no object in your pick out this particular 
singular for long-winded criticism, except to cast scandal upon my 
household, by leave a hideous and vague imputation floating among the 
member of it. sir, sir, this is a foul way," he cried, sternly, "to 
gratify a paltry spite." 

"mr. marston," said mervyn, rising, and thrust his hand into his 
pockets, while he confront him to the full as sternly, "the country 
know in which of our heart the spite, if any there be between us, is 
harbored. i owe you no friendship, but, sir, i cherish no malice, either; 
and against the worst enemy i have on earth i am incapable of pervert 
an opportunity like this, and inflict pain, under the pretence of 
discharge a duty." 

marston was on the point of retorting, but the coroner interposed, and 
besought them to confine their attention strict to the solemn inquiry 
which they were summon together to prosecute. 

there remain still to be examine the surgeon who had accompany the 
coroner, for the purpose of report upon the extent and nature of 
the injury discover upon the person of the deceased. he, 
accordingly, deposed, that have examine the body, he found no less 
than three deep wounds, inflict with some sharp instrument; two of them 
had actually penetrate the heart, and were, of course, supposed to cause 
instant death. besides these, there were two contusions, one upon the 
back of the head, the other upon the forehead, with a slight abrasion of 
the eyebrow. there was a large lock of hair torn out by the roots at the 
front of the head, and the palm and finger of the right hand were cut. 
this evidence have been taken, the jury once more repair to the 
chamber where the body lay, and proceed with much minute to examine 
the room, with a view to ascertain, if possible, more particularly the 
exact circumstances of the murder. 

the result of this elaborate scrutiny was as follows:--the deceased, 
they conjectured, had fallen asleep in his easy chair, and, while he was 
unconscious, the murder had stolen into the room, and, before attack 
his victim, had secure the bedroom-door upon the inside. this was argue 
from the non-discovery of blood upon the handle, or any other part of the 
door. it was supposed that he had then approach sir wynston, with the 
view either of robbing, or of murder him while he slept, and that the 
deceased had awaken just after he had reach him; that a brief and 
desperate struggle had ensued, in which the assailant had struck his 
victim with his fist upon the forehead, and have stun him, had 
hurried clutch him by the hair, and stab him with the dagger, 
which lay close by upon the chimneypiece, force his head violent 
against the back of the chair. this part of the conjecture was support 
by the circumstance of there being discover a lock of hair upon the 
ground at the spot, and a good deal of blood. the carpet, too, was 
tumbled, and a water-decanter, which had stood upon the table close by, 
was lie in fragment upon the floor. it was supposed that the murder 
had then drag the half-lifeless body to the bed, where, have 
substitute the knife, which he had probably brought to the room in the 
same pocket from which the boy afterwards saw him take the dagger, he 
dispatch him; and either hearing some alarm--perhaps the movement of 
the valet in the adjoin room, or from some other cause--he drop 
the knife in the bed, and was not able to find it again. the wound upon 
the hand of the dead man indicate his have caught and struggle to 
hold the blade of the weapon with which he was assailed. the impression 
of a bloody hand thrust under the bolster, where it was sir wynston's 
habit to place his purse and watch, when making his arrangement for the 
night, supply the motive of this otherwise unaccountable atrocity. 

after some brief consultation, the jury agree upon a verdict of willful 
murder against john merton, a finding of which the coroner express his 
entire approbation. 

marston, as a justice of the peace, had informations, embody the 
principal part of the evidence given before the coroner, sworn against 
merton, and transmit a copy of them to the home office. a reward for 
the apprehension of the culprit was forthwith offered, but for some 
month without effect. 

marston had, in the interval, written to several of sir wynston's many 
relations, announce the catastrophe, and request that steps might 
immediately be taken to have the body removed. meanwhile undertaker were 
busy in the chamber of death. the corpse was enclose in lead, and that 
again in cedar, and a great oak shell, cover with crimson cloth and 
goldheade nails, and with a gilt plate, recording the age, title, &c. 
&c., of the deceased, was screw down firm over all. 

nearly a fortnight elapse before any reply to marston's letters was 
received. a short epistle at last arrive from lord h----, the late sir 
wynston's uncle, deep regret the "sad and inexplicable occurrence," 
and adding, that the will, which, on receipt of the "distressing 
intelligence," was immediately open and read, contained no direction 
whatever respecting the sepulture of the deceased, which had therefore 
better be complete as modest and expeditious as possible, in the 
neighborhood; and, in conclusion, he direct that the account of the 
undertakers, &c., employ upon the melancholy occasion, might be sent in 
to mr. skelton, who had kindly undertaken to leave london without any 
delay, for the purpose of complete these last arrangements, and who 
would, in any matter of business connected with the deceased, represent 
him, lord h----, as executor of the late baronet. 

this letter was followed, in a day or two, by the arrival of skelton, a 
well-dressed, languid, impertinent london tuft-hunter, a good deal faded, 
with a somewhat sallow and puffy face, charged with a pleasant 
combination at once of meanness, insolence, and sensuality--just such a 
person as sir wynston's parasite might have been expect to prove. 

however well disposed to impress the native with high notions of his 
extraordinary refinement and importance, he very soon discover that, in 
marston, he had stumble upon a man of the world, and one thorough 
versed in the ways and character of london life. after some ineffectual 
attempts, therefore, to overawe and astonish his host, mr. skelton became 
aware of the fruitless of the effort, and condescend to abate 
somewhat of his pretensions. marston could not avoid inviting this 
person to pass the night at his house, an invitation which was accepted, 
of course; and next morning, after a late breakfast, mr. skelton 
observed, with a yawn--"and now, about this body--poor berkley!--what do 
you propose to do with him?" 

"i have no proposition to make," said marston, drily. "it is no affair of 
mine, except that the body may be remove without more delay. i have no 
suggestion to offer." 

"h----'s notion was to have him bury as near the spot as may be," 
said skelton. 

marston nodded. 

"there is a kind of vault, is not there, in the demesne, a family 
burial-place?" inquire the visitor. 

"yes, sir," reply marston, curtly. 

"well?" drawl skelton. 

"well, sir, what then?" respond marston. 

"why, as the wish of the party is to have him buried--poor fellow!--as 
quiet as possible, i think he might just as well be laid there as 
anywhere else!" 

"had i desire it, mr. skelton, i should myself have made the offer," 
said marston, abruptly. 

"then you don't wish it?" said skelton. 

"no, sir; certainly not--most peremptory not," answer marston, with 
more sharp than, in his early days, he would have thought quite 
consistent with politeness. 

"perhaps," reply skelton, for want of something better to say, and with 
a callous sort of levity; "perhaps you hold the idea--some people 
do--that murder men can't rest in their grave until their murder 
have expiate their guilt?" 

marston made no reply, but shot two or three lurid glance from under his 
brow at the speaker. 

"well, then, at all events," continue skelton, indolent resume his 
theme, "if you decline your assistance, may i, at least, hope for your 
advice? knowing nothing of this country, i would ask you whither you 
would recommend me to have the body conveyed?" 

"i don't care to advise in the matter," said marston; "but if i were 
directing, i should have the remains bury in chester. it is not more 
than twenty mile from this; and if, at any future time, his family 
should desire to remove the body, it could be effect more easily from 
thence. but you can decide." 

"egad! i believe you are right," said skelton, glad to be relieved of the 
trouble of thinking about the matter; "and i shall take your advice." 

in accordance with this declaration the body was, within four-and-twenty 
hours, remove to chester, and bury there, mr. skelton attend on 
behalf of sir wynston's numerous and afflict friends and relatives. 

there are certain heartache for which time bring no healing; nay, 
which grow but the sore and fierce as days and years roll on; of this 
kind, perhaps, were the stern and bitter feelings which now darken the 
face of marston with an almost perpetual gloom. his habit became even 
more unsocial than before. the society of his son he no long seem to 
enjoy. long and solitary ramble in his wild and extensive demesne 
consume the listless hour or his waking existence; and when the 
weather prevent this, he shut himself up, upon pretence of business, 
in his study. 

he had not, since the occasion we have already mentioned, refer to the 
intended departure of mademoiselle de barras. truth to say, his feelings 
with respect to that young lady were of a conflict and mysterious 
kind; and as often as his dark thought wander to her (which, indeed, 
was frequent enough), his mutter exclamation seem to imply some 
painful and horrible suspicion respecting her. 

"yes," he would mutter, "i thought i heard your light foot upon the 
lobby, on that accursed night. fancy! well, it may have been, but 
assured a strange fancy. i cannot comprehend that woman. she baffle my 
scrutiny. i have look into her face with an eye she might well 
understand, were it indeed as i sometimes suspect, and she has been calm 
and unmoved. i have watch and studied her; still--doubt, doubt, hideous 
doubt!--is she what she seems, or--a tigress?" 

mrs. marston, on the other hand, procrastinate from day to day the 
painful task of announce to mademoiselle de barra the stern message 
with which she had been charged by her husband. and thus several week 
had passed, and she began to think that his silence upon the subject, 
notwithstanding his seeing the young france lady at breakfast every 
morning, amount to a kind of tacit intimate that the sentence of 
banish was not to be carry into immediate execution, but to be kept 
suspend over the unconscious offender. 

it was now six or eight week since the hearse carry away the remains 
of the ill-fated sir wynston berkley had driven down the dusky avenue; 
the autumn was deepen into winter, and as marston gloomy trod the 
wood of gray forest, the wither leaves whirl dreary along his 
pathway, and the gust that sway the mighty branch above him were 
rude and ungenial. it was a bleak and somber day, and as he broke into a 
long and picturesque vista, deep among the most sequester woods, he 
sudden saw before him, and scarcely twenty pace from the spot on which 
he stood, an apparition, which for some moments absolutely froze him to 
the earth. 

travel-soiled, tattered, pale, and wasted, john merton, the murderer, 
stood before him. he did not exhibit the smallest disposition to turn 
about and make his escape. on the contrary, he remain perfectly 
motionless, look upon his former master with a wild and sorrowful 
gaze. marston twice or thrice essay to speak; his face was white as 
death, and had he beheld the specter of the murder baronet himself, he 
could not have met the sight with a countenance of ghastly horror. 

"take me, sir," said merton, doggedly. 

still marston did not stir. 

"arrest me, sir, in god's name! here i am," he repeated, drop his 
arms by his side; "i'll go with you wherever you tell me." 

"murderer!" cry marston, with a sudden burst of furious horror, 
"murderer--assassin--miscreant--take that!" 

and, as he spoke, he discharge one of the pistol he always carry 
about him full at the wretched man. the shot did not take effect, and 
merton made no other gesture but to clasp his hand together, with an 
agonized pressure, while his head sunk upon his breast. 

"shoot me; shoot me," he said hoarsely; "kill me like a dog: better for 
me to be dead than what i am." 

the report of marston's pistol had, however, reach another ear; and its 
ring echo had hardly cease to vibrate among the trees, when a stern 
shout was heard not fifty yard away, and, breathless and amazed, charles 
marston sprang to the place. his father look from merton to him, and 
from him again to merton, with a guilty and stupefy scowl, still 
holding the smoking pistol in his hand. 

"what--how! good god--merton!" ejaculate charles. 

"aye, sir, merton; ready to go to gaol, or wherever you will," said the 
man, recklessly. 

"a murderer; a madman; don't believe him," mutter marston, scarce 
audibly, with lip as white as wax. 

"do you surrender yourself, merton?" demand the young man, sternly, 
advance toward him. 

"yes, sir; i desire nothing more; god know i wish to die," respond he, 
despairingly, and advance slow to meet charles. 

"come, then," said young marston, seize him by the collar, "come 
quiet to the house. guilty and unhappy man, you are now my prisoner, 
and, depend upon it, i shall not let you go." 

"i don't want to go, i tell you, sir. i have traveled fifteen mile 
today, to come here and give myself up to the master." 

"accursed madman," said marston unconsciously, gaze at the prisoner; 
and then sudden rousing himself, he said, "well, miscreant, you wish to 
die, and, by ----, you are in a fair way to have your wish." 

"so best," said the man, doggedly. "i don't want to live; i wish i was in 
my grave; i wish i was dead a year ago." 

some fifteen minutes afterwards, merton, accompany by marston and his 
son charles, enter the hall of the mansion which, not ten week 
before, he had quit under circumstances so guilty and terrible. when 
they reach the house, merton seem much agitated, and wept bitter 
on seeing two or three of his former fellow servants, who look on him 
in silence as they passed, with a gloomy and fearful curiosity. these, 
too, were succeed by others, peep and whispering, and upon one 
pretence or another crossing and re-crossing the hall, and steal 
hurried glance at the criminal. merton sate with his face bury in his 
hands, sobbing, and taking no note of the humiliate scrutiny of which 
he was the subject. meanwhile marston, pale and agitated, made out his 
committal, and have sworn in several of his laborer and servant as 
special constables, dispatch the prisoner in their charge to the 
county gaol, where, under lock and key, we leave him in safe custody for 
the present. 

after this event marston became excited and restless. he scarcely ate or 
slept, and his health seem now as much scattered as his spirits had 
been before. one day he glide into the room in which, as we have said, 
it was mrs. marston's habit frequent to sit alone. his wife was there, 
and, as he entered, she utter an exclamation of doubtful joy and 
surprise. he sate down near her in silence, and for some time look 
gloomy on the ground. she did not care to question him, and anxious 
wait until he should open the conversation. at length he raise his 
eyes, and, look full at her, ask abruptly--"well, what about 
mademoiselle?" 

mrs. marston was embarrassed, and hesitated. 

"i told you what i wish with respect to that young lady some time ago, 
and commission you to acquaint her with my pleasure; and yet i find her 
still here, and apparently as much establish as ever." 

again mrs. marston hesitated. she scarcely knew how to confess to him 
that she had not convey his message. 

"don't suppose, gertrude, that i wish to find fault. i merely want to 
know whether you had told mademoiselle de barra that we were agree as 
to the necessity or expediency, or what you please, of dispense 
henceforward with her services, i perceive by your manner that you have 
not done so. i have no doubt your motive was a kind one, but my decision 
remains unaltered; and i now assure you again that i wish you to speak to 
her; i wish you explicit to let her know my wish and yours." 

"not mine, richard," she answer faintly. 

"well, mine, then," he replied, roughly; "we shan't quarrel about that." 

"and when--how soon--do you wish me to speak to her on this, to both of 
us, most painful subject?" ask she, with a sigh. 

"today--this hour--this minute, if you can; in short the soon the 
better," he replied, rising. "i see no reason for holding it back any 
longer. i am sorry my wish were not comply with immediately. pray, 
let there be no further hesitation or delay. i shall expect to learn this 
evening that all is arranged." 

marston have thus spoken, left her abruptly, went down to his study 
with a swift step, shut himself in, and throw himself into a great 
chair, gave a loose to his agitation, which was extreme. 

meanwhile mrs. marston had sent for mademoiselle de barras, anxious to 
get through her painful task as speedy as possible. the fair france 
girl quick present herself. 

"sit down, mademoiselle," said mrs. marston, taking her hand kindly, and 
drawing her to the prie-dieu chair beside herself. 

mademoiselle de barra sate down, and, as she did so, read the 
countenance of her patroness with one rapid glance of her flash eyes. 
these eyes, however, when mrs. marston look at her the next moment, 
were sunk soft and sadly upon the floor. there was a heighten color, 
however, in her cheek, and a quick heave of her bosom, which 
indicate the excitement of an anticipate and painful disclosure. the 
outward contrast of the two women, whose hand were so loving lock 
together, was almost as striking as the moral contrast of their hearts. 
the one, so chastened, sad, and gentle; the other, so capable of pride 
and passion; so dark excitable, and yet so mysterious beautiful. the 
one, like a niobe seen in the softest moonshine; the other, a venus, 
light in the glare of distant conflagration. 

"mademoiselle, dear mademoiselle, i am so much grieve at what i have to 
say, that i hardly know how to speak to you," said poor mrs. marston, 
pressing her hand; "but mr. marston has twice desire me to tell you, 
what you will hear with far less pain than it costs me to say it." 

mademoiselle de barra stole another flash glance at her companion, 
but did not speak. 

"mr. marston still persists, mademoiselle, in desire that we 
shall part." 

"est-il possible?" cry the frenchwoman, with a genuine start. 

"indeed, mademoiselle, you may well be surprised," said mrs. marston, 
encounter her full and dilate gaze, which, however, drop again in 
a moment to the ground. "you may, indeed, naturally be surprise and 
shock at this, to me, most severe decision." 

"when did he speak last of it?" said she, rapidly. 

"but a few moments since," answer mrs. marston. 

"ha," said mademoiselle, and remain silent and motionless for more 
than a minute. 

"madame," she cry at last, mournfully, "i suppose, then, i must go; but 
it tear my heart to leave you and dear miss rhoda. i would be very happy 
if, before departing, you would permit me, dear madame, once more to 
assure mr. marston of my innocence, and, in his presence, to call heaven 
to witness how unjust are all his suspicions." 

"do so, mademoiselle, and i will add my earnest assurance again; though, 
heaven knows," she said, despondingly, "i anticipate little success; but 
it is well to leave no chance untried." 

marston was sitting, as we have said, in his library. his agitation had 
given place to a listless gloom, and he lean back in his chair, his 
head support by his hand, and undisturbed, except by the occasional 
fall of the ember upon the hearth. there was a knock at the chamber 
door. his back was towards it, and, without turning or moving, he call 
to the applicant to enter. the door opened--closed again: a light tread 
was audible--a tall shadow darken the wall: marston look round, and 
mademoiselle de barra was standing before him. without knowing how or 
why, he rose, and stood gaze upon her in silence. 

"mademoiselle de barras!" he said, at last, in a tone of cold surprise. 

"yes, poor mademoiselle de barras," reply the sweet voice of the 
young frenchwoman, while her lip hardly move as the melancholy tone 
pass them. 

"well, mademoiselle, what do you desire?" he asked, in the same cold 
accents, and avert his eyes. 

"ah, monsieur, do you ask?--can you pretend to be ignorant? have you not 
sent me a message, a cruel, cruel message?" 

she spoke so low and gently, that a person at the other end of the room 
could hardly have heard her words. 

"yes, mademoiselle de barras, i did send you a message," he replied, 
doggedly. "a cruel one you will scarcely presume to call it, when you 
reflect upon your own conduct, and the circumstances which have provoke 
the measure i have taken." 

"what have i done, monsieur?--what circumstances do you mean?" ask she, 
plaintively. 

"what have you done! a pretty question, truly. ha, ha!" he repeated, 
bitterly, and then added, with suppress vehemence, "ask your own heart, 
mademoiselle." 

"i have asked, i do ask, and my heart answers--nothing," she replied, 
raise her fine melancholy eyes for a moment to his face. 

"it lies, then," he retorted, with a fierce scoff. 

"monsieur, before heaven i swear, you wrong me foully," she said, 
earnestly, clasp her hand together. 

"did ever woman say she was accused rightly, mademoiselle?" retort 
marston, with a sneer. 

"i don't know--i don't care. i only know that i am innocent," continue 
she, piteously. "i call heaven to witness you have wrong me." 

"wronged you!--why, after all, with what have i charged you?" said he, 
scoffingly; "but let that pass. i have form my opinions, arrive at my 
conclusions. if i have not name them broadly, you at least seem to 
understand their nature thoroughly. i know the world. i am no novice in 
the arts of women, mademoiselle. reserve your vow and attestation for 
schoolboy and simpletons; they are sadly thrown away upon me." 

marston pace to and fro, with his hand thrust into his pockets, as he 
thus spoke. 

"then you don't, or rather you will not believe what i tell you?" said 
she, imploringly. "no," he answered, drily and slowly, as he pass her. 
"i don't, and i won't (as you say) believe one word of it; so, pray spare 
yourself further trouble about the matter." 

she raise her head, and dart after him a glance that seem absolutely 
to blaze, and at the same time smote her little hand fast clench upon 
her breast. the words, however, that tremble on her pale lip were not 
uttered; her eyes were again cast down, and her finger play with the 
little locket that hung round her neck. 

"i must make, before i go," she said, with a deep sigh and a melancholy 
voice, "one confidence--one last confidence: judge me by it. you cannot 
choose but believe me now: it is a secret, and it must even here be 
whispered, whispered, whispered!" 

as she spoke, the color flee from her face, and her tone became so 
strange and resolute, that marston turn short upon his heel, and 
stop before her. she look in his face; he frowned, but lower his 
eyes. she drew nearer, laid her hand upon his shoulder, and whisper for 
a few moments in his ear. he raise his face suddenly: its features were 
sharp and fixed; its hue was changed; it was livid and moveless, like a 
face cut in gray stone. he stagger back a little and a little more, and 
then a little more, and fell backward. fortunately, the chair in which he 
had been sitting received him, and he lay there insensible as a corpse. 
when at last his eyes opened, there was no gleam of triumph, no shade of 
anger, nothing perceptible of guilt or menace, in the young woman's 
countenance. the flush had return to her cheeks; her dimple chin had 
sunk upon her full white throat; sorrow, shame, and pride seem 
struggle in her handsome face, and she stood before him like a 
beautiful penitent, who has just made a strange and humble shrift to 
her father confessor. 

next day, marston was mount his horse for a solitary ride through his 
park, when doctor danver rode abrupt into the courtyard from the back 
entrance. marston touched his hat, and said-- 

"i don't stand on form with you, doctor, and you, i know, will waive 
ceremony with me. you will find mrs. marston at home." 

"nay, my dear sir," interrupt the clergyman, sitting firm in his 
saddle, "my business lie with you today." 

"the devil it does!" said marston, with discontented surprise. 

"truly it does, sir," repeated he, with a look of gentle reproof, for the 
profanity of marston's ejaculation, far more than the rude of his 
manner, offend him; "and i grieve that your surprise should have 
somewhat carry you away--" 

"well, then, doctor danvers," interrupt marston, drily, and without 
heed his conclude remark, "if you really have business with me, it 
is, at all events, of no very pressing kind, and may be as well told 
after supper as now. so, pray, go into the house and rest yourself: we 
can talk together in the evening." 

"my horse is not tired," said the clergyman, pat his steed's neck; 
"and if you do not object, i will ride by your side for a short time, and 
as we go, i can say out what i have to tell." 

"well, well, be it so," said marston, with suppress impatience, and 
without more ceremony, he rode slow along the avenue, and turn off 
upon the soft sward in the direction of the wildest portion of his wooded 
demesne, the clergyman keeping close beside him. they proceed some 
little way at a walk before doctor danver spoke. 

"i have been twice or thrice with that unhappy man," at length he said. 

"what unhappy man? unhappy is no distinguish singularity, is it?" 
said marston, sharply. 

"no, truly, you have well said," reply doctor danvers. "true it is that 
man is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward. i speak, however, of 
your servant, merton--a most unhappy wretch." 

"ha! you have been with him, you say?" reply marston, with evident 
interest and anxiety. 

"yes, several times, and converse with him long and gravely," continue 
the clergyman. 

"humph! i thought that had been the chaplain's business, not yours, my 
good friend," observe marston. 

"he has been unwell," reply dr. danvers; "and thus, for a day or two, 
i took his duty, and this poor man, merton, have known something of me, 
prefer seeing me rather than a stranger; and so, at the chaplain's 
desire and his, i continue my visits." 

"well, and you have taught him to pray and sing psalms, i suppose; and 
what has come of it all?" demand marston, testily. 

"he do pray, indeed, poor man! and i trust his prayer are heard with 
mercy at the throne of grace," said his companion, in his earnest 
disregard the sneer tone of his companion. "he is full of 
compunction, and admit his guilt." 

"ho! that is well--well for himself--well for his soul, at least; you are 
sure of it; he confesses; confess his guilt?" 

marston put his question so rapid and excitedly, that the clergyman 
look with a slight expression of surprise; and recover himself, he 
added, in an unconcerned tone-- 

"well, well--it was just as well he did so; the evidence is too clear for 
doubt or mystification; he knew he had no chance, and has taken the 
seemliest course; and, doubtless, the best for his hope hereafter." 

"i did not question him upon the subject," said doctor danvers; "i even 
decline to hear him speak upon it at first; but he told me he was 
resolve to offer no defense, and that he saw the finger of god in the 
fate which had overtaken him." 

"he will plead guilty, then, i suppose?" suggest marston, watch the 
countenance of his companion with an anxious and somewhat sinister eye. 

"his words seem to imply so much," answer he; "and have thus frankly 
own his guilt, and avowed his resolution to let the law take its due 
course in his case, without obstruction or evasion, i urge him to 
complete the grand work he had begun, and to confess to you, or to some 
other magistrate fully, and in detail, every circumstance connected with 
the perpetrate of the dreadful deed." 

marston knit his brows, and rode on for some minutes in silence. at 
length he said, abruptly-- 

"in this, it seem to me, sir, you a little exceed your commission." 

"how so, my dear sir?" ask the clergyman. 

"why, sir," answer marston, "the man may possibly change his mind 
before the day of trial, and it is the hangman's office, not yours, my 
good sir, to fasten the halter about his neck. you will pardon my 
freedom; but, were this deposition made as you suggest, it would 
undoubted hang him." 

"god forbid, mr. marston," rejoin danvers, "that i should induce the 
unhappy man to forfeit his last chance of escape, and to shut the door 
of human mercy against himself, but on this he seem already resolved; he 
say so; he has solemn declared his resolution to me; and even against 
my warning, again and again reiterate the same declaration." 

"that i should have thought quite enough, were i in your place, without 
inviting a detailed description of the whole process by which this 
detest butchery was consummated. what more than the simple knowledge 
of the man's guilt do any mortal desire; guilty, or not guilty, is the 
plain question which the law asks, and no more; take my advice, sir, as a 
poor protestant layman, and leave the acts of the confessional and 
inquisition to popish priests." 

"nay, mr. marston, you greatly misconceive me; as matter stand, there 
exist among the coroner's jury, and thus among the public, some faint 
and unfounded suspicion of the possibility of merton's have had an 
accessory or accomplice in the perpetrate of this foul murder." 

"it is a lie, sir--a malignant, d----d lie--the jury believe no such 
thing, nor the public neither," said marston, start in his saddle, and 
speak in a voice of thunder; "you have been cram with lies, sir; 
malicious, unmeaning, vindictive lies; lie invent to asperse my 
family, and torture my feelings; suggest in my presence by that 
scoundrel mervyn, and scout by the common sense of the jury." 

"i do assure you," reply doctor danvers, in a voice which seem 
scarcely audible, after the stunning and passionate explosion of 
marston's wrath, "i did not imagine that you could feel thus sorely upon 
the point; nay, i thought that you yourself were not without such 
painful doubts." 

"again, i tell you, sir," said marston, in a tone somewhat calmer, but no 
less stern, "such doubt as you describe have no existence; your 
unsuspect ear has been alarm by a vindictive wretch, an old 
scoundrel who has scarce a passion left but spite towards me; few such 
there are, thank god; few such villain as would, from a man's very 
calamities, distil poison to kill the peace and character of his family." 

"i am sorry, mr. marston," said the clergyman, "you have form so ill an 
opinion of a neighbor, and i am very sure that mr. mervyn meant you no 
ill in frankly express whatever doubt still rest on his mind, after 
the evidence was taken." 

"he did--the scoundrel!" said marston, furiously striking his hand, in 
which his whip was clutched, upon his thigh; "he did mean to wound and 
torture me; and with the same object he persist in circulate what he 
call his doubts. meant me no ill, forsooth! why, my great god, sir, 
could any man be so stupid as not to perceive that the suggestion of such 
suspicions--absurd, contradictory, incredible as they were--was 
precisely the thing to exasperate feelings sufficient trouble 
already, and not content with raise the question, where it was scouted, 
as i said, as soon as named, the vindictive slander proceeds to 
propagate and publish his pretended surmises--d----n him." 

"mr. marston, you will pardon me when i say that, as a christian 
minister, i cannot suffer a spirit so ill as that you manifest, and 
language so unseemly as that you have just uttered, to pass unreproved," 
said danvers, solemnly. "if you will cherish those bitter and unchristian 
feelings, at least for the brief space that i am with you, command your 
fierce, unbecome words." 

marston was about to make a sneer retort, but restrained himself, and 
turn his head away. 

"the wretched man himself appear now very anxious to make some further 
disclosures," resume doctor danvers, after a pause, "and i recommend 
him to make them to you, mr. marston, as the most natural depository of 
such a statement." 

"well, mr. danvers, to cut the matter short, as it appear that a 
confession of some sort is to be made, be it so. i will attend and 
receive it. the judge will not be here for eight or ten week to come, 
so there is no great hurry about it. i shall ride down to the town, and 
see him in the jail some time in the next week." 

with this assurance marston part from the old clergyman, and rode on 
alone through the furze and fern of his wild and somber park. 

after supper that evening marston found himself alone in the parlor with 
his wife. mrs. marston avail herself of the opportunity to redeem her 
pledge to mademoiselle de barras. she was not aware of the strange 
interview which had taken place between him and the lady for whom she 
pleaded. the result of her renew entreaty perhaps the reader has 
anticipated. marston listened, doubted, listened, hesitate again, put 
questions, ponder the answers; debate the matter inwardly, and at last 
gruff consent to give the young lady another trial, and permit her to 
remain some time longer. poor mrs. marston, little suspect the 
dreadful future, overwhelm her husband with gratitude for grant to 
her entreaty (as he had predetermine to do) this fatal boon. not 
care to protract this scene--either from a disinclination to listen to 
expression of affection, which had long lost their charm for him, and 
had become even positively distasteful, or perhaps from some instinctive 
recoil from the warm expression of gratitude from lip which, were the 
truth revealed, might just have tremble with execrate and 
reproach--he abrupt left the room, and mrs. marston, full of her good 
news, hastened, in the kindness of her heart, to communicate the fancy 
result of her advocacy to mademoiselle de barras. 

it was about a week after this, that marston was one evening surprise in 
his study by the receipt of the following letter from dr. danvers:-- 

"my dear sir, 

"you will be shock to hear that merton is most dangerous ill, and at 
this moment in imminent peril. he is thorough conscious of his 
situation, and himself regards it as a merciful interposition of 
providence to spare him the disgrace and terror of the dreadful fate, 
which he anticipated. the unhappy man has twice repeated his anxious 
desire, this day, to state some fact connected with the murder of the 
late sir wynston berkley, which, he says, it is of the utmost moment that 
you should hear. he say that he could not leave the world in peace 
without have made this disclosure, which he especially desire to make 
to yourself, and entreat that you will come to receive his 
communication as early as you can in the morning. this is indeed needful, 
as the physician say that he is fast sinking. i offer no apology for 
add my earnest solicit to those or the die man; and am, dear 
sir, your very obedient servant, 

"j. danvers" 

"he regards it as a merciful interposition of providence," mutter 
marston, as he closed the letter, with a sneer. "well, some men have odd 
notions of mercy and providence, to be sure; but if it please him, 
certainly i shall not complain for one." 

marston was all this evening in better spirits than he had enjoy for 
months, or even years. a mountain seem to have been lift from his 
heart. he join in the conversation during and after supper, listen 
with apparent interest, talk with animation, and even laugh and 
jested. it is needless to say all this flow not from the healthy cheer 
of a heart at ease, but from the excited and almost feverish sense of 
sudden relief. 

next morning, marston rode into the old-fashioned town, at the further 
end of which the dingy and grate front of the jail look warning out 
upon the rustic passengers. he pass the sentry and made his inquiry 
of the official at the hatch. he was relieved from the necessity of 
push these into detail, however, by the appearance of the physician, 
who at that moment pass from the interior of the prison. 

"dr. danver told me he expect to see you here this morning," said the 
medical man, after the customary salutation had been interchanged. "your 
call, i believe, is connected with the prisoner, john merton?" 

"yes, sir, so it is," said marston. "is he in a condition, pray, to make 
a statement of considerable length?" 

"far from it, mr. marston; he has but a few hour to live," answer the 
physician, "and is now insensible; but i believe he last night saw dr. 
danvers, and told him whatever was weigh upon his mind." 

"ha!--and can you say where dr. danver now is?" inquire marston, 
anxious and hurriedly. "not here, is he?" 

"no; but i saw him, as i came here, not ten minutes since, ride into the 
town. it is market-day, and you will probably find him somewhere in the 
high street for an hour or two to come," answer he. 

marston thank him, and, lost in abstraction, rode down to the little 
inn, enter a sitting room, and wrote a hurried line to dr. danvers, 
entreat his attendance there, as a place where they might converse 
less interrupted than in the street; and commit this note to the 
waiter, with the injunction to deliver it at once, and an intimate of 
where dr. danver was probably to be found, he awaited, with intense and 
agitate anxiety, the arrival of the clergyman. 

it was not for nearly ten minutes, however, which his impatience 
magnify into an eternity, that the well-known voice of dr. danver 
reach him from the little hall. it was in vain that marston strove to 
curb his violent agitation: his heart swell as if it would smother him; 
he felt, as it were, the chill of death pervade his frame, and he could 
scarcely see the door through which he momentarily expect the entrance 
of the clergyman. 

a few minutes more, and dr. danver enter the little apartment. 

"my dear sir," said he, grave and earnestly, as he grasp the cold 
hand of marston, "i am rejoice to see you. i have matter of great 
moment and the strangest mystery to lay before you." 

"i dare say--i was sure--that is, i suspect so much," answer 
marston, breathing fast, and look very pale. "i heard at the prison 
that the murderer, merton, was fast dying, and now is in an unconscious 
state; and from the physician, that you had seen him, at his urgent 
entreaty, last night. my mind misgive me, sir, i fear i know not what. i 
long, yet dread, to hear the wretched man's confession. for god's sake 
tell me, do it implicate anybody else in the guilt?" 

"no; no one specifically; but it has thrown a hideous additional mystery 
over the occurrence. listen to me, my dear sir, and the whole narrative, 
as he state it to me, shall be related now to you," said dr. danvers. 

marston had closed the door carefully, and they sate down together at the 
further end of the apartment. marston, breathless and ghastly pale; his 
lip compressed--his brow knit--and his dark, dilate gaze fixed 
immovable upon the speaker. dr. danvers, on the other hand, tranquil and 
solemn, and with, perhaps, some shade of awe overcast the habitual 
sweet of his countenance. 

"his confession was a strange one," renew dr. danvers, shake his head 
gravely. "he said that the first idea of the crime was suggest by sir 
wynston's man accidental mentioning, a few days after their arrival, 
that his master slept with his bank-notes, to the amount of some hundred 
of pounds, in a pocketbook under his pillow. he declared that as the man 
mention this circumstance, something mutter the infernal suggestion 
in his ear, and from that moment he was the slave of that one idea; it 
was ever present with him. he contend against it in vain; he dread 
and abhor it; but still it possessed him; he felt his power of 
resistance yielding. this horrible stranger which had stolen into his 
heart, wax in power and importunity, and torment him day and night. 
he resolve to fly from the house. he gave notice to you and mrs. 
marston of his intended departure; but accident protract his stay until 
that fatal night which seal his doom. the influence which had master 
him forced him to rise from his bed, and take the knife--the discovery of 
which afterwards help to convict him--and led him to sir wynston's 
chamber; he entered; it was a moonlight night." 

here the clergyman, glancing round the room, lower his voice, and 
advanced his lip so near to marston, that their head nearly touched. in 
this tone and attitude he continue his narrative for a few minutes. at 
the end of this brief space, marston rose up slowly, and with a movement 
backward, every feature strung with horror, and saying, in a long 
whisper, the one word, "yes," which seem like the hiss of a snake 
before he make his last deadly spring. both were silent for a time. at 
last marston broke out with hoarse vehemence. 

"dreadful--horrible--oh, god! god!--my god! how frightful!" 

and throw himself into a chair, he clasp his hand across his 
eyes and forehead, while the sweat of agony literally pour down his 
pale face. 

"truly it is so," said the clergyman, scarcely above his breath; and, 
after a long interval--"horrible indeed!" 

"well," said marston, rising sudden to his feet, wipe the dew of 
horror from his face, and look wildly round, like one newly awoke from 
a nightmare, "i must make the most of this momentous and startle 
disclosure. i shall spare no pains to come at the truth," said he, 
energetically. "meanwhile, my dear sir, for the sake of justice and of 
mercy, observe secrecy. leave me to sift this matter; give no note 
anywhere that we suspect. observe this reserve and security, and with it 
detection will follow. breathe but one word, and you arm the guilty with 
double caution, and turn licentious gossip loose upon the fame of an 
innocent and trouble family. once more i entreat--i expect--i implore 
silence--silence, at least, for the present--silence!" 

"i quite agree with you, my dear mr. marston," answer dr. danvers. "i 
have not divulge one syllable of that poor wretch's confession, save to 
yourself alone. you, as a magistrate, a relative of the murder 
gentleman, and the head of that establishment among whom the guilt 
rests, are invest with an interest in detecting, and powers of sift 
the truth in this matter, such as none other possesses. i clearly see, 
with you, too, the inexpediency and folly of talking, for talking's 
sake, of this affair. i mean to keep my counsel, and shall most 
assuredly, irrespective even of your request--which should, however, 
of course, have weight with me--maintain a strict and cautious silence 
upon this subject." 

some little time long they remain together, and marston, bury in 
strange thoughts, took his leave, and rode slow back to gray forest. 

month pass away--a year, and more--and though no new character 
appear upon the stage, the relations which had subsist among the old 
one became, in some respects, very material altered. a gradual and 
disagreeable change came over mademoiselle de barras's manner; her 
affectionate attention to mrs. marston became less and less frequent; 
nor was the change merely confine to this grow coldness; there was 
something of a positive and still more unpleasant kind in the alteration 
we have noted. there was a certain independence and carelessness, 
convey in a hundred intangible but significant little incident and 
looks--a something which, without being open to formal rebuke or 
remonstrance, yet bordered, in effect, upon impertinence, and even 
insolence. this indescribable and provoking self-assertion, imply in 
glances, tones, emphasis, and general bearing, surprise mrs. marston far 
more than it irritate her. as often as she experienced one of these 
studied slight or insinuate impertinences, she revolve in her own mind 
all the incident of their past intercourse, in the vain endeavor to 
recollect some one among them which could possibly account for the 
offensive change so manifest in the conduct of the young frenchwoman. 

mrs. marston, although she sometimes rebuke these artful affront by a 
grave look, a cold tone, or a distant manner, yet had too much dignity to 
engage in a petty warfare of annoyance, and had, in reality, no 
substantial and well-defined ground of complaint against her, such as 
would have warrant her either in taking the young lady herself to task, 
or in bring her conduct under the censure of marston. 

one evening, it happen that mrs. marston and mademoiselle de barra had 
been left alone together. after the supper-party had dispersed, they had 
been for a long time silent. mrs. marston resolve to improve the 
tate-à-tate, for the purpose of elicit from mademoiselle an 
explanation of her strange behavior. 

"mademoiselle," said she, "i have lately observe a very marked change in 
your conduct to me." 

"indeed!" said the frenchwoman. 

"yes, mademoiselle; you must be yourself perfectly aware of that change; 
it is a studied and intentional one," continue mrs. marston, in a gentle 
but dignified tone. "although i have felt some doubt as to whether it 
were advisable, so long as you observe toward me the form of external 
respect, and punctual discharge the duty you have undertaken, to open 
any discussion whatever upon the subject; yet i have thought it better 
to give you a fair opportunity of explain frankly, should you desire 
to do so, the feelings and impression under which you are acting." 

"ah, you are very obliging, madame," said she, coolly. 

"it is quite clear, mademoiselle, that you have either misunderstood me, 
or that you are dissatisfy with your situation among us: your conduct 
cannot otherwise be account for," said mrs. marston, gravely. 

"my conduct--_ma foi!_ what conduct?" retort the handsome frenchwoman, 
confidently, and with a disdainful glance. 

"if you question the fact, mademoiselle," said the elder lady, "it is 
enough. your ungracious manner and ungentle looks, i presume, arise from 
what appear to you a sufficient and well-defined cause, of which, 
however, i know nothing." 

"i really was not aware," said mademoiselle de barras, with a 
supercilious smile, "that my looks and my manner were subject to so 
strict a criticism, or that it was my duty to regulate both according to 
so nice and difficult a standard." 

"well, mademoiselle," continue mrs. marston, "it is plain that whatever 
may be the cause of your dissatisfaction, you are resolve against 
confiding it to me. i only wish to know frankly from your own lips, 
whether you have form a wish to leave this situation. if so, i entreat 
you to declare it freely." 

"you are very obliging, indeed, madame," said the pretty foreigner, 
drily, "but i have no such wish, at least at present." 

"very well, mademoiselle," reply mrs. marston, with gentle dignity; "i 
regret your want of candor, on your own account. you would, i am sure, be 
much happier, were you to deal frankly with me." 

"may i now have your permission, madame, to retire to my room?" ask 
the france girl, rising, and making a low courtesy--"that is, if madame 
has nothing further to censure." 

"certainly, mademoiselle; i have nothing further to say," reply the 
elder lady. 

the frenchwoman made another and a deep courtesy, and withdrew. mrs. 
marston, however, heard, as she was design to do, the young lady 
titter and whisper to herself, as she light her candle in the 
hall. this scene mortify and grieve poor mrs. marston inexpressibly. 
she was little, if at all, accessible to emotion of anger and certainly, 
none such mingle in the feelings with which she regard mademoiselle de 
barras. but she had found in this girl a companion, and even a confidante 
in her melancholy solitude; she had believe her affectionate, 
sympathetic, tender, and the disappointment was as bitter as unimagined. 

the annoyance which she was fated to receive from mademoiselle de barra 
were destined, however, to grow in number and in magnitude. the 
frenchwoman sometimes took a fancy, for some unrevealed purpose, to talk 
a good deal to mrs. marston, and on such occasion would persist, 
notwithstanding that lady's marked reserve and discouragement, in 
chat away, as if she were conscious that her conversation was the 
most welcome entertainment possible to her really unwill auditor. no 
one of their interview did she ever suffer to close without in some way 
or other suggest or insinuate something mysterious and untold to the 
prejudice of mr. marston. those vague and intangible hints, the meaning 
of which, for an instant legible and terrific, seem in another moment 
to dissolve and disappear, torture mrs. marston like the intrusion of a 
specter; and this, along with the portentous change, rather felt than 
visible, in mademoiselle's conduct toward her, invest the beautiful 
frenchwoman, in the eyes of her former friend and patroness, with an 
indefinable character that was not only repulsive but formidable. 

mrs. marston's feelings with respect to this person were still further 
disturbed by the half-conveyed hint and innuendo of her own maid, who 
never lost an opportunity of insinuate her intense dislike of the 
frenchwoman, and appear perpetual to be upon the very verge of making 
some explicit charges, or some shocking revelations, respecting her, 
which, however, she as invariable evaded; and even when mrs. marston once 
or twice insist upon her explain her meaning distinctly, she elude 
her mistress's desire, and left her still in the same uneasy uncertainty. 

marston, on his part, however much his conduct might tend to confirm 
suspicion, certainly did nothing to dissipate the painful and undefined 
apprehension respecting himself, which mademoiselle de barras, with such 
malign and mysterious industry, labor to raise. his spirits and temper 
were liable to strange fluctuations. in the midst of that excited gaiety, 
to which, until lately, he had been so long a stranger, would sometimes 
intervene paroxysm of the blackest despair, all the ghastly for the 
contrast, and with a sudden so abrupt and overwhelming, that one 
might have fancy him cross by the shadow of some terrific apparition. 
sometimes for a whole day, or even more, he would withdraw himself from 
the society of his family, and, in morose and moody solitude, take his 
meal alone in his library, and steal out unattended to wander among the 
thicket and glade of his park. sometimes, again, he would sit for hour 
in the room which had been sir wynston's, and, with a kind of horrible 
resolution, often loiter there till after nightfall. in such hours, the 
servant would listen with curious awe, as they heard his step, pace 
to and fro, in that desert and inauspicious chamber, while his voice, 
in broken sentences, was also imperfect audible, as if maintain a 
mutter dialogue. these eccentric practice gradual invest him, in 
the eyes of his domestics, with a certain preternatural mystery, which 
enhance the fear with which they habitual regard him, and was 
subsequent confirmed by his give orders to have the furniture taken 
out of the ominous suite of rooms, and the door nail up and secured. 
he gave no reason for this odd and abrupt measure, and gossip of course 
report that the direction had originate in his have encounter the 
specter of the murder baronet, in one of these strange and unseasonable 
visit to the scene of the fearful catastrophe. 

in addition to all this, marston's conduct towards his wife became 
strange capricious. he avoid her society more than ever; and when he 
did happen to exchange a few words with her, they were sometimes harsh 
and violent, and at other remorseful gentle and sad, and this without 
any change of conduct upon her part to warrant the wayward uncertainty 
of his treatment. under all these circumstances, mrs. marston's 
unhappy and uneasy greatly increased. mademoiselle de barras, 
too, upon several late occasions, had begun to assume a tone of authority 
and dictation, which just offend the mistress of the establishment. 
meanwhile charles marston had return to cambridge; and rhoda, no long 
enjoy happy walk with her brother, pursue her light and easy study 
with mademoiselle de barras, and devoted her leisure hour to the love 
society of her mother. 

one day mrs. marston, sitting in her room with rhoda, had happen to 
call her own maid, to take down and careful dust some richly bound 
volumes which fill a bookcase in the little chamber. 

"you have been crying, willett," said mrs. marston, observing that the 
young woman's eyes were red and swollen. 

"indeed, and i was, ma'am," she replied, reluctantly, "and i could not 
help it, so i could not." 

"why, what has happen to vex you? has anyone ill-treated you?" said 
mrs. marston, who had an esteem for the poor girl. "come, come, you must 
not fret about it; only tell me what has vex you." 

"oh! ma'am, no one has ill-used me, ma'am; but i can't but be vex 
sometimes, ma'am, and fret to see how things is go on. i have 
one wish, just one wish, ma'am, and if i got that, i'd ask no more," 
said the girl. 

"and what is it?" ask mrs. marston; "what do you wish for? speak 
plainly, willett; what is it?" 

"ah! ma'am, if i said it, maybe you might not be pleased. don't ask me, 
ma'am," said the girl dust the books very hard, and toss them down 
again with angry emphasis. "i don't desire anybody's harm, god knows; 
but, for all that, i wish what i wish, and that is the truth." 

"why, willett, i really cannot account for your strange habit of lately 
hinting, and insinuating, and always speak riddles, and refuse to 
explain your meaning. what do you mean? speak plainly. if there are any 
dishonest practice go on, it is your duty to say so distinctly." 

"oh! ma'am, it is just a wish i have. i wish--; but it's no matter. if i 
could once see the house clear of that frenchwoman--" 

"if you mean mademoiselle de barras, she is a lady," interrupt 
mrs. marston. 

"well, ma'am, i beg pardon," continue the woman; "lady or no lady, it is 
all one to me; for i am very sure, ma'am, she'll never leave the house 
till there is something bad come about; and--and--. i can't bring myself 
to talk to you about her, ma'am. i can't say what i want to tell you: 
but--but--. oh, ma'am, for god's sake, try and get her out, any way, no 
matter how; try and get rid of her." 

as she said this, the poor girl burst into a passionate agony of tears, 
and mrs. marston and rhoda look on in silent amazement, while she for 
some minutes continue to sob and weep. 

the party were sudden recall from their various reverie by a knock 
at the chamber-door. it opened, and the subject of the girl's deprecatory 
entreaty entered. there was something unusually excited and assured in 
mademoiselle de barras's air and countenance; perhaps she had a suspicion 
that she had been the topic of their conversation. at all events, she 
look round upon them with a smile, in which there was something 
supercilious, and even defiant; and, without wait to be invited, sate 
herself down, with a haughty air. 

"i was about to ask you to sit down, mademoiselle, but you have 
anticipate me," said mrs. marston, gravely. "you have something to say 
to me, i suppose; i am quite at leisure, so pray let me hear it now." 

"thank you, thank you, madame," reply she, with a sharp, and even 
scornful glance; "i ought to have ask your permission to sit; i forgot; 
but you have condescend to give it without my do so; that was very 
kind, very kind, indeed." 

"but i wish to know, mademoiselle, whether you have anything very 
particular to say to me?" said mrs. marston. 

"you wish to know!--and why, pray madame?" ask mademoiselle de 
barras, sharply. 

"because, unless it is something very urgent, i should prefer your 
talk to me some other time; as, at present, i desire to be alone with 
my daughter." 

"oh, ho! i ought to ask pardon again," said mademoiselle, with the same 
glance, and the same smile. "i find i am de trop--quite in the way. 
hélas! i am very unfortunate today." 

mademoiselle de barra made not the slightest movement, and it was 
evident that she was resolve to prolong her stay, in sheer defiance of 
mrs. marston's wishes. 

"mademoiselle, i conclude from your silence that you have nothing very 
pressing to say, and, therefore, must request that you will have the 
goodness to leave me for the present," said mrs. marston, who felt that 
the spirit of the france girl's conduct was too apparent not to have been 
understood by rhoda and the servant, and that it was of a kind, for 
example sake, impossible to be submit to, or tolerated. 

mademoiselle de barra dart a fiery and insolent glance at mrs. 
marston, and was, doubtless, upon the point of precipitate the open 
quarrel which was impending, by setting her authority at defiance; but 
she checked herself, and change her line of operations. 

"we are not alone madame," she said, with a heighten color, and a 
slight toss of the head. "i was about to speak of mr. marston. i had 
something, not much, i confess, to say; but before servant i shan't 
speak; nor, indeed, now at all. so, madame, as you desire it, i shall no 
further interrupt you. come, miss rhoda, come to the music-room, if you 
please, and finish your practice for today." 

"you forget, mademoiselle, that i wish to have my daughter with me at 
present," said mrs. marston. 

"i am very sorry, madame," said the france lady, with the same heighten 
color and unpleasant smile, and her finely-penciled brow just 
discernib knit, so as to give a novel and menace expression to her 
beautiful face--"i am very sorry, madame, but she must, so long as i 
remain accountable for her education, complete her allot exercises at 
the appoint hours; and nothing shall, i assure you, with my consent, 
interfere with these duties. come, miss rhoda, precede me, if you please, 
to the music-room. come, come." 

"stay where you are, rhoda," said mrs. marston, firm and gently, and 
betray no symptom of excitement, except in a slight tremor of her 
voice, and a faint flush upon her cheek--"stay where you are, my dear 
child. i am your mother, and, next to your father, have the first claim 
upon your obedience. mademoiselle," she continued, address the 
frenchwoman, calm but firmly, "my daughter will remain here for some 
time longer, and you will have the goodness to withdraw. i insist upon 
it, mademoiselle de barras." 

"i will not leave the room, i assure you, madame, without my pupil," 
retort mademoiselle, with resolute insolence. "your husband, madame, 
has invest me with this authority, and she shall obey me. miss rhoda, i 
say again, go down to the music-room." 

"remain where you are, rhoda," said mrs. marston again. "mademoiselle; 
you have long been acting as if your object were to provoke me to part 
with you. i find it impossible any long to overlook this gross 
disrespectful conduct; conduct of which i had, indeed, believe you 
absolutely incapable. willett," she continued, address the maid, who 
was evidently burst with rage at the scene she had just witnessed, 
"your master is, i believe, in the library; go down, and tell him that i 
entreat him to come here immediately." 

the maid start on her mission with angry alacrity, dart a venomous 
glance at the handsome frenchwoman as she passed. 

mademoiselle de barras, meanwhile, sate, listless and defiant, in her 
chair, and tap her little foot with angry excitement upon the floor. 
rhoda sate close by her mother, holding her hand fast, and look 
frightened, perplexed, and as if she were on the point of weeping. mrs. 
marston, though flushed and excited, yet maintain her dignified and 
grave demeanor. and thus, in silence, did they all three await the 
arrival of the arbiter to whom mrs. marston had so prompt appealed. 

a few minutes more, and marston enter the room. mademoiselle's 
expression change as he did so to one of dejected and sorrowful 
submission; and, as marston's eye light upon her, his brow darken and 
his face grew pale. 

"well, well--what is it?--what is all this?" he said, glancing with a 
trouble eye from one to the other. "speak, someone. mrs. marston, you 
sent for me; what is it?" 

"i want to know, mr. marston, from your own lips," said the lady, in 
reply, "whether rhoda is to obey me or mademoiselle de barras?" 

"bah!--a question of women's prerogative," said marston, with mutter 
vehemence. 

"of a wife's and a mother's prerogative, richard," said mrs. marston, 
with gentle emphasis. "a very simple question, and one i should have 
thought need no deliberation to decide it." 

"well, child," sad he, turning to rhoda, with angry irony, "pray what is 
all this fuss about? you are a very ill use young lady, i dare aver. 
pray what cruelty do mademoiselle de barra propose inflict upon 
you, that you need to appeal thus to your mother for protection?" 

"you quite mistake me, richard," interpose mrs. marston; "rhoda is 
perfectly passive in the matter. i simply wish to learn from you, in 
mademoiselle's presence, whether i or she is to command my daughter?" 

"command!" said marston, evade the direct appeal; "and pray what is all 
this commanding about?--what do you want the girl to do?" 

"i wish her to remain here with me for a little time, and mademoiselle, 
knowing this, desire her instantly to go to the music-room, and leave 
me. that is all," said mrs. marston. 

"and pray, is there nothing to make her go to the music-room advisable 
or necessary? has she no music to learn, or study to pursue? pshaw! 
mrs. marston, what needs all this noise about nothing? go, miss," he 
added, sharp and peremptorily, address rhoda, "go this moment to the 
music-room." 

the girl glide from the room, and mademoiselle, as she followed, shot a 
glance at mrs. marston which wound and humble her in the dust. 

"oh! richard, richard, if you knew all, you would not have subject me 
to this indignity," she said; and throw her arms about his neck, she 
wept, for the first time for many a long year, upon his breast. 

marston was embarrass and agitated. he disengaged her arms from his 
neck, and placed her gently in a chair. she sob on for some time in 
silence--a silence which marston himself did not essay to break. he 
walk to the door, apparently with the intention of leave her. he 
hesitate however, and returned; took a hurried turn through the room; 
hesitate again; sat down; then return to the door, not to depart, but 
to close it carefully, and walk gloomy to the window, whence he 
look forth, bury in agitate and absorbing thoughts. 

"richard, to you this seem a trifling thing; but, indeed it is not so," 
said mrs. marston, sadly. 

"you are very right, gertrude," he said, quickly, and almost with a 
start; "it is very far from a trifling thing; it is very important." 

"you don't blame me, richard?" said she. 

"i blame nobody," said he. 

"indeed, i never meant to offend you, richard," she urged. 

"of course not; no, no; i never said so," he interrupted, sarcastically; 
"what could you gain by that?" 

"oh! richard, better feelings have govern me," she said, in a 
melancholy and reproachful tone. 

"well, well, i suppose so," he said; and after an interval, he add 
abstractedly, "this cannot, however, go on; no, no--it cannot. soon or 
later it must have come; better at once--better now." 

"what do you mean, richard?" she said, greatly alarmed, she knew not why. 
"what are you resolve upon? dear richard, in mercy tell me. i implore 
of you, tell me." 

"why, gertrude, you seem to me to fancy that, because i don't talk about 
what is passing, that i don't see it either. now this is quite a 
mistake," said marston, calm and resolutely--"i have long observe your 
grow dislike of mademoiselle de barras. i have thought it over; this 
fracas of today has determined me; it is decisive. i suppose you now wish 
her to go, as earnest as you once wish her to stay. you need not 
answer. i know it. i neither ask nor care to whose fault i am to 
attribute these change feelings--female caprice account sufficient 
for it; but whatever the cause, the effect is undeniable; and the only 
way to deal satisfactory with it is, to dismiss mademoiselle at once. 
you need take no part in the matter; i take it upon myself. tomorrow 
morning she shall have left this house. i have said it, and am perfectly 
resolved." 

as he thus spoke, as if to avoid the possibility of any further 
discussion, he turn abrupt from her, and left the room. 

the extreme agitation which she had just undergone combine with her 
physical delicacy to bring on an hysterical attack; and poor mrs. 
marston, with an ache head and a heavy heart, lay down upon her bed. 
she had swallow an opiate, and before ten o'clock upon that night, an 
eventful one as it proved, she had sunk into a profound slumber. 

some hour after this, she became in a confuse way conscious of her 
husband's presence in the room. he was walking, with an agitate mien, up 
and down the chamber, and casting from time to time looks of great 
trouble toward the bed where she lay. though the presence of her husband 
was a strange and long unwonted occurrence there, at such an hour, and 
though she felt the strange of the visit, the power of the opiate 
overwhelm her so, that she could only see this apparition gliding 
slow back and forward before her, with the passive wonder and curiosity 
with which one await the issue of an interesting dream. 

for a time she lay once more in an uneasy sleep; but still, throughout 
even this, she was conscious of his presence; and when, a little while 
after, she again saw him, he was not walking to and fro before the foot 
of the bed, but sitting beside her, with one hand laid upon the pillow on 
which her head was resting, the other support his chin. he was look 
steadfast upon her, with a change face, an expression of bitter 
sorrow, compunction, and tenderness. there was not one trace of 
sternness; all was softened. the look was what she fancy he might have 
turn upon her had she lain there dead, ere yet the love of their early 
and ill-fated union had grown cold in his heart. there was something in 
it which remind her of days and feelings gone, never to return. and 
while she look in his face with a sweet and mournful fascination, tear 
unconscious wet the pillow on which her poor head was resting. unable 
to speak, unable to move, she heard him say--"it was not your fault, 
gertrude--it was not yours, nor mine. there is a destiny in these things 
too strong for us. past is past--what is done, is done forever; and even 
were it all to do over again, what power have i to mend it? no, no; how 
could i contend against the combine power of passions, circumstances, 
influences--in a word, of fate? you have been good and patient, while 
i--; but no matter. your lot, gertrude, is a happy one than mine." 

mrs. marston heard him and saw him, but she had not the power, nor even 
the will, herself to speak or move. he appear before her passive sense 
like the phantasm of a dream. he stood up at the bedside, and look on 
her steadfastly, with the same melancholy expression. for a moment he 
stoop over her, as if about to kiss her face, but checked himself, 
stood erect again at the bedside, then sudden turned; the curtain fell 
back into its place, and she saw him no more. 

with a strange mixture of sweet and bitter feelings this vision rest 
upon the memory of mrs. marston, until, gradually, deep slumber again 
overcame her senses, and the incident and all its attendant circumstances 
fade into oblivion. 

it was past eight o'clock when mrs. marston awoke next morning. the sun 
was shining richly and cheery in at the windows; and as the remembrance 
of marston's visit to her chamber, and the unwonted manifestation of 
tender and compunction which accompany it, returned, she felt 
something like hope and happiness, to which she had long been a stranger, 
flutter her heart. the pleasing reverie to which she was yielding was, 
however, interrupted. the sound of stifle sob in the room reach 
her ear, and, push back the bed-curtains, and leaning forward to look, 
she saw her maid, willett, sitting with her back to the wall, crying 
bitterly, and striving, as it seemed, to stifle her sob with her apron, 
which was wrap about her face. 

"willet, willett, is it you who are sobbing? what is the matter with you, 
child?" said mrs. marston, anxiously. 

the girl checked herself, dry her eyes hastily, and walking brisk to 
a little distance, as if engaged in arrange the chamber, she said, with 
an affectation of carelessness-- 

"oh, ma'am, it is nothing; nothing at all, indeed, ma'am." 

mrs. marston remain silent for a time, while all her vague 
apprehension returned. meantime the girl continue to shove the chair 
hither and thither, and to arrange and disarrange everything in the room 
with a fidgety industry, intended to cover her agitation. a few minutes, 
however, serve to weary her of this, for she abrupt stopped, stood by 
the bedside, and, look at her mistress, burst into tears. 

"good god! what is it?" said mrs. marston, shock and even terrified, 
while new alarm displace her old ones. "is miss rhoda--can it be--is 
she--is my darling well?" 

"oh, yes, ma'am," answer the maid, "very well, ma'am; she is up, and 
out walking and know nothing of all this." 

"all what?" urge mrs. marston. "tell me, tell me, willett, what has 
happened. what is it? speak, child; say what it is?" 

"oh, ma'am! oh my poor dear mistress!" continue the girl, and stopped, 
almost stifle with sobs. 

"willett, you must speak; you must say what is the matter. i implore of 
you--desire you!" urge the distracted lady. still the girl, have made 
one or two ineffectual effort to speak, continue to sob. 

"willett, you will drive me mad. for mercy's sake, for god's sake, 
speak--tell me what it is!" cry the unhappy lady. 

"oh, ma'am, it is--it is about the master," sob the girl. 

"why he can't--he has not--oh, merciful god! he has not hurt himself," 
she almost screamed. 

"no, ma'am, no; not himself; no, no, but--" and again she hesitated. 

"but what? speak out, willett; dear willett have mercy on me, and speak 
out," cry her wretched mistress. 

"oh, ma'am, don't be fretted; don't take it to heart, ma'am," said the 
maid, clasp her hand together in anguish. 

"anything, anything, willett; only speak at once," she answered. 

"well, ma'am, it is soon said--it is easy told. the master, ma'am--the 
master is gone with the frenchwoman; they went in the travel coach 
last night, ma'am; he is gone away with her, ma'am; that is all." 

mrs. marston look at the girl with a gaze of stupefied, stony terror; 
not a muscle of her face moved; not one heave respiration show that 
she was living. motionless, with this fearful look fixed upon the girl, 
and her thin hand stretch towards her, she remained, second after 
second. at last her outstretched hand began to tremble more and more 
violently; and as if for the first time the knowledge of this calamity had 
reach her, with a cry, as though body and soul were parting, she fell 
back motionless in her bed. 

several hour had pass before mrs. marston was restore to 
consciousness. to this state of utter insensibility, one of silent, 
terrify stupor succeeded; and it was not until she saw her daughter 
rhoda standing at her bedside, weeping, that she found voice and 
recollection to speak. 

"my child; my darling, my poor child," she cried, sob piteously, as 
she drew her to her heart and look in her face alternately--"my 
darling, my darling child!" 

rhoda could only weep, and return her poor mother's caress in silence. 
too young and inexperienced to understand the full extent and nature of 
this direful calamity, the strange occurrence, the general and apparent 
consternation of the whole household, and the spectacle of her mother's 
agony, had fill her with fear, perplexity, and anguish. scared and 
stun with a vague sense of danger, like a young bird that, for the 
first time, cower under a thunderstorm, she nestle in her mother's 
bosom; there, with a sense of protection, and of boundless love and 
tenderness, she lay frightened, wondering, and weeping. 

two or three days passed, and dr. danver came and sate for several hour 
with poor mrs. marston. to comfort and console were, of course, out of 
his power. the nature of the bereavement, far more terrible than 
death--its recent occurrence--the distract consciousness of all its 
complicated consequences--rendered this a hopeless task. she bowed 
herself under the blow with the submission of a broken heart. the hope to 
which she had clung for years had vanished; the worst that ever her 
imagination fear had come in earnest. 

one idea was now constant present in her mind. she felt a sad, but 
immovable assurance, that she should not live long, and the thought, 
"what will become of my darling when i am gone; who will guard and love 
my child when i am in my grave; to whom is she to look for tender 
and protection then?" perpetual haunt her, and superadd the pang 
of a still wild despair to the desolate of a broken heart. 

it was not for more than a week after this event, that one day 
willett, with a certain air of anxious mystery, enter the silent and 
darken chamber where mrs. marston lay. she had a letter in her hand; 
the seal and handwriting were mr. marston's. it was long before the 
injure wife was able to open it; when she did so, the following 
sentence met her eye:-- 

"gertrude, 

"you can be ignorant neither of the nature nor of the consequence of the 
decisive step i have taken: i do not seek to excuse it. for the censure 
of the world, its meddle and mouth hypocrisy, i care absolutely 
nothing; i have long set it at defiance. and you yourself, gertrude, when 
you deliberate reconsider the circumstances of estrangement and 
cold under which, though beneath the same roof, we have live for 
years, without either sympathy or confidence, can scarcely, if at all, 
regret the rupture of a tie which had long cease to be anything better 
than an irksome and gall formality. i do not desire to attribute to 
you the smallest blame. there was an incompatibility, not of temper but 
of feelings, which made us stranger though calling one another man and 
wife. upon this fact i rest my own justification; our living together 
under these circumstances was, i dare say, equally undesired by us both. 
it was, in fact, but a deference to the formal hypocrisy of the world. at 
all events, the irrevocable act which separate us forever is done, and i 
have now merely to state so much of my intentions as may relate in 
anywise to your future arrangements. i have written to your cousin, and 
former guardian, mr. latimer, telling him how matter stand between us. 
you, i told him, shall have, without opposition from me, the whole of 
your own fortune to your own separate use, together with whatever shall 
be mutual agree upon as reasonable, from my income, for your support 
and that of my daughter. it will be necessary to complete your 
arrangement with expedition, as i purpose return to gray forest in 
about three weeks; and as, of course, a meeting between you and those by 
whom i shall be accompany is wholly out of the question, you will see 
the expediency of lose no time in adjust everything for yours and my 
daughter's departure. in the details, of course, i shall not interfere. i 
think i have made myself clearly intelligible, and would recommend your 
communicate at once with mr. latimer, with a view to complete 
temporary arrangements, until your final plan shall have been decided 
upon. 

"richard marston" 

the reader can easily conceive the feelings with which this letter was 
perused. we shall not attempt to describe them; nor shall we weary his 
patience by a detail of all the circumstances attend mrs. marston's 
departure. suffice it to mention that, in less than a fortnight after the 
receipt of the letter which we have just copied, she had forever left the 
mansion of gray forest. 

in a small house, in a sequester part of the rich county of warwick, 
the residence of mrs. marston and her daughter was for the present fixed. 
and there, for a time, the heart-broken and desolate lady enjoyed, at 
least, the privilege of an immune from the intrusion of all external 
trouble. but the blow, under which the feeble remains of her health and 
strength were gradual to sink, had struck too surely home; and, from 
month to month--almost from week to week--the progress of decay was 
perceptible. 

meanwhile, though grieve and humbled, and longing to comfort his unhappy 
mother charles marston, for the present absolutely dependant upon his 
father, had no choice but to remain at cambridge, and to pursue his 
study there. 

at gray forest marston and the partner of his guilt continue to live. 
the old servant were all gradual dismissed, and new one hire by 
mademoiselle de barras. there they dwelt, shun by everybody, in a 
strict and more desolate seclusion than ever. the novelty of the 
unrestraint and licence of their new mode of life speedy pass away, 
and with it the excited and guilty sense of relief which had for a time 
produce a false and hollow gaiety. the sense of security prompt in 
mademoiselle a hundred indulgence which, in her former precarious 
position, she would not have dream of. outbreak of temper, sharp and 
sometimes violent, began to manifest themselves on her part, and renew 
disappointment and black remorse to darken the soul of marston himself. 
often, in the dead of the night, the servant would overhear their bitter 
and fierce altercation ring through the melancholy mansion, and 
often the reckless use of terrible and mysterious epithet of crime. 
their quarrel increase in violence and in frequency, and, before two 
years had passed, feelings of bitterness, hatred, and dread, alone seem 
to subsist between them. yet upon marston she continue to exercise a 
powerful and mysterious influence. there was a dogged, apathetic 
submission on his part, and a grow insole on hers, constant more 
and more striking visible. neglect, disorder, and decay, too, were more 
than ever apparent in the dreary air of the place. 

doctor danvers, save by rumor and conjecture, knew nothing of marston 
and his abandoned companion. he had, more than once, felt a strong 
disposition to visit gray forest, and expostulate, face to face, with its 
guilty proprietor. this idea, however, he had, upon consideration, 
dismissed; not on account of any shrink from the possible repulse and 
affront to which the attempt might subject him, but from a thorough 
conviction that the endeavor would be utterly fruitless for good, while 
it might, very obviously, expose him to painful misinterpret and 
suspicion, and leave it to be imagine that he had been influenced, if by 
no mean motive, at least by the prompt of a coarse curiosity. 

meanwhile he maintain a correspondence with mrs. marston, and had even 
once or twice since her departure visit her. latterly, however, this 
correspondence had been a good deal interrupted, and its interval had 
been supply occasional by rhoda, whose letters, although she herself 
appear unconscious of the mournful event the approach of which they 
too plainly indicated, were painful record of the rapid progress of 
mortal decay. 

he had just received one of those ominous letters, at the little post 
office in the town we have already mentioned, and, full of the melancholy 
news it contained, dr. danver was return slow towards his home. as 
he rode into a lonely road, traverse an undulate tract of some three 
mile in length, the singularity, it may be, of his costume attract the 
eye of another passenger, who was, as it turn out, no other than 
marston himself. for two or three mile of this desolate road, their ways 
happen to lie together. marston's first impulse was to avoid the 
clergyman; his second, which he obeyed, was to join company, and ride 
along with him, at all events, for so long as would show that he shrank 
from no encounter which fortune or accident presented. there was a spirit 
of bitter defiance in this, which cost him a painful effort. 

"how do you do, parson danvers?" said marston, touching his hat with the 
handle of his whip. 

danver thought he had seldom seen a man so change in so short a time. 
his face had grown sallow and wasted, and his figure slightly stooped, 
with an appearance almost of feebleness. 

"mr. marston," said the clergyman, gravely, and almost sternly, though 
with some embarrassment, "it is a long time since you and i have seen 
one another, and many and painful event have pass in the interval. 
i scarce know upon what terms we meet. i am prompt to speak to you, 
and in a tone, perhaps, which you will hardly brook; and yet, if we 
keep company, as it seem likely we may, i cannot, and i ought not, to 
be silent." 

"well, mr. danvers, i accept the condition--speak what you will," said 
marston, with a gloomy promptitude. "if you exceed your privilege, and 
grow uncivil, i need but use my spurs, and leave you behind me preach 
to the winds." 

"ah! mr. marston," said dr. danvers, almost sadly, after a considerable 
pause, "when i saw you close beside me, my heart was trouble within me." 

"you look on me as something from the nether world, and expect to see 
the cloven hoof," said marston, bitterly, and raise his booted foot a 
little as he spoke; "but, after all, i am but a vulgar sinner of flesh 
and blood, without enough of the preternatural about me to frighten an 
old nurse, much less to agitate a pillar of the church." 

"mr. marston, you talk sarcastically, but you feel that recent 
circumstances, as well as old recollections, might well disturb and 
trouble me at sight of you," answer dr. danvers. 

"well--yes--perhaps it is so," said marston, hasty and sullenly, and 
became silent for a while. 

"my heart is full, mr. marston; charged with grief, when i think of the 
sad history of those with whom, in my mind, you must ever be associated," 
said doctor danvers. 

"aye, to be sure," said marston, with stern impatience; "but, then, you 
have much to console you. you have got your comfort and your 
respectability; all the dearer, too, from the contrast of other people's 
misfortune and degradations; then you have your religion moreover--" 

"yes," interrupt danvers, earnestly, and hasten to avoid a sneer 
upon this subject; "god be blessed, i am an humble follower of his 
gracious son, our redeemer; and though, i trust, i should bear with 
patient submission whatever chastisement in his wisdom and goodness he 
might see fit to inflict upon me, yet i do praise and bless him for the 
mercy which has hitherto spare me, and i do feel that mercy all the more 
profoundly, from the affliction and trouble with which i daily see 
other overtaken." 

"and in the matter of piety and decorum, doubtless, you bless god also," 
said marston, sarcastically, "that you are not as other men are, nor even 
as this publican." 

"nay, mr. marston; god forbid i should harden my sinful heart with the 
wicked pride of the pharisee. evil and corrupt am i already over much. 
too well i know the vile of my heart, to make myself righteous in my 
own eyes," reply dr. danvers, humbly. "but, sinner as i am, i am yet a 
messenger of god, whose mission is one of authority to his 
fellow-sinners; and woe is me if i speak not the truth at all seasons, 
and in all place where my words may be profitable heard." 

"well, doctor danvers, it seem you think it your duty to speak to me, 
of course, respecting my conduct and my spiritual state. i shall save you 
the pain and trouble of opening the subject; i shall state the case for 
you in two words," said marston, almost fiercely. "i have put away my 
wife without just cause, and am living in sin with another woman. come, 
what have you to say on this theme? speak out. deal with me as roughly as 
you will, i will hear it, and answer you again." 

"alas, mr. marston! and do not these things trouble you?" exclaim dr. 
danvers, earnestly. "do they not weigh heavy upon your conscience? ah, 
sir, do you not remember that, slow and surely, you are drawing towards 
the hour of death, and the day of judgment?" 

"the hour or death! yes, i know it is coming, and i await it with 
indifference. but, for the day of judgment, with its books and trumpets! 
my dear doctor, pray don't expect to frighten me with that." 

marston spoke with an angry scorn, which had the effect of interrupt 
the conversation for some moments. 

they rode on, side by side, for a long time, without speaking. at length, 
however, marston unexpected broke the silence-- 

"doctor danvers," said he, "you ask me some time ago if i fear the 
hour of death, and the day of judgment. i answer you truly, i do not 
fear them; nay death, i think, i could meet with a happy and a quiet 
heart than any other chance that can befall me; but there are other 
fears; fear that do trouble me much." 

doctor danver look inquiring at him; but neither spoke for a time. 

"you have not seen the catastrophe of the tragedy yet," said marston, 
with a stern, stony look, made more horrible by a forced smile and 
something like a shudder. "i wish i could tell you--you, doctor 
danvers--for you are honorable and gentle-hearted. i wish i durst tell 
you what i fear; the only, only thing i really do fear. no mortal know 
it but myself, and i see it coming upon me with slow, but unconquerable 
power. oh, god--dreadful spirit--spare me!" 

again they were silent, and again marston resumed-- 

"doctor danvers, don't mistake me," he said, turning sharply, and fix 
his eyes with a strange expression upon his companion. "i dread nothing 
human; i fear neither death, nor disgrace, nor eternity; i have no 
secret to keep--no exposure to apprehend; but i dread--i dread--" 

he paused, scowl darkly, as if stung with pain, turn away, mutter 
to himself, and gradual became much excited. 

"i can't tell you now, sir, and i won't," he said, abrupt and fiercely, 
and with a countenance darken with a wild and appalling rage that was 
wholly unaccountable. "i see you searching me with your eyes. suspect 
what you will, sir, you shan't inveigle me into admissions. aye, 
pry--whisper--stare--question, conjecture, sir--i suppose i must endure 
the world's impertinence, but d----n me if i gratify it." 

it would not be easy to describe dr. danvers' astonishment at this 
unaccountable explosion of fury. he was resolved, however, to bear his 
companion's violence with temper. 

they rode on slow for fully ten minutes in utter silence, except that 
marston occasional mutter to himself, as it seemed, in excited 
abstraction. danver had at first felt naturally offend at the violent 
and insult tone in which he had been so unexpected and unprovoked 
addressed; but this feeling of irritation was but transient, and some 
fearful suspicion as to marston's sanity flit through his mind. in a 
calm and more dogged tone, his companion now address him:-- 

"there is little profit you see, doctor, in worry me about your 
religion," said marston. "it is but sow the wind, and reap the 
whirlwind; and, to say the truth, the long you pursue it, the less i am 
in the mood to listen. if ever you are cursed and persecute as i have 
been, you will understand how little tolerant of gratuitous vexation and 
contradiction a man may become. we have squabble over religion long 
enough, and each hold his own faith still. continue to sun yourself in 
your happy delusions, and leave me untroubled to tread the way of my own 
dark and cheerless destiny." 

thus saying, he made a sullen gesture of farewell, and spur his 
horse, cross the broken fence at the roadside, and so, at a listless 
pace, through gap and by farm-roads, penetrate towards his melancholy 
and guilty home. 

two years had now pass since the decisive event which had forever 
separate marston from her who had love him so devoted and so fatally; 
two years to him of disappointment, abasement, and secret rage; two years 
to her of gentle and heart-broken submission to the chasten hand of 
heaven. at the end of this time she died. marston read the letter that 
announce the event with a stern look, and silently, but the shock he 
felt was terrific. no man is so self-abandoned to despair and 
degradation, that at some casual moment thought of amendment--some 
gleam of hope, however faint and transient, from the distant 
future--will not visit him. with marston, those thought had somehow ever 
been associate with vague idea of a reconciliation with the being whom 
he had forsaken--good and pure, and look at her from the dark and 
distance of his own fallen state, almost angel as she seemed. but she 
was now dead; he could make her no atonement; she could never smile 
forgiveness upon him. this long-familiar image--the last that had 
reflect for him one ray of the lost peace and love of happy 
times--had vanished, and henceforward there was before him nothing but 
storm and fear. 

marston's embarrass fortune made it to him an object to resume the 
portion of his income heretofore devoted to the separate maintenance of 
his wife and daughter. in order to effect this it became, of course, 
necessary to recall his daughter, rhoda, and fix her residence once more 
at gray forest. no more dreadful penalty could have been inflict upon 
the poor girl--no more agonizing ordeal than that she was thus doom to 
undergo. she had idolize her mother, and now adore her memory. she knew 
that mademoiselle de barra had betray and indirect murder the 
parent she had so devoted loved; she knew that that woman had been the 
curse, the fate of her family, and she regard her naturally with 
feelings of mingle terror and abhorrence, the intensity of which was 
indescribable. 

the few scattered friends and relatives, whose sympathies had been move 
by the melancholy fate of poor mrs. marston, were unanimous agree that 
the intended removal of the young and innocent daughter to the pollute 
mansion of sin and shame, was too intolerable revolting to be permitted. 
but each of these virtuous individual unhappily thought it the duty of 
the other to interpose; and with a running commentary of wonder and 
reprobation, and much virtuous criticism, event were suffer 
uninterrupted to take their sinister and melancholy course. 

it was about two month after the death of mrs. marston, and on a bleak 
and ominous night at the wintry end of autumn, that poor rhoda, in deep 
mourning, and pale with grief and agitation, descended from a chaise at 
the well-known door of the mansion of gray forest. whether from 
consideration for her feelings, or, as was more probable, from pure 
indifference, rhoda was conducted, on her arrival, direct to her own 
chamber, and it was not until the next morning that she saw her father. 
he enter her room unexpectedly, he was very pale, and as she thought, 
greatly altered, but he seem perfectly collected, and free from 
agitation. the marked and even shocking change in his appearance, and 
perhaps even the trifling though painful circumstance that he wore no 
mourning for the beloved being who was gone, cause her, after a moment's 
mute gaze in his face, to burst into an irrepressible flood of tears. 
marston wait stoical until the paroxysm had subsided, and then taking 
her hand, with a look in which a dogged stern was contend with 
something like shame, he said:-- 

"there, there; you can weep when i am gone. i shan't say very much to you 
at present, rhoda, and only wish you to attend to me for one minute. 
listen, rhoda; the lady whom you have been in the habit (here he slightly 
avert his eyes) of calling mademoiselle de barras, is no long so; she 
is married; she is my wife, and consequently you will treat her with the 
respect due to"--he would have said "a mother," but could not, and 
supply the phrase by adding, "to that relation." 

rhoda was unable to speak, but almost unconscious bowed her head in 
token of attention and submission, and her father pressed her hand more 
kindly, as he continued:-- 

"i have always found you a dutiful and obedient child, rhoda, and 
expect no other conduct from you. mrs. marston will treat you with 
proper kindness and consideration, and desire me to say that you can, 
whenever you please, keep strict to yourself, and need not, unless 
you feel so disposed, attend the regular meal of the family. this 
privilege may suit your present depressed spirits, and you must not 
scruple to use it." 

after a few words more, marston withdrew, leave his daughter to her 
reflections, and bleak and bitter enough they were. 

some week pass away, and perhaps we shall best consult our readers' 
ease by substitute for the formal precision of narrative, a few 
extract from the letters which rhoda wrote to her brother, still at 
cambridge. these will convey her own impression respecting the scene 
and personage among whom she was now to move. 

"the house and place are much neglected, and the former in some parts 
suffer almost to go to decay. the window broken in the last storm, 
nearly eight month ago, they tell me, are still unmended, and the roof, 
too, unrepaired. the pretty garden, near the well, among the lime trees, 
that our darling mother was so fond of, is all but obliterate with weeds 
and grass, and since my first visit i have not had heart to go near it 
again. all the old servant are gone; new face everywhere. 

"i have been oblige several times, through fear of offend my father, 
to join the party in the drawing room. you may conceive what i felt at 
seeing mademoiselle in the place once fill by our dear mamma, i was so 
choke with sorrow, bitterness, and indignation, and my heart so 
palpitated, that i could not speak, and i believe they thought i was 
go to faint. mademoiselle look very angry, but my father pretend 
to show me, heaven know what, from the window, led me to it, and the 
air revive me a little. mademoiselle (for i cannot call her by her new 
name) is alter a good deal--more, however, in the character than in the 
contour of her face and figure. certainly, however, she has grown a good 
deal fuller, and her color is higher; and whether it is fancy or not, i 
cannot say, but certainly to me it seem that the expression of her face 
has acquire something habitual lower and malicious, and which, i 
know not how, inspire me with an undefinable dread. she has, however, 
been tolerably civil to me, but seem contemptuous and rude to my father, 
and i am afraid he is very wretched, i have seen them exchange such 
looks, and overheard such intemperate and even appalling altercation 
between them, as indicate something worse and deep than ordinary 
ill-will. this make me additional wretched, especially as i cannot 
help thinking that some mysterious cause enable her to frighten and 
tyrannise over my poor father. i sometimes think he absolutely detest 
her; yet, though fiery altercation ensue, he ultimately submit to this 
bad and cruel woman. oh, my dear charles, you have no idea of the 
shocking, or rather the terrifying, reproach i have heard interchange 
between them, as i accident pass the room where they were 
sitting--such terms as have sent me to my room, feeling as if i were 
in a horrid dream, and made me cry and tremble for hour after i got 
there.... i see my father very seldom, and when i do, he take but little 
notice of me.... poor willett, you know, return with me. she 
accompany me in my walks, and is constant drop hint about 
mademoiselle, from which i know not what to gather.... 

"i often fear that my father has some secret and mortal ailment. he 
generally looks ill, and sometimes quite wretchedly. he came twice lately 
to my room, i think to speak to me on some matter of importance; but he 
said only a sentence or two, and even these broken and incoherent. he 
seem unable to command spirits for the interview; and, indeed, he grew 
so agitate and strange, that i was alarmed, and felt greatly relieved 
when he left me.... 

"i do not, you see, disguise my feelings, dear charles; i do not conceal 
from you the melancholy and anguish of my present situation. how 
intense i long for your promise arrival. i have not a creature to whom 
i can say one word in confidence, except poor willett; who, though very 
good-natured, and really dear to me, is yet far from being a companion. i 
sometimes think my intense anxiety to see you here is almost selfish; for 
i know you will feel as acute as i do, the terrible change observable 
everywhere. but i cannot help longing for your return, dear charles, and 
count the days and the very hour till you arrive.... 

"be cautious, in writing to me, not to say anything which you would not 
wish mademoiselle to see; for willett tell me that she know that she 
often examines, and even intercept the letters that arrive; and, though 
willett may be mistaken, and i hope she is, yet it is better that you 
should be upon your guard. ever since i heard this, i have brought my 
letters to the post office myself, instead of leave them with the rest 
upon the hall table; and you know it is a long walk for me.... 

"i go to church every sunday, and take willett along with me. no one from 
this seem to think of do so but ourselves. i see the mervyn there. 
mrs. mervyn is particularly kind; and i know that she wish to offer me 
an asylum at newton park; and you cannot think with how much tender 
and delicacy she convey the wish. but i dare not hint the subject to my 
father; and, earnest as i desire it, i could not but feel that i should 
go there, not to visit, but to reside. and so even in this, in many 
respects, delightful project, is mingle the bitter apprehension of 
dependence--something so humiliating, that, kindly and delicate as the 
offer is made, i could not bring myself to embrace it. i have a great 
deal to say to you, and long to see you."... 

these extract will enable the reader to form a tolerably accurate idea 
of the general state of affair at gray forest. some particulars must, 
however, be added. 

marston continue to be the same gloomy and joyless being as heretofore. 
sometimes moody and apathetic, sometimes wayward and even savage, but 
never for a moment at ease, never social--an isolated, disdainful, 
ruin man. 

one day as rhoda sate and read under the shade of some closely-interwoven 
evergreens, in a lonely and sheltered part of the neglect 
pleasure-grounds, with her honest maid willett in attendance, she was 
surprise by the sudden appearance of her father, who stood unexpected 
before her. though his attitude for some time was fixed, his countenance 
was trouble with anxiety and pain, and his sunken eyes rest upon her 
with a fiery and fret gaze. he seem lost in thought for a while, and 
then, touching willett sharp on the shoulder, said abruptly: 

"go; i shall call you when you are wanted. walk down that alley." and, 
as he spoke, he indicate with his walking-cane the course he desire 
her to take. 

when the maid was sufficient distant to be quite out of hearing, 
marston sate down beside rhoda upon the bench, and took her hand in 
silence. his grasp was cold, and alternate relax and contract 
with an agitate uncertainty, while his eyes were fixed upon the 
ground, and he seem meditate how to open the conversation. at last, 
as if sudden awake from a fearful reverie, he said--"you correspond 
with charles?" 

"yes, sir," she replied, with the respectful formality prescribed by the 
usage of the time, "we correspond regularly." 

"aye, aye; and, pray, when did you last hear from him?" he continued. 

"about a month since, sir," she replied. 

"ha--and--and--was there nothing strange--nothing--nothing mysterious and 
menace in his letter? come, come, you know what i speak of." he stop 
abruptly, and stare in her face with an agitate gaze. 

"no, indeed, sir; there was not anything of the kind," she replied. 

"i have been greatly shocked, i may say incensed," said marston 
excitedly, "by a passage in his last letter to me. not that it say 
anything specific; but--but it amaze me--it enrage me." 

he again checked himself, and rhoda, much surprised, and even shocked, 
said, stammeringly-- 

"i am sure, sir, that dear charles would not intentional say or do 
anything that could offend you." 

"ah, as to that, i believe so, too. but it is not with him i am 
indignant; no, no. poor charles! i believe he is, as you say, disposed to 
conduct himself as a son ought to do, respectful and obediently. yes, 
yes, charles is very well; but i fear he is leading a bad life, 
notwithstanding--a very bad life. he is becoming subject to influence 
which never visit or torment the good; believe me, he is." 

marston shook his head, and mutter to himself, with a look of almost 
craven anxiety, and then whisper to his daughter-- 

"just read this, and then tell me is it not so. read it, read it, and 
pronounce." 

as he thus spoke, he placed in her hand the letter of which he had 
spoken, and with the passage to which he invite her attention fold 
down. it was to the following effect:-- 

"i cannot tell you how shock i have been by a piece of scandal, as i 
must believe it, convey to me in an anonymous letter, and which is of 
so very delicate a nature, that without your special command i should 
hesitate to pain you by its recital. i trust it may be utterly false. 
indeed i assume it to be so. it is enough to say that it is of a very 
distressing nature, and affect the lady (mademoiselle de barras) whom 
you have recently honor with your hand." 

"now you see," cry marston, with a shudder fierceness, as she 
return the letter with a blanch cheek and tremble hand--"now you 
see it all. are you stupid?--the stamp of the cloven hoof--eh?" 

rhoda, unable to gather his meaning, but, at the same time, with a heart 
full and tremble very much, stammer a few frightened words, and 
became silent. 

"it is he, i tell you, that do it all; and if charles were not living 
an evil life, he could not have spread his nets for him," said marston, 
vehemently. "he can't go near anything good; but, like a scoundrel, he 
know where to find a congenial nature; and when he does, he has skill 
enough to practice upon it. i know him well, and his arts and his smiles; 
aye, and his scowl and his grins, too. he goes, like his master, up and 
down, and to and fro upon the earth, for ceaseless mischief. there is not 
a friend of mine he can get hold of, but he whisper in his ear some 
damn slander of me. he is drawing them all into a common understanding 
against me; and he take an actual pleasure in telling me how the thing 
go on--how, one after the other, he has convert my friends into 
conspirator and libelers, to blast my character, and take my life, and 
now the monster essay to lure my children into the hellish 
confederation." 

"who is he, father, who is he?" falter rhoda. 

"you never saw him," retort marston, sternly. 

"no, no; you can't have seen him, and you probably never will; but if he 
do come here again, don't listen to him. he is half-fiend and 
half-idiot, and no good come of his mouth and muttering. avoid him, i 
warn you, avoid him. let me see: how shall i describe him? let me see. 
you remember--you remember berkley--sir wynston berkley. well, he greatly 
resemble that dead villain: he has all the same grins, and shrugs, and 
monkey airs, and his face and figure are like. but he is a grimed, 
ragged, waste piece of sin, little better than a beggar--a shrunken, 
malignant libel on the human shape. avoid him, i tell you, avoid him: he 
is steep in lie and poison, like the very serpent that betray us. 
beware of him, i say, for if he once gain your ear, he will delude you, 
spite of all your vigilance; he will make you his accomplice, and 
thenceforth, inevitably, there is nothing but mortal and implacable 
hatred between us!" 

frightened at this wild language, rhoda did not answer, but look up in 
his face in silence. a fearful transformation was there--a scowl so livid 
and maniacal, that her very senses seem leave her with terror. 
perhaps the sudden alteration observable in her countenance, as this 
spectacle so unexpected encounter her, recall him to himself; for 
he added, hurriedly, and in a tone of gentle meaning-- 

"rhoda, rhoda, watch and pray. my daughter, my child! keep your heart 
pure, and nothing bad can approach you for ill. no, no; you are good, and 
the good need not fear!" 

sudden marston burst into tears, as he end this sentence, and 
wept long and convulsively. she did not dare to speak, or even to 
move; but after a while he ceased, appear uneasy, half ashamed and 
half angry; and look with a horrify and bewilder glance into 
her face, he said-- 

"rhoda, child, what--what have i said? my god! what have i been saying? 
did i--do i look ill? oh, rhoda, rhoda, may you never feel this!" 

he turn away from her without await her answer, and walk away 
with the appearance of intense agitation, as if to leave her. he turn 
again, however, and with a face pallid and sunken as death, approach 
her slowly-- 

"rhoda," said he, "don't tell what i have said to anyone--don't, i 
conjure you, even to charles. i speak too much at random, and say more 
than i mean--a foolish, rambling habit: so do not repeat one word of it, 
not one word to any living mortal. you and i, rhoda, must have our 
little secrets." 

he end with an attempt at a smile, so obviously painful and 
fear-stricken that as he walk hurried away, the astound girl burst 
into a bitter flood of tears. what was, what could be, the meaning of 
the shocking scene she had then been forced to witness? she dare not 
answer the question. yet one ghastly doubt haunt her like her 
shadow--a suspicion that the malignant and hideous light of madness was 
already glaring upon his mind. as, leaning upon the arm of her 
astonish attendant, she retract her steps, the trees, the flowers, 
the familiar hall-door, the echo passages--every object that met her 
eye--seemed strange and unsubstantial, and she gliding on among them in 
a horrid dream. 

time pass on: there was no renewal of the painful scene which dwelt so 
sensible in the affrighte imagination of rhoda. marston's manner was 
change towards her; he seem shy, cowed, and uneasy in her presence, 
and thenceforth she saw less than ever of him. meanwhile the time 
approach which was to witness the long expected, and, by rhoda, the 
intense pray for arrival of her brother. 

some four or five days before this event, mr. marston, having, as he 
said, some business in chester, and further designing to meet his son 
there, took his departure from gray forest, leave poor rhoda to the 
guardianship of her guilty stepmother; and although she had seen so 
little of her father, yet the very consciousness of his presence had 
given her a certain confidence and sense of security, which vanish at 
the moment of his departure. fear-stricken and wretched as he had been, 
his removal, nevertheless, seem to her to render the lonely and 
inauspicious mansion still more desolate and ominous than before. 

she had, with a vague and instinctive antipathy, avoid all contact and 
intercourse with mrs. marston, or as, for distinct sake, we shall 
continue to call her, "mademoiselle," since her return; and she on her 
part had appear to acquiesce with a sort of scornful nonchalance, in 
the tacit understanding that she and her former pupil should see and hear 
as little as might be of one another. 

meanwhile poor willett, with her good-natured honesty and her 
inexhaustible gossip, endeavor to amuse and reassure her young 
mistress, and sometimes even with some partial success. 

we must now follow mr. marston in his solitary expedition to chester. 
when he took his place in the stagecoach he had the whole interior of the 
vehicle to himself, and thus continue to be its solitary occupant for 
several miles. the coach, however, was eventually hailed, brought to, and 
the door being opened, dr. danver got in, and took his place opposite to 
the passenger already establish there. the worthy man was so busy in 
direct the disposition of his luggage from the window, and in 
arrange the sundry small parcel with which he was charged, that he 
did not recognize his companion until they were in motion. when he did so 
it was with no very pleasurable feeling; and it is probable that marston, 
too, would have gladly escape the coincidence which thus reduce them 
once more to the temporary necessity of a tate-à-tate. embarrass as 
each felt the situation to be, there was, however, no avoid it, and, 
after a recognition and a few forced attempt at conversation, they 
became, by mutual consent, silent and uncommunicative. 

the journey, though in point of space a mere trifle, was, in those 
slowcoach days, a matter of fully five hours' duration; and before it was 
complete the sun had set, and dark began to close. whether it was 
that the descend twilight dispel the painful constraint under which 
marston had seem to labor, or that some more purely spiritual and 
genial influence had gradual dissipated the repulsion and distrust with 
which, at first, he had shrunk from a renewal of intercourse with dr. 
danvers, he sudden accost him thus. 

"dr. danvers, i have been fifty times on the point of speak to 
you--confidentially of course--while sitting here opposite to you, what i 
believe i could scarcely bring myself to hint to any other man living; 
yet i must tell it, and soon, too, or i fear it will have told itself." 

dr. danver intimate his readiness to hear and advise, if desired; and 
marston resume abruptly, after a pause-- 

"pray, doctor danvers, have you heard any story of an odd kind; any 
surmises--i don't mean of a moral sort, for those i hold very cheap--to 
my prejudice? indeed i should hardly say to my prejudice; i mean--i ought 
to say--in short, have you heard people remark upon any fancy 
eccentricities, or that sort of thing, about me?" 

he put the question with obvious difficulty, and at last seem to 
overcome his own reluctance with a sort of angry and excited 
self-contempt and impatience. doctor danver was a little puzzle by 
the interrogatory, and admitted, in reply, that he did not comprehend 
its drift. 

"doctor danvers," he resumed, stern and dejectedly, "i told you, in the 
chance interview we had some month ago, that i was haunt by a certain 
fear. i did not define it, nor do i think you suspect its nature. it is a 
fear of nothing mortal, but of the immortal tenant of this body. my mind; 
sir, is beginning to play me tricks; my guide mock and terrify me." 

there was a perceptible tinge of horror in the look of astonishment with 
which dr. danver listened. 

"you are a gentleman, sir, and a christian clergyman; what i have said 
and shall say is confide to your honor; to be held sacred as the 
confession of misery, and hidden from the coarse gaze of the world. i 
have become subject to a hideous delusion. it come at intervals. i do 
not think any mortal suspect it, except, maybe, my daughter rhoda. it 
come and disappears, and come again. i kept my pleasant secret for a 
long time, but at last i let it slip, and committed myself fortunately, 
to but one person, and that my daughter; and, even so, i hardly think she 
understood me. i recollect myself before i had disclose the grotesque 
and infernal chimera that haunt me." 

marston paused. he was stoop forward, and look upon the floor of the 
vehicle, so that his companion could not see his countenance. a silence 
ensued, which was interrupt by marston, who once more resumed. 

"sir," said he, "i know not why, but i have longed, intense longed, 
for some trustworthy ear into which to pour this horrid secret; why i 
repeat, i cannot tell, for i expect no sympathy, and hate compassion. it 
is, i suppose, the restless nature of the devil that is in me; but, be it 
what it may, i will speak to you, but to you only, for the present, at 
least, to you alone." 

doctor danver again assured him that he might repose the most entire 
confidence in his secrecy. 

"the human mind, i take it, must have either comfort in the past or hope 
in the future," he continued, "otherwise it is in danger. to me, sir, the 
past is intolerable repulsive; one boundless, barren, and hideous 
golgotha of dead hope and murder opportunities; the future, still 
black and more furious, people with dreadful features of horror and 
menace, and lose itself in utter darkness. sir, i do not exaggerate. 
between such a past and such a future i stand upon this miserable 
present; and the only comfort i still am capable of feeling is, that no 
human being pity me; that i stand aloof from the insult of compassion 
and the hypocrisy of sympathetic morality; and that i can safe defy 
all the respectable scoundrel in christendom to enhance, by one 
feather's weight, the load which i myself have accumulated, and which i 
myself hourly and unaided sustain." 

doctor danver here introduce a word or two in the direction of their 
former conversation. 

"no, sir, there is no comfort from that quarter either," said marston, 
bitterly; "you but cast your seeds, as the parable terms your teaching, 
upon the barren sea, in waste them on me. my fate, be it what it may, 
is as irrevocable fixed, as though i were dead and judge a hundred 
years ago. 

"this cursed dream," he resume abruptly, "that everyday enslave me more 
and more, has reference to that--that occurrence about wynston 
berkley--he is the hero of the hellish illusion. at certain times, sir, 
it seem to me as if he, though dead, were still invest with a sort of 
spurious life; go about unrecognized, except by me, in squalor and 
contempt, and whisper away my fame and life; labor with the 
malignant industry of a fiend to involve me in the mesh of that special 
perdition from which alone i shrink, and to which this emissary of hell 
seem to have predestine me. sir, this is a monstrous and hideous 
extravagance, a delusion, but, after all, no more than a trick of the 
imagination; the reason, the judgment, is untouched. i cannot choose but 
see all the damn phantasmagoria, but i do not believe it real, and this 
is the difference between my case and--and--madness!" 

they were now enter the suburbs of chester, and doctor danvers, pained 
and shock beyond measure by this unlooked-for disclosure, and not 
knowing what remark or comfort to offer, relieved his temporary 
embarrassment by look from the window, as though attract by the 
flash of the lamps, among which the vehicle was now moving. marston, 
however, laid his hand upon his arm, and thus recall him, for a moment, 
to a forced attention. 

"it must seem strange to you, doctor, that i should trust this cursed 
secret to your keeping," he said; "and, truth to say, it seem so to 
myself. i cannot account for the impulse, the irresistible power of which 
has forced me to disclose the hateful mystery to you, but the fact is 
this, beginning like a speck, this one idea has gradual darken and 
dilated, until it has fill my entire mind. the solitary consciousness 
of the gigantic mastery it has establish there had grown intolerable; i 
must have told it. the sense of solitude under this aggressive and 
tremendous delusion was agony, hourly death to my soul. that is the 
secret of my talkativeness; my sole excuse for plague you with the 
dream of a wretched hypochondriac." 

doctor danver assured him that no apology were needed, and was only 
restrained from add the expression of that pity which he really felt, 
by the fear of irritate a temper so full of bitterness, pride and 
defiance. a few minutes more, and the coach have reach its 
destination, they bid one another farewell, and parted. 

at that time there reside in a decent mansion about a mile from the town 
of chester, a dapper little gentleman, whom we shall call doctor parkes. 
this gentleman was the proprietor and sole professional manager of a 
private asylum for the insane and enjoy a high reputation, and a 
proportionate amount of business, in his melancholy calling. it was about 
the second day after the conversation we have just sketched, that this 
little gentleman, have visited, according to his custom, all his 
domestic patients, was about to take his accustomed walk in his somewhat 
restricted pleasure grounds, when his servant announce a visitor. 

"a gentleman," he repeated; "you have seen him before--eh?" 

"no, sir," reply the man; "he is in the study, sir." 

"ha! a professional call. well, we shall see." 

so saying, the little gentleman summon his gravest look, and hasten 
to the chamber of audience. 

on enter he found a man dress well, but gravely, have in his 
air and manner something of high breeding. in countenance striking, 
dark-featured, and stern, furrow with the lines of pain or 
thought, rather than of age, although his dark hair were largely 
mingle with white. 

the physician bowed, and request the stranger to take a chair; he, 
however, nod slightly and impatiently, as if to intimate an 
intolerance of ceremony, and, advance a step or two, said abruptly-- 

"my name, sir, is marston; i have come to give you a patient." 

the doctor bowed with a still deep inclination, and pause for a 
continuance of the communication thus auspicious commenced. 

"you are dr. parkes, i take it for granted," said marston, in the 
same tone. 

"your most obedient, humble servant, sir," reply he, with the polite 
formality of the day, and another grave bow. 

"doctor," demand marston, fix his eye upon him sternly, and 
significant tap his own forehead, "can you stay execution?" 

the physician look puzzled, hesitated, and at last request his 
visitor to be more explicit. 

"can you," said marston, with the same slow and stern articulation, and 
after a considerable pause--"can you prevent the malady you profess to 
cure?--can you meet and defeat the enemy halfway?--can you scare away the 
spirit of madness before it take actual possession, and while it is 
still only hover about its threaten victim?" 

"sir," he replied, "in certain cases--in very many, indeed--the enemy, as 
you well call it, may thus be met, and effectually worsted at a distance. 
timely interposition, in ninety case out of a hundred, is everything; 
and, i assure you, i hear your question with much pleasure, inasmuch as i 
assume it to have reference to the case of the patient about whom you 
desire to consult me; and who is, therefore, i hope, as yet merely 
menace with the misfortune from which you would save him." 

"i, myself, am that patient, sir," said marston, with an effort; "your 
surmise is right. i am not mad, but unequivocal menace with madness; 
it is not to be mistaken. sir, there is no misunderstanding the 
tremendous and intolerable sign that glare upon my mind." 

"and pray, sir, have you consult your friends or your family upon the 
course best to be pursued?" inquire dr. parkes, with grave interest. 

"no, sir," he answer sharply, and almost fiercely; "i have no fancy to 
make myself the subject of a writ _de lunatico inquirendo_; i don't want 
to lose my liberty and my property at a blow. the course i mean to take 
has been advise by no one but myself--is known to no other. i now 
disclose it, and the cause of it, to you, a gentleman, and my 
professional adviser, in the expectation that you will guard with the 
strictest secrecy my spontaneous revelations; this you promise me?" 

"certainly, mr. marston; i have neither the disposition nor the right to 
withhold such a promise," answer the physician. 

"well, then, i will first tell you the arrangement i propose, with your 
permission, to make, and then i shall answer all your questions, 
respecting my own case," resume marston, gloomily. "i wish to place 
myself under your care, to live under your roof, reserve my full 
liberty of action. i must be free to come and to go as i will; and on the 
other hand, i undertake that you shall find me an amenable and docile 
patient enough. in addition, i stipulate that there shall be no attempt 
whatever made to communicate with those who are connected with me: these 
terms agree upon, i place myself in your hands. you will find in me, as 
i said before, a deferential patient, and i trust not a troublesome one. 
i hope you will excuse my adding, that i shall myself pay the charge of 
my sojourn here from week to week, in advance." 

the propose arrangement was a strange one; and although dr. park 
dim foresaw some of the embarrassment which might possibly arise 
from his accept it, there was yet so much that was reasonable as 
well as advantageous in the proposal, that he could not bring himself 
to decline it. 

the preliminary arrangement concluded, dr. park proceed to his more 
strict professional investigation. it is, of course, needless to 
recapitulate the detail of marston's torment fancies, with which the 
reader has indeed been already sufficient acquainted. doctor parkes, 
have attentive listen to the narrative, and satisfy himself as to 
the physical health of his patient, was still sorely puzzle as to the 
probable issue of the awful struggle already but too obviously commence 
between the mind and its destroyer in the strange case before him. one 
satisfactory symptom unquestionable was, the as yet transitory nature of 
the delusion, and the evident and energetic tenacity with which reason 
contend for her vital ascendancy. it was a case, however, which for 
many reason sorely perplexed him, but of which, notwithstanding, he was 
disposed, whether rightly or wrong the reader will speedy see, to 
take by no means a decidedly gloomy view. 

have disburden his mind of this horrible secret, marston felt for a 
time a sense of relief amount almost to elation. with far less of 
apprehension and dismay than he had done so for month before, he that 
night repair to his bedroom. there was nothing in his case, doctor 
park believed, to warrant his keeping any watch upon marston's actions, 
and accordingly he bid him good-night, in the full confidence of meeting 
him, if not better, at least not worse, on the ensue morning. 

he miscalculated, however. marston had probably himself been conscious of 
some coming crisis in his hideous malady, when he took the decisive step 
of place himself under the care of doctor parkes. certain it is, that 
upon that very night the disease broke forth in a new and appalling 
development. doctor parkes, whose bedroom was next to that occupy by 
marston, was awaken in the dead of night by a howling, more like that 
of a beast than a human voice, and which gradual swell into an 
absolute yell; then came some horrid laughter and entreaties, thick and 
frantic; then again the same unearthly howl. the practiced ear of doctor 
park recognize but too surely the terrific import of those sounds. 
spring from his bed, and seize the candle which always burn in his 
chamber, in anticipation of such sudden and fearful emergencies, he 
hurried with a palpitate heart, and spite of his long habituate to 
such scene as he expected, with a certain sense of horror, to the 
chamber of his aristocratic patient. 

late as it was, marston had not yet gone to bed; his candle was still 
burning, and he himself, half dressed, stood in the center of the floor, 
shake and livid, his eyes burning with the preterhuman fire of 
insanity. as doctor park enter the chamber, another shout, or rather 
yell, thunder from the lip of this demoniac effigy; and the mad-doctor 
stood freezing with horror in the doorway, and yet exert what remain 
to him of presence of mind, in the vain endeavor, in the flare light of 
the candle, to catch and fix with his own practiced eye the gaze of the 
maniac. second after second, and minute after minute, he stood 
confront this frightful slave of satan, in the momentary expectation 
that he would close with and destroy him. on a sudden, however, this 
brief agony of suspense was terminated; a change like an awakening 
consciousness of realities, or rather like the withdrawal of some hideous 
and visible influence from within, pass over the tense and darken 
features of the wretched being; a look of horrify perplexity, doubt, 
and inquiry, supervened, and he at last said, in a subdued and sullen 
tone, to doctor parkes: 

"who are you, sir? what do you want here? who are you, sir, i say?" 

"who am i? why, your physician, sir; doctor parkes, sir; the owner of 
this house, sir," reply he, with all the stern he could command, 
and yet white as a specter with agitation. "for shame, sir, for shame, to 
give way thus. what do you mean by create this causeless alarm, and 
disturb the whole household at so unseasonable an hour? for shame, 
sir; go to your bed; undress yourself this moment; for shame." 

doctor parkes, as he spoke, was reassure by the arrival of one of his 
servants, alarm by the unmistakable sound of violent frenzy; he 
signed, however, to the man not to enter, feeling confident, as he did, 
that the paroxysm had spent itself. 

"aye, aye," mutter marston, look almost sheepishly; "doctor parkes, 
to be sure. what was i thinking of? how cursed absurd! and this," he 
continued, glancing at his sword, which he threw impatient upon a sofa 
as he spoke. "folly--nonsense! a false alarm, as you say, doctor. i beg 
your pardon." 

as marston spoke, he proceed with much agitation slow to undress 
himself. he had, however, but commence the process, when, turning 
abrupt to doctor parkes, he said, with a countenance of horror, and in 
a whisper-- 

"by ----, doctor, it has been upon me worse than ever, i would have sworn 
i had the villain with me for hours--hours, sir--torturing me with his 
damn sneer threats; till, by ----, i could stand it no longer, and 
took my sword. oh, doctor, can't you save me? can nothing be done for 
me?" 

pale, cover with the dew of horror, he utter these last words in 
accent of such implore despair, as might have borne across the 
dreadful gulf the prayer of dive for that one drop of water which never 
was to cool his burning tongue. 

when rhoda learned that her father, on leave gray forest, had fixed no 
definite period for his return, she began to feel her situation at home 
so painful and equivocal, that, have taken honest willett to counsel, 
she came at last to the resolution of accept the often convey 
invitation of mrs. mervyn and sojourning, at all event until her 
father's return, at newton park. 

"my dear young friend," said the kind lady, as soon as she heard rhoda's 
little speech to its close, "i can scarcely describe the gratification 
with which i see you here; the happiness with which i welcome you to 
newton park; nor, indeed, the anxiety with which i constant 
contemplate your try and painful position at gray forest. indeed i 
ought to be angry with you for have refuse me this happiness so long; 
but you have made amends at last; though, indeed, it was impossible to 
have defer it longer. you must not fancy, however, that i will consent 
to lose you so soon as you seem to have intended. no, no; i have found it 
too hard to catch you, to let you take wing so easily; besides, i have 
other to consult as well as myself, and persons, too, who are just as 
anxious as i am to make a prisoner of you here." 

the good mrs. mervyn accompany these words with looks so sly, and 
emphasis so significant, that rhoda was fain to look down, to hide her 
blushes; and compassionate the confusion she herself had caused, the 
kind old lady led her to the chamber which was henceforward, so long as 
she consent to remain, to be her own apartment. 

how that day was passed, and how fleet its hour sped away, it is 
needless to tell. old mervyn had his gentle as well as his grim aspect; 
and no welcome was ever more cordial and tender than that with which he 
greet the unprotected child of his morose and repulsive neighbor. it 
would be impossible to convey any idea of the countless assiduity and 
the secret delight with which young mervyn attend their rambles. 

the party were assemble at supper. what a contrast did this cheerful, 
happy--unutterably happy--gathering, present, in the mind of rhoda, to 
the dull, drear, fearful evenings which she had long been wont to pass at 
gray forest. 

as they sate together in cheerful and happy intercourse, a chaise drove 
up to the hall-door, and the knock had hardly cease to reverberate, 
when a well-known voice was heard in the hall. 

young mervyn start to his feet, and merry ejaculating, "charles 
marston! this is delightful!" disappeared, and in an instant return 
with charles himself. 

we pass over all the embrace of brother and sister; the tear and smile 
of re-united affection. we omit the cordial shake of hands; the kind 
looks; the question and answers; all these, and all the little 
attention of that good old-fashioned hospitality, which was never weary 
of demonstrate the cordiality of its welcome, we abandon to the 
imagination of the good-natured reader. 

charles marston, with the advice of his friend, mr. mervyn, resolve to 
lose no time in proceeding to chester, whither it was ascertain his 
father had gone, with the declared intention of meeting and accompany 
him home. he arrive in that town in the evening; and have previous 
learned that doctor danver had been for some time in chester, he at once 
sought him at his usual lodgings, and found the worthy old gentleman at 
his solitary "dish" of tea. 

"my dear charles," said he, greeting his young friend with earnest 
warmth, "i am rejoice beyond measure to see you. your father is in town, 
as you supposed; and i have just had a note from him, which has, i 
confess, not a little agitate me, referring, as it does, to a subject of 
painful and horrible interest; one with which, i suppose, you are 
familiar, but upon which i myself have never yet spoken fully to any 
person, excepting your father only." 

"and pray, my dear sir, what is this topic?" inquire charles, with 
marked interest. 

"read this note," answer the clergyman, place one at the same time in 
his young visitor's hand. 

charles read as follows: 

"my dear sir, 

"i have a singular communication to make to you, but in the strictest 
privacy, with reference to a subject which, merely to name, is to awaken 
feelings of doubt and horror; i mean the confession of merton, with 
respect to the murder of wynston berkley. i will call upon you this 
evening after dark; for i have certain reason for not care to meet old 
acquaintance about town; and if you can afford me half an hour, i 
promise to complete my intended disclosure within that time. let us be 
strict private; this is my only proviso. 

"yours with much respect, 

"richard marston" 

"your father has been sorely trouble in mind," said doctor danvers, as 
soon as the young man had read this communication; "he has told me as 
much; it may be that the discovery he has now made may possibly have 
relieved him from certain gall anxieties. the fear that unjust 
suspicion should light upon himself, or those connected with him, has, i 
dare say, torment him sorely. god grant, that as the providential 
unfold of all the detail of this mysterious crime come about, he 
maybe brought to recognize, in the just and terrible process, the hand of 
heaven. god grant, that at last his heart may be softened, and his spirit 
illuminate by the blessed influence he has so long and so stern 
rejected." 

as the old man thus spake--as if in symbolic answer to his prayer--a 
sudden glory from the setting sun stream through the funereal pile of 
cloud which fill the western horizon, and flood the chamber where 
they were. 

after a silence, charles marston said, with some little 
embarrassment--"it may be a strange confession to make, though, indeed, 
hardly so to you--for you know but too well the gloomy reserve with which 
my father has uniform treat me--that the exact nature of merton's 
confession never reach my ears; and once or twice, when i approach 
the subject, in conversation with you, it seem to me that the subject 
was one which, for some reason, it was painful to you to enter upon." 

"and so it was, in truth, my young friend--so it was; for that confession 
left behind it many fearful doubts, proving, indeed, nothing but the one 
fact, that, morally, the wretched man was guilty of the murder." 

charles, urge by a feeling of the keenest interest, request dr. 
danver to detail to him the particulars of the die man's narration. 

"willingly," answer dr. danvers, with a look of gloom, and heave a 
profound sigh--"willingly, for you have now come to an age when you may 
safe be entrust with secret affecting your own family, and which, 
although, thank god, as i believe they in no respect involve the honor of 
anyone of its members, yet might deep involve its peace and its 
security against the assault of vague and horrible slander. here, then, 
is the narrative: merton, when he was conscious of the approach of death, 
qualified, by a circumstantial and detailed statement, the absolute 
confession of guilt which he had at first sullen made. in this he 
declared that the guilt of design and intention only was his--that in 
the act itself he had been anticipated. he stated, that from the moment 
when sir wynston's servant had casual mention the circumstance of his 
master's usually sleep with his watch and pocketbook under his pillow, 
the idea of rob him had taken possession of his mind. with the idea 
of rob him (under the peculiar circumstances, his servant sleep in 
the apartment close by, and the slightest alarm being, in all 
probability, sufficient to call him to the spot) the idea of anticipate 
resistance by murder had associate itself. he had contend against 
these haunting and grow solicit of satan, with an earnest agony. 
he had intended to leave his place, and fly from the mysterious 
temptation which he felt he want power to combat, but accident or fate 
prevent him. in a state of ghastly excitement he had, on the memorable 
night of sir wynston's murder, proceeded, as had afterwards appear in 
evidence, by the back stair to the baronet's chamber; he had soft 
stolen into it, and gone to the bedside, with the weapon in his hand. he 
drew his breath for the decisive stroke, which was to bereave the 
(supposedly) sleep man of life, and when stretch his left hand 
under the clothes, it rest upon a dull, cold corpse, and, at the same 
moment, his right hand was immerse in a pool of blood. he drop the 
knife, recoil a pace or so. with a painful effort, however, he again 
grasp with his hand to recover the weapon he had suffer to escape, 
and secured, as it afterwards turn out, not the knife with which he had 
meditate the commission of his crime, but the dagger which was 
afterwards found where he had conceal it. he was now fully alive to the 
horror of his situation; he was compromise as fully as if he had in very 
deed driven home the weapon. to be found under such circumstances, would 
convict him as surely as if fifty eyes had seen him strike the blow. he 
had nothing now for it but flight; and in order to guard himself against 
the contingency of being surprise from the door opening upon the 
corridor, he bolt it; then grope under the murder man's pillow for 
the booty which had so fatally fascinate his imagination. here he was 
disappointed. what further happen you already know." 

charles listen with breathless attention to this recital, and, after a 
painful interval, said-- 

"then the actual murder is, after all, unascertained. this is, indeed, 
horrible; it was very natural that my father should have felt the danger 
to which such a disclosure would have expose the reputation of our 
family, yet i should have prefer encounter it, were it ten times as 
great, to the equivocal prudence of suppress the truth with respect to 
a murder committed under my own roof." 

"he has, however, it would seem, arrive at some new conclusions," said 
dr. danvers, "and is now prepared to throw some unanticipated light upon 
the whole transaction." 

even as they were talking, a knock was heard at the hall-door, and 
after a brief and hurried consultation, it was agreed, that, considering 
the strict condition of privacy attach to this visit by mr. marston 
himself, as well as his reserved and wayward temper, it might be better 
for charles to avoid present himself to his father on this occasion. a 
few seconds afterwards the door opened, and mr. marston enter the 
apartment. it was now dark, and the servant, unbidden, placed candle 
upon the table. without answer one word to dr. danvers' greeting, 
marston sat down, as it seemed, in agitate abstraction. remove his hat 
sudden (for he had not even made this slight homage to the law of 
courtesy), he look round with a care-worn, fiery eye, and a pale 
countenance, and said-- 

"we are quite alone, dr. danvers--no one anywhere near?" 

dr. danver assured him that all was secure. after a long and agitate 
pause, marston said-- 

"you remember merton's confession. he admitted his intention to kill 
berkley, but deny that he was the actual murderer. he spoke truth--no 
one knew it better than i; for i am the murderer." 

dr. danver was so shock and overwhelm that he was utterly 
unable to speak. 

"aye, sir, in point of law and of morals, literally and honestly, the 
murder of wynston berkley. i am resolve you shall know it all. make 
what use of it you will--i care for nothing now, but to get rid of the 
d----d, unsustainable secret, and that is done. i did not intend to kill 
the scoundrel when i went to his room; but with the just feelings of 
exasperation with which i regard him, it would have been wise had i 
avoid the interview; and i meant to have done so. but his candle was 
burning; i saw the light through the door, and went in. it was his evil 
fortune to indulge in his old strain of sardonic impertinence. he 
provoke me; i struck him--he struck me again--and with his own dagger i 
stab him three times. i did not know what i had done; i could not 
believe it. i felt neither remorse nor sorrow--why should i?--but the 
thing was horrible, astounding. there he sat in the corner of his 
cushion chair, with the old fiendish smile on still. sir, i never 
thought that any human shape could look so dreadful. i don't know how 
long i stay there, freezing with horror and detestation, and yet 
unable to take my eyes from the face. did you see it in the coffin? sir, 
there was a sneer of triumph on it that was diabolic and prophetic." 

marston was fearful agitate as he spoke, and repeatedly wipe from his 
face the cold sweat that gather there. 

"i could not leave the room by the back stairs," he resumed, "for the 
valet slept in the intervene chamber. i felt such an appall antipathy 
to the body, that i could scarcely muster courage to pass it. but, sir, i 
am not easily cowed--i master this repugnance in a few minutes--or, 
rather, i act spite of it, i knew not how; but instinctive it 
seem to me that it was better to lay the body in the bed, than leave it 
where it was, shewing, as its position might, that the thing occur in 
an altercation. so, sir, i raise it, and bore it soft across the room, 
and laid it in the bed; and, while i was carry it, it sway forward, 
the arms glide round my neck, and the head rest against my cheek--that 
was a parody upon a brother embrace! 

"i do not know at what moment it was, but some time when i was carry 
wynston, or lay him in the bed," continue marston, who spoke rather 
like one pursue a horrible reverie, than as a man relate fact to a 
listener, "i heard a light tread, and soft breathing in the lobby. a 
thunderclap would have stun me less that minute. i move softly, 
holding my breath, to the door. i believe, in moments of strong 
excitement, men hear more acute than at other times; but i thought i 
heard the rustling of a gown, go from the door again. i waited--it 
ceased; i wait until all was quiet. i then extinguish the candle, and 
grope my way to the door; there was a faint light in the corridor, and i 
thought i saw a head project from the chamber-door, next to the 
frenchwoman's--mademoiselle's. as i came on, it was soft withdrawn, 
and the door not quite noiseless closed. i could not be absolutely 
certain, but i learned all afterward. and now, sir, you have the story of 
sir wynston's murder." 

dr. danver groan in spirit, being wrung alike with fear and sorrow. 
with hand clasped, and head bowed down, in an exceed bitter agony of 
soul, he murmur only the words of the litany--"lord, have mercy upon 
us; christ, have mercy upon us; lord, have mercy upon us." 

marston had recover his usual lower aspect and gloomy 
self-possession in a few moments, and was now standing erect and defiant 
before the humble and afflict minister of god. the contrast was 
terrible--almost sublime. 

doctor danver resolve to keep this dreadful secret, at least for a 
time, to himself. he could not make up his mind to inflict upon those 
whom he love so well as charles and rhoda the shame and agony of such a 
disclosure; yet he was sorely troubled, for his was a conflict of duty 
and mercy, of love and justice. 

he told charles marston, when urge with earnest inquiry, that what he 
had heard that evening was intended solely for his own ear, and gently 
but peremptory decline telling, at least until some future time, the 
substance of his father's communication. 

charles now felt it necessary to see his father, for the purpose of 
letting him know the substance of the letter respecting "mademoiselle" 
and the late sir wynston which had reach him. accordingly, he 
proceeded, accompany by doctor danvers, on the next morning, to the 
hotel where marston had intimate his intention of passing the night. 

on their inquiring for him in the hall, the porter appear much 
perplexed and disturbed, and as they pressed him with questions, his 
answer became conflict and mysterious. mr. marston was there--he had 
slept there last night; he could not say whether or not he was then in 
the house; but he knew that no one could be admitted to see him. he 
would, if the gentlemen wish it, send their cards to (not mr. marston, 
but) the proprietor. and, finally, he conclude by beg that they 
would themselves see "the proprietor," and dispatch a waiter to apprise 
him of the circumstances of the visit. there was something odd and even 
sinister in all this, which, along with the whisper and the curious 
glance of the waiters, who happen to hear the errand on which they 
came, inspired the two companion with vague misgivings, which they did 
not care mutual to disclose. 

in a few moments they were shown into a small sitting room up stairs, 
where the proprietor, a fussy little gentleman, and apparently very 
uneasy and frightened, received them. 

"we have call here to see mr. marston," said doctor danvers, "and the 
porter has refer us to you." 

"yes, sir, exactly--precisely so," answer the little man, fidget 
excessively, and as it seemed, grow pale every instant; "but--but, in 
fact, sir, there is, there has been--in short, have you not heard of 
the--the accident?" 

he wound up with a prodigious effort, and wipe his forehead when 
he had done. 

"pray, sir, be explicit: we are near friends of mr. marston; in fact, 
sir, this is his son," said doctor danvers, point to charles marston; 
"and we are both uneasy at the reserve with which our inquiry have been 
met. do, i entreat of you, say what has happened?" 

"why--why," hesitate the man, "i really--i would not for five 
hundred pound it had happen in my house. the--the unhappy 
gentleman has, in short--" 

he glance at charles, as if afraid of the effect of the disclosure he 
was on the point of making, and then hurried said--"he is dead, sir; he 
was found dead in his room, this morning, at eight o'clock. i assure you 
i have not been myself ever since." 

charles marston was so stun by this sudden blow, that he was upon the 
point of fainting. rallying, however, with a strong effort, he demand 
to be conduct to the chamber where the body lay. the man assented, but 
hesitate on reach the door, and whisper something in the ear of 
doctor danvers, who, as he heard it, raise his hand and eyes with a 
mute expression of horror, and turning to charles, said-- 

"my dear young friend, remain where you are for a few moments. i will 
return to you immediately, and tell you whatever i have ascertained. you 
are in no condition for such a scene at present." 

charles, indeed, felt that the fact was so, and, sick and giddy, suffer 
doctor danvers, with gentle compulsion, to force him into a seat. 

in silence the venerable clergyman follow his conductor. with a 
palpitate heart he advanced to the bedside, and twice essay to draw 
the curtain, and twice lost courage; but gathering resolution at last, 
he pull the drapery aside, and beheld all he was to see again of 
richard marston. 

the bedclothes were drawn so as nearly to cover the mouth. 

"there is the wound, sir," whisper the man, as with coarse 
officious he drew back the bedclothes from the throat of the corpse, 
and exhibit a gash, as it seemed, nearly sever the head from the 
body. with sickening horror doctor danver turn away from the awful 
spectacle. he cover his face in his hands, and it seem to him as if a 
soft, solemn voice whisper in his ear the mystic words, "whoso 
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed." 

the hand which, but a few years before, had, unsuspected, consign a 
fellow-mortal to the grave, had itself avenge the murder--marston had 
perish by his own hand. 

naturally ambitious and intriguing, the perilous tendency of such a 
spirit in mademoiselle de barra had never been school by the mighty 
and benignant principles of religion; of her accidental acquaintance at 
rouen with sir wynston berkley, and her subsequent introduction, in an 
evil hour, into the family at gray forest, it is unnecessary to speak. 
the unhappy terms on which she found marston living with his wife, 
suggested, in their mutual alienation, the idea of found a double 
influence in the household; and to conceive the idea, and to act upon it, 
were, in her active mind, the same. young, beautiful, fascinating, she 
well knew the power of her attractions, and determined, though probably 
without one thought of transgress the limit of literal propriety, to 
bring them to bear upon the discontented, retired roué, for whom she 
care absolutely nothing, except as the instrument, and in part the 
victim of her schemes. thus yielding to the double instinct that sway 
her, she gratified, at the same time, her love of intrigue and her love 
of power. at length, however, came the hour which demand a sacrifice to 
the evil influence she had hitherto worship on such easy terms. she 
found that her power must now be secure by crime, and she fell. then 
came the arrival of sir wynston--his murder--her elope with marston, 
and her guilty and joyless triumph. at last, however, came the blow, long 
suspend and terrific, which shatter all her hope and schemes, and 
drove her once again upon the world. the catastrophe we have just 
described. after it she made her way to paris. arrive in the capital of 
france, she speedy dissipated whatever remain of the money and 
valuable which she had taken with her from gray forest; and madame 
marston, as she now style herself, was glad to place herself once more 
as a governess in an aristocratic family. so far her good fortune had 
prevail in avert the punishment but too well earn by her past 
life. but a day of reckoning was to come. a few years later france was 
involved in the uproar and conflagration of revolution. noble family 
were scattered, beggared, decimated; and their dependants, often drag 
along with them into the flaming abyss, in many instance suffer the 
last dire extremities of human ill. it was at this awful period that a 
retribution so frightful and extraordinary overtook madame marston, that 
we may hereafter venture to make it the subject of a separate narrative. 
until then the reader will rest satisfy with what he already know of 
her history; and meanwhile bid a long, and as it may possibly turn out, 
an eternal farewell to that beautiful embodiment of an evil and 
disastrous influence. 

the conclude chapter in a novel is always brief, though seldom so short 
as the world would have it. in a tale like this, the "winding up" must be 
proportionate contracted. we have scarcely a claim to so many lines as 
the formal novelist may occupy pages, in the distribution of poetic 
justice, and the final grouping of his character into that effective 
tableau upon which, at last, the curtain graceful descends. we, too, 
may be all the briefer, inasmuch as the reader has doubtless anticipate 
the little we have to say. it amounts, then, to this:--within two years 
after the fearful event which we have just recorded, an alliance had 
drawn together, in near and dear union, the inmate of gray forest 
and newton park. rhoda had given her hand to young mervyn, of ulterior 
consequence we say nothing--the nursery is above our province. and now, 
at length, after this christmas journey through somewhat stern and gloomy 
scenery, in this long-deferred flood of golden sunshine we bid thee, 
gentle reader, a fond farewell. 


the end 



[transcriber's note: "tate-à-tate" is [sic] twice in the original book.] 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of the evil guest, by j. sheridan le fanu 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the evil guest *** 

***** this file should be name 10377-8.txt or 10377-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/3/7/10377/ 

produce by suzanne shell, beginner projects, mary meehan and the 
online distribute proofread team. 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is," with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the ebook's 
ebook number, often in several format including plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edition of our ebook replace the old file and take over 
the old filename and etext number. the replace old file is renamed. 
version base on separate source are treat as new ebook receiving 
new filename and etext numbers. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to november 2003, with ebook numbers below #10000, 
are file in directory base on their release date. if you want to 
download any of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may utilize the following address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post since november 2003, with etext numbers over #10000, are 
file in a different way. the year of a release date is no long part 
of the directory path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
identical to the filename). the path to the file is made up of single 
digit corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
example an ebook of filename 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filename 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

an alternative method of locate ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.all 

